  
 
CPU NO. 944 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION OF RASTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7th December, 2010 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2010 / Agrahayana, 1932(S) 
11 

Contents 
 
Composition of the Committee (2010-11)     (iii) 
Introduction          (v)  
Facts about RINL at a Glance            (vii) 
 
Part- A 
Report 
Page No. 
Chapter I Introduction         1 
A. Formation of RINL         1 
B. Objectives and Functions       2 
C. Organizational Set-up       4 
D. Board of Directors        4 
E. Role of Independent Directors      5 
 
Chapter II  Physical and Financial Performance    7 
A. Production Performance       7 
B. Performance rating (MOU)       19 
C. Capacity Utilization        19 
D. Expansion Plans        20 
E. Capital Structure        38 
F. Financial Performance       30 
G. Export-Import        31 
H. Foreign Exchange        33 
I. Marketing         34 
 
Chapter III Input Management       42 
 
Chapter- IV Evaluation of Complimentary Areas of Performance  59 
A. Research and Development       59 
B. Transparency Mechanisms      62 
C. Environmental Issues        62 
 
 
Part- B 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee    65 
 
Annexures 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee      76 
 
 
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010 - 2011) 
 
 
SHRI V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO - CHAIRMAN 
 
 
Sl. No. MEMBERS,  LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
5. Shri Hemanand Biswal 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
8. Shri Baijayant Panda 
9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
  
 MEMBERS, RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Naresh Gujral 
18. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
19. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
20. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
21. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
22. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma  -          Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ravinder Garrimella  - Director 
3 Shri Paolienlal Haokip        -          Under Secretary 
4 Smt. Malvika Mehta - Senior Executive  Assistant  
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on  Public Undertakings (2010 -11) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this 11th Report on Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL). 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of RINL 
on 11th August, 2010 and further, took oral evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Steel on 28 th September, 2010. The Committee then took 
evidence of Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Coal  on 21 st October 2010 
regarding allocation of Mines and Coal Blocks.                   .   
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting 
held on 6th December, 2010.      
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the repr esentatives 
of the Rashtriya Is pat Nigam Limited and Ministries of Steel, Mines and 
Coal for placing before them the desired information and materials in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  The Committee would 
also like to place on record their appr eciation for the invaluable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
Part-B of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                              V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
          6th December, 2010              Chairman, 
15 Agrahayana 1932 (Saka)     Committee on Public Undertakings  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 
FACTS ABOUT RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED (RINL) AT A GLANCE 
 
Early Years In April 1970, intent to set up the company announced. Foundation stone 
was laid in January 1971. Feasibility report prepared in 1973. Indo -Soviet 
Agreement for Plant construction reach ed in 1979. Formed as a separate 
company by separation from SAIL in 1982. Commissioned in 1992. 
Vision To be a continuously growing world class company by 
 Harnessing growth potential and sustain profitable growth.  
 Delivering high quality and cost competi tive products and be the 
first choice of customers.  
 Creating an inspiring work environment to unleash the creative 
energy of people.  
 Achieving excellence in enterprise management.  
 Being a respected corporate citizen, ensuring clean and green 
environment and developing vibrant communities around.  
Mission To attain 16 million ton liquid steel capacity through technological up -
gradation, operational efficiency and expansion; augmentation of assured 
supply of raw materials; to produce steel at internationa l standards of cost 
and quality; and to meet the aspirations of the stakeholders. 
Objectives  Expand plant capacity to 6.3Mt by 2011 -12 with the mission to expand 
further in subsequent phases as per Corporate Plan.  
 Revamping existing Blast Furnaces to mak e them energy efficient to 
contemporary levels and in the process increase their capacity by 1 
Mt, thus total hot metal capacity to 7.5 Mt  
 Be amongst top five lowest cost liquid steel producers in the world  
 Achieve higher levels of customer satisfaction  
 Vibrant work culture in the organization  
 Be proactive in conserving environment, maintaining high levels of 
safety & addressing social concerns  
Financials 
As on 31st March 
2009 
Equity Share capital – 4889.85,   Preference Share Capital – 2937.47,  
Total paid-up capital – 7827.32. 
Turnover: Targeted – 10500.46, Actual – 10410.63. 
Value addition: Targeted – 1989.60, Actual – 2126.96 
Profit after tax: Targeted – 1285.14, Actual – 1335.57 
Dividend paid to Government – 339.18 
Production Product  Competitor/s  Market size  Market 
Share 
Bars & Rods SAIL, TATA, JSW, etc.  22.5 mt. 
 9.8% 
Structurals SAIL, Secondary producers 5.5 mt.  
 4.5% 
Manpower 17225 
Achievements RINL‟s accumulated losses increased to Rs 4987 Cr. by 2000 -01 and it 
was reported to BIFR as a  potential sick company in the year 2000. 
Staged a remarkable turnaround since 2002 -03 with high productivity 
levels based on low operating costs and improved yields showing high 
operational efficiency in the industry. Became first integrated steel plant i n 
India to get certified for all the three system standards: ISO: 9001 -2000, 
ISO: 14001 & OHSAS: 18001. Became debt -free in 2003-04, wiped out its 
accumulated losses in 2005 -06. Was awarded Mini -ratna status in 2006. 
Awaiting the appointment of independent  Directors on the company‟s 
board to be conferred Navratna status – October 2010.  Conferred 
Navratna Status on 16 November 2010. 
Hurdles Aged equipments overdue for replacement. No captive mines for primary 
inputs, i.e., Iron-ore and Coking Coal, challenging margins. 
Challenges Expansion plan envisaging a two -fold increase in production capacity by 
Third Quarter of 2012, and revamp of aged machinery. Securing mining 
leases for captive use, both of Iron ore and Coking Coal. 
 
(vii)

Part- A 
Report 
Chapter I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL), a Navratna and the first integrated 
steel plant triple certified for Quality, Health and Safety and Environment, is the 
producer of the highest percentage of value added products among Public Sector 
Undertakings in the steel sector . RINL‟s journey till today, has involved it being 
referred to BIFR as a potential sick company  and then staging a remarkable 
turnaround, showing considerabl y good performance  for the last decade . The 
company faces many cha llenges ahead, however, mainly on account of lack of 
captive mines, the revamp of its aged plants, the financial liability to fund its 
expansion plans, and related plan for its capital restructuring. The Committee by 
examining the various facets of the Com pany, seek to help the Company take its 
growth story to greater heights. 
 
A. Formation of RINL 
 
1.2 The background of formation of RINL as furnished by the company is 
given below:- 
“Visakhapatnam Steel Plant (VSP) was the latest in the public sector steel 
plants conceived by the Government of India (GOI).  The intent to set up 
the plant was announced in April, 1970 and its foundation stone was laid 
in January, 1971 by the then Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi.  A 
feasibility report was prepared in 1973 and  the Indo- Soviet agreement for 
the construction of the plant was reached in June, 1979. 
RINL was separated from SAIL and was formed as separate company for 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant in Feb 1982 and the construction of 
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant Project com menced.  Due to fund constraints, 
the project was later pruned and a rationalized concept was evolved in 
August 1986 deleting certain units and upgrading the capacities of others.  
The project cost worked out to Rs 8,594 Crs. The plant was commissioned 
and fully dedicated to the nation in August, 1992 by the then Prime 
Minister Shri P.V. Narasimharao.   
With high financial costs and the recession in steel industry cycle following 
the initial years of de -controlled economy, RINL‟s accumulated losses 
increased to Rs 4987 Cr. by 2000 -01 and it was reported to BIFR as a 
potential sick company in the year 2000.     
Not withstanding all these odds, the functioning of RINL staged a 
remarkable turnaround since 2002 -03 with high productivity levels based 
on low opera ting costs and improved yields showing high operational 
efficiency in the industry. VSP was the first integrated steel plant in India, 

to get certified for all the three system standards: ISO: 9001 -2000, ISO: 
14001 & OHSAS: 18001.  
It is now known for the quality of its products and as the leading producer 
of long products and value added steels; it became debt -free in 2003 -04, 
wiped out its accumulated losses in 2005 -06. VSP was awarded Miniratna 
status in 2006.” 
 
1.3 The role of the Ministry of Steel in t he functioning of RINL was explained 
by the Secretary, Ministry of Steel during evidence before the Committee:- 
 “……the Ministry of Steel is no longer the regulatory system.  There is no 
licensing of steel now.  It is more of a developmental -oriented Ministry.  It 
is responsible for the planning and development of iron and steel industry 
and essential inputs like iron ore, dolomite, manganese ore, etc.  The 
Ministry is also required to interface with various infrastructure Ministries 
for removing the bottle necks in the production of steel because steel is a 
very essential input in the growth of an economy and in the modernisation 
of an economy…..”  
 
B. Objectives and Functions 
1.4 The main objectives of the company are as under:- 
“Visakhapatnam Steel Plant o f Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited was 
envisaged with a view to give impetus to the industrial growth and meet 
the aspirations of the people from South India with an annual capacity of 
3.4 million tonnes of hot metal in collaboration with the then USSR 
Government (for which an agreement was signed between the two 
Governments on 12 th June 1979) to produce long products and structural 
products. 
In terms of the Memorandum of Association of the Company, (MOA), the 
main objects include, among others, to set up the Steel Plant and do 
business in the Iron & Steel manufacturing industry.” 
 
1.5 The functions of RINL are given below:- 
“The present functions of the Company include, inter-alia, the following: 
1. To operate the existing Plant to the envisaged capacity levels 
efficiently in terms of the MOU signed with Ministry of Steel 
2. To improve the quality of the products on a continuous basis. 
3. To establish the product range of “Vizag Steel” in the Market as a 
quality product. 
4. To carry out AMR (Additions, Modifications and Re placements) and to 
modernize to keep deploying contemporary technology. 
5. To make efforts for organic and inorganic growth with the available 
resources for raw material security and increasing capacities. 
6. To complete the Expansion Project as approved by the Government, 
increasing the existing capacity of Liquid steel to 6.3 Million Tonnes 
and commissioning the New Units for increasing availability of Vizag 
Steel Products not only in the Southern Region but across the nation 
and exports as required. 

7. To optimize production capacity and facilities keeping in view land and 
infrastructure available. 
8. To enter into Joint Ventures for raw materials security like Coal, Iron 
ore, Ferro Alloys etc. 
9. To enter into strategic JVs for making use of the By -products through 
JV route for manufacturing Cement and other products of value and 
benefit to the company. 
10. To carry out planned development of people and to look after their 
welfare. 
11. To carry out Corporate Social Responsibility befitting the status of the 
company.” 
 
1.6 When the ministry of Steel was asked about the efforts made by it to help 
RINL to achieve its objectives, the Ministry replied:- 
a) “…….Ministry of Steel has approved and expansion plan of Rs. 14000 
crore to RINL to increase its steel production capacity from 3.3 million 
tonnes to 6.3million tonnes. which will help RINL in optimizing the 
manpower and off set the overhead costs. 
 
b) For revival of the RINL, Government approved restructuring proposals 
twice, first in 1993 and second in 1998 which resulted in conversion of 
Government loans of Rs.4121 crores into equity / preference shares.  
 
c) RINL has been making conscious efforts to acquire captive iron ore 
and coking coal mines and the Ministry of Steel has fully backed 
RINL‟s efforts, in this regard. Appreciating RINL‟s  concern for raw 
material security, RINL was advised by the Ministry to make focused 
efforts through formation of a dedicated team in RINL to pursue 
acquisition of mines and other possibilities like joint ventures with other 
public sectors and sound privat e companies. RINL‟s efforts for 
development of iron ore blocks inclusive of proposals for value 
addition, jointly with State Mineral Development Corporation(s) of iron 
ore rich States of Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Chhatisgarh, Orissa & 
Karnataka, were also taken up with the concerned State Governments.  
 
d) Recently the Union  Cabinet in it‟s meeting held on 10.09.09, has 
approved the restructuring proposal of BIRD group of companies  and 
transfer of 51% stake of GoI in M/s EIL, the holding company of OMDC 
& BSLC to RINL.  OMDC have 6 mining leases (to be renewed) for 
Iron Ore with reserves of 200 Mt & Manganese reserves of 45 Mt and 
BSLC have 375 Mt of Lime stone and 287 Mt of Dolomite reserves. 
This would help RINL to partially overcome it's handicap of not having 
captive iron ore mines, apart from considering value addition 
propositions like installation of pelletisation plant etc.   
 
e) Government has facilitated a Joint venture of RINL with MOIL which 
will solve the problem of Manganese, a critical raw material requi red in 
steel making.  
 

f) The Government has approved formation of International Coal 
Ventures Ltd (ICVL) with equity participation by RINL, SAIL, CIL, 
NTPC & NMDC, in order to enable these companies to acquire 
metallurgical and thermal coal assets overseas. This will result in 
availability of Coking Coal for steel making in RINL.  
 
g) Government has since, approved, granting of Navratna Status to RINL 
which would be beneficial to RINL in it‟s endeavour to pursue further 
modernization & expansion projects.  
 
h) For improving gross margin the company has been advised to go for 
change in value added product mix, technology upgradation, 
rationalization of manpower etc. ” 
 
C. Organizational Set-up 
 
1.7 Details of the organizational set-up of the company are as follows:- 
“Visakhapatnam Steel Plant in the public sector category is operating 
under the corporate entity Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd (RINL) with head 
quarters at Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh. RINL has a wide network in 
the country with 5 Regional offices, 23 Branch offices and 23 Stock Yards. 
Out of the existing 23 Stock Yards, 3 Stock Yards i.e., Hyderabad, 
Chennai & Mumbai are RINL-VSP‟s own stockyards. The other stockyards 
are owned by Consignment Agents. Further, in order to meet the 6.3 Mt 
expansion needs, the marketing network is being further expanded by 
setting up 3 Nodal Stock Yards one each in South, West and North.” 
 
D. Board of Directors 
 
1.8 The Composition of Board of Directors of RINL is given below:- 
Board of Directors of RINL 
as on    15th October, 2009 
         Numbers % w.r.t 
Sanctioned Sanctioned In 
position 
Independent Professional 
Directors 
4 4 100 
Ministerial Directors 2 2 100 
Functional Directors 
(including Chairman)                
6 5 83.33 
 12 11 83 
 
The sanctioned strength of Board M embers is 12 comprising of 6 whole 
time Directors, 2 Directors nominated by MoS & 4 independent Directors, 
which is sufficient as per Corporate Governance norms.  However, the 
existing strength of Board Members is 10, consisting of 6 whole time 
Directors, 2 Directors from the Administrative Ministry & 2 independent 
Directors. The vacancies that have arisen, due to retirement of two 
independent Directors on completion of their tenure are to be filled up in 
due course.  The sanctioned strength is considered as sufficient.” 
 

E. Role of Independent Directors 
  
1.9 On being asked about the contribution of Government/non official 
Directors in the Board meetings held during last three years, RINL in their written 
replies submitted as under:- 
“Varied and vast experi ence of Government and non -official Directors 
make the deliberations in the Board meeting interactive & fruitful, which 
help in taking the right decisions. Their suggestions also result in improved 
operations and quick resolution of problems. The technical  and 
professional expertise of whole time / functional Directors coupled with 
varied experience of Govt. / non -official Directors develops a synergy for 
optimal utilization of resources and enhancing stakeholder value. The 
Government Directors have ensured  that the interest of the Govt. in RINL 
is protected and the functioning of the Company is as per guidelines 
issued from time to time. Besides, independent Directors as members of 
Audit Committee and various other committees contributed to its 
functioning.” 
 
1.10 When asked as to what specific steps were taken by the Company on the 
outcome of Ministerial review meetings to improve the working of the Company, 
the company submitted in their written replies as under:-  
“These are given below:  
Decision taken/directives 
received 
Action taken 
1. As RINL is working around 
120% rated capacity, many of 
the plants and eqpt. require 
revamping. RINL was directed 
to anticipate & plan for 
unavoidable capital repairs to 
be undertaken. 
 An exclusive Modernization and Capital Repair group was formed, as 
the name suggests spearheading much needed Capital repairs & 
modernisation to bring back reliability of the equipment.  
 This action helped in initiating and continuing many proposals, which 
are at various stages. 
 Notable amongst them are, Category-1 capital repairs of BFs, revamp 
of converters in the Steel Melt Shop, modernization of the continuous 
casting machines of the Steel melt Shop, Coke Ovens etc. (Each of 
them are essential, very major and would need total shutdown of the  
units for many months) 
2. It was noted that supply of 
inferior quality of iron ore to 
RINL was affecting the 
production in Blast Furnace. 
Use pellets on experimental 
basis to study processing iron 
ore with high alumina content 
 A technical study was conducte d by R&D on pellet usage in the Blast 
Furnace and found that improvement in production could be attained 
with usage of good quality pellets.  
 
Experience of using pellets can now be gainfully utilized depending on 
cost economics. 
3. Technical examination be 
undertaken for the decline in 
production in 07-08 
MoS constituted a committee comprising of JS(Steel) and Ex -
Director(Tech.)-SAIL for study and suggesting remedial actions. 
Based on the recommendations of the committee, several actions have 
been initiated and are being implemented like strengthening of operating 
practices, modernization, upgradation, capital repairs and major 
revamps as mentioned at S.No.1 above. 
 
4. Analysis for increase in 
Specific energy consumption 
A detailed analysis on the correlation b etween hot metal and specific 
energy consumption was done by the Works Department and report has 
been submitted to MOS. The increase in energy consumption during the 
period was due to adverse quality of iron ore, coal etc. used and lower 

output due to aging plant. Several management initiatives are in place to 
ensure VSP‟s leadership position in energy efficiency amongst similarly 
placed plants in the Steel Industry.  
5. Transparent and clear criteria 
for distribution of Steel 
Bullock carts for the benefit 
of small and needy farmers 
District authorities were contacted for identifying the beneficiaries for 
distribution of steel bullock carts with special preference to weaker 
sections and distributed  50 nos of bullock carts to the needy farmers 
6. Steel villages being 
developed to be the role 
model for the entire country. 
Seven villages have been identified for development as Model Steel 
Villages, of which, for one, construction of rural steel houses, Panchayat 
building, community hall, bus shelters etc have been completed.  
7. The impact of CSR works 
undertaken to be visible 
and benefit the common 
man in aspects like health 
care and basic facilities. 
Some major initiatives include: 
 Multi-purpose Social Camps including De -addiction programme and 
Health counseling con ducted at Salugu (tribal village) of Paderu 
Mandal, Visakhapatnam District. 
 Installation of Water De -fluoridation Plant at Vadlapudi rehabilitation 
colony 
 Mega medical camps were organised in and around Visakhapatnam 
 Jal-Dhara scheme for drinking water fac ility in tribal villages was 
implemented. 
 

Chapter II 
 
Physical and Financial Performance 
 
2.1 RINL were asked to furnish a note on the current and future production 
plans of the Company. The Company submitted the following:- 
“As VSP is already operating  at above rated capacity levels, major 
increase in production levels is expected after expansion units are 
brought on stream. Currently, the ongoing expansion project is for 
capacity expansion to 6.3 Mt liquid steel by 2010-11. 
                                                                                                                    
Unit: Mt 
Item Current 
capacity 
Capacity after 
Expansion  
Remarks 
Hot metal  3.4 6.5 Expected Q2 2010-11 
Liquid steel 3.0 6.3 Expected Q3 2010-11 
Saleable 
steel 
2.6 5.7 Expected Q2& Q3  
2011-12 
Note: 
1. Production plans will be firmed up once commissioning and stabilization 
is under way during Mar- Sep 2010. 
2. Production plan will also depend on shutdown schedule of major units 
(BF, BOF etc.). These will be finalized  after the award of major revamp 
tenders.  
 
A. Production Performance 
2.2 On being asked to furnish a note showing the total production of various 
products by the company during each of the last three years, the main 
competitors and the constraints if any,  and steps taken / proposed to be taken to 
overcome the same, RINL in their written replies stated as under:-  
“RINL was envisaged to be a mild steel producer and has only long 
products in it‟s product range, comprising bars, rods, rounds, billets, 
blooms and light and medium structurals. Main competitors in VSP‟s 
range of products are shown in the table below: 
 
Product Key Segment Competitor 
Market 
Size 
(Mt) 
VSP‟s 
Market 
Share (%) 
(2008-09) 
Bars & 
Rods 
Wire drawing industry, 
Construction and 
Engineering Industry 
SAIL, TATA,  JSW, 
Secondary   
Producers 
22.5 9.8 
Structurals Construction & Fabrication 
Industry 
SAIL, Secondary 
Producers 5.5 4.5 

Source: JPC 
The production of various finished products during last three years is given 
below.         Unit: „000 t 
Sl. 
No 
Product 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09* 
1 Bar Products 878 859 825 
2 Wire Rods 1055 998 972 
3 MMSM Products 1077 1015 748 
   
* Due to unprecedented global meltdown in the second half of 2008 -09, 
RINL resorted to   production cuts.   
1. Primary reason  for not being able to increase production, besides the 
production cut resorted to, is due to aging plant, which in almost all areas 
require major repairs and revamp. 
2. RINL facilities installed were designed for producing mild steel. 
However, eventually to compete with secondary sector and get better 
price realization more and more of special steel is being produced, as 
shown in the table below; production of special steel takes its toll on 
productivity. 
  
Value added steel sales (Rs Cr)
7356
6123
2878
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
(Sales Rs Cr)
0
20
40
60
80
% of gross sales
Sales (Rs Cr) %  of gross sales
 
Value added steel as % of sal steel
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
Value added
0
20
40
60
80
% of sal steel
Val added % of Sal Steel
 
 
3. RINL has been su rpassing rated capacities of it s production units 
since 2001 -02. As a result of operating at higher capacities and 
consistent growth in value added steel production (as mentioned 
above), has also put additional load on the  equipment. Many of the 
plant equipment due to aging require major revamp. Aging plant with 
major equipment requiring revamp/major capital repairs is the major 
constraint faced by RINL presently, in increasing volumes of 
production. For example, major equi pment like Blast Furnaces and 
Converters have exceeded their normal life, Sinter Plant needs 
modernization. To illustrate, 
 Since inception, BF–1 & BF-2 produced more than 29 Mt and 28 Mt 
till 31.03.2009 and have been in operation for 18 & 16 years 
respectively. As per the accepted industry norms Russian Blast 
Furnaces are to be taken for Category –I capital repairs after 14 to 
16 years of operations and 18 -20Mt throughput. Blast Furnaces at 

VSP are therefore due for major category -1 repairs, for which 
action has already been initiated and tenders are being processed 
for the work. 
 In Steel Melt Shop, repeated failures of converters have been 
affecting production. These failures were analysed along with the 
original manufacturers & suppliers of converters. The y confirmed 
that converters have exceeded their accepted service life of 40 -50 
thousand heats or 17 years by producing over 1 Lakh heats. They 
also confirmed that the converters at VSP are of very old design, 
the only one of this design and vintage working in the world and are 
overdue for total revamp. Accordingly, steps to revamp the 
converters with modified design were initiated and a complete 
revamp is being planned. This will also help the cause for 
environment protection. 
 The Continuous Casting Machines in the Steel Melt Shop also need 
to be modernized and this is being attempted one by one. Out of six 
machines, one is being upgraded now which would not only 
improve productivity but quality as well, once its operations are 
stabilized. The other five will be done progressively. 
 Sinter Machines 1 and 2 were commissioned in Nov‟ 89 and Dec 
‟91 respectively and have produced 41.66 Mt and 41.63 Mt 
respectively till 31.03.09. Machines are now due for major repairs to 
bring back efficiency and earlier reliabili ty, more importantly from 
environmental point of view. The process of conceptualization of 
revamping and upgradation has already commenced. 
 The three Coke oven batteries were commissioned progressively 
between Sep ‟89 and Jul ‟92. Cumulative gross coke pro duced till 
31.03.09 is 35.5 Mt. Intermittent repairs are being carried out and 
major repairs are now planned from 2012. Rebuilding of each 
battery is likely to take 30 months apiece. 
It is primarily because of Steel Melt Shop that production upstream 
(i.e, Blast Furnace) and downstream (Finishing Mills) have been 
affected adversely because of restricted availability. 
A number of initiatives, some of them as brought out above, have 
been planned towards upgrading, revamping and rejuvenating of 
major plant equ ipment. Some of them have already commenced 
and others planned during the period 2009 to 2011. The equipment 
health is then expected to improve and again achieve higher 
production levels……  
4. VSP is the only public sector steel plant that does not have ca ptive 
iron ore and coking coal mines  in the country. Supply of these key raw 
materials as also the quality (alumina content in iron ore and ash 
content in coal) have also affected production and productivity. This 
handicap also erodes the competitiveness o f the company as it is 
adversely impacted by the volatility of the coking coal and iron ore 
markets. VSP is trying to overcome this constraint by pursuing 
allocation of iron ore mines in the States of Orissa, Karnataka and 
Jharkhand and is also pursuing wi th State Mineral Development 
Corporations for setting JVs for projects involving value addition. Also, 
the company is scouting for opportunities in other countries as well. 

VSP has been allocated coking coal blocks in Dec 2005 and Sep 2008 
in Mahal & Tenug hat Jhirkhi, Bokaro Dt., Jharkhand State respectively. 
But both the blocks are having various and serious technical, geological 
and surface constraints and are un -mineable due to lack of suitable 
technology in the country for economical mining with better recovery of 
coal from these blocks. RINL have suggested to GoI to take back these 
allocations. 
RINL is also pursuing coal assets overseas through International Coal 
Ventures Ltd (ICVL) which was formed with equity participation by 
NMDC, CIL, NTPC, SAIL & R INL to acquire metallurgical and thermal 
coal assets overseas.”  
 
2.3 RINL were asked whether they had started focusing on optimizing 
production of value -added products. They submitted in their written replies as 
under:-   
 “RINL is consistently focusing on improving the Value Added Steel as per 
the market demand and registering growths year after year. The Value 
Added Steel production in the last three years is given below: 
Item 2009-10 2008-09 2007-08 
Value Added Steel Production 
(Mt) 2.403 2.008 1.893 
 
Value Added production has recorded a growth of 20% in 2009 -10 over 
2008-09 and w.r.t the total saleable steel production the component of 
value added steel has reached 76%.”  
 
2.4 On being asked if there was any possibility of RINL, establishing any new 
green field capacities in India in the near future, RINL replied as under:- 
“RINL has plans to go for brown -field expansion upto 16 or 20 Mt in 
phases at the present location to take advantage of the already available 
infrastructure like land, rail/road co nnectivity, two Ports in the vicinity etc. 
and strategic advantages such as lower specific investment cost for 
expansion, availability of experienced manpower and faster 
implementation of project as land and other infrastructure are readily 
available. 
Phase Liquid Steel Capacity (Mt) 
Phase-1 7.3(6.3+1.0) 
Phase-2 11.0 
Phase-3 13.0 
Phase-4 16.0 
                                           Note: Phase-1 is presently under implementation 
RINL has made a proposal to the Government of Jharkhand for allotment 
of mines jointly with their State Mineral Development Corporation as part 
of efforts to secure critical Raw Material like Iron Ore. In line with the 
requirement of the State Government of Jharkhand, RINL proposes to 
set up beneficiation, pelletisation and a  Steel Plant as part of the value 

addition to the mining and exploration project.  The proposal of RINL is 
pending for decision with the Government of Jharkhand.  Similar letters 
have also been written to the Governments of Orissa and Karnataka 
requesting for grant of mines.” 
 
2.5 When queried as to whether RINL has ever cut production in the last two 
years, the company replied thus:- 
“RINL has been operating the plant consistently over 100% capacity 
utilisation for the last 9 years.  For operational reason s RINL has not cut 
production.  However, due to external conditions and market fluctuations, 
RINL was forced to rationalise the production in 2008 -09.  Despite 
rationalisation, the capacity utilisation was maintained above 100% in 
2008-09.  
In view of the unprecedented global economic melt down, the production 
of pig iron was curtailed from Nov „08 to Mar „09 in view of high 
accumulated stock and un -remunerative market prices of pig iron. In 
order to avoid/minimize production of pig iron because of low 
realizations, hot metal production had to be regulated by lowering the 
thermal regime of the Blast Furnaces to match the requirement of the 
Steel Melt Shop. Consequentially, coke production was regulated to meet 
the coke requirement of the Blast furnace.  
No production cut was resorted to, during the year 2009 -10. Production 
was normalized in the year 2009 -10 and RINL -VSP registered a growth 
of 10% in hot metal, 8% in liquid steel & 17% in saleable steel production 
in 2009 -10 compared to CPLY. VSP also register ed the best ever 
quarterly (since inception) saleable steel production in the IVth Quarter of 
2009-10.”  
 
2.6 Regarding bottlenecks in the existing production facilities of RINL, it was 
asked how the same are resolved:-  
“The bottlenecks being faced are: 
  (i)  Many of the major units and equipment are aged and require 
revamping. 
 (ii)  Lack of captive mines 
Steps taken to de-bottleneck are: 
(i)  Revamp/modernization of the existing units like Sinter Plant, 
Blast Furnace and SMS converters & Casters and the Mil ls are 
planned in phases. 
(ii) Technological upgradation and infusing new technology is being 
addressed in current and future expansion plan and partly 
through Additions, Modifications & replacement (AMR) 
(iii) The proposal for restructuring of BIRD group of companie s, 
making it a subsidiary of RINL was approved by the Union 
cabinet on 10.09.09 and transfer of 51% stake in M/s EIL, the 
holding company of OMDC & BSLC to RINL, is in the advanced 
stage of completion. This would give RINL access to around 
200Mt of iron or e reserves, which would help VSP to partially 
overcome it‟s handicap of not having captive iron ore mines. 

However, Mining leases for Iron ore mines of OMDC need to be 
restored / extended for obtaining full / potential benefits.   
(iv)  Acquisition of iron ore mines have also been taken up with the 
respective State Govts. Of Orissa, Chattisgarh, AndhraPradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka and Rajasthan.  RINL has also expressed 
its‟ keenness to enter into Joint Venture with State Mineral 
Development Corporation of the S tate Govt. to develop the 
mines.”   
 
2.7 On being asked about the delay in the revamp of aging plants of the 
company which should have been initiated five years back before the expiry of 
the normal life span of the plant, the CMD, RINL during oral evidence  before the 
Committee replied:- 
 “……Five years ago, when the market started looking up, obviously the 
company thought that this is the good time to produce more and sell more, 
and get better prices and pay up accumulated losses. I would not say five 
years, but yes, some thing could have been started. But that is the past. 
We are making those corrective things. I must say that our colleagues in 
the operations department had done a good job, despite this, we are 
producing at efficiencies which are comparable with the best, even in the 
SAIL and other plants. We could have done better, which we will be able 
to, after we repair that……” 
 
2.8 The company further added in their post-evidence replies:- 
“RINL would like to submit that by 31 st Mar 2002 it had accumulat ed 
losses to the tune of Rs. 4981.96 Crs (say, Rs. 5000crs) and the company 
was reported to BIFR for being potentially sick.  This had happened for 
several reasons, including a long period of sluggish market with low prices 
of steel. Immediately after 1992 , when the plant got commissioned, RINL 
had to grapple with the problems of a very high capital cost, high debt at 
higher interest cost and innumerable teething problems during the initial 
phase of production & stabilization. 
When the market turned positiv e in the early 2000, with all out efforts of 
the RINL collective, improvement in productivity levels could be achieved 
and capacity utilization improved from around 90% in the year 1999 -00 to 
about 120% in the year 2005 -06.  It was therefore, the ideal tim e for RINL 
to maximize production levels, generate surplus and try and wipe out it‟s 
accumulated losses which it could ultimately achieve by the end of 2005 -
06.  Thus, though RINL took up maintenance activities during this period 
to keep the equipment fit for production, the highly capital intensive repairs 
or revamps etc. could not be planned for two reasons:  
i) due to continuous efforts to wipe out accumulated losses and 
ii) to take advantage of good market conditions  
It must be stated here that RINL, thereaft er, did initiate steps immediately 
for major repairs and rejuvenation programme for it‟s Blast Furnaces and 
converters.  But all major steel equipment producers in Europe were busy 
at that time catering to the booming steel market in 2007 and early 2008 
etc. and were not interested in doing repair/ revamping job as compared to 

supplying new equipment.  So the tender enquiries floated by RINL in 
2007, were inadequately responded to, for these reasons.  However, after 
the severe downturn of market towards end  of 2008, we started to get 
response from top companies in the year 2009 as they then started 
seeking this kind of business i.e modernization/repairs etc as well. We are 
now nearing our process for approvals for placement of orders for these 
jobs.   
It may be noted that the downturn of 2008 second half gave an opportunity 
to RINL to do some intensive health check of key equipment which were 
helpful in improving productivity during the year 2009 -10 and the 
improvement trend is continuing even now.  However, our operations 
personnel are carefully operating the plant now. We are hopeful that 
around the year 2012-13 (as it takes two years from planning to revamp of 
Blast Furnaces), these key facilities would be rejuvenated and RINL would 
be back with highest pro duction levels for which it is known.  Expansion 
facilities are also expected to stabilize by then.   
So we would like to submit that there was no catastrophe, but capacity 
utilization levels came down from earlier high of over 120% to, in the 
range of 115-120%. (except the year 2008-09 when we had effected some 
production cuts in view of the unprecedented global financial meltdown).”   
 
2.9  Considering the importance of captive Mines of primary inputs like iron 
ore, manganese ore and chrome ore, for the s teel industry to reduce their costs 
of production and to expand their capacities, it was queried whether the Ministry 
of Steel has any say in the allocation of Mining Leases for these minerals.  The 
Ministry replied:- 
“The allocation of mineral concessions  for minerals including iron ore, 
manganese ore and chrome ore is governed by the provisions of Mines 
and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Rules 
thereof. The allocation of major minerals like iron ore, manganese ore and 
chrome ore is d one by State Governments after taking prior approval of 
the Central government.   As per Government of India (Allocation of 
Business Rules), 1961, the work of legislation as well as regulation of 
mines and development of minerals within the territory of In dia has been 
allocated to Ministry of Mines.   Accordingly, the prior approval of the 
Government of India in the matter of allocation of mineral concessions in 
respect of major minerals under the provisions of MMDR Act, 1957 is 
given by Ministry of Mines.   Ministry of Steel has got no say in the matter. 
Efforts made by the Ministry:    
a).Ministry of Steel had taken up the matter with Cabinet Secretary for 
examining the matter for making suitable amendments in the Government 
of India (Allocation of Busines s Rules), 1961 to make provision for 
exercise of the powers of the Central Government under the provisions of 
MMDR Act, 1957 by Ministry of Steel, in respect of iron ore, manganese 
ore and chrome ore . However, Cabinet Secretariat informed that no 
amendments to the Government of India (Allocation of Business Rules), 
1961 are considered necessary.   
 

          b).Letters have been sent to State authorities of Rajasthan, Jharkhand, 
Orissa, Chattisgarh & Karnataka for allocation of mines.   The Ministry of 
Mines has also been requested to consider the case of RINL favourably.   
Periodical meetings are also held to expedite the decision.  
(c). Recently the Union  Cabinet in it‟s meeting held on 10.09.09, has 
approved the restructuring proposal of BIRD group of com panies and 
transfer of 51% stake of GoI in M/s Eastern Investment Ltd. (EIL), the 
holding company of OMDC & BSLC to RINL.  OMDC have 6 mining 
leases (to be renewed) for Iron Ore with reserves of 200 Mt & Manganese 
reserves of 45 million tonnes and BSLC hav e 375 million tonnes of Lime 
stone and 287 million tonnes of Dolomite reserves. This would help RINL 
to partially overcome it's handicap of not having captive iron ore mines, 
apart from considering value addition propositions like installation of 
pelletisation plant etc.  
(d). Ministry of Steel is facilitating a proposal of RINL to be the holding 
company of Nilanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL). The move was envisaged 
to impart synergy to both the companies as it would satisfy RINL‟s basic 
requirement of raw ma terial from the mines owned by NINL and 
simultaneously allow investment by RINL in NINL‟s future modernization 
and expansion plans.  RINL has submitted in June 2010, it‟s valuation of 
NINL shares for consideration.  The matter is under consideration of 
Ministry of Commerce, which is administrative Ministry of NINL. 
(e). The Government has approved  formation of International Coal Ventures Ltd 
(ICVL) with equity participation by RINL, SAIL, CIL, NTPC & NMDC, in order to 
enable these companies to acquire coking and thermal coal assets overseas.”  
 
2.10 The Ministry further added:-  
“……As regards captive coking coal blocks, it is mentioned that as a result 
of efforts of Ministry of Steel, RINL was allocated two coking coal blocks by 
Ministry of Coal i.e. Mahal in in 2005 and Tenughat Jhirki in Jharkhand in 
2008.  However, RINL   did not find these blocks suitable for economic 
mining and requested this Ministry to take up the matter with Ministry of 
Coal for surrendering the allotment of these two coal blocks and  for 
considering allotment of some other good coking coal blocks with open cast 
mining possibilities.    The matter has accordingly been taken up by Ministry 
of Steel with Ministry of Coal vide letter dt.3 rd September 2009.  The reply of 
Ministry of Coal is awaited.” 
 
2.11 The Secretary, Steel on the issue of the central government having a 
bigger say in the allocation of mining leases made the following statement:- 
“….Another issue that was raised is whether the Central Government 
should have greater say i n mining leases. We think it should have. We 
also feel that we should be actually the Ministry authorized to grant mining 
leases for iron ore because it is captive to the steel industry and no other 
industry uses it. We will be able to much appreciate all the ramifications 
regarding conservation vis -à-vis export, regarding our long -term 
requirements, regarding what kind of industries should be granted these 
leases and what kind of firms should be granted these leases….”  
 

2.12 The allotment of iron ore mini ng leases is governed by MMDR Act, 1957 
(Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation Act) in terms of which the 
primary role in allocation of mines rests with the State Government. It was 
understood that the State Government (Jharkhand) had rejected the applications 
of RINL for mining leases on the ground that they were not adding any value in 
the respective state by way of creation of new units/plants leading to more 
employment opportunities for the local people of that state.In this regard, the 
ministry of steel were asked Whether they had taken any steps to pursue the 
case of RINL by taking up the matter with PMO or Cabinet Committee of 
Economic Affairs and whether they were coordinating with the concerned State 
Governments and other central Ministries. It was further asked if any Empowered 
Group of Ministers was constituted to solve this problem and if it was true that the 
different Central Government Ministries (Ministry of Mines Ministry of 
Environment Ministry of Commerce etc.) were working in differ ent directions to 
strengthen their own position and were thereby working at cross purposes.  In 
reply, the Ministry stated the following:- 
“The applications of RINL for mines in Jharkhand has not been rejected.  
Efforts have been made by the Ministry of St eel and letters sent by the 
Ministry of Steel to State Governments of iron ore rich states of Rajasthan, 
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chattisgarh & Karnataka.   The Ministry of Steel has also 
taken up the matter with the Ministries of Mines and Coal for allotment of  
mining leases in the State of Orissa, Chattisgarh etc.  No empowered Group 
of Ministers has been constituted in this regard. 
The Ministries of Mines, Environment, Commerce, etc. have been set up to 
carry out  the activities  as set out in the Government o f India (Allocation of 
Business), Rules.   The Ministries together are committed to ensure proper 
economic and social development of the country.  If there are differences in 
some particular area, the same is resolved through appropriate mechanism of 
consultation focusing on larger interest of the country.   However, it is added 
that Ministry of Mines has proposed to replace the existing Mines and 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 with a new Act.   As there 
were differences of opinion among vari ous Ministries, the Draft Mines and 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Bill, 2010 proposed by Ministry of 
Mines has been referred to a Group of Ministers (GoM) for deliberation.   The 
matter is presently under consideration of GOM.”  
 
2.13 The company was  asked whether coke rate of RINL is higher than the 
coke rate of other steel majors such as SAIL, TISCO etc., and that if so, what 
steps have been taken to decrease the coke rate. In reply, they submitted the 
following:-  

“As per available information, tot al Coke rate of SAIL is around 517* Kg/ t 
HM when compared to around 495 Kg/t HM of RINL (2009 -10). However, 
auxiliary fuels like Coal Dust Injection, tar injection are adopted in SAIL, 
due to which the Coke rate is lower in some of the units of SAIL. Simi larly 
for TISCO which uses auxiliary fuels, the fuel rate as per available 
information was 560 kg/thm for 2009-10. 
Steps are being taken by RINL to decrease Coke rate further by use of 
pulverised coal dust injection which is planned to be taken up in the B last 
Furnace that is going to come up in the expansion stage and also in the 
existing Blast Furnaces after suitable modifications, which are currently 
under implementation. Additionally use of pellets is contemplated which 
would further decrease coke rate.  Fuel rates will undergo change in future 
depending on the extent of injection of auxiliary fuels. 
* Excludes Nut coke and Pulverised Coal dust Injection”  
 
2.14 When asked if RINL has a lower productivity of Blast furnace, as 
compared to SAIL, TISCO etc., the company replied thus:-  
“It is not true that RINL has a lower BF Productivity. BF Productivity at 
RINL is around 1.94 t/day/cum against 1.57 t/day/cum of SAIL, as per 
the available information.   
RINL‟s productivity is better than TISCO‟s Blast Furnac es except new 
furnaces.RINL‟s BF now under installation is expected to match with that 
of new furnaces of TISCO.” 
 
2.15 RINL were asked to define "Special Steels" and to state whether RINL has 
developed expertise in manufacturing them. In reply, RINL submitted:-  
“The various grades of steel which are being produced through normal 
process are called garden variety and they cannot be used for several 
special application.  Certain segments of usage of steels need special / 
desired physical properties and chem istry including cleanliness, surface 
qualities, dimensional tolerances and mechanical/metallurgical properties 
etc.  The production of such steels needs development of special 
process, adoption of special technologies, strict operational discipline and 
additional alloying elements etc.,    Steels of such quality produced 
through special technology along with addition of alloying elements are 
generally called “ Special Steels.” The physical & chemical properties of 
special steels remain stable during various stages of it‟s use.   
RINL which was originally envisaged to produce only mild steel, has 
developed expertise over the years in manufacturing of special steels 
and its component has gone up to over 70% in the total saleable steel 
production. The majority o f special steels produced cater to general 
engineering, bright bar, automobile and fastener sectors. In addition to 
this, to cater to construction sector for various specialized applications 
like, pre -stressed concrete, corrosion resistant rebar and transm ission 
line towers, various new grades were developed. RINL is approved as a 
vendor for various products by Government as well as OEMS. There is a 
continuous effort in developing newer grades of special steel to meet the 
requirements of various sectors in the country.  

In the existing Steel Melt Shop, adoption of bottom blowing in converters 
and installation of Electro - Magnetic Stirrer (EMS) in continuous casting 
has facilitated production of special steels. In the current phase of 
expansion, facilities su ch as desulphurisation, ladle heating furnace, RH 
degassing etc., are under installation.  The finishing mills under 
installation would  also be having latest technology for rolling of difficult 
grades like welding steel, spring steel, bearing steel, case hardening 
steel etc. 
The conceptualization process for production of very high grade steel i.e. 
silicon steel, required by electrical industries have also started.  This will 
help in making such steel available indigenously which are currently 
getting imported.” 
 
2.16 It was observed that despite being an exporter of steel, some quantity of 
specialized grades of steel is still being imported. RINL was therefore asked why 
they could not manufacture such grades of steel themselves. RINL submitted the 
following in their written replies:- 
“RINL is basically long products producer and originally envisaged to 
produce only normal grade(s) of steel.  However, subsequently with in -
house expertise and by adding a few facilities, number of grades of 
products as special  steel grade(s) could be developed.  It is to be 
mentioned that the specialized grade of steel which is being imported 
currently in the country mainly pertains to flat products for which RINL 
does not have facilities. 
In next phase of expansion, RINL intends to produce specialized grade of 
steel which is currently being imported like silicon steel, grain oriented 
and non grain oriented which is largely used in electrical transformers, 
wind mills, turbine blades, fan motors etc.,  Production of these steels 
however needs special know -how & technology which is available with 
limited number of companies globally.” 
 
2.17 It was also asked if RINL manufactures "seamless steel pipes" and if not, 
why RINL is not capable of manufacturing it. In their reply, they stated:- 
 “RINL is not having manufacturing facilities for production of “seamless 
steel pipes”. In next phase of expansion to 11 Mtpa, the installation of 
suitable seamless steel pipe plant is being explored. Current phase of 
expansion had envisaged setting up of a facility/unit for the manufacture of 
seamless tubes. However, the same could not materialize due to very high 
cost offered by bidders due to the prevailing buoyant market at that point 
of time.  The technology that was sought at that time was being  overtaken 
by new and improved processes.  Price and technology were two reasons 
for not going ahead with Seamless Tube Mill at that time. In next phase, if 
the unit is installed, RINL will be fully capable of manufacturing seamless 
steel pipes with latest and the most appropriate technology.”       
 

2.18 According to the National Steel Policy -2005, there is a surplus of fines 
in the country, which are not fully utilized by the domestic steel industry and are 
likely to be exported in huge quantities to Jap an and South Korea. In this regard, 
it was queried as to why RINL did not set up fines based steel plant and if it was 
a fact that RINL did not have the technical know -how to set up fines based steel 
plants. In reply, RINL stated the following:-  
 “At RINL , Iron input to the Blast Furnace primarily is through Sinter. 
Sinter is produced by an agglomeration process where the main raw 
material is Iron ore fines. Currently, RINL has already two Sinter Plants 
for usage of iron ore fines of around 65 - 75% in its total consumption of 
iron ore.  
The company has planned higher usage of fines in its existing plants as 
well as new plants by enhancing the sinter and pellet usage for which the 
new Sinter Plants, Pellet Plant and up -gradation of existing Sinter Plants 
are planned as part of the current expansion plan / revamping and 
modernization/ next phase of expansion. Additional new sinter plant for 
production of sinter using about 3Mt of iron ore fines is already under 
installation in the on-going expansion. 
RINL has proposal for installation of 4 to 6 MT capacity pelletisation plant 
using iron ore fines.  However, the installation of this would depend on 
assured supply of iron ore fines by mining company for which discussion 
is in process with NMDC. As RINL does not h ave any iron ore mines 
allotted by Govt. of India, we are totally dependent on other mining 
companies for supply of iron ore.”    
 
B. Performance rating (MOU) 
2.19 It was asked if the company has been signing MOU with the 
Administrative Ministry and, if so what was MOU rating obtained by  the company 
during these years. The written replies are as under:-  
“RINL has been signing MoU with MoS /GoI since 2000 -01. Ratings 
obtained are given below: 
 
Year 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Rating Excellent Very Good 
 
C. Capacity Utilization 
 
2.20 It was asked whether the steel plant of RINL had exceeded its rated 
capacity during the last two years and details thereof. The company replied as 
under:- 
“RINL-VSP has exceeded its rated capacity in  the last two years. Details 
are given below.  

             Unit: „ 000 
t 
Item Rated 
Capacity 
2009-10 2008-09 
Actual   % Capacity 
Utilisation   Actual    % Capacity 
Utilisation   
Hot Metal Production 3400 3900 115 3546 104 
Liquid Steel Production 3000 3399 113 3145 105 
Saleable Steel 
Production 2656 3167 119 2701 102 
 
2.21 On being asked the percentage of capacity utilization of the Company and 
steps proposed to be taken to increase capacity utilization, RINL furnished in 
their written replies as under:- 
 “VSP has been  achieving more than 100% capacity utilization for its 
units, since 2001 -02. In the year 2008 -09, in spite of production cuts 
affected during the second half due to slump in steel markets, the 
capacity utilization of the Plant was above 100%.  
…… major equipment like Blast Furnaces and Converters in the Steel 
Melt Shop have already exceeded their accepted service life and are due 
for major repairs/revamp, which are a must for enhancement of 
production levels.  
Accordingly, action has already been initiated for major Catgory-1 repairs 
of Blast Furnaces for which the tendering process is in progress. 
Complete revamp of converters is being planned.  Various schemes like 
installation of Pulverized Coal Injection facilities in Blast furnaces, 
production enhancement in sinter machines, modernization of the 
Continuous Casting Machines have also been planned to further improve 
the capacity utilization. 
  Capacity utilization is expected to improve from existing levels, once 
major revamp and capital repairs are completed.” 
 
D. Expansion Plans 
 
2.22 RINL were asked for the original schedule, revised schedule, actual 
expected date of commissioning of each project during each of the last five years 
and reasons for the time lag in commissioning of projec ts. They were further 
asked to what extent the delays were responsible for escalation in costs and 
whether they were unavoidable. In reply, they submitted the following:-  
“Three major projects costing more than Rs.20 cr. have been 
commissioned during the last five years as given below: 
 
Sl. 
No Project 
Date of 
Commission
ing 
Original / 
Revised 
Estimate  
(Rs. Crs.) 
Anticipate
d Cost        
(Rs. Crs.) 
Remarks and Reasons for cost 
overrun 
1. Coke Oven 
Battery – IV 
Original 
(contractual)- 
286.83  /  
380 
380 Battery commissioned and is 
under regular operation as per 

, (Phase – I) Nov „ 08   
 
Actual  
 Apr „ 09 
 
requirement.  This will supply part 
of coke requirement of plant on 
expansion.   
No cost over run anticipated with 
respect to revised cost.  However, 
there was an  increase in project 
cost to the extent of about Rs.64 
crores mainly due to escalation 
within project  time cycle,  
variance in statutory levies. The 
part of increase in project cost 
was also due to higher order 
value due to limited suppliers / 
inadequate response of bidders  
for some of the critical 
equipments like oven machines, 
lifters , refractories  etc 
Sl. 
No Project 
Date of 
Commission
ing 
Original / 
Revised 
Estimate  
(Rs. Crs.) 
Anticipate
d Cost        
(Rs. Crs.) 
Remarks and Reasons for cost 
overrun 
2. Combined 
blowing in 
SMS-1 
Original 
contractual -  
Jan ‟09  
Actual -Mar 
‟09 to May „ 
09 
18 / 37 37 Commissioned and is under 
regular operation.   No cost over 
run anticipated w.r.t revised 
estimate, however there was 
increase with respect to origi nal 
estimate mainly due to 
subsequent changes in the scope 
due to adoption of new 
technology for the first time in the 
plant.  However there has been 
no cost over run after placement 
of order except for contractual 
escalations which will be frozen  
while closing of contract 
3. Caster 
Upgradation 
(CCM-2) 
Original 
contractual –  
Jan „09 
Actual - Sept 
„ 09 
51.4 / 77 77 Continuous Caster Upgradation 
(CCM-2):  Commissioned and is 
under stabilisation.  With this, the 
production of special quality steel 
and productivity is set to increase.    
No cost over run is anticipated 
over revised approved cost   
except minor variation on account 
of statutory escalations which will 
be frozen while closing of contract 
 
As VSP is already operating at above rated capacity leve ls, major 
increase in production levels is expected after expansion units are 
brought on stream. Currently, the ongoing expansion project is for 
capacity expansion to 6.3 Mt liquid steel by 2010-11. 
 
                                                                                                                    
Unit: Mt 
Item Current 
capacity 
Capacity after 
Expansion  
Remarks 
Hot metal  3.4 6.5 Expected Q2 2010-11 
Liquid steel 3.0 6.3 Expected Q3 2010-11 
Saleable 
steel 
2.6 5.7 Expected Q2& Q3  2011-12 

Note: 
1. Production plans will be firmed up once commissioning and stabilization 
is under way during Mar- Sep 2010. 
2. Production plan will also depend on shutdown schedule of major units 
(BF, BOF etc.). These will be finalized after the award of major re vamp 
tenders.  
 
 RINL has excellent layout and other infrastructure facilities at its Vizag 
unit to expand the capacity up to 16 million tonne per annum.   
Accordingly, RINL has drawn its long term directional plans to expand the 
capacity of liquid steel  to 16 million tonne in phases by the year 2020  to 
maintain its dominant position in the Indian steel market.  In the first 
phase RINL is focussing on expansion limiting to long products category 
which is required for infrastructure growth of the country a nd to diversify 
to flat products category in the subsequent phases.   
To achieve the above endeavour, RINL has already frozen the first phase 
expansion plan and is in the process to raise liquid steel capacity to 6.3 
million tonne per annum by the year 201 1.   With the completion of this 
phase of expansion RINL will be able to meet part of growing demand of 
construction steel like wire rod, bar, channel, angle, beam etc.  
The production target of hot metal, crude steel and saleable steel after 
Expansion Plans of RINL in phases will be as indicated below: 
 
Item Current capacity 
(2006-07)   
Capacity after 
current Expansion by 
2011 
Directional 
plan 2020 
Hot metal 3.4 6.5 16 
Liquid steel 3.0 6.3 16 
Saleable steel 2.6 5.7 15 
 
Major facilities coming up in the current phase of expansion  are :  
 New Blast Furnace   of 3800 cum capacity water cooled hearth 
bottom to produce 2.5Mt of hot metal with a state of art technology 
viz. inclusion of  profilometer, copper staves, PCI, TRT etc.,   
 New Steel Melting Shop  with two converters and three casters to 
produce liquid steel of 2.8 Mt capacity along with facilities to produce 
cleaner and high grade steel viz., secondary steel melting facilities, 
electro magnetic stirrer, auto mould level control, combined blowing 
along with pollution control measures etc.,    
 New Sinter Plant  with 408 m2 sintering area along with circular cooler to 
produce 10950 TPD of sinter. 
 New CRMP  with two nos. 500 TPD vertical shaft kilns to produce 1000 
TPD of calcined lime.  
 New high speed Wire Rod Mill of 6 lakh tonne per annum capacity with 
wider range of products to meet the customer requirement.   
 Special Bar Mill of 7.5 lakh tonne per annum capacity   to meet the 
customer requirement of special steel, both in term of sizes and quality 
with a flexibility of supply in straight  and coil  form.   
 Structural Mill  of 7 lakh tonne per annum capacity with high speed 
roughing stand to produce 75 – 175 mm structurals as per market demand.   

 
 Completion schedule : The overall schedule for commissioning and 
stabilisation  of  iron and steel zone and finishing mills is given below :   
 
Stages Facility Commissioning & 
stabilization 
Stage-I New Blast Furnace along with new steel 
melting facilities and new wire rod mill 
including supporting facilities like n ew 
sinter plant, raw material handling 
system etc.  
From Mar„ 10 – Sept „ 
10 
Statge-II 
 
New Special bar mill and associated 
facilities 
New structural mill and associated 
facilities 
From Jan „ 11  - Jul „ 11 
From Jul „ 11 – Dec „ 11 
 
Overall status:  
Order placement – completed for all major process packages including 
auxiliary packages.  Balance few auxiliary packages are also being 
ordered as per requirement.   
 
Design & Engineering : Basic engineering has already been completed 
for all the packages.  Det ailed engineering by the consultant for civil & 
structural work and also by the main technology supplier have been 
completed except part of utilities and miscellaneous areas which are also 
progressively being completed matching overall integrated 
commissioning schedule of expansion units. 
 
Execution at site  : The execution of various packages at site including 
civil, structural, equipment supply and  equipment erection have already 
commenced and are at various stages of completion. Overall status  of 
stage-1 is given below : 
Piling  Completed 
Basic engineering Completed 
Design & 
Engineering 
completed except few areas 
Concreting 81% completed (critical concreting done 
except few areas which is planned for 
completion by Dec ‟09) 
Structural fabrication 86% completed (critical fabrication done 
except few areas which is planned for 
completion by Dec ‟09) 
Structural erection 60% completed (balance progressing at fast 
pace to make all fronts available for 
equipment erection by Dec ‟09 
Equipment erection 27% completed (erection of blast furnace and 
several auxiliaries are in advanced stage of 
completion). 
 

To ensure timely completion of the project, several initiatives have been 
taken by VSP which includes monitoring at various levels including up to 
Ministry o f Steel, engagement of large number of man power (about 
16000 – 17000 workers), deployment of more than 50 cranes of different 
capacities, stretched hours of working, visit of engineers to suppliers 
manufacturing shops for expediting supplies, across the t able 
discussions on engineering wherever required.  Inspite of all efforts being 
made, there are intermediate delays in some of the packages which are 
also being attempted to be made up by deployment of additional 
resources to match the overall integrated commissioning schedule as 
indicated above.” 
 
Strategic Alliances: 
 
BIRD group of companies:  
Union Cabinet has approved a proposal for restructuring of BIRD group 
and for RINL to become a strategic partner. In the proposed 
restructuring, OMDC and BSCL will be made subsidiaries of EIL, which in 
turn will be made subsidiary of RINL, thus bringing EIL, OMDC and 
BSCL under the umbrella of RINL. The other two companies of KDC & 
SSL would be phased out. 
JV with MOIL : RINL -VSP has formed a joint venture company wi th 
Manganese Ore India Ltd -RINMOIL Ferro Alloys Pvt Ltd. The company 
was incorporated on 29.07.09. The JVC with one 27 MVA furnace and 
one 9 MVA furnace is envisaged to produce 37500 tonnes per annum of 
Silico Manganese and 20000 tonnes per annum of Ferro Manganese. 
The JV will serve to meet VSP‟s ferro alloy requirement besides 
opportunity to export. The JV will also help in beneficial use of low grade 
Manganese ore of VSP‟s existing mines and also Manganese from 
OMDC etc. 
JV with State Mineral Development  Corporations (SMDCs) : RINL is 
pursuing for allocation of iron ore blocks through JVs with SMDCs for 
value added projects in the States of Karnataka, Jharkhand and Orissa. 
NINL: RINL is pursuing strategic alliance with Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd 
(NINL) to impart synergy to both the companies as it would satisfy RINL‟s 
requirement of raw material from the mines owned by NINL 
simultaneously enable NINL‟s future modernization and expansion plans. 
Slurry Pipeline:  RINL-VSP is getting its entire iron ore requirem ents 
from NMDC Bailadilla mines since inception. There have been major 
disruptions to the railway line (KK line) transporting the iron ore, due to 
Naxalite activities. For mutual benefit and better synergy, construction of 
a slurry pipeline is being explored. 
RINL has undertaken and is already implementing it‟s major expansion 
plan to almost double it‟s capacity to 6.3 million tonnes of liquid steel, as 
mentioned at 13c above, which is at various stages of completion. 
Apart from expansion, RINL is also in t he process of modernizing and 
upgrading it‟s existing facilities to sustain the current production and 
productivity level and also to reduce energy consumption, improve 
technological parameters, to meet environmental norms etc. In this 
endeavour, several projects have already been frozen for implementation 
and some of them are further being identified as per requirement. Major 

projects which have been completed / under implementation / being 
planned for implementation are as brought out below: 
S.No Project Area 
Major Projects completed 
1 Coke oven Battery-4 (Phase-1) Coke making 
2 Combined Blowing in all of the 3 LD converters  
 
 
Steel making 
 
3 Modernization of CCM-2 
4 Modification of gas cutting machine in SMS 
5 Replacement of Lift  & Turn stand housing in CCM-4 
6 Upgradation of ladle furnace PLC & MMI 
7 
 
Up-gradation of Control and Instrumentation of 1 Turbo generator Power plant 
Up-gradation of Control and Instrumentation of 1 Boiler  
8 Conversion of binding machine to automatic strapping machine in 
bar mill 
Rolling mills 
 
SNo Project Area 
Projects under implementation 
1 Iron Ore Storage Augmentation Raw Materials 
2 Battery 4-phase 2 Coke Making 
 
Coal Handling facility 
By Product facility 
3 Pulverised Coal Dust Injection Iron making 
4 Combined Blowing facility in Converters (Completed & under 
stabilisation) 
Steel making 
Modernization and Automation of Continuous casting Machine-2 
5 Conversion of tying machine to strapping machine Rolling Mills  
6 
 
Up-gradation of Control and Instrumentation of 2 Turbo generators Power plant 
Up-gradation of Control and Instrumentation of 4 Boilers  
7 
 
Air Separation Unit 4 Utilities 
 Air Separation Unit 5  
Feed Air Compressor 5 & 6 
8 Reduction of Ammonical Nitrogen at MBC Pollution control 
Projects being planned for implementation 
1 Stacker-cum-Reclaimer  & Dozers Raw Materials 
2 Enhancing production in Sinter Machines Sinter Making 
 20.6 MW waste heat recovery system 
Twin boom stacker in Sinter Plant 

3 
 
Category 1 repairs of BF 1 Iron making 
Category 1 repairs of BF 2 
Pig Iron storage augmentation 
Repair / replacement of BF 1 secondary equipment 
Repair / replacement of BF 2 secondary equipment 
Level-2 automation 
4 Modification of Continuous Casting Machine Steel making 
Converter revamping / upgradation 
Upgradation of slag yard cranes 
Handling and finishing line - 4 
Augmentation of SMS water system for upgradation of CCMs 
5 Additional storage facility (EPI) Marketing 
 
Presently, the company is meeting the expenditure towards modernization 
though internal generation. The company will borrow long term loans, as 
per requirement, in the future.  Being a zero debt company and with equity 
capital of Rs.4889.95 Crs, VSP can raise further funds from the m arket.  
RINL plan to match modernization activities with internal resources and 
borrowings, as also BOO wherever feasible. 
Benefit of modernization 
As brought out earlier VSP is in the process of expanding it‟s capacity to 
6.3 Mt of liquid steel in the fir st phase of expansion. Though increase in 
capacity in the first phase, is almost 100%, the manpower increase for 
expansion works proposed is within sanctioned strength and is expected 
to be within 20% thereof. Modern technological features being adopted fo r 
expansion include: 
- Sinter Machine (400 Sq.m) with circular cooler and multi slit burners 
- Blast Furnace (3800 cum) with facilities like profilometer, Copper 
staves in high heat zones, PCI etc. 
- Steel Melt Shop with facilities like Combined blowing, Electro  
Magnetic Stirrer, auto mould level control etc. 
- High speed Wire Rod Mill (105 – 110 meters/second) 
- Special Bar Mill with free size rolling and 20 -45mm sizes in straight 
& coil forms  
- Structural Mill with high speed roughing train (100 -175 mm size 
beams) 
VSP is also in the process of modernizing and upgrading it‟s existing 
facilities to sustain the current production and productivity levels and also 
enhance to level 2 automation levels, reduce energy consumption, 
improve technological parameters, meet envir onmental norms etc. 
Increase in productivity levels through these measures will result in lower 
costs. These would be firmed up during stabilization phase.” 
 
2.23 The opinion of the Ministry was sought with regard to the expansion plan 
of RINL without assured supply of iron ore. The Ministry stated as under:-  

 “a). In October, 2005, the Ministry of Steel approved expansion plan of 
RINL from 3.00 million tonnes to 6.3 million tonnes of liquid steel per 
annum.   The National Mineral Development Corporation ( NMDC), a PSU 
under Ministry of Steel is supplying iron ore to RINL on need basis.   
Hence iron ore supply to RINL is assured.  Meanwhile the following efforts 
have also been made by the Ministry to maintain supply of iron ore to 
RINL:   
b). Recently the Un ion Cabinet in it‟s meeting held on 10.09.09, has 
approved the restructuring proposal of BIRD group of companies  and 
transfer of 51% stake of GoI in M/s Eastern Investment Ltd. (EIL), the 
holding company of OMDC & BSLC to RINL.  OMDC have 6 mining 
leases (to be renewed) for Iron Ore with reserves of 200 Mt & Manganese 
reserves of 45 million tonnes and BSLC have 375 million tonnes of Lime 
stone and 287 million tonnes of Dolomite reserves. This would help RINL 
to partially overcome its handicap of not having captive iron ore mines, 
apart from considering value addition propositions like installation of 
pelletisation plant etc.  
  c). Ministry of Steel is facilitating a proposal of RINL to be the holding 
company of Nilanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL). The move wa s envisaged 
to impart synergy to both the companies as it would satisfy RINL‟s basic 
requirement of raw material from the mines owned by NINL and 
simultaneously allow investment by RINL in NINL‟s future modernization 
and expansion plans.  RINL has submitte d in June 2010, it‟s valuation of 
NINL shares for consideration.  The matter is under consideration of 
Ministry of Commerce, which is administrative Ministry of NINL.  
d). The Government has approved  formation of International Coal 
Ventures Ltd (ICVL) wit h equity participation by RINL, SAIL, CIL, NTPC & 
NMDC, in order to enable these companies to acquire cocking and 
thermal coal assets overseas.”   
 
2.24  The Ministry further added:- 
 
“The Ministry of Steel thinks that it is p roper for RINL go ahead with i ts 
sanctioned expansion plan due to following reasons: 
a). Per capita consumption of steel in India is 48 kg, which is far below the 
world average of 178.9 kg and that of developing countries like China 
which stood at 405 kg in 2009. This wide gap in per c apita consumption 
coupled with India‟s competitive advantage in steel making in terms of iron 
ore availability and lower labour costs, signify the existence of tremendous 
growth potential for steel in India.  With large scale construction projects 
and infrastructure growth in the anvil, it is imperative that India increase its 
production levels from the existing 60Mt to at least 200Mt by 2020.  
b). With land acquisition proving to be a major impediment and cause for 
delay in green field capacities projects taking off, it may be noted that 
RINL, has sufficient land bank available at it‟s disposal (already in 
possession of about 20000 acres of land), which coupled with well 
developed infrastructure and other facilities in terms of proximity to Ports, 
highways, railways etc is most suited to encash on the growth opportunity 
in the country.  

c). Expansion would ensure long term Sustainability for RINL in the Steel 
Industry by cost reduction, technology upgradation, change in product mix 
etc.  
d). Growth of the co mpany would generate fresh employment 
opportunities, employment for more numbers of (earlier) Displaced 
Persons (DPs) and also  work opportunities for construction labour etc. 
 e). RINL‟s expansion would create Multiplier effect for local / State 
economy b y way of development of downstream Industries, other 
establishments, transport services, logistics etc which are usually 
associated with a steel making unit. 
f). RINL being shore based and planning to produce high end Value 
Added Products from expansion wo uld be catering to niche markets and 
could find export market lucrative to take care of fluctuations in domestic 
steel market, as and when needed.” 
 
2.25 Regarding expansion plans of the company , the Secretary, Ministry of 
Steel during oral evidence added the following:- 
“…Sir regarding the expansion plan of RINL, currently it is undergoing 
some expansion from the current capacity of 3 million tonnes to 6.3 million 
tonnes.  But it is based more or less on the same product mix.  So, when I 
took over, I asked  the Chairman.  I said, `we should have gone in for a 
better product mix which gives you higher value addition and improves the 
bottom line‟.  But the entire package has been ordered.  It is also 
somewhat delayed.  Therefore, the cost has gone up and the c urrent 
expansion is going to cost the company about Rs. 12,499 crore as per the 
present estimates and will be progressively completed by December, 2010 
the first phase and December, 2011. This is the current expansion 
programme.  But besides this, the Boar d of RINL has also recommended 
that further expansion by 4 million tonnes leading to a capacity of roughly 
about 11 million tonnes should be considered to make the company 
viable.  They also proposed that ultimately it should go to 20 million 
tonnes.  This  is based on the premise that higher capacities will lead to 
higher economies of scale and reduction of overhead cost per tonne.  But 
I think what is very important this time is that we must see whether the 
company wants to borrow Rs. 24,000 crore from the  financial institutions 
to fund this expansion.  So, if the product mix is correct and they choose 
the right product mix which gives them adequate margin, then only they 
will have a capacity to repay that loan. Otherwise, the company will again 
sink under the debt burden…..”   
 
E. Capital Structure 
 
2.26 The total investment in the Company (paid up Capital and loans 
separately) as on 2007-08 (Rs. Crs.) source wise is given below:- 
i)  Paid up Capital     
    Central Government:     
                Equity Share Capital 4889.85   
                Preference Share Capital 2937.47 7827.32 
    Financial Institutions   0.00 
Total Paid up Capital                 (A)   7827.32 

ii)  Loan Funds     
    Central Government   0.00 
    Financial Institutions   0.00 
Total Loan Funds                      (B)   0.00 
Grand Total of Investment     
    Central Government   7827.32 
    Financial Institutions   0.00 
Grand Total Investment       (A + B)   7827.32 
Note:  
Rs. 440.73 crores has been taken for the purpose of working capital 
under the head -Secured and Unsecured Loans in the Annual Financial 
Statements.” 
 
2.27 Regarding the issue of capital restructuring, the CMD, RINL during oral 
evidence before the Committee made the following statement:-  
“…..As far as ca pital restructuring is concerned, I must say that we have 
submitted a scheme to the Ministry of Steel. It is under their examination 
and we feel that it is very important and it needs to be done little faster. 
Obviously, the Ministry of Steel would like to  examine it and take it. So, I 
would say that if it is done in the next three, four or five months, it will go to 
the Ministry of Finance. That should suffice, but something needs to be 
done on that….”  
 
2.28 In a post -evidence note furnished before the Co mmittee on Capital 
Restructuring, the company submitted:-  
“At present, RINL has a disproportionately high capital base, which will not 
be conducive to Govt of India to dilute their equity by way of an IPO and for 
RINL to raise further funds by way of issu e of fresh capital for further 
expansion & growth.  As RINL does not have captive mines for major raw 
materials, expansion is a must to optimize manpower and overhead cost per 
tonne of steel through increased volumes and to partially offset adverse 
impact of rising input costs incurred in absence of key captive mines. 
Against this backdrop, action s taken by RINL to restructure its high capital 
base are given below: 
• M/s IDBI was engaged in August 2009 to study & suggest optimum 
capital restructure taking int o account the future growth plan and 
funding requirements of RINL.  
• Based on the recommendation of M/s IDBI a capital restructuring 
proposal was submitted to Ministry of Steel on 2nd January 10, after 
due approval by RINL Board.  
• The proposal submitted by RINL came up for further detailed 
discussions with the MOS on 14 th July 2010, wherein one or more 
alternatives were asked to be worked out for further consideration by 
MOS 
• The aspects raised by the MOS were discussed by the RINL 
Management & a detailed not e along with revised proposal on the 
immediate need for restructuring RINL‟s high capital base and an 
additional consideration for issuance of fresh capital was submitted to 
the MOS on 26th July 2010.  
• The proposal is under consideration by the MoS.”  

2.29 Asked if there was any precedent in the Government of India for reducing 
capital structure in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), RINL submitted:- 
“Capital restructuring is generally resorted to, as and when necessitated 
by the business for its growth. In the year 2000, major capital restructuring 
scheme was extended to SAIL. In the recent past, restructuring of the Bird 
Group of Companies was done, by making Orissa Mineral Development 
Corporation (OMDC) & Bisra Stone Lime Company (BSLC) subsidiary 
companies of Eastern Investments Ltd -EIL (through change in 
shareholding pattern) and EIL in turn a subsidiary of RINL by transfer of 
51% stake in EIL to RINL, thus bringing EIL, OMDC & BSLC under the 
umbrella of RINL. The schemes mentioned are for other than redu cing 
capital and based on their business necessities. 
In the past, capital restructuring of RINL was done to convert some 
outstanding loans/ interest into Equity & Preference Share Capital, which 
has resulted in the huge capital base. The proposal of RINL is now to: 
• Reverse this process and reduce it‟s high capital base by a mere 
transfer of capital amount into reserve account, keeping net worth 
(shareholders funds) intact,  to make it more serviceable by dividend 
• Capital restructuring being cash neutral wo uld help RINL to preserve 
cash for meeting its present and future funds requirement for on - 
going expansion and other schemes and make it attractive for 
investors enabling the company to raise  further funds   
• Improved EPS would enhance share value leading  to higher market 
capitalization. This would facilitate GOI to unlock its value by offering 
part of its equity through IPO / FPO 
• Restructuring of the capital base will also facilitate listing. Listing of 
the company is an important aspect for continuance o f the granted 
Navratna Status to RINL.” 
 
F. Financial Performance 
 
2.30 The financial performance of the company in respect of parameters such 
as Turnover / Sales, Value added, Profit / Loss, Dividend paid to the 
Government, Internal Generation of resources etc are given below:- 
SL  
N
O 
  
DESCRIPTI
ON 
2008-09 2007-08 2006-07 2005-06 2004-05 
Target Actu
al 
Target Actual Targe
t 
Actual Targe
t 
Actua
l 
Targe
t 
Actua
l 
i Sales 
10500.
46 
1041
0.63 
9136.17 10433.
07 
8748.
84 
9150.5
7 
8793.
42 
8482.
44 
5424.
84 
8181.
34 
ii 
Value 
Added 
1989.6
0 
2126.
96 
2154.54 3290.0
3 
1824.
93 
2400.8
2 
1899.
13 
2024.
74 
464.9
4 
2939.
47 
iii 
Profit  (After 
Tax) 
1285.1
4 
1335.
57 
1091.64 1942.7
4 
1021.
53 
1363.4
3 
1598.
27 
1252.
37 
754.2
6 
2008.
09 
iv Dividend 
paid to 
- 339.1
8 
- 0.00 - 0.00 - 0.00 - 0.00 

Governmen
t including 
Preferential 
Dividend  
v Internal 
Generation 
of 
Resources                 
1534.3
9 
1537.
72 
1379.50 2287.6
2 
1295.
86 
1689.6
8 
2072.
27 
1524.
29 
1218.
77 
3154.
27 
Note: 
   1. Dividend for the year 2008-09 paid in 2009-10 
  2. The value added is calculated as per MoU guidelines 
 
G. Export-Import 
 
2.31 RINL was asked to furnish a note on the export/import performance of the 
Company, the value of exports/imports during each of the last three years and 
efforts made by the Company to augment the exports  and reduce the imports. In 
their written replies RINL submitted: -  
“RINL being a public sector undertaking has always given thrust for 
making adequate steel available in the domestic market to meet the 
needs of the common people. Export is being resorted  to, mainly in the 
case of low demand in the market and also to keep presence in the 
international markets so as to meet any eventuality arising out of low 
demand in the domestic market. 
Exports country-wise in the last 3 years i.e., 2006-07, 2007-08 & 2008-09 
are brought out below: 
                                                                                                           Unit: 
Tonnes 
Country 06-07 07-08 08-09 
Pig Iron Steel Pig Iron Steel Pig Iron Steel 
Africa - 878 - - - - 
Bangladesh - 35931 - - - - 
Indonesia - - 52500 - - - 
Japan 81000 - 78610 - - - 
Korea - - - - 22500 - 
Malaysia - - 27500 - - - 
Nepal - 7460 - 20332 - - 
Sri Lanka - 25037 - 31710 - - 
Taiwan 24000       - - 
Thailand 53750 20234 95940 10361 - - 
UAE - 5200 - - - - 
USA - 25993 - -   - 
Grand Total 158750 120733 254550 62403 22500 - 
Note: Exports were less in 2008 -09 due to high domestic demand and to 
help in controlling inflation. 

Export of iron and steel products helped in proving a natural hedge for 
taking care of imports of raw materials like coking coal, SMS limestone 
partially. Further, in case of slump in the domestic market, Exports come 
to the rescue of VSP for improving overall sales of iron and steel 
products.   
Import of raw material: 
All efforts are mad e to get required quality of raw materials from 
indigenous sources and balance quantities only, is imported. However, 
RINL is largely dependent on imports for specific raw materials like low 
ash metallurgical coal required for hot metal production and low silica 
limestone required for liquid steel production, as these materials are not 
available indigenously of desired quality and for better capacity utilisation 
of highly capital intensive equipment, for RINL. Other materials like 
thermal coal for power gen eration, sea water magnesia for converter 
brick making are also imported in small quantities. 
Most of the low ash metallurgical coking coal is procured from Australia 
and a small quantity from US and New Zealand. Low silica limestone is 
imported generally from UAE and sometimes being sourced from Oman 
and Thailand based on global tenders. 
Thermal coal is not an item of regular import but in the recent past, the 
Plant has resorted to import of small quantities due to failure of M/s CIL 
to supply the required  quantity for uninterrupted generation of power 
which is essential for running of the Steel Plant. Imported thermal coal is 
sourced from Indonesia to supplement shortfall in supply from M/s CIL.  
The other minor raw materials for steel making like Sea Wate r Magnesia, 
Fused Magnesia etc., is sourced from different countries like China, 
Ireland, Mexico etc., in small quantities.  
Major raw material imports for the last three years is tabulated below:  
Material Quantity of imports (in Lakh Tonnes.) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Coking Coal 29.39 28.02 28.74 
LAM Coke 1.84 2.52 1.57 
Low Silica Limestone 3.18 4.26 4.49 
Boiler Coal NIL 0.52 1.32 
 
2.32 When asked why iron ore (being a national asset) should be exported in 
view of the future requirement of the count ry and What the National Mineral 
Policy (NMP) says in this regard, the Ministry of Steel in their post evidence 
replies submitted the following:- 
“The extraction and disposal of minerals is governed by the extant 
National Mineral Policy and the statutory r ules viz. Mines & Minerals 
Development & Regulation (MMDR) Act 1957.    Iron Ore has not been 
defined as a national asset, either under the Mineral Policy  or the Act.    
However, Ministry of Steel feels that mineral resources of strategic 
minerals like ir on ore should be considered as national assets, whose 
exploitation should be governed by national interest.   Ministry of Steel is 
also of the view that iron ore, being a non -renewable natural asset, should 
be conserved for long term utilization of domesti c steel industry.   The 

policy should aim at value addition of iron ore within the country instead of 
exporting iron ore.  
National Mineral Policy 2008 provides that the policy of export (of 
minerals) shall keep in view the dynamics of mineral inventories as well as 
the short, medium and long term needs of the country. Efforts shall be 
made to export minerals in value added form as far as possible (Para 8 of 
NMP, 2008). National Mineral Policy 2008 also provides that to maximize 
gains from the comparative a dvantage which the country enjoys intra se 
mineral development will be prioritized in term of import substitution, value 
addition and export, in that order (Para 7.1 of NMP, 2008). Therefore, as 
per NMP, 2008, value addition has to be given priority over e xports of 
minerals like iron ore.” 
 
2.33 Secretary, Ministry of Mines during evidence before the Committee made 
the following statement with regard to exports:- 
 “……. (on) the issue of exports and the issue of utilisation in the country. 
…. in our view, th e total steel-making capacity is roughly about 60 million 
tonnes in the country according to the information given to us and all that 
is being exported is essentially surplus, that is, over and above the 
production capacity. Therefore, the question is this . Should we produce 
that much of iron ore at all or should we conserve it? Why is it that we are 
not able to increase our steel -making capacity? Either we reduce our 
production in line with capacity or increase our production capacity in line 
with our production. These are the two clear options.” 
 
H. Foreign Exchange 
 
2.34 Details of items on which foreign exchange was earned (and spent by the 
Company during each of the last five years are given below:- 
Description 2008-09 2007-08 2006-07 2005-06 2004-05 
Expenditure in foreign exchange :           
A. Expenditure in Foreign Exchange           
a. Technical Consultation Fee / Know-
how 0.58 0.72 0.26 0.01 0.31 
b. Interest 0 6.91 31.78 21.83 7.38 
c. Others 1.55 3.65 6.14 2.08 4.82 
 Sub Total: (A) 2.13 11.28 38.18 23.92 12.51 
B. Value of Imports during the year 
on CIF basis           
a. Spares 101.05 65.66 47.21 37.04 41.03 
b. Raw materials 3552.86 1812.78 2044.25 1734.93 1692.41 
c. Capital Goods 356.64 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.50 
Sub Total:(B) 4010.55 1878.44 2091.46 1771.97 1734.94 
Total: (A+B) 4012.68 1889.72 2129.64 1795.89 1747.45 
Earnings in foreign exchange:           
a) Export of Goods (on FOB basis) 78.32 555.47 425.23 442.65 249.22 
b) Others 0.23 0.62 0.96 0.87 10.05 
Total 78.55 556.09 426.19 443.52 259.27 
 
 
 

I. Marketing 
 
2.35 RINL were asked to give details of steps taken to improve the market 
share of RINL in an expanding steel market. In their reply, they submitted:- 
 “The details of steel consumption in the country and the market share of 
RINL-VSP in the last two years are given below: 
                                                                       Unit : Mt 
Item 2008-09 2009-10 
Estimated steel consumption in India  52.351 56.475 
Estimated consumption of Longs in 
India 
26.897 28.705 
Sales of finished steel of RINL, VSP 2.462 2.922 
% Share of RINL, VSP in Longs 9 10 
              Source : JPC  
 Note: RINL-VSP produces long products only. 
Steps taken by RINL - VSP to improve its market share  in the expanding 
steel market: 
- Current phase of expansion of capacity to 6.3 million tonne per 
annum by 2011 -12 will enable VSP to improve it‟s market share to 
11% 
- In the on -going expansion, to facilitate production of special grade 
steels including higher grade of clean steel, with better tolerance,  
different sizes  etc., secondary refining facilities like Electro Magnetic 
Stirrer (EMS), LHF& RH Degasser alongwith several state of art 
technological based equipment etc. are being installed.  
- Providing prompt service to the customers. RINL has been ran ked 1st 
(First)  for the year 2007-08 in the Customer Satisfaction Survey done 
by M/s AC Nielsen ORG -MARG, an independent agency appointed 
by the Ministry of Steel, GOI  
- The Scheme for Registration of Retailers to service customers in 
Metros, Urban and Sem i-urban areas has been introduced in 2010 -
11. The process of Registration is going on.  
- Introduction of the Scheme of Registration of District Level Dealers 
(DLDs) to realize the market potential in the rural markets in 2004 -05. 
As on 31 st May 2010, there were 102 District Level Dealers in 
position.  
- Apart from the above, addition of Consignment Agents (CAs) and 
Consignment Sales Agents (CSAs) outlets are envisaged for 
improving reach to the customers.  
- Entering into MoUs with customers for assuring supplies to customers 
and for establishing loyal customer base.   
- Branding of RINL -VSP‟s rebars as “Vizag TMT” and structural steel 
products as “Vizag Ukku”  has been done to differentiate VSP‟s 
products from the products manufactured by the secondary steel 
producers.”  
 
2.36 On being queried as to how far RINL has grabbed the opportunity of 
supplying steel for 'infrastructure industry' in countries like India and China, RINL 
replied thus:-  

“a) RINL has primarily been selling its steel in domestic market to meet the 
needs of the growing market. Therefore, efforts were not made to sell to 
“infrastructure industry” in countries like China.  
b) RINL makes only long products, which are used in the infrastructure 
industry. 
In the product range of RINL-VSP, rebars and structural steel products are 
more specifically utilized in the infrastructure sector. With increase in 
demand for rebars for infrastructure sector, sales of rebars have been 
increasing over the years. Sale of rebars and the percentage share in 
saleable steel during the last four years are brought out below: 

             Unit : Mt 
Item 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09* 2009-10 
Sales of 
Saleable Steel 
3.266 2.941 2.617 3.131 
Sale of Rebars 1.034 1.106 1.024 1.205 
% Rebar in 
Saleable Steel 
32% 38% 39% 39% 
  * The dip in sales volume in 2008-09 is attributed to global meltdown. 
It may be observed that the percentage of rebars in the total saleable steel 
has increased from 32% in 2006-07 to 39% in 2009-10.” 
 
2.37 On the issue of efforts being made by RINL to cater to the needs of 
quality-conscious middle class people, who are still at the mercy of unscrupulous 
traders who pass off sub -standard steel as quality material and whether RINL is 
selling any branded steel to such small consumers, RINL submitted as under:- 
 “After commissioning of its integrated operations in 1992, in a short span 
of time, RINL - VSP earned a name for itself as a quality steel producer 
both in the domestic and international markets. The steel products of 
RINL- VSP are most sought after, in the ma rket because of quality 
advantage and the image.   
The rebars produced by VSP are branded as “Vizag TMT”. These rebars 
are used in the construction sector including building of houses. These 
products are supplied to all categories of customers including sm all 
customers, who procure steel to build their houses, which is done through 
our marketing network. 
RINL-VSP has a network of 5 Regional Offices i.e. North (Delhi), East 
(Kolkata), South (Chennai), West (Mumbai) and Andhra (Visakhapatnam) 
and 23 Branch Sa les Offices (BSOs) and Stockyards, spread across the 
country. In addition, Consignment Sales Agents have been appointed at 5 
locations in the country. These are Visakhapatnam and Kadapa in Andhra 
Pradesh, Damtal in Himachal Pradesh, Jamshedpur in Jharkhand  and 
Guwahati in Assam. Individual house builders are provided the facility of 
registering their requirements with the nearest Branches directly subject to 
completing documentation formalities. Their requirements are directly 
serviced by the Branch and pro vision exists in the stockyards to deliver 
part loads vehicles by multiple loading process. This ensures that even 
small quantities typically required for the individual house builders are 
serviced. 
Semi-urban & rural customers who also require steel in sm all and specific 
quantities and for whom the nearest stockyard is not easily accessible, are 
serviced through a network of District Level dealers (DLDS), who are 
appointed by the company in such identified areas wherein they set up 
shop and storage facilit y. The dealers cater to the requirements of the 
individual consumers in their area by carrying adequate stocks. 
As on 31 st May 2010, 102 DLDs are in operation. In due course, it is 
proposed to register DLDs in all the Districts in the country. 
It is RINL‟s  constant effort to avoid sale of iron and steel products to 
unscrupulous Traders. In this direction, during the current year i.e. 2010 -

11, Retailer Scheme has been introduced by converting some of the major 
Traders into Retailers. Retailers are allowed to  sell VSP‟s products from 
the exclusive outlets set up by them as an extended arm of the company 
at or below the Maximum Recommended Retail Price (MRRP) fixed by the 
company. RINL, VSP supplies steel products to various segments i.e. 
SSICs/NSIC, DLDs, Actual Users, Project Sales and Retailers in this order 
of priority.  
The sale of products to Actual Users vary from product to product.  The 
Sales Policy 2010 -11 envisages sale of 100% of Wire Rod Coils and 
Semis to Actual Users, Project Sales and Small Scale  Industries. Further, 
50% of Rebars and Structurals, 55% of Rounds and 70% of Squares are 
sold to Actual Users, Project Sales and Small Scale Industries. The 
remaining quantities are sold to DLDs, Retailers and others. 
To cater to the needs of the employee s and other middle class people, 
who build houses, a Consignment Sales Agency (CSA) outlet has been 
opened in Visakhapatnam w.e.f. October 2009. Through this outlet, buyers 
can purchase even small quantities of steel products used for house 
construction. From this outlet, multiple loading of various sizes in smaller 
quantities in a truck are supplied to the buyers.”   
 
2.38 Regarding steps taken by RINL to expand their presence in global steel 
markets and whether there has been any reduction in Export s ales of steel, RINL 
in their written replies stated the following:-  
“Within a short duration of time after commissioning of its integrated 
operations in 1992, RINL - VSP had established itself as a quality steel 
producer in both the domestic and international markets. Exports of steel 
products started right from the year of the commissioning of the Plant in 
1992-93, when products worth Rs 212 cr. were exported.  
Since then, RINL - VSP has been maintaining its presence in the 
international markets. RINL-VSP has been maintaining its presence in the 
Export market to the extent opportunities arise or for obtaining better 
realisations. Exports value of iron and steel products in the last five years 
are brought out below: 
             Unit : Rs 
cr. 
Item 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Exports  443 424 555 78* 351 
  
* The figures for 08 -09 reflect the poor international market conditions 
consequent to the global meltdown. However in 09 -10, as the markets 
slowly returned to normalcy, exports also picked up showi ng substantial 
growth on the back of a weak 2008-09 performance. 
Considering the fluctuations in demand in the Domestic Market in the 
current year, during May 2010, letters were written to Indian Embassies in 
other countries requesting them to disseminate information about RINL -
VSP tenders in trade circles under their jurisdiction to boost export sales. 
Customers were also asked to convey their difficulties, if any in doing 
business with RINL -VSP. Opinions of the customers were sought and 
served as inputs for formulating policies.”  

 
2.39 On whether the introduction of dealership network at district level has 
boosted the sales of steel products and on what basis, dealers have been 
selected, RINL replied thus:- 
“In line with the  objective of increasing steel consumption in the semi 
urban & rural areas as indicated in the National Steel Policy 2005, issued 
by Ministry of Steel, GOI, RINL - VSP has introduced the Scheme of 
Registering District Level Dealers in 2004 -05. The DLDs Policy envisages 
Registration of DL Ds at locations other than the Branch/CSA locations. 
The DLDs are registered in tier -2 Towns, excluding the District Head 
Quarters and major towns.  Sales of steel through DLDs since 2004 -05 
are as follows, which clearly shows that the sales have been boosted: 
Unit : Tonnes 
Year Qty. of Sales 
2004-05 1053 
2005-06 7334 
2006-07 10434 
2007-08 34922 
2008-09 42953 
2009-10 14700* 
 
 * DLDs Policy was introduced in 2004 -05 and sales picked -up in the 
subsequent years i.e. 2005 -06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008 -09. In 2009 -
10, based on the experience gained and the inputs received like vigilance 
suggestions, feedback from District Level Dealers, as a part of Corporate 
Governance, DLDs Policy has been revised and new registration for DLDs 
started from 2009 -10 onwards. As per this policy, 4 District Level Dealers 
are being appointed in each District, instead of one in Andhra Pradesh 
and Kerala States.      
Basis for selection of DLDs: The appointment of DLDs is done through 
paper advertisement, wherein the locations a nd also the category (SC/ST, 
OBC, and GEN) are notified. The interested candidates are required to 
apply against such advertisement. Out of every 4 DLDs, 1 DLD is 
reserved for SC/ST and 1 DLD for OBC and the remaining 2 for General 
Category. ….. 
The applications received are evaluated on a 20 point score and consists 
of various attributes like applicant‟s experience in the field, selling ability 
and market reputation, infrastructure facilities and financial capabilities. 
The minimum qualifying criteria for all categories is 4 (Four) points. The 
applications meeting the minimum qualifying criteria are short -listed and 
such short listed applicants are inspected by a committee to ascertain the 
infrastructure and other facilities declared in their application. T he 
applicant scoring maximum marks is selected for registration as DLD.” 
 
2.40 On the steps taken by RINL for popularizing RINL products in the rural 
market in the past one year, RINL submitted as under:- 
“RINL- VSP has taken up advertising campaigns on buses plying in rural & 
semi-urban areas, wall paintings and hoardings in those areas for 
popularizing RINL‟s products in the rural market in the past one year.  

Additionally, the DLDs also undertake sales promotion of RINL - VSP‟s 
products. The promotional m aterial used by the DLDs is cleared by RINL. 
During the past one year, the DLDs have taken extensive advertisement 
campaign to promote VSP‟s products in their area of operation by way of 
wall paintings, advertisement in the vernacular news papers in their 
location, pamphlets, by participating in local melas etc. ….. 
RINL is a member of Institute for Steel Development & Growth (INSDAG). 
In order to create mass awareness regarding various innovative and 
common uses of steel, INSDAG has initiated several innov ative and cost 
effective solutions in order to promote usage of steel, which includes steel 
intensive solutions for Rural housing, design and development of steel 
bullock carts and propagation of the utility of steel bullock carts vis -à-vis 
primitive bullock carts, design of rural and urban bridges as well as steel -
concrete composite bridges etc. 
RINL-VSP has been actively involved and also contributed immensely to 
the efforts made by INSDAG in popularizing the use of steel in rural areas. 
As a part of it‟s  Corporate Social Responsibility, steel bullock carts 
designed by INSDAG were fabricated and distributed to the farmers to 
promote steel usage. The advantages of steel bullock carts over 
conventional/ primitive bullock carts were also propagated in rural areas.  
In line with INSDAG‟s efforts to promote and popularise steel intensive 
housing in rural areas, RINL –VSP has already developed and 
constructed one model steel village consisting of steel intensive houses, 
school building, meeting hall etc. in the p eripheral village at 
Maddivanipalem, Visakhapatnam.…. 
 
With a view to gauge the Market Prices and improve transparency in 
Marketing, VSP sells iron and steel products through e -auctions. All the 
secondary steel products and by -products are sold through e -auctions. In 
addition to these, prime steel products are also sold through e -auctions. 
The number of e-auctions held in the last two years are given below: 
 
Year 
No. of 
e-
auctions 
2007-08 87 
2008-09 1975 
Reverse e-auction 
 Reverse auction is a tool used for managing supply chain management 
activities. Reverse auctions are fixed -duration bidding events hosted by 
a single buyer, in which multiple suppliers compete for business.  
 For finalizing Transportation Contracts for movement of iron and steel 
products from head quarters to branches and from branches to the 
other branches and District Level Dealers (DLDs) premises, VSP 
resorts to Reverse E -auction. The process of Reverse auction was 
introduced in VSP during 2007 -08. In reverse auctions, VSP makes 
necessary preparations to conduct the reverse auction. These include 
finding new transporters, training new and incumbent transporters, 
organizing the auction, managing the auction event, and using the 
auction data to facilitate decision making. 

 At the designa ted day and time, several transporters, typically 15 -20, 
log on to the auction site and input quotes over a 45 to 90 minute 
period. These quotes reflect the prices at which they are willing to 
supply the requested service. Quotes given in real -time via the  Internet 
result in dynamic bidding. VSP awards contracts to the supplier, who 
bids the lowest price for movement of materials by Road.  
 For the efforts made for introduction of the mechanism of reverse e -
auction for transportation contracts, the company was awarded for e -
governance, by the GoI, in the cadre “Exemplary usage of Information 
and Communication Technology by PSUs” 
Details of No. of Contracts awarded through Reverse auction in the last 
two years are given below:  
Year No. of contracts 
awarded 
2007-08 98 
2008-09 118 
Rural Marketing 
With a view to ensuring availability of VSP‟s steel product to the rural 
consumers and improve customer base, VSP has started District Level 
Dealership Scheme (DLDS) in September 2004. This Scheme is also 
aimed at promotion and popularization of VSP‟s products and improving 
VSP‟s market share. 
 DLDs are appointed in the districts other than the locations, where RINL 
has its Branch or Consignment Sales Agency (CSA) Outlet. It is planned 
to appoint DLDs in phases. Init ially, as per the plan for appointment of 
one dealer in each district, all the districts in the Southern States i.e. 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala were covered. 
Subsequently the districts in the adjacent States i.e. Orissa, 
Chattishgarh and Maharashtra were covered.   
 The District Level Dealers are supplied with TMT Rebars in sizes 8.0 to 
16.0 mm. Rebars in higher size and Structurals are also supplied as per 
request from DLD. DLDs shall be offered 50 tons/month. However, the 
DLDs, who a re willing to lift the material can be offered additional 50 
tons. 
 The DLDs are required to sell the material to the rural consumers at the 
Maximum Recommended Retail Price (MRRP), declared by RINL from 
time to time.  
 VSP has appointed 127 District Level  Dealers in the country. The sales 
of steel products to DLDs in the last three years has gone up four folds 
thus making more steel available in rural areas . 
Cost reduction 
Thrust on cost reduction has always a priority for VSP. In line with the 
company wide thrust on cost reduction, all the departments identify and 
take up initiatives to reduce cost and generate additional revenue. All 
major departments assisted by the Cost Control Cell, set targets to 
reduce the cost of production. The potential areas of cost reduction are 
identified at the beginning of the year for improvement over the previous 
year and accordingly the targets for cost reduction are fixed and 
monitored on monthly basis by the Cost Control Cell. Special drives are 
also undertaken to reinfo rce cost consciousness amongst the 
employees through various programmes.  

Process improvements resulting in cost reduction through use of 
alternative cheaper inputs and waste recycling have gained prominence 
in view of increasing cost of input materials. S ome of the initiatives in 
this direction are highlighted below: 
Improvement initiatives aimed at utilizing alternative cheaper materials 
without compromising on quality of output: 
1. Nut coke in partial replacement of metallurgical coke in BF 
2. LD slag at SP and BF as flux material to replace BF lime stone 
The waste materials generated in the plant are identified continuously 
and are gainfully utilized for improving the environment, as well as cost 
saving. Improvement initiatives directed at recovery and recycli ng of 
waste materials are given below:  
1. Recycling of tar sludge and benzol muck as replacement charge     
coal 
2. Partial replacement of iron ore fines with metallurgical waste 
generated in the plant 
3. Separation of steel scrap from LD slag by magnetic separators 
4. Briquetting of lime fines and their usage in place of coarse lime in 
LD converters  
5. Introduction of LPG supply from Acetylene plant discharge cylinder 
manifolds to CCM -1 for bloom cutting, in place of earlier used 
Acetylene gas   
6. Conservation of power  
7. Conservation of water. 
Cost savings through financial interventions are also achieved in areas 
like insurance cost, availing of CENVAT credit, Bank charges etc. 
The efforts made by the company have led to cost savings  over the 
years and savings achieved for the last 3 years are shown below: 
 
Cost savings Rs.Cr 
207
258
307
150
200
250
300
350
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
 
 
Specific Water Consumption 
(cum/tcs) – 2008-09 

2.64
3.95
6.82
0
3.5
7
VSP SAIL Tata
VSP SAIL Tata
 

Chapter III 
 
Inputs Management 
 
3.1 The Company was asked if any assessment of the lo ng term iron ore / 
coking coal requirements of RINL had been made. RINL stated the following in 
their replies:- 
“Assessment of Iron Ore / Coking Coal requirements has been made up to 
2014-15, based on current levels of usage and increase in production 
planned for the period as shown below in Table-1 & Table-2 respectively: 
                                        Table:1                       Unit: million ton 
Item 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Iron Ore 6.990 9.010 10.112 11.803 11.803 
Coking Coal 4.136 4.347 4.428 3.601 4.682 
 
The requirement projected above is for a production level indicated below: 
     Table:2               Unit: million ton 
Item 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Hot Metal 4.500 5.725 6.425 7.500 7.500 
Note: These est imates may undergo some change based on technical 
parameter changes  
As per Corporate Plan of RINL it was envisaged to reach a capacity of 16 
million tonnes (Mt) of liquid steel (16 Mt of Hot metal) by 2020. Based on 
recent consultant‟s assessment, about 2 0 Mt capacity can be put up at 
present location.  Based on 20 Mt production, say from 2020 onwards, 
requirement of Iron ore & Coking coal will be as given below: 
Table: 3                                 
Item 2020 onwards  
Iron Ore (Lumps, Fines & 
Pellets @30% ) 36 mt 
Coking coal (incl.  Pulverised 
Coal) 17 mt 
As per global trend, when ever any steel plant goes for either Greenfield 
installations or major expansion, they look for assured supply of iron ore 
for at least 30 years (earlier days trend was for  50 years) for long term 
viability and consistent operation of the units. Hence as per directional 
plan, RINL would be needing assured supply of about one thousand 
Million ton of iron ore for consistent operation of  existing units including its 
phase-wise expansion upto 20 MT which is being planned by 2020. 
RINL does not have captive mines for major raw materials like iron ore 
and coal. RINL has been making efforts for captive iron ore mines, but are 
yet to succeed.”   
 
3.2 On being asked if any expert Com mittee was set up to look into issues 
relating to iron ore, manganese and chrome ores and its recommendations, RINL 
replied thus:-  

“A high level, focused, Committee –Raw Material Linkage & Strategic 
Investment Committee (RMLSIC), has been formed and is fu nctioning in 
VSP to look into aspects pertaining to joint ventures and strategic 
investments in mineable assets. The committee consists of internal 
experts drawn from various functions such as Mining, Finance, Material 
Management, Operations and Strategic Management. The committee 
evaluates the offers /opportunities received / discovered in the areas of 
ores such as Iron and Manganese.  
The committee meets periodically to discuss the findings and suggest and 
implement thereafter, the way forward in case of promising 
offers/opportunities for approval by the competent authority. CMD -RINL 
reviews the deliberations/proposals of the RMLSIC in his monthly review 
meeting on Raw Material Security issues. 
Iron ore: 
As a result of the deliberations of the Committee, R INL-VSP has 
approached the States of Karnataka, Jharkhand & Orissa, for allocation of 
suitable iron ore blocks in the States and also for setting up of JVs for 
projects involving value addition in the State, along with the State Mineral 
Development Corpora tions.  In line with the requirement of the State 
Government of Jharkhand, RINL -VSP has also made a proposal to the 
Government of Jharkhand to set up beneficiation, pelletisation and a Steel 
Plant as part of the value addition in the State. 
Secretary (Steel) and CMD -RINL have also taken up with Chief Secretaries of 
Governments of Orissa, Karnataka & Jharkhand, requesting for allocation of 
suitable iron ore blocks to RINL -VSP along with State Mineral Development 
Corporation(s) (SMDCs) as a Joint Sector proje ct for mine development and 
further value addition.  
 
Manganese: 
One of the outcomes of the working of RMLSIC Committee has been the 
Joint Venture between RINL and MOIL for setting up a ferro alloy plant at 
Bobbili, Vizianagaram, Andhra Pradesh. The JV com pany will help VSP to 
achieve security with respect to ferro manganese needs, thus somewhat 
insulating it against irregular supplies due to market fluctuations in the 
prices of manganese. 
Chrome: 
The requirement of Ferro Chrome (all grades) is very nominal  ranging 
from 1500 to 2000 tonnes per annum and procured from open market.” 
 
3.3 Since lack of good coking coal in India is perceived as a handicap, RINL 
was asked about steps being taken by them to ensure adequate supply of coking 
coal. The reply furnished is as follows:- 
“Lack of good coking coal in India and non -allocation of a coking coal 
mine of reasonable quality has been a handicap to RINL. Consumption 
cost of coal is consistently increasing adversely impacting the profit 
margins of the company, as evidenced by the following: 
Description  2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11*  
Hard Coking Coal- FOB 
Price in USD/T 91.50 292.50 122.00 218.75 

Cost of Coal consumed in 
Rs Cr 1695 3081 3240  4586 
Net Sales in Rs Cr 9088 9128 9809   9742 
Coal consumption cost as 
Percentage of net yearly 
sales 
18.65 33.75 33.03 47.07 
           * estimated for the year 
To ensure availability of sufficient Imported Coking Coal seamlessly, at 
the initiative of Ministry of Steel (MoS) the Boards of RINL and SAIL 
have constituted a Committee viz., Empowered Joint Committee (A 
Committee of three Functional Directors each of SAIL and RINL and 
subsequently two Independent Directors also) to negotiate yearly prices 
International Suppliers under the Long Term Contracts (3/5 years) with 
individual companies.  Through this, both RINL and SAIL are getting the 
desired quantity of Coal to meet the production targets. 
A Joint Venture (ICVL) International Coal Ventures Ltd., consisting of 
major PSUs i.e., RINL, SAIL, CIL, NTPC & NMDC has been f ormed to 
acquire Coal assets outside India to provide, in phases, security of 
supplies.” 
 
3.4 It was questioned whether RINL approached the Governments of 
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh for grant ing iron ore mining leases and if so, 
whether any breakthrough was achieved. RINL submitted as under:- 
“Applications were submitted for mining lease of Iron Ore deposit in 
Bastar and Dantewada of Chattisgarh in 2003 and 2005 respectively. 
However both the applications have been subsequently rejected by State 
Govt. of Chattisgarh in 2007 and details are given below: 
 
S 
N
o 
Lease 
Name 
Type of 
Ore 
Area        
(Ha) 
Reserve of 
Ore in the 
Mining Lease                           
(in Million 
Tonnes) 
Background/ 
History of the 
Mining Lease 
Present Status  (where the 
proposal is pending for 
what and since when, 
date) 
 CHHATTISGARH  
1 Raoghat, 
Narayanpu
r Division, 
Bastar 
District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite
) 
3975.0
0 
255.00 Mining Lease 
application 
was filed on 
09.12.2003 
vide  
application 
No.8 
The application has been 
rejected by the Govt. of 
Chhattisgarh vide Order 
No.2-10/2007/12 (3), Dated 
31.01.2007 since 
exploration was not 
conducted by Govt. 
Agencies / Non-Govt. 
Agencies. 
2 Bailadilla, 
Dantewad
a District 
Iron Ore 
(Haematite
) 
631.34 327.24 Mining Lease 
application 
was filed on 
23.09.2005 
vide  
application 
No.21 
The application has been 
rejected by the Govt. of 
Chhatisgarh vide  Order 
No.F.3-84/96/12, Dated  
10.11.2006 since it was 
prematured. A Lr. 
addressed to the Secretary, 
Mineral Resource Dept, 
Govt. of Chhattisgarh, 
Raipur vide Lr.No. 
Mines/H/IOM/2-06/07/2211, 

dt. 20.08.07 for revoking 
Rejection Order and 
consideration for allocation. 
 
Revision Application under Rule 54, of Mineral Concession Rules 1960, 
has been filed with Ministry of Mines, Govt. of India on 21.06.10 for 
reconsideration of allotment of Iron ore mines to RINL. 
…….RINL has approached, during 2008 and 2009, Jharkhand 
Government with a proposal to invest in joint venture with SMDC.  No 
break through has not been achieved yet.”   
 
3.5 RINL w as asked whether the stock p ositions of coking coal with RINL 
Steel Plant is satisfactory. In reply they submitted:-  
“RINL makes all possible efforts to have satisfactory coking coal stock 
position. However, at times, due to following reasons stock position 
becomes critical; 
i). Force majeure at Suppliers‟ mines 
ii). Congestion at ports of loading, primarily at Australia.” 
3.6 Highlighting how RINL‟s applications for iron -ore mines are often rejected 
by the state governments on various grounds, the CMD, RINL during evidence 
before the Committee submitted:- 
 “….I will give you one example of Orissa. We have applied for some iron 
ore mine there. The Government of Orissa informed us by letter dated 13 -
12-2006 that the matter was under process of disposal due to RINL does 
not have any proposal for  value addition in the State, (2) the area is 
located inside a dense forest, (3) that area is earmarked for earlier 
applicants, that is TISCO and L&T. This is one reason they have given. 
Like that for everything they have given some reason.” 
 
3.7 On the st eps taken by the company to redress the issues cited by states 
for rejecting their proposals, the CMD added:- 
 “…We have submitted to them but we are willing to work with the State 
Mineral Development Corporations. Therefore, the iron ore mine you 
allocate jointly, we will form a joint venture and, therefore, State will also 
get some benefit out of it. We have also committed in writing that we will 
add value if you give us iron ore. What kind of value we have said step by 
step that we will do beneficiation as required, we will do p elletisation and 
then give it to steel plant. These letters of ours were written in the last two 
years I think. The Secretary of Steel also knows about it” 
 
3.8 In view of the fact that MMDR Act was proposed to be amended 
comprehensively putting PSUs at a disadvantage in the allocation of mines of 
iron ore and coal,  the Ministry of Steel were asked to give details of the efforts 
made by them for the same. The replies are given below:- 

“As regards coal, an amendment in Mines and Min erals (Development & 
Regulation) Act 1957 has been approved by Parliament recently as per 
which the allocation of mineral concessions for coal will be made through 
auction by competitive bidding. However, this procedure of allocation of 
mineral concession for coal through auction by competitive bidding shall 
not be applicable for allocation to a Government Company or corporation 
for mining or specified end use. 
Ministry of Mines has also proposed a new Mines and Minerals 
(Development & Regulation) Bill 2010 , which also includes almost a 
similar provision with regard to allocation of mineral concession for coal. It 
is, therefore, felt that PSUs will not be at a disadvantage in the allocation 
of mineral concessions for coal. 
As regards iron ore, in the new Min es and Minerals (Development & 
Regulation) Bill 2010 proposed by Ministry of Mines, there is inter alia a 
provision for allocation of mineral concessions for major minerals like iron 
ore through a process of competitive bidding, which will also be applicab le 
to Government companies. 
It is added that while Section 17A (1A) of the existing MMDR Act, 1957 
provides for the reservation of areas for grant of mineral concession for 
prospecting or mining operations by government companies, there is no 
such provisio n for reservation of areas for prospecting or mining 
operations by Government companies in the proposed Draft MMDR Bill 
2010. Ministry of Steel is of the view that i n order to help Government 
companies in contributing towards equitable growth of various areas of the 
country and also in the larger public interest, it is desirable that the 
reservation may be provided for government companies for prospecting 
and mining operations . Ministry of Steel   has taken up this matter with 
Ministry of Mines as well as at various other levels.” 
 
3.9 Asked as to why the new MMDR Bill 2010 no longer contains provisions 
for reservation of mining leases for Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), the 
Ministry of Mines in their reply submitted:- 
“Section 17A (1A) of the MMDR Act, 1 957, provides that t he Central 
Government may in consultation with State Government, reserve any area 
not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease, for 
undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a Government 
company or corporati on owned or controlled by it, and where it proposes 
to do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which 
such area will be reserved.  However, the reservation of the  area per se 
does not allow a PSU to carry out mining, and a separate mining lease is 
required under the provisions of Section 4 of the MMDR Act, which 
provides as follows: 
―4 (1) No person shall undertake any reconnaissance, prospecting or 
mining operations in any area, except under and in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of reconnaissance permit or of a prospecting licence 
or, as the case may be, a mining lease, granted under this Act and the 
rules made thereunder; ......‖. 
In case of reservation of area for a central PSU, the concerned PSU 
seeking reservation of area identifies a mineral bearing area keeping in 

view its demand for the mineral which can be reserved and applies to the 
Ministry of Mines for reserving the identified area in a specific  manner. 
The Ministry of Mines then refers the application to: 
(i) the State Government concerned for consultation, including 
ascertaining whether any mineral concession are granted on the 
area and whether the area is available for reservation.  
(ii) the I BM, for technical advice on the availability of ore in the area 
sought for reservation and whether mining is possible.  
After obtaining the comments from State Government and the IBM, the 
Ministry of Mines takes a decision on whether the area can be reserv ed in 
favour of a PSU. Once the area is reserved through Gazette notification, 
the concerned PSU has to apply for a mineral concession 
(reconnaissance licence, prospecting licence or mining lease) to the State 
Government concerned and only after the State Government recommends 
the application for grant of concession, and in case of First Schedule 
minerals after obtaining prior approval of the Ministry of Mines, the State 
Government grants the licence or lease. Reservation in itself does not 
provide a statutory assurance of grant of mining lease, which is a separate 
process entirely. 
The powers of reservation were earlier existing in the Mineral Concession 
Rules framed under the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act (MMDR Act). The Rule provided  the State Governments 
to reserve a mineral bearing area for purposes other than mining. 
However, with the amendment of MMDR Act in 1987, the relevant Rule in 
the Mineral Concession Rules was repealed and section 17A introduced in 
the MMDR Act. The purpose  of introducing Section 17A in the MMDR Act 
was to ensure that the PSUs in the country get to proactively enter into the 
field of mineral development through exploration and mining in order to 
provide for the raw material needs of the industry. This was ne cessary 
since the private sector was yet to increase their presence in the mineral 
sector through investments. 
With the increase in the global demand for metals and minerals, there has 
been a significant increase in the involvement of private sector in the  
mineral production. Further it has been noticed that that the reservation 
powers have not been always used in the manner beneficial for mineral 
development and reservation powers have been misused quite often to 
favour backdoor entry of applicants through Joint venture agreements with 
PSUs who obtain areas through reservations, and who would otherwise 
have been not eligible under the normal selection criteria in the MMDR 
Act.   
The Hoda Committee, constituted in the Planning Commission, in para 
1.74 and 1.75 of its Report has held that the provisions in Section 17A of 
MMDR Act run counter to the spirit of level playing field, which is essential 
if private investment, is to be attracted to the mining sector. The 
Committee held that given the fact that expend iture on exploration in India 
is a small fraction of world expenditure there is need for not only 
increasing public spending in exploration but also attract private 
investment into exploration and mining. It was pointed out to the 
Committee that the reserv ation powers have been and are being used by 
the states to stall private sector initiative and it was argued that there 
should be a level playing field between the public and private sectors and 

that the government should adopt an arm‟s -length approach. Th e 
Committee recognised the need to distinguish between the State‟s role as 
a promotional explorer and as a commercial explorer/miner. The 
Committee held that work done by GSI, state Directorates, and a certain 
part of the work done by MECL (paid for by gov ernment) is mainly 
promotional in nature, and no business interests are involved here as the 
output is available to the public at large for carrying out the next stage of 
operations. On the other hand, commercial operations of PSUs are similar 
to operations of private sector entities and no ostensible public purpose is 
served by giving PSUs an overriding priority. The Hoda Committee noted 
that another Committee headed by the Additional Secretary, Ministry of 
Mines that went into this issue earlier, had obse rved that the reservation 
provision not only had led to blocking off large areas from being explored 
and mined, but had also been used to circumvent other provisions of the 
Act, such as the „first -come-first-served‟ principle or prioritisation 
entitlement of concession holders. This is through the mechanism of so -
called JVs or MOU -based subcontract arrangements between PSUs and 
individual private parties. It has been argued that if government entities 
want to get into detailed exploration or mining ventures  as business 
propositions then they should be treated as any other party without any 
special dispensation, and if they are interested in a JV they could make 
such arrangements prior to staking a claim for a particular area. With this 
consideration, the Hod a Committee held that in order to provide a level 
playing field to the private sector, without disturbing the primacy of 
promotional work done by national agencies, and at the same time, it is 
also necessary to allow the PSUs to pursue their core competenc e albeit 
in a competitive atmosphere. 
 
The Ministry of Mines considered the recommendations of the Hoda 
Committee and has proposed to do away with the powers of reservation of 
area in favour of PSUs in its existing form, particularly as the question 
itself notes it has not achieved its intended purpose. However, it has been 
provided in the new draft MMDR Act (3 rd June 2010 version available on 
website of the Ministry of Mines) that preference can be given for value -
addition, for providing long term ore -linkage and to give preference to 
industries whose captive mines are likely to be exhausted. The general 
intention is that mining has to be seen as an independent activity and 
there should be a market for ore, enabling better utilisation of the run -of-
the–mine, incentivization for beneficiation including blending through 
discovery of prices based on supply and demand, so as to make Indian 
metal making globally competitive.” 
 
3.10 In light of the fact that RINL having met all possible criteria for allocation of 
mining leases as a steel major in the country, Ministry of Mines was asked why 
they were still without a captive iron ore mine. In response, they submitted:- 
“The Ministry of Mines has not received any proposal for grant of mineral 
concession from the Stat e Government or any proposal for reservation of 
area in favour of RINL.  As has been pointed out, reservation by itself is 
not enough since the State Government has to separately send a 

recommendation for grant of mining lease. The reservation only blocks an 
area and prevents anyone from applying for a lease. It does not provide a 
statutory guarantee that the lease for the area will be given to the PSU. 
That is why the Ministry of Mines agrees with the Hoda Committee 
conclusion that reservation actually acc omplishes no useful purpose, but 
only hinders investment in the sector as a whole. 
Today we live in a situation where there is global competition for 
resources. China is aggressively securing resources in Africa, Australia 
and Canada. Indian Companies have  started doing the same thing. The 
paradigm change is that now the steel maker constantly looks for new 
acquisitions wherever it is feasible. The new MMDR Act 2010 will actually 
incentivize this by enabling transfer of leases through mergers and 
acquisitions (M&A), something very common abroad, but not permissible 
in the existing MMDR Act 1957, which prevents transfers at a premium. 
The future for RINL and any other steel maker whether in the private or 
the public sector is to explore a range of options in acquiring raw material 
through  Long Term Agreements (LTA), spot market purchases, captive 
resources through allocation  and captive resources through M&A, either 
domestic or abroad. The important thing is to have globally competitive 
processes. In a situa tion where the percentage of iron ore Fines vis -à-vis 
iron ore lumps produced in Indian iron ore is increasing, Indian companies 
whether in the public or the private sector must also explore ways of 
converting this available surplus of Fines into an opport unity by acquiring 
pelletisation processes or technology to directly use Fines for steel 
making. These companies must also invest in exploration rather than 
compete for what is generally termed the “low hanging fruit” of resources 
already explored at public expense by GSI etc.” 
 
3.11 Views of the Ministry of Mines on the issue of allocation of mines were 
also sought during their evidence before the Committee. The Secretary, Ministry 
of Mines stated the following:- 
“….They (RINL) have told us that the total number of applications that they 
have submitted is 15. Out of them, 5 were for Orissa; 2 for Jharkhand; 3 
for Andhra Pradesh; 2 for Chhattisgarh; and 3 for Rajasthan. According to 
them, 7 of these have already been rejected by the State Government. As 
I said, in the case of rejections, these cases do not even come to us. Eight 
of them are pending with the State Governments, and none of them has 
come to us. Certainly, there is a provision in the Act that if the State 
Government has rejected someone‟s application, then that party can apply 
to us in a judicial forum through a tribunal process. I think one case has 
come to us as part of the tribunal, but that is as a quasi judicial function 
and not as part of the grant of the concession process. I thought that I  
must clarify this point, namely, when I say that our Ministry does not know 
about the applications of RINL, it is not because we do not care for RINL. 
It is because the format or the process of grant of concession is such that 
the State Government keeps a ll the concession applications and only 
sends us those that it recommends in our favour.” 
 

3.12 The Secretary Mines further responded on the system being introduced in 
the new Bill:- 
 “In the new Bill, we have put in several provisions that require interne t-
based system by which every applicant will be required to first register 
himself. Secondly, we are not fully aware of the complexity of procedures 
involved in different State Governments as each State Government has its 
own procedure for receiving applications. In some cases they are received 
in the Collectorate; in some cases they are received by the Director of 
Mine and Geology; and in some cases these are received by the State 
Secretariat. The detailed procedures -- beyond the basic framework -- are 
all left to the individual State Governments. So, the issue of registering it 
Centrally and managing it Centrally has to be preceded by a system of 
standardising the procedure so that it can be computerised. We cannot 
computerise different procedures in diff erent States. We first have to 
standardise it and then computerise it. We are engaged in this process, 
and we would like to do it.  
 We hope -- once the new Act comes -- that we will first register any one 
who wants to apply so that all these applications can be totalled up to 
know who has applied for how many, and then we will track it with the 
States. Further, when they come to us, it will then become a single 
seamless database that enables everyone to know the status of their 
application. It will certain ly be very transparent; it will vastly improve the 
sector; and it will probably make it much more efficient. We do intend to do 
it.”  
 
3.13 Advocating that pelletization is the way forward to tackle the issue of 
excess fines in iron -ore mines and to supple ment the supply of raw material for 
steel, the Secretary, Ministry of Mines during evidence submitted; 
“The issue of use of fines is basically that the sintering is possible only at 
the plant site. So, integrated plants have sintering capability and they u se 
these fines and sinter the ore. Whatever they cannot use, they are 
dumping. They are many mines where the overburden is such that it may 
now be very difficult to actually go deeper because the overburden has 
piled up. Therefore, the fines have to be disposed of.  
The problem is that sintered ore cannot be transported and therefore, 
pelletisation is necessary if we are to use the fines within the country. As 
the hon. Member rightly said, whey are we selling fines, why not pelletise 
and sell? The world ove r, pellets are internationally traded. They are 
traded, in fact, a lot of consumption in steel plants is of pellets. It would be 
highly advisable to increase pelletisation capacity within the country. I 
must admit as Mines Ministry, we do not have control over the pelletisation 
policy. I am sure; there are many factors why that is not happening. But 
certainly it is the direction in which we should be moving because on the 
mines side, I can say, Sir, over the years, as we are going deeper and 
deeper; the cap acity of fines is increasing. Ten years ago, fine to lump 
was 50:50; today, in the eastern part of India, it is already about 60:40; in 
the southern part of India, the percentage is higher, maybe 70 per cent 
fines. We fear that as we go deeper, actually, w e would be getting more 
and more fines. Therefore, it is time that we develop a policy that enabled 
us to use fines. I understand that the National Steel Policy has made 

certain projections about how the steel sector in the country would grow. It 
is essent ial that the feedstock for this growth should firmly factor in the 
conversion of fines into pellets in order to be able to sustainably use the 
ore that coming into the Indian sector. So, till pelletisation takes place, our 
Ministry‟s view is that, firstly,  the export of fines is not adversely affecting 
the market. One honourable Member said that if we do not export the ore, 
the prices might fall. They will not. Actually, there is no domestic market 
for it; they would only clog up the mines but they will not  bring down the 
prices of lumpy ore.”  
 
3.14 The Ministry of Coal were asked to submit their view point on the issue of 
allocation of coal blocks to RINL. The same is given below:- 
“It is stated that allocation of coal blocks is made on the basis of reques ts 
made by the allocattee companies.  M/s RINL had made several specific 
requests for allocation of Mahal and Tenughat Jhirki coal blocks as 
recorded in the allocation letters. 
 
So far as the procedure existing during the time of allocation of the coal 
blocks to M/s RINL, it is stated that Coal is a Schedule -I mineral and the 
eligibility to do coal mining in the country has been laid down in the 
provisions in Section 3 (3) of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973  as 
extracted below:- 
 
―(3) On and from  the commencement of Section 3 of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 1976:- 
 
(a)   No person other than— 
(i)     the central government or a government, company or a 
corporation owned, managed or controlled by the central 
government, or 
(ii)    a person to whom a sub lease referred to in the proviso to 
clause (C), has been granted by any such government, 
company or corporation, or 
(iii)    a company engaged in – 
        1.      the production of Iron and steel, 
       2.      generation of power 
       3.      washing of coal obtained from a mine, or 
      4.      such other end use as the central government may, by 
notification, specify, shall carry on coal mining operation, in 
India, in any form.‖ 
 
Coal/lignite blocks to eligible public and pr ivate sector companies registered 
under the Indian Companies Act, 1956 for approved end use are allocated 
for captive purpose under the relevant provisions of the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973 as described below:- 
(i)         Government Company Di spensation – Under this 
arrangement, the list of blocks identified is circulated to all the State 
Governments/Central Ministries and applications invited from the State 
Government/Central Govt. for government companies.  Allocation of 
coal blocks to State/ Central PSUs is made under Section 3(3)(a)(i) of 

the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973. Under this route only 
government companies are allocated coal blocks and no private 
company is eligible for allocation under this dispensation. 
 
(ii)       Captive Dispensation –Allocation of coal blocks in favour of 
public as well as private sector companies under Section 3(3)(a)(iii) of 
the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 is done by the Government 
on the recommendations of the Screening  Committee which is an inter-
ministerial and inter -governmental committee headed by 
Secretary(Coal).  This Committee has representatives from Ministry of 
Power, Steel, Railways, Environment & Forest, Commerce & Industry 
and Railways and Coal companies.  The concerned State Go vernment 
where the block is located is also represented in the Committee.  Under 
this dispensation, blocks identified for allocation for approved end -use 
for captive mining are advertised in national/regional newspapers 
calling applications from both publi c and private sector companies. The 
applications received are circulated to the concerned administrative 
Ministry/Department, State Government and CMPDIL for scrutiny and 
recommendation. Based on the comments/recommendations received 
from the concerned adm inistrative Ministry/Department, State 
Government and CMPDIL, the same are placed before the Screening 
Committee for its examination and recommendation. In respect of coal 
block allocatees are more than one company, then the allocations are 
decided taking into account, inter-alia, techno-economic viability of end-
use project, state of project preparedness, compatibility in terms of 
quality and quantity of coal in a block with the requirement of end user 
and track record of applicant company, recommendations  of the State 
Government and Administrative Ministry concerned etc.  Based on the 
recommendations of the Screening Committee, the Govt. allocates the 
coal block to the companies. 
 
(iii)      Allocation of coal blocks under Tariff based competitive 
bidding (UMPP): In this case, identified coal blocks are placed at the 
disposal of Ministry of Power which determines the linkage of coal 
blocks with the power projects proposed to be awarded on the basis of 
Tariff Based Competitive Bidding by calling applications  from eligible 
companies. The UMPP is awarded to the successful bidder. For power 
projects to be selected through tariff based bidding, coal blocks are 
allotted on the basis of bidding for tariff on the recommendations of 
Ministry of Power under Section 3( 3)(a)(iii) of the Coal 
Mines(Nationalisation) Act, 1973.  In allocation of coal blocks to UMPP, 
Ministry of Power is the nodal Ministry to decide allocation of coal 
blocks in consultation with Ministry of Coal. 
 
 
On the direction of Central Government, Coa l India Limited (CIL) as per the 
coal production target and demand -supply assessed by the Planning 
Commission for the respective Five Year Plans, earmarks the coal blocks 
for its envisaged production programme.  Those coal blocks which Coal 
India Limited does not include in its production programme are identified for 
captive allocation.  Based on the list of blocks prepared, and in consultation 

with CIL, CMPDIL and the concerned Administrative Ministries, the 
identified coal blocks are further earmarked sector-wise.  
 
 Further, on the recommendations of the Energy Coordination Committee 
headed by the Prime Minister, Ministry of Coal carries out the exercise of 
identification and earmarking of coal blocks and opens up the captive 
allocations by inviting fresh applications from eligible applicants. 
 
 Accordingly, initially, in total 229 coal blocks (148 blocks in the first lot and 
81 blocks in the second lot and) with geological reserves of approximately 
50 billion tonnes were identified. Hence it is clear that  the identification 
and earmarking of coal blocks for allocation for captive use is made 
after having consultation with Coal India Limited. 
 
 Based on the above process, so far 215 coal blocks have been allocated to 
various public sector / private sector c ompanies.  Out of 215, blocks, 09 
blocks have been de-allocated and mining lease in case of one coal block has 
been declared void.  Out of de -allocated coal blocks, 2 blocks have been re -
allocated to eligible companies. As such 208 coal blocks are effectiv ely 
allocated as on date.  M/s RINL has been allocated Mahal coking coal block 
on 9 th December, 2005 under government dispensation route for its steel 
plant subject to certain terms and conditions.  Similarly, M/s RINL has been 
allocated Tenughat Jhirki co king coal block on 10 th September, 2008 under 
captive dispensation route for its steel plant subject to certain terms and 
conditions……. 
 
 However, instead of making any development of the coal blocks despite 
passage of adequate time, recently Ministry of S teel vide their D.O. letter 
No.6(4)/2004-VSP dated 1 st September, 2009 addressed to Ministry of Coal 
…… has stated that Mahal and Tenughat -Jhirki coal blocks allocated to M/s 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), a CPSU of Ministry of Steel are having 
many fa ults, have high gaseous deposits, very deep workable seams, 
obstructed by railway line, river/nala etc. blocking substantial reserves.  Due 
to these adverse conditions, not only a very high investment and production 
cost is involved but it may also take mi nimum 9 years to start mining.  
Moreover, the extractable reserves of coal are just a fraction i.e. 4% of the 
geological reserves of 258 MT in Mahal Coking Coal Block and 215 MT in 
Tenughat Jhirki Coking Coal Block. Accordingly Ministry of Steel after havi ng 
in depth  consultation with RINL have decided to surrender Mahal and 
Tenughat Jhirki coking coal blocks and has made a request to Ministry of 
Coal to allot some other good coking coal blocks with open cast mining 
possibilities.  The submissions made by Ministry of Steel have been 
forwarded to the Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd. (CMPDIL) for 
examination and before the request for surrender of coal block is 
considered/decided in the Ministry. 
 
In this regard it is stated that as per para 2 of  the allocation letter the 
allocation / mining lease of the coal block may be cancelled, inter -alia, on the 
following grounds :- 
 

 Unsatisfactory progress of implementation of their end use power 
plant. 
 Unsatisfactory progress in the development of coal mining project. 
 For breach of any of the conditions of allocation mentioned above. 
 
 Further para 3 of allocation letter dated 10.09.2008 of Tenughat Jhirki coal 
block clearly states that the de -allocation/cancellation of mining lease shall 
be without any lia bility to the Government or its agencies, whatsoever. Any 
expenses incurred by the allocatee or any right or liability arising on the 
allocattee out of the measures taken by him shall solely be to his account 
and in no way be transferred to or borne by the  Government or its 
agencies.” 
 It is informed that at present no coal blocks are identified and earmarked for 
allocation by the Ministry of Coal. As regards allocation of alternative coal 
block, it may be stated that there is no policy arrangement for allo cation of 
alternative coal block in lieu of surrendered coal block(s). To formulate a 
policy on alternative coal blocks, a Working Group (WG) on resolving the 
forest clearance issue of allocatted blocks has been set up in Planning 
Commission with members from Ministry of E&F, Power, Coal, Finance etc.   
  
As regard, the present policy/procedure for allocation of coal blocks for 
captive purpose, it is informed that the Mines and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2010 regarding introduction  of 
competitive bidding system for allocation of coal blocks for captive use, 
has been passed by the both Houses of Parliament and the assent of the 
Hon‟ble President of India has been obtained on 8 th September, 2010 and 
notified in Gazette of India (Extra ordinary) on 9 th September, 2010. The 
Amendment Act seeks to provide for grant of reconnaissance permit, 
prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of an area containing coal 
and lignite through auction by competitive bidding, on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed.  This, would however, not be applicable 
in the following cases:- 
 
 where such area is considered for allocation to a Government 
company or corporation for mining or such other specified end use; 
 where such area is considered for al location to a company or 
corporation that has been awarded a power project on the basis of 
competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects). 
 
 The Government is now examining the modalities for preparation of the 
guidelines/legal framework for conducting the competitive bidding of coal 
and lignite blocks.   
 
Accordingly, M/s RINL may apply for allocation of captive coal blocks as 
and when the formulation of policy and identification and earmarking of 
coal blocks are completed and the blocks on offer are advertised.” 
 
 

3.15 The Secretary, Ministry of Coal added the following during evidence 
before the Committee:- 
 “We were doing the allocation of blocks under three routes.  One is the 
Government dispensation; second is for captive purposes; a nd the third 
category is for Ultra Mega Power Plants.  As you are aware, the last 
amendment to the MMDR Act was passed and received Presidential 
assent for introducing competitive bidding for the allocation of coal blocks 
for captive purposes.  But in the meanwhile, the other two dispensations 
viz. Government dispensation as well as the Ultra Mega Power Plants 
continue at the present.   We have got the Cabinet approval for that.  The 
way it used to be done is that the blocks that were outside the planned 
production of Coal India and coal companies were sought to be blocked 
and a list was prepared and it was widely advertised and applications 
were invited for these blocks.  The blocks were segregated into categories 
depending on the end use, like power, steel , sponge iron, cement, etc.  
Now, with the passage of time, the position has been that we are getting 
far too many applications and the number of blocks were being hotly 
contested.  In order to make the whole system a little more objective and 
based on ide ntifiable parameters, competitive bidding has been approved 
for future allocations.  Uptil now, a net total of 208 blocks have been 
allocated among the different sectors. We have got the break -up and we 
will give the detailed break -up for the Government di spensation, captive 
purposes and for the UMPPs.  The present position is that only 26 blocks 
have come into production till date.  That is also a cause of concern 
because most of these blocks are monitored both at the Ministry as well 
as at the Coal Contro ller‟s organisation to try and see that they adhere to 
the agreed milestones, which were fixed at the time of allocation.  That 
process is also on.  Based on the last review done in July, 2010 we have 
issued show cause notices for the companies to show cause why the 
allocation should not be cancelled or de -allocated because the 
performance as per the milestones has not been forthcoming.  But at the 
same time we also realise that the expectation while doing this allocation 
process was that for some reason or  the other we were hopeful that the 
private sector parties or the other participants, including the State 
Governments and their own corporations, in concert with other private 
sector groups would be able to get some of the clearances that the coal 
companies were taking quite long to get.  But in practice that has also not 
worked out because most of the people in their responses to our show 
cause notices have squarely said that most of the permissions that were 
expected, like getting the mining lease or the prospecting lease from the 
State Government, getting the environment or the forest clearance from 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the State Government have 
been taking inordinate amount of time and in some cases they have also 
been refused.  
These are certainly matters which we take into consideration and based 
on which it becomes difficult for us to take extreme measures. Of course, 
the idea is that we will follow the due process of law. We have given 
notice. We are in the process of getting al l the responses to them. We will 
analyse them and quickly put it up for a decision. But the factual position is 
that only 9 blocks have been de -allocated since the time the allocation 

process started. Even in that, one or two are matters of court cases whe re 
we are contesting. The short point is that we are looking for allocations for 
captive purpose, for specific end -use. One is for power plant, captive 
power or if there is a Governmental organisation, for merchant power also. 
It is for steel and gasificat ion also. These have been added later on as 
specified end-use.  
 When we look at the case of RINL, they have two allocations of two 
blocks. One was the Mahal block which was given to them under the 
Government dispensation route and the other one was  Tenug hat Jhikri 
which was given to them for captive purpose. One was allotted in 2006 
and the other one was allotted in 2008. Of course, you had a point about 
whether the companies have a choice in getting the blocks. These two 
allocations are also based on the  specific request of the company. In fact, 
for the Tenughat Jhikri block, as many as 32 applicants expressed their 
interest in getting that allocated. I think in the initial stages, there was an 
attempt to try and make a joint allocation to two parties but  it was not 
considered feasible because it would neither meet their requirement in full 
nor is it a workable or economic proposition. So, ultimately, it took time till 
it was finally decided to be given independently to RINL. They, in turn, 
wrote back to u s after consultation with their Ministry.   They pleaded for 
giving back the blocks for  different reasons like faults in the seams, 
difficult working conditions, not being in a position to exploit it in the time -
frame that we had envisaged originally. Ano ther important point is that the 
extractable reserves were very small compared to  the original reserves  
projection. Taking all these facts, the Ministry of Steel also supported their 
request for giving back the blocks. They made the request for alternate  
blocks.  
Turning to alternate blocks, the position till today is that there is no policy 
for giving anybody alternate blocks for any reason whatsoever. People  
have had problems in developing the block. There have been one or two 
cases for returning the b locks. One allocation was declared null and void. 
They have also not been given alternate blocks. This is the stand taken 
consistently by the Ministry. It has also stood the test in one or two  court 
cases. With the passage of time, particularly since last year since this new 
development with the Ministry of Environment and Forests which has 
another background to it, there was a suggestion from the Ministry of Coal 
that we should try and fast track the process of getting clearances in the 
so-called “go” areas where they should not have much problems in giving 
us the permission. We tried to superimpose the maps of forest areas as 
well as coal blocks. We also tried to see which are the dense forest areas 
which we would segregate as the “no go” areas.  But the i nitial cut based 
on the agreed definitions at that point, turned out to be fairly alarming 
because it cut very drastically into the kind of production projections that 
we could make in future putting the entire power sector development plans 
in jeopardy. S o, that is one step which is still under negotiation. We have 
had rounds of discussions at different forums including the Planning 
Commission and the Prime Minister‟s Office. Arising out of that, the issue 
is still to be resolved: whether to insist on “go or no go” area. So, we are 
coming round to the point  that where there are wildlife implications, we 
ourselves will consider those as inviolate and the so -called “no go” area 
should be restricted to those areas; for others, let the statutory provisions 

which are there for the Forest Apprais al Committee should be continued. 
We are trying to float a paper; taking it to the Cabinet Committee on 
Infrastructure. It will be discussed. We hope to get some resolution in that 
forum. But, arising out of that, when th e initial exercises were on, we 
discovered that a large number of blocks, where people have made 
considerable amount of investment in setting up end -use plants and also 
some investment for progressing the coal mines,  were also getting badly 
affected, espe cially there is one  forest region which, they said, is 
completely out and it should not be considered as  nowhere near “go” area 
at all; no project should be considered in that region. The implication of 
that was both for the power sector and the steel se ctor. There were huge 
projects involved where serious investments have been made and that led 
the Prime Minister‟s Office, in one of the discussions, to say that we have 
to come up with some policy for allocation of alternate blocks. So, there 
was a suggestion that a Group be set up under Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, who 
is the Member of Planning Commission. We have had a couple of 
discussions with them. They have made some tentative 
recommendations. But even in that our request was that till the issue of 
“go or no go” area is not clarified or finally settled, rejection on the ground 
that it will fall in the “no go” area should not be taken as sacrosanct at this 
point. Those recommendations have been received. That issue will also 
be progressively discussed and som e clarity will emerge.  But, as of now, 
the official position is that there is some move to consider the question of 
allocation of alternate blocks but considering that also has its own 
problems because we do not have a number of blocks which gives us the 
luxury of considering alternate blocks in case there is some problem in 
getting the clearances. We could come up, maybe in single digit, with a 
couple of blocks. For different reasons, we might have to consider it. But 
the moment that is done, the number o f blocks available for auction or 
competitive bidding will be drastically reduced.…..”  
 
  
 
 
 

Chapter- IV 
 
Evaluation of Complimentary Areas of Performance 
 
A. Research and Development  
4.1 Details of research and development activities of the Company alo ng with 
major achievements, annual expenditure in terms of percentage of total 
expenditure and also turnover for the last five years, and the impact of R&D 
activities in improving the working of the Company  as submitted by the company 
are given below:- 
“RINL has been giving continuous thrust on applied R & D activities and 
has tripled the expenditure on R& D during the last 5 years, from a level 
of around Rs. 6 crores in 2004 -05, to over Rs.17 crores during the last 
financial year. 
Annual Expenditure for Last Five years. 
Year 
R&D Exp 
(Rs in 
crs) 
R&D Exp as % 
of Total 
Expenditure 
R&D Exp. as 
% of 
turnover 
2008-09  17.35 0.21 0.17 
2007-08 17.93 0.26 0.17 
2006-07 11.68 0.18 0.13 
2005-06 10.46 0.18 0.12 
2004-05 5.72 0.11 0.07 
 
R&D of RINL has identified fo llowing thrust areas for development 
activities: 
a. Development of New Grades / Products 
b. Process Improvements 
c. Cost reduction 
d. Waste Management 
e. Energy Conservation 
f. Environment Management 
g. Technology Development 
 
Continuous efforts are in place for developing new  products to meet 
specific applications. On an average more than 50 products are 
developed every year to meet specific needs and applications.  
Decisions regarding new product development are based on various 
factors like total demand in the market, compet itors‟ offerings, influence 
on targeted segment and economic viability for VSP. Different products 
were developed to meet general engineering applications, forgings, steel 
wool etc .Some examples of product details to cater to specific customer 
requirement are shown in the following table: 

 
RINL has also given prime importance to innovative technology 
development. To illustrate, RINL has initiated a Project on Nano 
Technology as a development of coating made of nano particles for lining 
of BOF Vessel.   
RINL along with IMMT, Bhubaneshwa r have submitted a Project 
proposal to MOS for financial aid for the development of futuristic Iron 
making technology by the usage of H2 as a replacement of Coal/Coke for 
reduction of CO2 emission. Premier research institutes like IISc -
Bangalore, IIT-Madras, IIT-Kanpur, NIT-Trichy, Andhra University, IMMT-
Bhubaneswar etc have been identified as Partners for Joint Research 
initiatives.  Process of initiating Joint Research Project with IIT -
Kharagpur, NMDC -R&D, RDCIS -Ranchi, etc is also on. With a view to 
reaffirm Industry-Institute interaction, regular lectures by eminent experts 
in various fields are organized.   
RINL has also initiated a number of projects in the areas of process 
improvement, productivity improvement, cost reduction & waste 
management etc. Some of the major achievements / findings in various 
areas are tabulated below:  
i) Process Optimization 
Name of 
project 
Objective Results/impact 
 Pilot Coke oven                Optimization of Coal   
blend 
- The Pilot coke oven was designed, 
Fabricated & comm issioned internally by 
R&D . 
- Optimization of blend is being done with 
different sources and types of coal and 
recommendation given for industrial 
application.                              
      Maximization of 
usage of micro fine 
iron ore in sinter 
making.                                                                                                                           
To study the effect of 
Iron ore Micro fines on 
Sinter & Sintering 
Process to maximize 
usage of micro-fines.                       
In Laboratory Scale Sintering Process found 
to be supporting production of sinter with 
50% of micro -fines in Iron ore.  However, 
strength of Sinter found to be deteriorating 
with increase in micro -fines content. 
Therefore the work on this being continued.  
 
ii)   Increase in productivity 
Name of Project Objective Results/impact 
Improving the yield and 
Metallurgical performance 
of Vizag Steel‟s 4 -strand   
Tundish by water Modeling.                                                                           
To improve the cast Bloom 
Yield.                 
Reduction in skull loss by 
50% and Improvement in   the 
yield of cast bloom.                                                                                                    
 
Year Grade/Size Application 
2006-07 
Vizag TLT  as structural in transmission line towers 
 SAE1524S  ship building components and anchor chain 
HC75CR PC wire for railway sleepers 
2007-08 
CHQ1010 and 
CHQ1018 
cold heading process of making fasteners. 
C20MMN angles against orders of Power Grid Corporation of 
India,  
40 mm Rebars- 
IS 1786, Fe 415 
As concrete reinforcement 
2008-09 JISG 4801 SUP 10 Helical Springs 
SAE 1547 Forging /Piercing & machining into Bomb Shells  

Technical Analysis and 
Optimization of Continuous 
Casting at VSP 1using 
existing Plant facilities. 
Improvement in the yield of 
Bloom by reducing machine 
stoppage.  
Reason for Breakout 
including the most significant 
cause and the cost of 
Breakout was ascertained. 
iii) Improvement in Quality: 
  Name of 
Project 
Objective Results/impact 
Improving the yield and 
Metallurgical performance 
of Vizag Steel‟s 4-strand   
Tundish by Water 
Modeling.                                                                           
To reduce the non -metallic 
inclusion content of steel for 
improved quality.  
The water modeling of 
Tundish at Steel melt shop 
(SMS), followed by 
redesigning of contour of 
tundish has the potential of 
reducing skull loss by 50%.  
 
iv) Reduction of Cost of Production and Solid Waste 
Utilization : 
Name of Project Objective Results/impact 
Briquetting of SMS Gas 
Cleaning Plant Sludge. 
Replacement of usage of Sized 
Iron ore in Converter by 
Briquettes made of SMS GCP 
Sludge as a cost reduction 
measure as well as effective 
solid waste utilization. 
Briquettes were made and 
successfully used in Converter 
as a replacement of sized iron 
ore. 
Briquetting of Solid 
Metallurgical Waste. 
To recycle and effective reuse 
of Metallurgical Waste 
generated in the Plant. 
Briquettes could be made at 
Lab Sca le.  Briquettes are 
being made now for Industrial 
Trial Run in Blast Furnace. 
 
4.2 When questioned why the R&D expenditure of the company was only 
0.148%, the company replied:- 
“In the Indian steel industry all new processes and related technology are 
generally provided by the equipment supplier and this mode of technology 
transfer continues to be used by all major steel players in the country, 
including RINL. The focus of the R&D efforts of the plant is therefore more 
towards areas like process improvemen t, product development, waste 
management, cost reduction, environment protection. etc   
Development of new products to cater to the niche Indian market segment 
to meet customer applications, Pilot oven tests to study the suitability of 
usage of various coa l blends in coke making including testing of inferior 
grade coal in blend, Water modeling of Continuous Casting Tundish for 
improvement of Yield and Metallurgical performance” etc are some 
examples of the R & D initiatives in the company. 
RINL has signed M OUs with some of the premier educational 
institutes/research laboratories for Joint Research Initiatives. The list of the 
research partners includes the IITs, IISc, Jadavpur University, Andhra 
University, National Mineral Development Corporation, Institute  of Minerals 
and Materials Technology, National Geophysical Research Institute, Central 
Glass and Ceramic Institute, Central Electro Chemical Research Institute 
etc. 
RINL has identified some projects for funding from Steel Development Fund 
(SDF)) under Min istry of Steel. RINL has also taken up four joint research 

projects with Research and Development Centre for Iron and Steel, SAIL, 
Ranchi.  
However, we do humbly submit that we have a long way to go.” 
B. Transparency Mechanisms 
4.3 Asked to elaborate on th e company‟s policy on whistle blowers which the 
company is involved in the  process of evolving, the company in their post -
evidence submissions stated:-  
“Whistle Blower mechanism helps to bring in transparency and good 
governance in an organization, as it encourages and provides an 
opportunity for employees to bring to the notice of the competent authority 
issues or concerns, if they have a reason to believe that the standards of 
integrity, Ethics and Code of conduct in the company are being 
compromised. 
A draft Whistle Blower Policy … has been formulated and is scheduled to be 
put up to the Audit Committee for their recommendations and then to seek 
approval of Board of Directors, to eventually put in place the Whistle Blower 
Policy for implementation. “ 
C. Environmental Issues  
4.4 On being asked whether RINL has made any significant progress in 
reducing green house gas emissions and details thereof, RINL replied thus:- 
“RINL has made significant progress in reducing GHG emissions. 
The following Energy Effic ient Technologies have been adopted since 
inception: 
Department  Technology 
Coke Ovens  Coke dry quenching system  
 Back pressure turbine station 
Blast Furnaces  Top Gas recovery turbine 
Steel Melting shop  LD gas recovery plant 
Rolling Mills  Evaporative cooling systems 
 Waste heat recovery systems in reheating furnaces 
 Installation of these facilities has reduced GHG emissions by more than 
approx 10,00,000 tons annually. 
 Process Improvement Initiatives: 
 Injection of reversal pause coke oven gas in to BF gas to TPP  
 Augmenting usage of by product gases in thermal power plant  
 Blending of Sinter returns from Blast Furnace in base mix of sinter 
plant  
 Rationalization of heat distribution at Billet Mill reheating furnaces  
 Waste recycling  
 Reducing reversal p ause duration between heating cycles of Coke 
Oven Battery 1&2  
 Installation of Energy Efficient Chillers  
 Installation of VF drives, Energy Savers, Energy Efficient lamps 
Other Major Initiatives:  
 RINL is installing 20.6 MW waste heat recovery system on si nter 
straight line cooler of Sinter Machine 1 & 2 with NEDO 
technological support under Japan Green Aid Plan at an estimated 

cost of Rs 244.70 crores. The project reduces Green House gas 
emissions to the extent of 116,585 tons annually. MOU was signed 
between RINL, MOS, MOF and NEDO on 25th May, 2009. 
 Pulverized Coal injection in the existing Blast Furnaces as well as 
in the expansion  
 “Zero effluent Discharge” Scheme 
 Water consumption (2.18 cum/ tls) per tonne of liquid steel at RINL, 
is the lowest, contri buting to reduction of Green house gases 
because of reduction in pumping of water  
 Specific Energy consumption of RINL is one of the lowest in the 
country thereby reducing load on internal & external environment 
 Power generation of 40MW through waste heat recovery and top 
recovery turbine (TRT) etc. and another 50MW Waste heat 
recovery in expansion contributing to reduction of Green house 
gases 
 4.5 million Trees within the boundary to conserving the ecological 
balance leading to reduction in Green house gas emission.” 
 
4.5 RINL was asked whether they had undertaken eco -friendly operating 
processes to reduce environmental degradation. In reply, they stated:- 
“RINL has undertaken eco -friendly operating processes to reduce 
environmental degradation. The major c lean technologies adopted in VSP 
are described below along with the environmental benefits. 
 
Sl. 
No 
Area Unit / process Environmental improvements / Benefits. 
    
A. 
Coke 
Oven 
Batteries 
Coke Dry Cooling 
Plants (CDCP) 
a. Elimination of fugitive dust emissions , 
discharges & toxic gaseous pollutants 
during cooling of red hot coke. 
b. Recovery of waste heat from the red hot 
coke for generation of power (2 X 7.5 MW) 
and saturated steam (2.5 ata, 7 ata and 13 
ata) for process use. 
B. Blast 
Furnaces 
Bell-less/belt 
conveyor charging 
and Top recovery 
turbine 
a. No fugitive dust emission during charging 
of raw materials, ie., coke, sinter, iron ore 
etc., into BF resulting in better work zone 
environment 
b. Generation of power in gas expansion 
turbines (2 X 12 MW). 
C. 
Steel 
Melt 
Shop 
Recovery of L.D 
.gas produced 
during steel making 
in Gas Recovery 
Plant (GRP) 
a. No fugitive emissions, dust and gaseous 
pollutants. 
b. Utilization of LD gas as fuel. 
 
D. 
Rolling 
Mills 
 
(LMMM& 
MMSM) 
 
Evaporative cooling 
systems & Waste 
heat recovery form 
furnace 
c. Generation of process steam (13 ata) by 
recovery of heat from the skids in 
reheating furnaces in LMMM & MMSM. 
 
In the Expansion phase also RINL has adopted major clean technologies 
as given below: 

Sl. 
No 
Area Unit / process Environmental 
improvements / Benefits. 
    
A. 
Coke Oven 
Batteries 
Mechanical , 
Biological & Chemical 
treatment plant 
To bring down Ammonical 
Nitrogen before the water is 
discharged to sea 
B. Raw Material 
Handling Plant 
Dry fog dust 
suppression system  No fugitive dust emission  
C. 
Calcining and 
Refractory 
Material Plant 
Bag filters Better Pollution control 
D. 
Sinter plant -3,               
Blast Furnace -3 
& Steel Melt 
Shop-2  
Electro Static 
Precipitators  Better pollution control. 
E. Blast Furnace -3 Top Heat Recovery Waste heat recovery 
F. Blast Furnace -3 Pulverised Coal 
Injection Reduction of coke usage 
G. Steel Melt Shop -
2 LD Gas recovery 
a. No fugitive emissions, dust 
and gaseous pollutants. 
b. Utilization of LD gas as fuel 
H. Steel Melt Shop -
2 Dog House No fugitive dust emissions 
 
Other eco-friendly environmental processes: 
Sl. 
No 
Area Unit / process Environmental 
improvements / Benefits. 
    
A. 
Coke Oven 
Battery # 4 
Coke Dry Cooling 
Plants (CDCP) 
Recovery of waste heat from the 
red hot coke for generation of 
power (1 X 14 MW) and saturated 
steam for process use. 
B. Sinter Plant 
Power generation 
from Straight line 
cooler 
Generation of power 20.6 MW 
through 
Waste heat recovery 
 
 

PART-B 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee‟s thrust all thro ugh has been to ensure that PSUs 
function to their optimum capability and to suggest ways and means in the 
event of any problems being faced by a PSU alongside proposals for 
plugging loopholes hampering the functioning of the undertaking.  It is with 
this objective that the Committee went about with the examination of RINL. 
 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited which was set -up in 1979, is the first 
integrated steel plant in the country.  It is indeed appreciable that despite 
teething problems and huge losses in t he nascent stage of the Company, 
which incidentally led to reference of the Company to the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in the year 2000, have 
bounced back since 2002 -03.  The resurgent company not only wiped out 
accumulated los ses amounting to Rs. 4,981.96 crore in 2005 -06, but also 
achieved Navratna status, which was conferred upon the Company on 16 
November, 2010.   
 
In keeping with it‟s remit, the Committee examined RINL in great 
detail with a view to ensure that the public s ector company is being 
managed efficiently within the defined autonomy parameters, and, that 
sound business principles and prudent commercial practices have been 
adhered to in the management of the affairs of the Company.  
Notwithstanding the impressive pe rformance of the company during 
the past 7 -8 years, the Committee, during the course of its examination, 
have noticed several challenges the public company is facing. These 
challenges have stood in the way of the company attaining its potential 
competitive edge, and unless and until suitably redressed, are likely to 
hinder the company‟s competitiveness in terms of profit margins, its 
medium to long term sustainability and its growth into a globally 
competitive company.  
 Some of the challenges facing RINL, the third largest player after 
SAIL and Tata Steel in the country‟s steel sector, are discussed in the 

following paragraphs in the form of observations and recommendations of 
the Committee.  
 While focusing on RINL specific issues, the Committee also found  it 
relevant to dilate upon the broader issue of conservation of natural 
resources of the country. 
 
Ageing Plant and Equipments 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee observe that the plants of RINL, the lifespan of which 
normally is of 15 years, are overdue for revamp, thereby adversely affecting 
the company‟s production and capacity realization.  The Committee note 
that steps that ought to have been initiated five years ago for a timely 
renovation or revamp of the aged machinery are being taken up only 
recently.  The Committee, while appreciating the submission of the 
Company that they are still producing at efficiencies comparable with the 
best despite the aging plants, find it pertinent to observe that they could 
have done better had timely steps been taken for repair.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the company should 
expedite steps required to carry out the revamp of the aged 
Plant/machinery within a specified time frame, ensuring all the while, a 
minimal disruption in their production. The Commit tee desire that action 
taken in this regard together with status report vis-à-vis the progress 
achieved be submitted before the Committee. 
 
Expansion of Capacity  
Recommendation No. 2  
The Committee are apprised of the ongoing expansion plan of the 
company, whereby the current installed production capacity of 3 million 
tonnes is sought to be enhanced to 6.3 million tonnes per annum. The 
Committee note with concern the several delays in implementation of the 
expansion project that have led to escalation of t he estimated costs by 
thousands of crores. The Committee are constrained to observe that 
unless effective monitoring and corrective steps are taken on a continuous 
basis the cost would further escalate. Besides the expansion project, the 

Committee also tak e note of delays in other infrastructure projects of the 
company resulting in cost overruns of more than 400 crore rupees. 
While conceding the fact that some of the cost escalations are due to 
new and additional features being added to the original scheme,  the 
Committee are nevertheless of the opinion, that such escalation would very 
well have been anticipated in the original scheme of things, and that a 
major bulk of the escalations are due, primarily, to the delay in 
implementation.  
The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the company should, 
while taking steps to ensure minimum further delay, evolve a 
comprehensive and effective project planning and monitoring mechanism 
which shall minimize future delays and the associated escalation of costs 
involved.  The Committee desire some concrete steps by the Company in 
this regard within six months of the presentation of this report, which may 
duly be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Inputs Management 
Recommendation No. 3 
 The Committee observe that the primary challenge facing RINL today 
is the securitization of raw materials, such as, iron ore and coking coal, the 
primary inputs in the production of steel.  A crucial point which the 
Committee note is that RINL is the only integrated steel plant among Public 
Sector Undertakings not having captive iron ore and coal mines.  The 
Committee appreciate the fact that the non -allocation of captive mines of 
iron ore and coking coal to the company are attributable to RINL being a 
company which has been created by separation of units from SAIL and the 
supply of its iron ore requirements being planned to be met from Bailadila 
mines of National Mineral Development Corporation, another offspring of 
SAIL. However, with increase in competition and the falling margins of the 
company owing to its having to buy these primary raw materials at a 
comparatively higher cost than its competitors having captive mines of 
these raw materials, the Committee feel that the growth and sustainability 
of the Company today hinges on the securitization  of these primary raw 
materials at lower costs through captive mines.  

 The Committee are apprised of the fact that iron ore mining leases 
are governed by MMDR Act, 1957 under which the primary role of allocation 
of mines rests with State Governments. The Committee also took evidence 
of representatives of Ministry of Mines in this regard and were informed 
that no application of RINL for allocation of iron ore mines have reached 
the Ministry, this, despite numerous such applications having been filed by 
the Company in various States like Jharkhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and 
Rajasthan. The Committee also note with serious concern that these 
applications are often processed at snail‟s pace owing to multiplicity of 
clearances required from as many authorities, causing much delay and 
escalations in costs.  Besides, different States are known to be following 
different procedures in the matter.  
The Committee, in the light of the above facts, desire that a via-media 
be worked out to ensure expeditious processing of  applications for mining 
blocks.  The Committee further recommend that a standardized procedure 
for processing mining lease applications applicable in all States must be 
seriously considered by the Government to make the process more 
transparent and expedient.  
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Regarding the non -allocation of captive iron -ore mines to RINL, the 
Committee find that the problem lies in State Governments often denying 
the Company‟s applications, thereby ruling out the same being forwarded 
to the Union Ministry of Mines.  The Committee, while appreciating the fact 
that the State Governments may have their own set of considerations and 
criteria for selection of eligible applicants for mining leases, feel that the 
consistent denial or non -selection of a steel  giant in the public sector like 
RINL smacks of not only irregularity but also inconsistencies in the system 
and warrants a serious re -think on the existing statutory and procedural 
provisions.  
Noting that the Company‟s applications have been denied on 
grounds such as RINL not contributing any value additions in the States 
having Mining blocks; the blocks being in forest reserves; the blocks 
having been allocated to earlier applicants, etc., the Committee recommend 

that the Company should make serious effo rts at fulfilling the criterion laid 
down by concerned States. Further, the Committee observe that States 
should be actively encouraged to give due weightage to macro value 
additions to be achieved through preferential allocation of resources to 
Public Sec tor Undertakings, which is for the nation as a whole as 
compared to value additions to be had locally.  
In conformity with the Supreme Court‟s observations in RIL vs RNRL 
case treating mineral reserves as national resources, the Committee would 
like to emp hasise that the Government of India should take initiatives to 
declare all mineral resources including iron -ore and coal as national 
wealth. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note with concern the travails of the Company in its 
efforts to secure a captiv e mine for sourcing its coking coal requirements.  
The Committee also note that RINL had surrendered two blocks, Mahal and 
Tenughat Jhirkri for economic unviability and have sought alternative 
blocks in lieu thereof.  The Committee have obtained the views of the 
Ministry of Coal on the matter and have been apprised that no provisions 
exist for allocation of alternate blocks in lieu of surrendered allocations.   
 Considering that the company is required to start from scratch in 
applying afresh for other coal  blocks and taking note of the urgency of the 
coking coal requirements of the company in view of its expansion plans, 
the Committee desire that the plan to acquire adequate and secure supply 
of coking coal for its expanded capacity must be firmed up to ens ure that 
additional capacity to be added do not go under -utilised for want of Coking 
coal. 
Further, the Committee desire that in consideration of the fact that 
PSUs have been mandated with the important task of giving a fillip to 
industrial and economic gr owth and infrastructure base of the country, 
every effort must be made by the Government to give them some priority in 
securing essential inputs over the private sector, which primarily are 
modeled on profit generation.  
 

Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee  appreciate that the Government has approved the 
formation of an International Coal Ventures Ltd. (ICVL) between RINL, CIL, 
NTPC & NMDC towards enabling acquisition of coking and thermal coal 
assets overseas, and note that this venture holds much promise f or 
possible supplementing of the supply of coking coal for RINL‟s 
requirements, among others.  
The Committee express their hope that the formation of ICVL may 
result in enhancing the supply of coking and thermal coal to the PSUs as a 
whole, and RINL in par ticular.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should facilitate and actively promote this entity to enable it to 
achieve its objectives expeditiously.  
 
Pelletization Plants 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee, during the course of examinat ion, have been 
apprised of the importance of pelletization of fines (iron -ore fines) in 
supplementing the supply of lump iron -ore as raw input for steel 
production. They also note that there still are huge cost and technology 
constraints in this field in t he country.  The Committee nevertheless 
observe that the process of pelletization has not been given adequate 
priority in the country, neither by the domestic steel industry in general, 
nor by RINL as an individual steel producer, leading to huge export of  
valuable natural resources in the form of fines at throw-away prices. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that RINL should draw up a 
plan to go into pelletization in enhanced capacities to supplement its 
supply of iron-ore, and that the government should  explore mechanisms to 
incentivize pelletization plants, with the twin objectives of preventing the 
dumping of precious natural resources in the export market at throw away 
prices and enhancing the supply chain of raw materials for steel producers 
in the country. 
 
 
 

Research & Development 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee regret to note that the Research and Development 
(R&D) spending in RINL is at a dismal 0.148 per cent of its total expenditure 
in 2009 -10.  The Committee are informed that the core proces s and 
technology related improvements are generally provided by the equipment 
supplier, and domestic R&D are on peripheral process improvements, 
product development, waste management, cost reduction and environment 
protection, etc.  
 However, the Committee  further note that RINL has rightly admitted 
that they have a long way to go in terms of R&D.  While appreciating the 
ongoing efforts of the company in signing MOUs with educational 
institutes and research laboratories, etc., the Committee recommend that 
the Company, as a bulwark of the steel industry in the country, should 
enhance its R&D and develop such a strong unit that can serve the 
country‟s needs over and above meeting the needs of the Company.  
 
Transparency 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note the formulation of the draft Whistle Blower 
Policy of RINL with its stated objective of bringing in more transparency 
and good governance in the organization and to encourage and provide a 
platform to employees for voicing their concerns regarding any unet hical 
and improper practice, etc. in the Company. 
 
The Committee appreciate this initiative.  The Committee are also of 
the considered view that a Whistle Blower Policy more or less on uniform 
parameters be formulated for all PSUs as part of good corporate  
governance so as to usher in an environment of transparency among all 
PSUs and establishment of a self correcting mechanism to check unethical 
and improper practices within the organizations. 
 
 
 

Conservation of National Resources  
Recommendation No. 10 
Minerals in any form, be it iron ore, coal or bauxite etc., are national 
wealth.  These minerals are not inexhaustible.  Slowly but steadily these 
minerals deplete.  It takes hundreds of years for these minerals to form.  
Nature has bestowed upon our country  a bounty of minerals, notable 
among them being iron ore, coal, bauxite etc.  But how well we utilize our 
natural resources solely depends on our own prudence concerning them. 
In this context, the Committee note, with concern, the twin menaces of 
reckless export of minerals and illegal mining. 
 
The Committee find it quite disturbing to note the present trend of 
exporting minerals particularly of iron -ore. Globally, though many 
countries have rich reserves of minerals, they procure them from others to 
preserve their own mineral resources for use at a later date. At this 
juncture it would be much wiser for us to preserve our minerals which may 
not be available to us when we actually require them for our industrial 
purposes and other needs (including our defenc e requirements) in the 
future.  Our mineral wealth certainly cannot be frittered away for meager 
sums which are to be paid as royalty to fatten the purses of a few private 
individuals of our companies. Hence it would be rather unwise and callous 
on our par t to fritter away such valuable resources which we may in the 
future require for own industrial purposes including defence requirements. 
In this context, it would be pertinent to note the following observations 
made by the Supreme Court of India in their r ecent judgement pronounced 
on 7 May, 2010 “…… Among various considerations, the prime aspect 
relates to  national interest relating to the interest of consumers and 
protection of natural resources. ……… gas is an essential natural 
resource…..  The Government holds this natural resources as a trust for 
the people of the country.  Supply of gas is a matter of national 
interest…………..” 
  

The natural resources are vested with Government as a matter of 
trust in the name of the people of India.  Thus it is the solemn  duty of the 
State to protect the national interest. 
 
The Constitutional requirements on the Government would equally 
apply not only to the Government but also to private players in the process. 
Natural resources must always be used in the interests of the  country, and 
not to promote personal or private interests.   These observations which 
were made by Supreme Court in their judgement in the above mentioned 
cases, made in the context of natural resources are applicable to all natural 
resources including ou r mineral wealth and underscore the vital 
importance of the preservation of natural resources.  Under the provisions 
of Article 39(b) of the Constitution “The State shall, in particular, direct its 
policy towards securing -that ownership and control of the material 
resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the 
common good. 
 
The Committee, therefore, observe that our country having just taken 
wings and still in a nascent stage of development,  frittering away all our 
resources at this stage may by allowing unlimited exports for crass 
commercial interest certainly would not be a prudent policy which the 
government, as a trustee to the national wealth, needs to comprehensively 
review.  
 
Illegal Mining 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee would now like to dwell on the other disconcerting 
development viz. illegal mining. Illegal mining has now become an endemic 
feature.  The Committee feel it is time to find out how much natural 
resources/ minerals have been legally used and how much has be en 
illegally mined.  The national resources, especially minerals including coal, 
should not be allowed to become the exclusive preserve of a handful of 
free looters. Another point which the Committee feel needs to be noted is 

that illegal mining has led to  a situation where thousands of people have 
become homeless.  This is the ugly face of illegal mining which involves 
rampant exploitation of people.  Tribals and forest dwellers have been 
irreversibly affected, having been thrown out of their original habi tats.  
Lamentably, this distressing scenario has forced them to resort to 
unconstitutional acts and to go into arms of extremists. 
 
Illegal mining not only depletes the country of its natural resources 
but has also led to the disturbing situation of exploi tation of hapless forest 
dwellers and tribals.  The Committee find it pertinent to take note of 
concerted measures / measures proposed by Government to tackle the 
menace of „illegal mining‟, as the same is reflective of the seriousness with 
which the Government views this subject. 
 
The need of the hour is conservation of National resources.  The 
Committee after indepth consideration recommend action on following 
lines: 
a.   The injudicious export of raw natural resources like iron ore, coal 
needs to be banned. 
b. The Committee note that the Government has formulated a new 
National Mineral Policy, 2008 which envisages the regulation of mines and 
development of mineral resources.  The Committee commend the various 
steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government to  check the menace of 
illegal mining.  The Committee desire that the measures taken need to be 
assiduously followed and monitored.  The Committee further desire that 
the proposed action be taken up in right earnest and pursued 
expeditiously. 
c. In view of the emerging scenario of depletion of precious 
resources like minerals owing to injudicious export and illegal mining, the 
Committee emphasise upon the need to revisit the National Mineral Policy 
for effectively addressing these issues. 
d. In the context of judic ious utilization of National resources, the 
Committee strongly desire rightful allocations of minerals such as iron ore 

and coal to Public Sector Undertakings, which have been choked due to 
the constraint of these resources.  
 
The Committee have recommended the above course of action in their 
endeavour to address the interlinked issue of mineral conservation and the 
interests of the Public Sector Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                   V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
6th December, 2010                              Chairman 
15 Agrahayana 1932 (Saka)      Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

MINUTES OF THE 6th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010-11) HELD ON 11th AUGUST, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs to 1745 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C.Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Shri Baijayant Panda 
6 Shri L.Rajagopal 
7 Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
8 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
9 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias „Lalan Singh‟ 
10 Shri Bhishma Shankar Singh alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
12 Shri Naresh Gujral 
13 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
14 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
15 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
16 Shri T.Subbarami Reddy 
17 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bishnoi CMD, RINL 
2. Shri Y. Manohar Director (Personnel) 
3. Shri Umesh Chandra Director (Operations) 
4. Shri A.P. Choudhary Director (Projects) 

5. Shri P. Madhusudan Director (Finance) 
6. Shri G. Brahmaiah Executive Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the represent atives of Rashtriya  
Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)  and drew their attention to Direction 58 issued by the 
Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  The 
representatives of RINL made a power point presentation on the subject.  The 
Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the 
representatives of RINL.  Information on some of the points raised by the 
Committee was not readily available with the  representatives of RINL.  They 
were therefore asked to furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the 
earliest possible. 
3. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of RINL for 
providing all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 (Verbatim record of evidence has been kept.) 
  The committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010-11) HELD ON 28th SEPTEMBER, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6 Shri Ganesh Singh 
7 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
8 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
9 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
10 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
11 Shri Naresh Gujral 
12 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
13 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
14 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
15 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Steel 
 
1 Shri P.K. Misra  Secretary, Steel 
2 Shri S. Machendranathan AS & FA 
3 Dr. Salip Singh Joint Secretary 
4 Shri G. Elias Joint Secretary 
5 Shri Udai Pratap Singh Joint Secretary 
 
 

2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Steel regarding the comprehensive examination  of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Steel and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker 
relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  Then, the  
representatives of Ministry made a brief statement on the subject.  Thereafter, 
the Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the 
representatives of Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised by the 
Committee was not readily available with the representatives of Ministry.  They 
were therefore asked to furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the 
earliest possible. 
 
3. The Chairman then than ked the representatives of Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept.) 
  The committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES OF THE 13th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010-11) HELD ON 21st OCTOBER, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Baijayant Panda 
5 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Naresh Gujral 
8 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
9 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
10 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Mines 
 
1 Shri S. Vijay Kumar,  Secretary  
2 Shri S. K. Srivastava AS  
3 Shri G. Srinivas Joint Secretary 
4 Shri A.K. Nayak Director 
 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Mines regarding the comprehensive examination of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Mines and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker 
relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  Then, the 

representatives of Ministry made a brief stat ement on the subject.  Thereaft er, 
the Chairman and Members raise d queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the 
representatives of Ministry.   
 
3. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept.) 
  The committee then adjourned. 
 

MINUTES OF THE 14th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010-11) HELD ON 21st OCTOBER, 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1300 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Baijayant Panda 
5 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Naresh Gujral 
8 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
9 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
10 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Coal 
 
1 Shri C. Balakrishnan,  Secretary,Coal 
2 Shri A.K. Bhalla Joint Secretary  
3 Shri P.S.S. Reddy Director 
 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of  
Coal regarding the comprehensive examination of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited.  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Coal and 
drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to 
evidence bef ore the Parliamentary Committees.  Then, the representatives of 

Ministry made a brief statement on the subject.  Thereafter, the Chairman and 
Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the sam e were given by the representatives of 
Ministry.   
3. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Ministry for providing 
all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
4. The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept.) 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE 15th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2010-11) HELD ON 6th DECEMBER 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Baijayant Panda 
5 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6 Ch. Lal Singh 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Naresh Gujral 
8 Shri Prakash Javadekar 
9 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
10 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Under Secretary 
 
 
2. The Committee considered the draft Reports on the following subjects and 
adopted them without modification: - 
 
(i). XXX XXX XXX XXX 
 
(ii). Power Grid Corporation of India Limited. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
  
  
****** 
 