CPU. No. 948 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
SALE OF SURPLUS LAND AND BUILDINGS BY  
NATIONAL TEXTILE CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (1 5th Lok Sabha) 
on Sale of Surplus Land and Buildings by National Textile Corporation 
Limited) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2012 / Chaitra 1934 (S)  
 
15 

2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
18 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  and which require 
reiteration 
 
28 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
36 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
*Minutes of the sitting  
Appendix-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Governmen t on 
the recommendations contained in the 2nd Report 
of COPU (15 th L.S.) on „ Sale of Surplus Land 
and Buildings by NTC Limited‟ 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

3 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2011 – 2012) 
 
Chairman 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4. Shri Ramesh Bais 
5. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
9. Shri Baijayant Panda „Jay‟ 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivajirao Patil 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Vacant * 
17. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
18. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
19. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
20. Vacant # 
21. Vacant # 
22. Shri N.K.Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   Additional Secretary 
2. Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
*   Ceased to be a Member of the Co mmittee consequent on his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 27.1.2012. 
#   Ceased to be Member s of the Committee consequent on their retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 2.4.2012. 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings have been  authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present their Fifteenth 
Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (15th Lok Sabha) on 
Sale of Surplus Land and Buildings by National Textile Corporation Limited. 
 
2. The Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 5th March, 2010.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations contained in the Report were receiv ed on 10th May 2011.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their 
sitting held on 4th April 2012.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendat ions 
contained in the 2nd Report of the Committee (2010-2011) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 April 2012        Chairman, 
15 Chaitra 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

5 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Rep ort of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings, which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 5th March 2010. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 1 3 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos. 3,9,10,12 and 13               (Total 05) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: (Chapter-III) 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,4,6 and 11                 (Total 05) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which r eplies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and which 
require reiteration: (Chapter-IV) 
Sl. Nos. 5,7 and 8                  (Total 03) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government is still awaited: (Chapter-V)    
Sl. No.                     NIL 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Valuations of NTC properties by Government agencies 
 
4. Expressing the need for involvement of Government agencies for 
valuation of NTC properties being offered for sale , the Committee in their original 
Report had recommended as follows:  
 
“The audit review reveals that out of 66 cases of sale of land through 
tender, CBDT valuation of 1994 -95 and 1998 -99 was considered for 
fixation of reserve price in 29 cases during April, 2002 to March, 2008. 
However, the CBDT valuation was not indexed to the year of fixation of 
reserve price for arriving at realistic value.   During his evidence before the 

6 
 
 
Committee, the CMD, NTC deposed “I have gone through the records of 
the Company and I have found that CBDT was involved in the valuation of 
land once in 1995 -96 period.  After that when the Company approached 
them, they have not agreed.” The Company, however, could not produce 
any documentary evidence portraying unwillingness by CBDT for 
undertaking valuation of NTC properties leading the Committee to believe 
that NTC did not invariably involve CBDT in the process of  fixation of 
reserve price in accordance with their own specific guidelines issued in 
November, 2002.  At this stage, the Committee express their strong 
displeasure over the manner in which the valuation of CBDT  was not 
given due consideration for fixatio n of reserve price in all cases as 
stipulated in the guidelines issued by the Company in November, 2002.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Textiles should 
involve expert agencies of the Government like CPWD and CBDT in the 
process of valuation of NTC properties to be offered for sale in the coming 
years.” 
 
5. In their action taken reply, the Government has stated as follows: 
 
“The BIFR has issued guidelines vide its order dated 24.08.2009 for 
valuation and asset sales.  The Company is following the same guidelines.  
Under these guidelines, the ASC is fixing the reserve price on the basis of 
4 values obtained from 3 independent Govt. approved valuers and 
collector‟s guidelines rates and the highest of the 4 values is approved by 
the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) as the reserve price for any property.” 
 
6. In their vetting on the Reply of the Government, the Office of C&AG 
observed that the Government has not accepted the recommendations of COPU 
regarding involvement of expert agencies like CB DT and CPWD for valuation of 
properties.  Reasons for not including recommendations made by COPU in the 
revised guidelines were not intimated. 
 
7. The Ministry furnished the following reply on the comments of the office of 
C&AG that e arlier when the Compan y approached CBDT through letters and 
personal follow -up, no response was received from CBDT. The latest BIFR 
guidelines dated 12.10.2010 have provided for only one valuation with no specific 
mention of CBDT. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
8. Expressing their  strong displeasure over the manner in which 
National Textiles Limited (NTC) did not involve Central Board of Direct 
Taxes (CBDT) for fixation of reserve prices in all cases as stipulated in its 
own specific guidelines issued in November 2002, the Committe e had in 

7 
 
 
their earlier report desired the Ministry of Textiles to involve expert 
agencies of the Government like CPWD and CBDT in the process of 
valuation of NTC properties to be offered for sale in the coming years.  The 
Committee are distressed at action  taken repl y of the Ministry which is 
completely silent about any follow up action taken in pursuance of the 
specific recommendation of the Committee for involvement of expert 
agencies of the Government for valuation of NTC properties to be put on 
for sale .  What has astonished the Committee more is that the Company 
has once again taken recourse to its earlier pleas made before the 
Committee that BIFR guidelines do not specifically provide for valuation of 
properties by CBDT and that no response was receive d from CBDT when 
approached by the Company in the past.  The Committee are not inclined to 
accept these assertions made by NTC and they stress that the Ministry of 
Textiles should take up this matter with BIFR as well as CPWD and CBDT at 
the highest level so as to involve these agencies in the process of 
valuation of NTC properties to the best advantage of the Company. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl.NO. 7) 
 
Fair Market Value 
 
9. Taking note of absence of an effective system to assess fair market value 
of NTC propertie s, the Committee had in their earlier Report recommended  as 
follows: 
 
The Committee note that the GOI directed in April, 2005 that the ASC 
should take a decision on the reserve price keeping it as close to the market 
value as possible.  The Committee‟s examination, has, however, brought out that 
there were wide variations between the reserve price fixed and the actual sale 
value realized in a number of cases on the basis of valuation done by the ASC.  
The self -admission of the Company that it has realized 180% to 350% higher 
than the reserve price fixed for the sale of properties in Mumbai is a clear 
indicator that no system had been put in place to assess the fair market value of 
the properties in accordance with the GOI directives.  Whatever may be the 
claims of the Company for sale value realizations for NTC‟s properties in 
Mumbai, the fact remains that the reserve prices fixed by the ASC in the instant 
cases were nowhere near the market prices realized by the Company.   
 

8 
 
 
The Committee express their stron g displeasure over the failure of the 
Company to devise an effective system to assess the fair market value of NTC 
properties before offering them for sale so as to ensure realization of maximum 
possible revenue.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that t he Ministry of 
Textiles should now devise suitable procedures for assessing fair market value of 
NTC properties being offered for sale and ensure strict compliance of such 
procedures within the laid down policies.  
 
10. In their action taken reply, the Government has stated as follows: 
 
The Company has received the maximum realization of resources by sale 
of its 5 properties in Mumbai by fetching Rs.2020.75 crore.  The Company 
engaged 5 of the best real estate consultants in the country to arrive at the 
Minimum Assured Return (MAR) value for its properties and follow a transparent 
procedure.   However, all future sales of NTC has to be strictly as per the 
guidelines issued by BIFR vide its order dated 24.08.2009, where the asset 
valuation is indicated, which is reproduced as follows:- 
 
“(b) All the assets should be got valued (if not already done) by an 
independent Government approved valuer and having regard to the likely 
market prices thereof, reserve price should be fixed in respect of each of the 
assets, if possible…………..” 
 
NTC decided to sell these properties as per laid down procedures through 
a transparent, open public tendering process.  The proposals for sale were 
placed before the Asset Sale Committee (ASC), constituted by the Ministry of 
Textiles under the directions of the BIFR.  The procedure followed were to invite 
bids by issue of public tenders in leading newspapers on all India basis.  Tender 
documents were made also available on the website of the Company.  The 
Reserve Price (RP) and the EMD were fixed by the ASC.  The sealed offers 
along with EMD were opened on a pre -determined date, on expiry of 30 days in 
the presence of all intending bidders and the bids quoted by each one of them 
was read out while opening the tender.  In case the price q uoted by the bidder is 
above RP, already fixed by the Company, the bid is accepted by the ASC.  The 
RP was fixed by the ASC on the basis of the valuations arrived at by the reputed 
Consultants in the country.  
 
As far as Mumbai land is concerned, it had be en decided that Reserve 
Price should not be less than the highest Minimum Assured Returns (MAR) 
quoted by the consultants, provided that it was above the prevailing circle 
rates/registration rates. The Company had gone by the directions and achieved 
262% of the RP. 
 
The response was purely determined by the market forces, demand and 
supply position and fierce competition created by NTC. 
 

9 
 
 
The following paper cuttings (copies enclosed at Annexure -1) on the land 
sale which shows that NTC has been breaking the records in every sale in 
Mumbai and how NTC land sale in Mumbai created a spurt in the real estate 
market in the country.   
1. “It‟s real: NTC sells plot for record Rs.702 crore” – The Times of India 
dated 21.06.2005. 
2. “NTC‟s prime plot may bust realty records ” – The Times of India dated 
20.06.2005. 
3. “DLF buys NTC land for Rs. 720 cr.” – Business Standard dated 
21.06.2005. 
4. “DLF- Akruti Bags NTC Mill for record Rs. 702 crore -  Jawala fires up 
Mumbai realty” – The Economic Times dated 21.06.2005. 
5. “India‟s biggest land deal: Rs.702 crore for city mill plot” – The Times of 
India dated 21.06.2005. 
6. “NTC mills‟ sale triggers boom in firms with land” – Business Line dated 
26.07.2005. 
7. “Well done, NTC” – Editorial of Economic Times dated 24.06.2005. 
 
The Company has been correcting its shortcomings / deficiencies 
regularly and bringing in improvements gradually.  The observations of the 
Committee have also been noted and all possible corrective steps will be taken.  
The Company has recently conducted two on -line e -auctions of surplus land 
which was accomplished successfully and received appreciation from all 
quarters.  
 
11. In their vetting on the Reply of the Government, the Office of C&AG 
observed that the no further comments please. 
 
12. The Ministry furnished the following reply on the comments of the office of 
C&AG that no further reply is desired please. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. Taking note of the failure of the Company to devise effective system 
to assess fair market value of its properties before offering them for sale, 
the Committee had in their earlier Report recommended that the Ministry of 
Textiles should devise suitable procedures for assessing fair market value 
of NTC properties being offered for sale.  The Committee are dismayed at 
the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry which lays mere emphasis 
on the sale value realizations of NTC properties in Mumbai during 2005 and 
reveals nothing about the suitable procedures contemplated to be devised 
in accordance with the specific recommendation about asse ssment of fair 

10 
 
 
market value of NTC properties.  The fact brought out elsewhere * in the 
action taken replies that the reserve prices of the Company’s properties for 
the e -auction finalized in July -August 2010 were also substantially lower 
than the highest b ids received in response speaks volume about the 
imperative need for devising suitable procedures for assessing fair market 
value of NTC properties being put on sale.  The Committee trust that the 
Ministry of Textiles would not forsake its responsibility a nd at least now 
take appropriate steps in the right direction without further loss of time.  
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 8) 
 
Defects in Tender Documents 
 
14. Pointing out d efects in Tender Documents  in specific cases  of the NTC 
properties offered for sale , th e Committee in their original report had 
recommended as follows:  
 
“The Committee are constrained to observe that the information disclosed 
in the tender documents issued for sale of assets in a number of cases 
was either incorrect or ambiguous and that th e Company had not 
established any system for verification of the contents of the tender 
documents.  Prominent among these cases related to Mumbai Textile Mill, 
Apollo Textile Mill and Chalisgaon Textile Mill where Audit has estimated a 
loss of Rs.185.10 cr ore to the Company.  The audit observations and the 
replies of the Ministry in these cases have been briefly enumerated in the 
following paragraphs: 
 
(i) Mumbai Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
The audit has pointed out that the tender document for sale of land 
of the Mill stated that the mill area cons isting of 67,293.17 square meter  
bearing CS No. 464 (admeasuring 65,993.17 square meter) and CS 
No.4/464 ( Marwari Chowka Chawl admeasuring 1300 Square Meter) was 
offered for sale.  While the Company had no intention fo r sale of land of 
Marwari Chowka Chawl, it was wrongly included in the tender document.  
Further, the sale deed and the possession letter specifying the boundaries 
of the land sold did not include area of Marwari Chowka Chawl.  
Subsequently, the purchaser a sked for possession of Marwari Chowka 
Chawl also since it was included in the tender document.  The ASC 
                                            
* Action Taken Reply of the Ministry on Recommendation at Sl.No. 6 of the Original Report.  
 

11 
 
 
accepted the fact that the parcel of land of 1300 square metre was 
wrongly included in the tender document and the possession and 
ownership of this land worth Rs.13.56 crore was given to the private party 
without any consideration besides the liability of about Rs.5.23 crore to 
rehabilitate 24 occupants of Chawl was owned by the Company resulting 
in loss of Rs.18.79 crores. 
 
NTC admitted the fact that lan d of 1300square metre was occupied 
by Chawl and had not appeared in the lay out plan due to mistake.  While 
contending that the mistake of non -disclosure of Marwari Chowka Chawl 
had not been liable for any loss to the Company, the reply of NTC is 
strangely and conspicuously silent on the audit observations on handing 
over the possession of 1300 square metre plot without any consideration 
and the liability owned by the Company for rehabilitation of occupants of 
Marwari Chowka Chawl.  
 
(ii) Apollo Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
The Audit has brought out that the Company had received lesser 
amount in tendered bids by not disclosing the vital information about the 
feasibility of access to the Main Road which was allowed later on.  This 
enhanced the value of the land resu lting in loss of Rs.165.80 crore to the 
Company after deducting consideration received for right to access to 
main road. 
 
NTC has informed the Committee that originally, the property was 
tendered in 2005 giving all the particulars known to the Company .  Later 
on in 2006, a provision for read was made as per the town planning and 
thus it cannot be presumed as deficiency in tender document.   
 
(iii) Chalisgaon Textile Mill, Chalisgaon     
 
According to the Audit, six plots of land of the Mills were sold to th e 
highest bidder and the purchaser did not pay second and final insta llment 
due on the plea that in the tender document the Company had wrongly 
mentioned the land to be in residential zone though it was in industrial 
zone.  This incorrect information in te nder document resulted in delay in 
receipt of sale proceeds for which no interest was recovered and the 
Company lost interest of Rs.51 lakh calculated on the basis of 18 percent 
per annum.   
 
Responding to the Audit observation, NTC stated that the State 
Government/local municipal authorities were reluctant to grant approvals 
for change of zone.  Since NTC was in financial crunch during that period, 
it was decided to sell the land on „as is where is‟ basis for survival of the 
Company and the tenders were floated before obtaining change of zone.     

12 
 
 
 
Explaining its failure to establish a proper system for verification of 
all the facts included in tender documents, the Company put forth the plea 
that NTC had no expertise of sale of land and it had resorted to execute 
sale of assets only to implement the revival scheme approved by the 
BIFR.   
 
Going by the self admission of the Company that the defects in the 
tender documents had occurred due to inadequacy of the system, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion tha t the casual approach on the part of 
the Company and the failure of the Ministry to devise a foolproof system in 
this regard ultimately proved detrimental to the financial interests of the 
Company.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the cases o f 
loss due to defective tender documents as pointed out by Audit should be 
thoroughly enquired into at the highest level in the Ministry of Textiles and 
responsibility fixed for such costly lapses.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in each such case.    
 
15. In their action taken reply, the Government has stated as follows: 
 
“Each case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) on 
merits.  The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and viewed 
from a commercial angle, the solution as has been arrived at by the ASC 
to settle the issue is in the best interest of the organization.  Marwari 
Chowka chawls consisting of 0.32 acres is a chawl area under DCR.58.  
This chawl is to be redeveloped by NTC for accommodation of the existing 
employees staying there.  By mistake, NTC while releasing the tender 
included this area also for sale.  The bidders quoted for the entire area 
that was offered for sale and the Company got the offer for the entire area 
including the Marwari Chowka chawl.  The only mistake that happened in 
this case is that NTC has included a property which was not meant for 
sale.  The Marwari Chowka chawls were to be developed by NTC as per 
Govt. of Maharashtra DCR – 58.  The Company had not suffered any loss 
on account of inclusion of Marwari Chowka chawls in the tender, as the 
bidder had made payment for this area also.    
 
Each and every case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee 
(ASC) on merits.  The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and 
viewed f rom a commercial angle, can only have a solution as has been 
taken by the ASC to settle the issue is in the best interest of the 
organization.   
 
Clause 1.3 of the tender document issued by NTC read as under:- 
 
The rear part of the mill stands closed by or der No. L -51016/5-
121/2004-IR(PG) dated 16.03.2004 of the Deputy Director, Ministry of 

13 
 
 
Labour, Government of India, under Section 25(O) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947.  The sub -division of the land shall be got demarcated 
by the DILR in presence of b oth the parties (as per condition No. 21 of 
MCGM).  At present, the mill is divided into two parts and the western part 
adjacent to Jivraj Boricha Marg is under sale.  An access could be made 
available through outside land of Sitaram Mills belonging to NTC (MN) Ltd. 
to Jivraj Boricha Marg.  All the machineries in the surplus area of the mills 
are in process of sale/disposal other than the retained machineries which 
are being shifted to sister units shortly, the surplus employees have opted 
for MVRS.” 
 
At th e time of issue of tender and finalization of sale, no other 
definite information was available with NTC with regard to the access 
road.  After sale of land of 5 mills and during the meeting with Hon‟ble 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra and other officials, i t was decided that NTC 
should appoint Architects/City Planner to carry out Traffic Impact Study of 
Road Network and Studies on Civil Infrastructure of all the mills and 
submit the same to State Govt. for implementation till the time no fresh 
permissions for sale of mill land shall be released.  Since this was a lateral 
development, it cannot be treated as „non-disclosure of vital information‟ in 
the tender.  According to DC Regulations, NTC is under statutory 
obligation to construct the road as per norms and specifications and thus it 
handed over the same to MCGM for public purpose.  It may, therefore, be 
seen that there was no malafide intention nor any actual loss to the 
company.  
 
Each case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) on 
merits.  The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and viewed 
from a commercial angle, the solution as has been arrived at by the ASC 
to settle the issue is in the best interest of the organization.  
 
This case has to be examined with respect to the facts of th e case 
as prevalent in 2002 when the Company was hard pressed for generating 
enough resources for implementation of the Revival Scheme.  The ASC 
considered the matter in its meeting held on 11.12.2002 and took a 
conscious decision in the interest of the Company. 
 
In the tender issued by NTC, the zone was indicated as residential.  
However, the Govt./local Municipal Authorities were reluctant to grant 
approvals for change of zone.  The residential rates are always higher 
than the industrial rate by around 30 % to 40% whereas the sale is „as is 
where is‟ basis, i.e. industrial land.   The party had to pay the fee for the 
change of zone from industrial to residential.  The audit had considered 
the waiver of interest on the delay.  If we consider the cost of conv ersion 
and the rate obtained for residential as against industrial, the company 

14 
 
 
would have gained more than the waiver of interest. The non -indication of 
proper zone in the tender document had not resulted in any loss.  
 
The sale of assets by NTC has been done after approval by a duly 
constituted broad based Asset Sale Committee comprising of the 
representatives of BIFR, the State Government, the Implementing Agency, 
etc.   As per the guidelines dated 24.8.09 issued by the BIFR, the Board 
only can intervene  in the matters considered by such ASCs.  In a recent 
order dated 19.2.2010, the BIFR has gone to the extent of mentioning that 
“the Ministry has no role in the matter, as the scheme has been 
sanctioned by BIFR, and its implementation for revival is under direct 
supervision of BIFR.  NTC approached Ministry as per its convenience.  
The Bench also noted that, in violation of tender conditions / BIFR’s ASC 
guidelines, the Ministry has intervened in the matter.” 
 
In view of the above facts, as the ASC comprise d of outside 
Members including BIFR nominee, it may not be proper for the Ministry of 
Textiles to conduct any enquiry in the matter.  In our opinion, if such 
enquiry has to be conducted, it may be appropriate to have such enquiry 
conducted either by the BIFR or as per their directions. 
 
16. In their vetting on the Reply of the Government, the Office of C&AG 
observed that the Government has not accepted the recommendations of COPU 
regarding enquiry into the cases of loss due to defective tender documents and  
fixation of responsibility thereof.  Further, it was also not intimated whether 
Government has sought the directions of BIFR for conducting the enquiry in 
these cases. 
 
17. The Ministry furnished the following reply on the comments of the office of 
C&AG that there is no loss to the Company in this case as the Company got the 
price even for the chawl occupied property that was offered for sale.  The 
mistake is limited to the action of the Company in putting a chawl occupied 
property for sale along with the main mill land.  The liability of rehabilitation of the 
chawl occupants on account of the above action is being sorted out amicably by 
the 3 parties without any commitment on the part of the NTC to go for 
rehabilitation of those workers. 
 
 In view of the above, M/Textiles requests that the issue may be closed. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee had recommended that all the 
cases of loss due to defective tender documents should be thoroughly 
enquired into at the highest level in the Ministry and responsibility fixed for 
such costly lapses.  The Committee note from the action taken reply that 

15 
 
 
the Ministry of Textiles does not feel it proper to conduct any enquiry in the 
matter as the Asset Sale Committee in these instances c omprised outside 
Members including BIFR nominee. Taking into consideration the 
submissions of the Ministry that it would be appropriate to have such 
enquiry conducted either by the BIFR or as per their directions, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of Texti les to work out the manner and 
parameters in  consultation with the agency concerned for conduct of an 
enquiry into these cases of loss due to defective tender documents with a 
view to fixing responsibility for the lapses.   They would also like to be 
apprised of the efforts made by the Ministry of Textiles in this regard and 
the results so achieved. 
 

16 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Committee note with satisfaction that in principle, the Government/ 
NTC have accept ed all the recommendations made by the Committee in their 
original Report.  However, on some of the recommendations, where the 
Committee feel that more prompt action is required to be taken or where the 
action taken reply has not covered all the aspects me ntioned in the 
recommendation, comments have been made in Chapter -I of the Report.  The 
rest of the recommendations along with action taken r eplies are reproduced in 
Chapter-II. 
 
Recommendation No.3  
 
Sale of Properties not identified in the Revival Scheme 
 
The Committee note that in accordance with the revival scheme approved 
by BIFR / GOI, the Ministry of Textiles constituted Asset Sale Committee (ASC) 
from time to time for the subsidiaries of NTC for undertaking sale of the 
properties of the Company.  Th e ASCs for sick subsidiaries so constituted were 
assigned the specific functions to ensure that the land was sold in such a manner 
as to generate maximum resources for the revival plan besides ensuring that the 
sale was conducted in a transparent and fair manner through open notification 
and as per highest professional standards.  Subsequently, a single ASC was 
constituted after merger of the nine subsidiaries in the Company in the year 
2006.  The Committee are surprised over the casual manner in which such  ASCs 
functioned as is evident from the audit findings that certain parcels of land not 
identified as surplus in five cases in the revival schemes were sold by the 
Company.  The Company has tried to justify sale of properties in such four cases 
on the grou nd that physical measurement was not done prior to submitting 
proposal to BIFR and the sale of entire land in these cases was approved by 
BIFR as a unit for the area appearing in records.  NTC has however, admitted 
that the sale of land in the fifth case w as initially not identified but BIFR approved 
its sale and treated it authorized subsequently. From these facts the Committee 
can only conclude that the ASCs functioned in an arbitrary manner and resorted 
to hasty sale of land of NTC mills without paying d ue attention towards the 
specific details of NTC properties being offered for sale under the revival 
schemes approved by BIFR.  Since 50 percent of its identified properties are yet 
to be sold, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Textiles should lay down 
precise guidelines in this regard so as to obviate recurrence of instances of sale 
of land and buildings beyond the purview of revival scheme approved by 
BIFR/GOI.  The Committee would also like the Ministry to make it mandatory that 
land measurements are carried out by the Company before offering any property 
for sale. 
 

17 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The entire resources required for implementation of Revival Scheme are 
to be generated by the sale of assets of closed mills and surplus assets of the 
viable mills through the mechanism of a duly constituted broad -based Asset Sale 
Committee (ASC), comprising of representatives of BIFR, State Govt., IDBI, 
Ministry of Textiles, etc. 
 
Formation of Asset Sale Committee (ASC) was as per BIFR guidelines.  
The BIFR has issued revised guidelines on 24.8.2009 for sale of assets.  These 
guidelines are being strictly followed by NTC for all sales.  The observations of 
the Committee have been carefully noted for strict compliance and all future land 
sale will be made only after proper measurements are carried out by the 
Company. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
 The Company could not show the measurement reports in respect of the 
properties sold after the issue of revised BIFR guidelines. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 Precise guidelines have been laid down by the Ministry of Textiles (copy of 
letter No. 9/1/2010 -NTC dated 23.09.2010 is enclosed for ready reference) and 
no property which is not approved for sale  under the Revival Scheme will be 
considered for sale by the Company.  Land measurements have been made 
mandatory before the sale is carried out.  Measurement report of 5 properties 
sold, after July, 2010 are enclosed, as desired. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Sale below the Registration Rates and Reserve Prices 
 
During the course of their examination, the Committee‟s attention has also 
been drawn to certain cases of sale of NTC properties below the prevaili ng 
registration rates and the reserve price in contravention of the GOI directives 
issued in November, 2004.  NTC has pleased that the Company cannot 
indefinitely keep on retendering if a property after repeated attempts is not taken 
for the reserve price fixed by the Company.  At the same time, NTC has assured 
the Committee that the “GOI is reviewing the guidelines for fixation of the reserve 
price with a view to refining and improving the system and achieving optimum 
realization from sale of assets.   
 

18 
 
 
The Committee hope that earnest efforts would be made by the Ministry of 
Textiles to ensure compliance of their new guidelines in the best financial interest 
of the Company.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company in toto adopted guidelines issued by the BIFR  vide its order 
dated 24.08.2009 and in no case, sale would be done when the bid received is 
less than the reserve price fixed by the ASC.  In case, a property is not able to 
get the bid above the reserve price, no sale will be made in future.  The 
observations of the Committee have been noted for future guidance and all 
possible efforts will be made to secure optimum returns for the sale of assets. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
No further comments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No further comments. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Sale without following Tender Process 
 
The Committee‟s scrutiny of the information made available to them brings 
out that the procedure and guideline s to be followed by ASC, issued in March, 
2002 as per BIFR Order -2002 clearly stipulated that the “Sale of assets should 
be effected by way of public sale through sealed tenders, after adequate notice is 
given to the public through advertisement....”. Furt her, one of the specific 
functions assigned to the ASC constituted from time to time was to ensure that 
the sale was conducted in a fair and transparent manner and through open 
notification. The audit review has, however, brought out that the sale was made  
without following tender process in a number of cases. While furnishing the 
reasons for not following guidelines in these cases, NTC pleaded that the 
Company could not resort to the public tender system in some cases which were 
of exceptional nature due t o reasons such as accessibility of the plot, size of the 
plot, consistent litigations, defects in title and orders issued by the local 
authorities for earmarking the land for road network, etc. While giving due 
credence to exceptional nature of some of the se cases, the Committee cannot 
accept the accessibility, size and location of some of the properties as valid 
reasons for not resorting to its sale without following tender process. 
 

19 
 
 
While taking a serious view of these instances of deviation from stipulat ed 
guidelines, the Committee recommend that the Government should now 
incorporate an effective system of review of the departure is made from the 
directions/guidelines issued for the implementation of the revival scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It may be  stated that each case had been placed before the duly 
constituted Asset Sale Committee and all decisions were taken after 
deliberations by the ASC, taking into account various considerations.  However, 
the observations of the Committee have been noted and  will be strictly 
implemented.  It may be added that the BIFR has issued revised guidelines on 
24.8.2009 for valuation and sale of assets.  These guidelines are being strictly 
enforced for implementation in NTC.  The revival scheme is also being monitored 
more frequently by the Board of Directors, Ministry of Textiles, BIFR, etc.   
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 The compliance with the revised guidelines would be watched in future. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 The remarks of the o/o C&AG have been noted. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
Recommendation No.12  
 
Need for Improving Systems 
 
During the examination of the subject matter, NTC has repeatedly pleaded 
before the  Committee that the Company has never been in the business of 
selling assets and this has been a new area of activity on account of 
implementation of the revival scheme. The Committee are constrained to 
observe that most of the issues/shortcomings pointed out by the Audit could have 
been avoided had the Company devised systems and procedures strictly in 
accordance with the BIFR guidelines and acted accordingly thereon. Having 
taken note of the assurance given by the Company that it will review the 
existence policy on the basis of suggestions of Audit and make modifications 
required for implementation in all future cases of sale, the Committee firmly 
desire that the Company should amend its system of valuation and sale of assets 
without further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As explained earlier, due to lack of experience and shortage of qualified 
man-power with the Company to undertake the special nature of work of sale of 

20 
 
 
land, certain procedural shortcomings had taken place.  It has to be appreciated 
that the Company was implementing a time bound revival plan based upon funds 
to be generated by sale of surplus land / assets.  The system of valuation and 
sale of assets are now being strictly followed on the basis of the guidelines dated 
24.8.2009 issued by the BIFR and all possible efforts are made to ensure 
optimum returns from all such future sale of land.  The recently introduced on-line 
e-auction by NTC was very transparent and has proved to be very successful in 
achieving our objectives.   
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
 Compliance to the revised guidelines will be watched while conducting 
audit of transaction occurred after the period covered in performance audit and 
deviations, if any, would be reported separately. 
 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 The remarks of the o/o C&AG have been noted. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
Recommendation No.13 
 
To sum up, the examination of the subject matter relating to sale of 
surplus properties by NTC has revealed several shortcomings / irregularities. 
According to the Audit findings, Company either suffered losses or lost 
opportunities to earn in the following cases:- 
 
a) Defects in tender documents (loss of Rs.185.10 crore); 
b) Sale b elow registration rates (loss of potential revenue of Rs.10.43 
crore); 
c) Sale below reserve price (loss of potential revenue of Rs.84.35 lakh); 
d) Inconsistencies in the guidelines ((loss of potential revenue of 
Rs.49.60 crore); 
 
The Committee are of the consid ered view that the Ministry and the 
Company have not made any sincere efforts to realize optimum value of the 
properties sold.   The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry of 
Textiles and the Company should take concrete measures to fully e xploit the 
market conditions for optimal gains to the advantage of the Company in respect 
of the sale of remaining surplus assets. 
 

21 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has already taken concrete measures to fully exploit the 
market conditions to get the best market price for its assets by following the 
guidelines of BIFR strictly.  The Company has recently conducted on -line e -
auction for sale of its land as per the BIFR guidelines.  In the first e -auction 
finalized on 31.7.2010, as against the reserve pri ce of Rs.250 crores, the highest 
bid received was of Rs.474 crores.  In the second e -auction finalized on 
6.8.2010, as against the reserve price of Rs.750 crore, the highest bid received 
was of Rs.1505 crores.  The e -auction completed by NTC was first of i ts kind in 
any central PSU which has set the future trend.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
No further comments. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
No further comments 

22 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.1  
 
Revival Scheme 
 
National Textile Corporation Limited (Company) incorporated with the 
main objective of managing the affairs of sick textile undertakings taken over by 
Government of India (GOI),  was managing 119 textile mills through its nine 
subsidiaries.  Of these,   eight subsidiaries were declared sick between 1992 and 
1994 under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.  In the 
year 2002, the Board for Industrial Finance and Reconstruction (BIFR/GOI) 
approved revival scheme for these sick subsidiaries envisaging modernization of 
53 viable mills and closure of 66 unviable mills at an estimated cost of Rs.3937 
crores.  The scheme was self -financing and the funds realized fro m sale of 
surplus assets of NTC mills were to be utilized for revival/modernization.  
However, this scheme could not be implemented, as envisaged, due to non -
availability of funds through sale of surplus assets    mainly on account of delay 
in getting the permission for sale of land of the mills from the State Governments 
concerned and implementation period of the scheme was extended from 31 st 
March, 2004 to 31st March, 2006. Meanwhile, the remaining one subsidiary of the 
Company was also declared sick in D ecember, 2005 and a modified 
rehabilitation scheme (MS -2006) costing Rs.5267.56 crores was submitted to 
BIFR in January, 2006 which was approved in March, 2006.  The implementation 
period of MS -2006 was upto 31 st March, 2008.  The Committee‟s examination 
has revealed that the Company could not achieve the precise objectives of 
modernization/revival of mills, reduced manpower strength and sale of surplus 
assets as envisaged in the modified scheme even after extension of 
implementation period for a further pe riod of one year under another modified 
scheme of 2008 approved by BIFR.  Although the Company is stated to have 
generated Rs.4034.60 crores by sale of assets of the closed mills and surplus 
assets of the viable mills upto 30 th September, 2009, the fact re mains that the 
process of revival/modernization and the sale of almost half of surplus land of 
NTC mills is yet to be completed.  Obviously, the Company and the 
administrative Ministry have failed to identify the weak spots in the 
implementation of the sch eme from every possible angle despite grant of 
extension of implementation period from time to time under modified schemes.   
 
Now that a proposal for extension of revival scheme upto 31st March, 2011 
is stated to be under consideration for approval of the  Union Cabinet, the 
Committee desire that effective and concrete steps should be taken by the 
Ministry of Textiles to ensure proper implementation and realization of objectives 
of the revival scheme within the proposed extended period.  

23 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Revival Scheme of NTC is a massive project and has various 
components.  The Company achieved major success in respect of :- 
 
1. The Company had no resources initially to pay the VRS compensation to 
its employees.  NTC successfully mobilised Rs.2028  crores by private 
placement of bonds in the initial days of implementation of the Revival 
Scheme during 2002 -03.  This fund was used mainly for payment of 
workers compensation on acceptance of MVRS.  
2. Offered MVRS to 62218 employees to bring down the numbe r of surplus 
manpower at a cost of Rs.2290.31 crores.  
3. As against 10 Companies in the past, NTC is today a single Company by 
the merger of 9 subsidiaries with the Holding Company. 
4. One Time Settlement (OTS) made for Rs.248.69 crores with 23 Banks 
and Financial Institutions and cleared the outstanding dues of all financial 
institutions and banks. 
5. Company has paid off all secured creditors and unsecured creditors 
except where there are disputes; 
6. Statutory payments to the tune of Rs.188.07 crores were made to E PF; 
ESIC, authorities. 
7. Waiver of Rs.3448.21 crores of GOI loans and Rs.3316.50 crores of 
interest as on 31.3.2007 as per scheme. 
8. Closed down 77 unviable units; 
9. NTC has spent Rs.876.12 crores on modernization. 
10. From Rs.385 crores budgetary support for wages in the year 2002 -03, 
there is no budgetary support from the Government for wages in the year 
2009-10 and 2010 -11.  NTC is generating the resources for payment of 
wages internally. 
11. NTC is being transformed into an integrated textile company consisting of 
ginning, spinning, weaving, processing and garmenting. 
 
The mandate was to modernize 22 mills.  The Company has already 
completed modernization of 18 mills.  Three mills are new projects, which are 
fast progressing, one each at Achalpur (Maharashtra), Hassan  (Karnataka) and 
Ahmedabad (Gujarat).  The spinning work of all the three projects is expected to 
be completed by September, 2010. 
 
For reasons beyond the control of the management, like, permission from 
the State Governments, there was delay in commencing the modernization work. 
 
The first major break -through in sale of land was achieved only in 
February, 2005 when the Company sold its first land in Mumbai.  Even this was 
challenged by a PIL in the Hon‟ble High Court of Mumbai.  NTC lost the case in 
the High Court of Mumbai and filed an appeal before the Supreme Court.  The 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court gave a judgement in favour of the Company in March, 

24 
 
 
2006.  So, the modernization work started only in March, 2006 on generation of 
sufficient funds. 
 
On account of slow down in the global economy, the real estate market 
also witnessed recession during 2007 -08 and 2008-09 and started showing sign 
of improvements only in 2009-10. 
 
The 17 mills have completed the modernization as on 31.03.2009 and the 
modernization of 1 8th mill was completed on 31.3.2010.  Out of the 4 new 
projects, 3 are at new locations as composite mills.  Two projects have already 
started trial production. The third project is commencing trial run in September, 
2010.  Therefore, only one mill which i s identified for Technical Textiles, has not 
started. 
 
The Company has started sale of its land through e -auction and is 
expected to mobilize enough resources in the current financial year for 
completing the modernization. The Board of Directors of NTC and  the Ministry of 
Textiles is closely monitoring the matter.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
As per BIFR schemes, 40 mills were identified for modernization.  
However, the Government has intimated the progress of modernization o f 22 
mills only.  The progress of balance 18 mills, which were to be modernized 
through Joint Venture route, was not intimated by the Government/Company. 
 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 Out of the 18 mills identified for reviva l through joint venture, 5 mills have 
already started functioning.  After review, the joint venture arrangement for 11 
mills has been cancelled, and the matter is now sub judice.   2 mills earlier 
identified for revival by JV have now been recommended by t he Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) for revival directly by NTC. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.2 
 
Audit Review 
 
The Committee note that the revival scheme for NTC envisaged 
compliance of BIFR/GOI guidelines and instructions issued by the Company for 
sale of surplus land and buildings.  The process of sale was to be operated in 
such a manner as to generate maximum resources for the revival plan and to 

25 
 
 
ensure that the sale was con ducted in a transparent and fair manner.  The 
findings contained in the Audit review covering the sale of surplus land and 
buildings between 1 st April, 2002 and 31 st March, 2008 in six of the nine sub -
offices of the Company and further examination of the s ubject matter by the 
Committee have brought out several inadequacies in the systems and 
procedures adopted by the Company during sale process of its surplus land and 
buildings.  Some such important aspects have been dealt with in the succeeding 
paragraphs of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
It may be stated that NTC had no past experience or qualified man -power 
to handle sale of land and for this reason certain procedural shortcomings / 
lacunae had occurred.  This, however, had no deliberate malafide . The 
inadequacies and shortcomings in the systems and procedures have been 
removed over a period of time based on the experience gained, guidelines 
issued by the BIFR, various audit observations etc.   
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
 Specific measures taken to remove the inadequacies and shortcomings in 
the systems and procedures for sale of surplus land and buildings have not been 
intimated by Government/Company. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 The specific measures being followed are as under:-  
 
1.    To ensure transparency in sale of assets, the company has introduced E -
auctioning, i.e. online competitive bidding with the approval of Assets Sale 
Committee (ASC). This was initiated in the month of July, 2010, and so far, the 
Company has conducted 9 e -auctions. Properties are now being sold through e -
auction, as E-auction provides a transparent, efficient and cartel free platform for 
competitive bidding in the sale of assets. The BIFR guidelines are applicable in 
all respects to e-auction as well.   
 
.2.      The guidelines revised by the BIFR from time to time are fully adopted by 
the Asset Sale Committee for sale of its surplus assets leaving no scope for any 
discretion.  The latest guidelines in su persession of all BIFR guidelines is dated 
12.10.2010. The salient features of BIFR guidelines dated 12.10.2010 on sale of 
assets, being strictly followed by the Company are given below :- 
 
(i) ASC to get all the assets valued before floating of tender by an 
independent Govt./bank approved valuer and having regard to the likely 
market prices thereof, reserve price should be fixed in respect of each of 

26 
 
 
the assets.  Asset valuation should be completed within a month of the 
order. 
(ii)  The bidder should deposit by mea ns of a bank draft earnest money 
deposit (EMD) equivalent to 5% of the notified reserve price in respect of 
each asset/package along with the bid.  Bids not accompanied by the 
EMD shall be rejected. 
(iii) Where a bid has been finally accepted, the purchaser shal l be required to 
pay the balance of the purchase consideration in two instalments of 50% 
and balance amount of the total selling price minus the EMD amount, 
payable, respectively before the end of 45 -days and 90 -days respectively 
from the date of which int imation regarding the final acceptance of the bid 
is dispatched to him by Regd. Post/Speed Post at his notified address. 
(iv) The successful purchaser shall within 15 days of the receipt of intimation 
regarding the acceptance of his bid, furnish a bank guarante e, valid for 
one year, as may be considered satisfactory by the OA/MA, to secure full 
and timely payment of consideration for the assets purchased. 
(v) The EMD received from the unsuccessful bidders will be refunded to them 
without any interest promptly. 
(vi) The p ossession of the assets purchased and the title thereof shall be 
transferred to the purchaser only on receipt of the full payment of the 
purchase consideration along with interest @ 15% per annum in case of 
delayed payments, if any. 
(vii) All advertisements for sale of assets will be issued on the basis of the sale 
being on “As is where is” basis and reserving the right to accept or reject 
any offer without assigning any reasons thereof. 
(viii) The Asset Sale Committee shall obtain the prior permission/approval of 
the Board, for any relaxation of the above guidelines. 
 
 In addition to above, for appropriate valuation, reserve price is fixed on the 
basis of highest of the four valuations – 3 by Govt. approved valuers and 1 from 
Collector‟s guidelines.  
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
System of Fixation of Reserve Price 
 
(a) Non-observance of procedure for valuation of properties 
 
The   Committee note that the procedure devised by the Company in 
November, 2002 for sale of fixed assets envisaged that the ASC should 
determine reserve price of land on the basis of average of three valuations, 
namely valuation in Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) approved by BIFR, 
valuation given by Property Consultants and the Valuation by the Central Board 

27 
 
 
of Direct Taxes (CBDT).  In November, 2004, the GOI further directed that the 
reserve price should not be less than Minimum Assured Return (MAR) in case of 
properties in Mumbai, where Marketing Consultants had quoted MAR.  It was, 
however, observed in Audit that all the three valuation factors were considered in 
only 27 cases out of 79 cases of sale of land.  Strangely enough, while only one 
of two valuations factors were considered in 37 cases, none of the prescribed 
valuation factors are  reported to be considered at the time of fixing the reserve 
price in as many as 15 cases.  In the opinion of the Committee, these cases of 
blatant procedural violations clearly reveal the scant regard shown by the ASC 
towards Company‟s precise guidelines for fixation of reserve price.   
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Textiles should 
identify the level at which these lapses had occurred and contemplate 
establishing an effective monitoring system to ensure that the 
guidelines/directions issued for sale of remaining surplus land of NTC mills are 
scrupulously followed in future.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NTC had no previous experience of sale of land and other assets. It 
availed of the services of professional experts wherever possi ble.  The Company 
in the initial days of implementation of Revival Scheme formulated guidelines on 
the basis of practices being followed by Companies for sale of assets and on the 
basis of the guidelines  laid down by BIFR.  
 
As regards valuation, the BIFR  Scheme envisages valuation only by a 
single valuer, whereas the Company has been getting valuation done by three 
Government approved valuers and the Collector‟s guidelines rate and the highest 
among the four is taken as the Reserve Price. 
 
It was found th at fixation of Reserve Price was not yielding the required 
results for generation of funds.  The ASC, therefore, had to analyze the reasons 
and bring in modification for fixation of Reserve Price.  It has to be noted that the 
Real Estate market in the coun try was on a very low key till 2005 January.  The 
Asset Sale Committee engaged professional experts for the first major sale of its 
property in Mumbai for fixation of Reserve Price.  Thus, all possible efforts were 
taken by the Company to follow professional standards and a transparent system 
was put in place.  
 
The properties identified in the audit are small pieces of land which have 
specific problems and the ASC considered these on a case to case basis, 
assessed the merits and de -merits and has taken cer tain commercial decision in 
the best interest of the Company. 
 
The Asset Sales Committee had followed the guidelines in force from time 
to time on sale of assets.  ASC has now taken a decision to follow strictly the 

28 
 
 
guidelines dated 24.08.2009 issued by BI FR without any dilution.  Any instances 
of non-unanimity in the decision making process of ASC will be referred to BIFR, 
as per stipulation in the guidelines.  Thus, there is an effective system of 
implementation put in place now. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
 The Government/Company has not accepted the recommendation of 
COPU for identifying the level at which lapses in the adherence to guidelines and 
procedures for sale of land have occurred.  Further, no specific reply has b een 
given regarding establishment of an effective monitoring system to ensure 
adherence to the guidelines and procedures. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 There is no specific  formula available for fixation of reserve price and 
therefore,  the reserve price fixation formula is determined with the utmost care 
as follows :- 
 
(i) While the BIFR guidelines stipulate valuation by a single valuer, the 
Company has been adopting 4 valuations – 3 being from Govt. 
approved valuers and the Coll ector‟s guideline rates.  The highest 
among the 4 was taken as reserve price. All efforts were made by the 
Company to follow the guidelines and a transparent system was 
adopted. Thus, it may be seen that an effective system has been put in 
place to ensure adherence to guidelines & procedures. These are all 
commercial decisions taken in the best interest of the Company by the 
ASC which has representatives from BIFR, State Governments and 
Operating Agency. 
(ii) The Company has introduced a system of vetting the pr oposal of 
valuation of reserve price by a Committee of 3 Officers before it is put 
up in the ASC.  The Company also is required to certify that all the 
guidelines issued by the BIFR on sale of assets have been fully 
complied with while moving the proposal before the ASC. 
(iii)  A check list is introduced and the ASC itself is monitoring the 
compliance of the guidelines of BIFR and there is no scope for any 
deviation of the guidelines.  It is mandatory for the Company to follow 
the same. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 

29 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Valuation of properties on Minimum Assured Returns 
 
7. Commenting on the fixation of reserve price in case of NTC properties on 
the basis of Minimum Assured Returns (MAR) , the Committee in  their original 
report had recommended as follows:  
 
“The Committee note that the GOI‟s direction stipulated that the reserve 
price in case of properties in Mumbai should not be less than MAR, where 
marketing consultants had quoted the same.  They, however , find that the 
Company had no system of vetting valuation reports and MAR given by 
the consultants with the result that there were wide variations between 
sale value realized and MAR quoted by the consultants. According to the 
Audit, such variations range d between 94.3% and 279.28% in the case of 
5 land parcels for which MAR was obtained.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reply of the Company that MAR was arrived at by best 
international real estate consultant and there was no reason for NTC to 
question their wisdom. On the other hand, the Committee are of firm view 
that MAR reports obtained by the Company did not give the realistic 
market value of the land parcels offered for sale as is evident from the 
substantially high sale value realized by the  Company in all these cases.  
At this stage, the Committee can only conclude that the purpose of 
obtaining MAR for the purposes of fixation of best price/reserve price 
could not be achieved.” 
 
8. In their action taken reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, 
the Government have stated as follows: 
“The BIFR has issued revised guidelines on 24.8.2009 for valuation and 
sale of assets.  The company is strictly following these guidelines.   The 
observations have been noted and the Company is making al l efforts to 
secure optimum returns out of land sale within the BIFR approved 
guidelines.   In this context, it is pertinent to point out that the Company 
has recently conducted on -line e -auction for sale of its land as per the 
BIFR guidelines.  In the fir st e-auction finalized on 31.7.2010, as against 
the reserve price of Rs.250 crores, the highest bid received was of Rs.474 
crores.  In the second e -auction finalized on 6.8.2010, as against the 
reserve price of Rs.750 crore, the highest bid received was of  Rs.1505 
crores.  The e-auction completed by NTC was first of its kind in any central 
PSU which has set the future trend.”  
  
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
The Government has not replied to the observation of COPU. Besides, it 
has not been intimated whether MAR was considered in fixation of reserve price 
in case of the sales made through e-auction. 

30 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 It is confirmed that no MAR valuation was considered for the e -auctioning 
of the properties considered in fixation of reserve price in case of the sales made 
through e-auction. 
 [Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Inconsistencies among Guidelines and the Procedures 
 
During their examination of the subject, the Committee‟s attention has also 
been drawn to the fact that there were inconsistencies among the guidelines 
issued by the BIFR/GOI and the procedures laid down by the Company resulting 
in revenue loss to the Company. These  included: fixation of earnest money 
deposit (EMD) by the Company at a lower rate; non receipt of EMD in Demand 
Draft; and grant of extension ranging from 96 days to 1371 days for payment 
beyond 60 days from the due date of payment without charging interes t leviable 
on delayed payments. According to the Audit, the Company stated during 
September, 2008 that ASC was an empowered body to decide the issues 
relating to the sale of surplus assets and to decide the guidelines depending 
upon the situation and circu mstances. The Company also maintained that the 
ASC was fully empowered to extend the period beyond 60 days.  
 
During the examination of the subject, the Company however, informed 
the Committee that the ASC constituted by the Government has no authority to 
evolve procedures going beyond the guidelines of the BIFR and the deviations 
pointed out have to be examined on a case to case basis so as to take a final 
view in the matter. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Company/Ministry should fix responsibil ity for these blatant acts of procedural 
irregularities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In a revival scheme involving sale of assets of thousands of crores of 
rupees, there may arise a few cases having specific problems which requires 
specific solutions.  If su ch cases are not examined on merit and solution found, 
innumerable number of disputes may arise between the company and the 
parties.  Every such case was considered by the duly constituted ASC and 
decision taken in the best interest of the Company and from the commercial point 
of view.   
 
It is important to mention that the Company was implementing a time -
bound revival plan as per BIFR approval, the source of funding of which was sale 

31 
 
 
of surplus land / assets through an Asset Sale Committee.  The Ministry o f 
Textiles has been closely following up and monitoring the revival plan.  As far as 
the Ministry is aware, no corruption or malafides were intended or involved in 
such transactions; nor any actual loss has been caused to the Company. 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted to ensure that such 
discretions are not used in future under any circumstances and the revised 
guidelines dated 24.8.2009 issued by the BIFR are now being strictly followed by 
NTC.    
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  
 
 The Government has not accepted the recommendations of COPU 
regarding fixation of responsibility for the irregularities pointed out in the audit 
report. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 In a revival scheme invo lving sale of assets of thousands of crores of 
rupees, there may arise a few cases having specific problems which requires 
specific solutions.  If such cases are not examined on merit and solution found, 
innumerable number of disputes may arise between the  company and the 
parties.  Every such case was considered by the duly constituted ASC and 
decision taken in the best interest of the Company and from the commercial point 
of view.  
 
 It is important to mention that the Company was implementing a time 
bound revival scheme as per BIFR approval, the source of funding of which was 
sale of surplus land/assets through an Asset Sale Committee.  The Ministry of 
Textiles has been closely following up and monitoring the revival plan.  There 
was no loss caused to the Company in the process of fixation of EMD or non -
receipt of EMD in Demand Draft.  
 
In view of the above, M/Textiles requests that the issue may be closed. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
 

32 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
CBDT Valuations 
 
The audit review reveals that out of 66 cases of sale of land through 
tender, CBDT valuation of 1994 -95 and 1998-99 was considered for fixation of 
reserve price in 29 cases during April, 2002 to March, 2008. However, the CBDT 
valuation was not indexed to the year of fixation of reserve price for arriving at 
realistic value.   During his evidence before the Commi ttee, the CMD, NTC 
deposed “I have gone through the records of the Company and I have found that 
CBDT was involved in the valuation of land once in 1995 -96 period.  After that 
when the Company approached them, they have not agreed.” The Company, 
however, could not produce any documentary evidence portraying unwillingness 
by CBDT for undertaking valuation of NTC properties leading the Committee to 
believe that NTC did not invariably involve CBDT in the process of fixation of 
reserve price in accordance with their own specific guidelines issued in 
November, 2002.  At this stage, the Committee express their strong displeasure 
over the manner in which the valuation of CBDT  was not given due 
consideration for fixation of reserve price in all cases as stipulated in the 
guidelines issued by the Company in November, 2002.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Textiles should involve expert agencies of 
the Government like CPWD and CBDT in the process of valuation of NTC 
properties to be offered for sale in the coming years.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The BIFR has issued guidelines vide its order dated 24.08.2009 for 
valuation and asset sales.  The Company is following the same guidelines.  
Under these guidelines, the ASC is fixing the reserve price on  the basis of 4 
values obtained from 3 independent Govt. approved valuers and collector‟s 
guidelines rates and the highest of the 4 values is approved by the Asset Sale 
Committee (ASC) as the reserve price for any property.” 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government has not accepted the recommendations of COPU 
regarding involvement of expert agencies like CBDT and CPWD for valuation of 
properties.  Reasons for not including recommendations made by COPU in the 
revised guidelines were not intimated. 
 

33 
 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
Earlier, when the Company approached CBDT through letters and 
personal follow -up, no response was received from CBDT. The latest BIFR 
guidelines dated 12.10.2010 have provided for only one valuation with no specific 
mention of CBDT. 
 [Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 8 of Chapter I 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
 
Fair Market Value 
 
The Committee note that the GOI  directed in April, 2005 that the ASC 
should take a decision on the reserve price keeping it as close to the market 
value as possible.  The Committee‟s examination, has, however, brought out that 
there were wide variations between the reserve price fixed a nd the actual sale 
value realized in a number of cases on the basis of valuation done by the ASC.  
The self -admission of the Company that it has realized 180% to 350% higher 
than the reserve price fixed for the sale of properties in Mumbai is a clear 
indicator that no system had been put in place to assess the fair market value of 
the properties in accordance with the GOI directives.  Whatever may be the 
claims of the Company for sale value realizations for NTC‟s properties in 
Mumbai, the fact remains that the reserve prices fixed by the ASC in the instant 
cases were nowhere near the market prices realized by the Company.   
 
The Committee express their strong displeasure over the failure of the 
Company to devise an effective system to assess the fair market value of NTC 
properties before offering them for sale so as to ensure realization of maximum 
possible revenue.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Textiles should now devise suitable procedures for assessing fair market value of 
NTC p roperties being offered for sale and ensure strict compliance of such 
procedures within the laid down policies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has received the maximum realization of resources by sale 
of its 5 properties in Mumbai by fetching Rs.20 20.75 crores.  The Company 
engaged 5 of the best real estate consultants in the country to arrive at the 
Minimum Assured Return (MAR) value for its properties and follow a transparent 
procedure.   However, all future sales of NTC has to be strictly as per the 

34 
 
 
guidelines issued by BIFR vide its order dated 24.08.2009, where the asset 
valuation is indicated, which is reproduced as follows :- 
 
“(b) All the assets should be got valued (if not already done) by an 
independent Government approved valuer and having  regard to the likely 
market prices thereof, reserve price should be fixed in respect of each of the 
assets, if possible…………..” 
 
NTC decided to sell these properties as per laid down procedures through 
a transparent, open public tendering process.  The pr oposals for sale were 
placed before the Asset Sale Committee (ASC), constituted by the Ministry of 
Textiles under the directions of the BIFR.  The procedure followed were to invite 
bids by issue of public tenders in leading newspapers on all India basis.  Tender 
documents were made also available on the website of the Company.  The 
Reserve Price (RP) and the EMD were fixed by the ASC.  The sealed offers 
along with EMD were opened on a pre -determined date, on expiry of 30 days in 
the presence of all intendin g bidders and the bids quoted by each one of them 
was read out while opening the tender.  In case the price quoted by the bidder is 
above RP, already fixed by the Company, the bid is accepted by the ASC.  The 
RP was fixed by the ASC on the basis of the val uations arrived at by the reputed 
Consultants in the country.  
 
As far as Mumbai land is concerned, it had been decided that Reserve 
Price should not be less than the highest Minimum Assured Returns (MAR) 
quoted by the consultants, provided that it was abo ve the prevailing circle 
rates/registration rates. The Company had gone by the directions and achieved 
262% of the RP. 
 
The response was purely determined by the market forces, demand and 
supply position and fierce competition created by NTC. 
 
The following paper cuttings (copies enclosed at Annexure -1) on the land 
sale which shows that NTC has been breaking the records in every sale in 
Mumbai and how NTC land sale in Mumbai created a spurt in the real estate 
market in the country.   
 
1. “It‟s real: NTC sells plot for record Rs.702 cr” – The Times of India dated 
21.06.2005. 
2. “NTC‟s prime plot may bust realty records” – The Times of India dated 
20.06.2005. 
3. “DLF buys NTC land for Rs. 720 cr.” – Business Standard dated 
21.06.2005. 
4. “DLF- Akruti Bags NTC Mill for rec ord Rs. 702 crore -  Jawala fires up 
Mumbai realty” – The Economic Times dated 21.06.2005. 
5. “India‟s biggest land deal: Rs.702 cr for city mill plot” – The Times of India 
dated 21.06.2005. 

35 
 
 
6. “NTC mills‟ sale triggers boom in firms with land” – Business Line d ated 
26.07.2005. 
7. “Well done, NTC” – Editorial of Economic Times dated 24.06.2005. 
 
The Company has been correcting its shortcomings / deficiencies 
regularly and bringing in improvements gradually.  The observations of the 
Committee have also been noted and  all possible corrective steps will be taken.  
The Company has recently conducted two on -line e -auctions of surplus land 
which was accomplished successfully and received appreciation from all 
quarters.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
 No further comments please. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 No further reply is desired please. 
 
[Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 13 of Chapter I 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 8 
 
Defects in Tender Documents 
 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that the information disclosed 
in the tender documents issued for sale of assets in a number of cases was 
either incorrect or ambiguous and that the Company had no t established any 
system for verification of the contents of the tender documents.  Prominent 
among these cases related to Mumbai Textile Mill, Apollo Textile Mill and 
Chalisgaon Textile Mill where Audit has estimated a loss of Rs.185.10 crore to 
the Compa ny.  The audit observations and the replies of the Ministry in these 
cases have been briefly enumerated in the following paragraphs: 
 
(i) Mumbai Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
The audit has pointed out that the tender document for sale of land of the 
Mill stated th at the mill area consisting of 67,293.17 square metre bearing CS 
No. 464 (admeasuring 65,993.17 square metre) and CS No.4/464 ( Marwari 
Chowka Chawl admeasuring 1300 Square Metre) was offered for sale.  While the 

36 
 
 
Company had no intention for sale of land o f Marwari Chowka Chawl, it was 
wrongly included in the tender document.  Further, the sale deed and the 
possession letter specifying the boundaries of the land sold did not include area 
of Marwari Chowka Chawl. Subsequently, the purchaser asked for possess ion of 
Marwari Chowka Chawl also since it was included in the tender document.  The 
ASC accepted the fact that the parcel of land of 1300 square metre was wrongly 
included in the tender document and the possession and ownership of this land 
worth Rs.13.56 crore was given to the private party without any consideration 
besides the liability of about Rs.5.23 crore to rehabilitate 24 occupants of Chawl 
was owned by the Company resulting in loss of Rs.18.79 crores. 
 
NTC admitted the fact that land of 1300square metre was occupied by 
Chawl and had not appeared in the lay out plan due to mistake.  Whie 
contending that the mistake of non -disclosure of Marwari Chowka Chawl had not 
been liable for any loss to the Company, the reply of NTC is strangely and 
conspicuously silent on the audit observations on handing over the possession of 
1300 square metre plot without any consideration and the liability owned by the 
Company for rehabilitation of occupants of Marwari Chowka Chawl.  
 
(ii) Apollo Textile Mill, Mumbai 
 
The Audit has brought out that the Company had received lesser amount 
in tendered bids by not disclosing the vital information about the feasibility of 
access to the Main Road which was allowed later on.  This enhanced the value 
of the land resulting in loss of Rs.165.80 crore to the Company after deducting 
consideration received for right to access to main road. 
 
NTC has informed the Committee that originally, the property was 
tendered in 2005 giving all the particulars known to the Company .  Later on in 
2006, a provision for read was made as per the town planning and thus it cannot 
be presumed as deficiency in tender document.   
 
(iii) Chalisgaon Textile Mill, Chalisgaon     
 
According to the Audit, six plots of land of the Mills were sold to the 
highest bidder and the purchaser did not pay second and final installment due on 
the plea that in the tender document the Company had wrongly mentioned the 
land to be in residential zone though it was in industrial zone.  This incorrect 
information in tender document res ulted in delay in receipt of sale proceeds for 
which no interest was recovered and the Company lost interest of Rs.51 lakh 
calculated on the basis of 18 percent per annum.   
 
Responding to the Audit observation, NTC stated that the State 
Government/local m unicipal authorities were reluctant to grant approvals for 
change of zone.  Since NTC was in financial crunch during that period, it was 

37 
 
 
decided to sell the land on „as is where is‟ basis for survival of the Company and 
the tenders were floated before obtaining change of zone.     
 
Explaining its failure to establish a proper system for verification of all the 
facts included in tender documents, the Company put forth the plea that NTC had 
no expertise of sale of land and it had resorted to execute sale of a ssets only to 
implement the revival scheme approved by the BIFR.   
 
Going by the self admission of the Company that the defects in the tender 
documents had occurred due to inadequacy of the system, the Committee are of 
the firm opinion that the casual appr oach on the part of the Company and the 
failure of the Ministry to devise a foolproof system in this regard ultimately proved 
detrimental to the financial interests of the Company.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that all the cases of loss due to def ective tender documents as 
pointed out by Audit should be thoroughly enquired into at the highest level in the 
Ministry of Textiles and responsibility fixed for such costly lapses.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in each such case.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Each case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) on merits.  
The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and viewed from a 
commercial angle, the solution as has been arrived at by the ASC to settle the 
issue is in the best interest of the organization.  Marwari Chowka chawls 
consisting of 0.32 acres is a chawl area under DCR.58.  This chawl is to be 
redeveloped by NTC for accommodation of the existing employees staying there.  
By mistake, NTC while releasing  the tender included this area also for sale.  The 
bidders quoted for the entire area that was offered for sale and the Company got 
the offer for the entire area including the Marwari Chowka chawl.  The only 
mistake that happened in this case is that NTC h as included a property which 
was not meant for sale.  The Marwari Chowka chawls were to be developed by 
NTC as per Govt. of Maharashtra DCR – 58.  The Company had not suffered any 
loss on account of inclusion of Marwari Chowka chawls in the tender, as the 
bidder had made payment for this area also.    
 
Each and every case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) 
on merits.  The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and viewed from a 
commercial angle, can only have a solution as has been take n by the ASC to 
settle the issue is in the best interest of the organization.   
 
Clause 1.3 of the tender document issued by NTC read as under:- 
 
The rear part of the mill stands closed by order No. L -51016/5-121/2004-
IR(PG) dated 16.03.2004 of the Deputy Director, Ministry of Labour, Government 
of India, under Section 25(O) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  The sub -
division of the land shall be got demarcated by the DILR in presence of both the 

38 
 
 
parties (as per condition No. 21 of MCGM).  At present, t he mill is divided into 
two parts and the western part adjacent to Jivraj Boricha Marg is under sale.  An 
access could be made available  through outside land of Sitaram Mills belonging 
to NTC (MN) Ltd. to Jivraj Boricha Marg.  All the machineries in the su rplus area 
of the mills are in process of sale/disposal other than the retained machineries 
which are being shifted to sister units shortly, the surplus  employees have opted 
for MVRS. 
 
At the time of issue of tender and finalization of sale, no other defin ite 
information was available with NTC with regard to the access road.  After sale of 
land of 5 mills and during the meeting with Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra 
and other officials, it was decided that NTC should appoint Architects/City 
Planner to c arry out Traffic Impact Study of Road Network and Studies on Civil 
Infrastructure of all the mills and submit the same to State Govt. for 
implementation till the time no fresh permissions for sale of mill land shall be 
released.  Since this was a lateral d evelopment, it cannot be treated as „non -
disclosure of vital information‟ in the tender.  According to DC Regulations, NTC 
is under statutory obligation to construct the road as per norms and specifications 
and thus it handed over the same to MCGM for publ ic purpose.  It may, 
therefore, be seen that there was no malafide intention nor any actual loss to the 
company.  
 
Each case was considered by the Asset Sale Committee (ASC) on merits.  
The facts and circumstances of the case is unique and viewed from a 
commercial angle, the solution as has been arrived at by the ASC to settle the 
issue is in the best interest of the organization.  
 
This case has to be examined with respect to the facts of the case as 
prevalent in 2002 when the Company was hard pressed for generating enough 
resources for implementation of the Revival Scheme.  The ASC considered the 
matter in its meeting held on 11.12.2002 and took a conscious decision in the 
interest of the Company. 
 
In the tender issued by NTC, the zone was indicated as res idential.  
However, the Govt./local Municipal Authorities were reluctant to grant approvals 
for change of zone.  The residential rates are always higher than the industrial 
rate by around 30% to 40% whereas the sale is „as is where is‟ basis, i.e. 
industrial land.   The party had to pay the fee for the change of zone from 
industrial to residential.  The audit had considered the waiver of interest on the 
delay.  If we consider the cost of conversion and the rate obtained for residential 
as against industrial , the company would have gained more than the waiver of 
interest. The non -indication of proper zone in the tender document had not 
resulted in any loss.  
 
The sale of assets by NTC has been done after approval by a duly 
constituted broad based Asset Sale Committee comprising of the representatives 

39 
 
 
of BIFR, the State Government, the Implementing Agency, etc.   As per the 
guidelines dated 24.8.09 issued by the BIFR, the Board only can intervene in the 
matters considered by such ASCs.  In a recent order dated 19.2.2010, the BIFR 
has gone to the extent of mentioning that “the Ministry has no role in the matter, 
as the scheme has been sanctioned by BIFR, and its implementation for revival 
is under direct supervision of BIFR.  NTC approached Ministry as per its 
convenience.  The Bench also noted that, in violation of tender conditions / 
BIFR’s ASC guidelines, the Ministry has intervened in the matter.” 
 
In view of the above facts, as the ASC comprised of outside Members 
including BIFR nominee, it may not be proper for the Ministry of Textiles to 
conduct any enquiry in the matter.  In our opinion, if such enquiry has to be 
conducted, it may be appropriate to have such enquiry conducted either by the 
BIFR or as per their directions. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has not accepted the recommendations of COPU 
regarding enquiry into the cases of loss due to defective tender documents and 
fixation of responsibility thereof.  Further, it was also not intimated whether 
Government ha s sought the directions of BIFR for conducting the enquiry in 
these cases. 
 
Reply of the Government on the remarks of office of C&AG 
 
 There is no loss to the Company in this case as the Company got the 
price even for the chawl occupied property that was o ffered for sale.  The 
mistake is limited to the action of the Company in putting a chawl occupied 
property for sale along with the main mill land.  The liability of rehabilitation of the 
chawl occupants on account of the above action is being sorted out am icably by 
the 3 parties without any commitment on the part of the NTC to go for 
rehabilitation of those workers. 
 
 In view of the above, M/Textiles requests that the issue may be closed. 
 
 [Ministry of Textiles] 
(File No. 9/1/2010-NTC dated 10.5.2011) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 18 of Chapter I 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 April 2012        Chairman, 
15 Chaitra 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04th April 2012 from 1130 hrs to 
1345 hrs in Committee Room „ E‟, Basement, Parliament House  Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Shri Ramesh Bais 
Shri Ambica Banerjee 
Shri Shailendra Kumar 
Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
7 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
11 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
1 Shri Gautam Guha Director General (Commercial)-I 
2 Ms. Saroj Punhani Director General (Commercial)-II 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee took up for consideration the following two 
draft action taken reports on:- 
 
(i). XXX   XXXX   XXX 
 

42 
 
 
(ii). 2nd Report of 15th Lok Sabha on Sale of Surplus land and Buildings by 
National Textiles Corporation Limited. 
 
3. The Committee adopted both the aforesaid Action Taken Reports and 
authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in view of the suggestions made 
by the Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
    
4. The representatives of the office of C&AG then withdrew. 
  
5. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
6. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
7. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
  
  The committee then adjourned. 

43 
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the action taken by government on the recommendations 
contained in the 2nd Report of COPU (15th L.S.) on “Sale of surplus land and 
buildings by National Textile Corporation Limited.” 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of recommendations 13 
II. Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
(vide recommendations at 3,9,10,12 and 13) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
05 
 
 
 
39 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies. 
(vide recommendations at 1,2,4,6 and 11) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
05 
 
 
 
39 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee which require reiteration 
(vide recommendations at 5,7 and 8) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
03 
 
 
 
 
22 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
Nil 
 
 
 