CPU NO. 956 
 
TWENTY - THIRD REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
EXPORT OF GOLD JEWELLERY BY MSTC LTD. 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 17.2 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 3 OF 2011-12] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
APRIL 2013 / VAISAKHA 1935(S) 
  
23 

CONTENTS 
                     Page 
Composition of the Committee (2012-13) (iii) 
Introduction  (v) 
REPORT 
PART I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS  
Introductory 
A New Business of export of Gold Jewellery 
 
5 
B Role of the Company and Associates in the Export of Gold Jewellery 10 
C Selection of Associates 11 
D Identification of Foreign Buyers 14 
E Safeguarding of the Financial Interest 16 
F High Risk Exposure and Return not Commensurate with the risk 22 
G Assessment of Demand of Gold Jewellery in Foreign Markets 24 
H Insurance Coverage of Export of Gold Jewellery 26 
I Non-payment of Dues by the Overseas Buyers 32 
J Rejection of Claims by Insurers 33 
K. Legal Proceedings  38 
L Referral of the case to Enforcement Agencies 
(i)   Central Bureau of Investigation 
(ii)   Enforcement Directorate 
43 
M Role of Ministry  46 
N Lessons learnt by MSTC 47 
 PART II  
 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee                     48 
 Appendices 
 
 
I. Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 on Export of Gold       
Jewellery by MSTC Ltd. 
53 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 19th April, 2012. 65 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26th April, 2012. 67 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 15th June, 2012. 69 
V. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 31st July, 2012. 71 
VI. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11th January, 2013 73 
VII. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 26th April, 2013. 75 
 
 
( i ) 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
Chairman 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant*  
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Shri 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Shri Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Girdhari Lal  Committee Officer 
________________________________________________________ 
* Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. on 25 April, 2013. 
 
 
( iii ) 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (2012-13) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-third Report on 
Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC  Limited based on para No.17.2 of the Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India Report No. 3 of 20 11-12 for the year ended March 2010,  Union 
Government (Commercial). 
 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Mi nistry of Steel and MSTC 
Ltd. on the subject at their sitting held on 19 April, 2012. The Committee also took evidence of 
the representatives of Central Bureau of Investigation and Enforcement Directorate at their 
sittings held on 26 April and 15 June, 201 2 respectively before taking further evidence of the 
representatives of the MSTC Ltd., Ministry of Steel, CBI and ED on 31 July, 2012. Thereafter, 
the Committee took the evidence of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation and ex -CMD of 
MSTC Ltd. separately at their sitting held on 11January, 2013.  
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted the Report at their 
sitting held on 26 April, 2013. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the  representatives of Ministry of Steel, 
MSTC Limited; CBI; ED; ECGC and former CMD of MSTC for tendering evidence before 
them and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with the examination of 
the subject.  
 
5. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The 
Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance rendered to them by the 
officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and R ecommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi               JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
29 April, 2013           Chairman  
9 Vaisakha 1935 (S)                                  Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
( v ) 
  

REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
Introductory 
 
 MSTC Limited is a Category-I Mini Ratna Public Sector Schedule B Company under 
the administrative control of the Ministry of Steel, Government of India. The Company was set 
up on 9 September 1964 to act as a regulating authority for export of ferrous scrap . MSTC 
became a subsidiary of SAIL in 1974. In 1982 it became an independent Company under the 
Ministry of Steel. It was a canalizing agency for import of ferrous scrap till 1992.  The 
Company has now grown into a large multi product diversified trading Company.   
 
Audit Paragraph 
  
2. This report is based on para 17.2 of the C&AG’s Report No. 3 (Commercial) of 2011-12 
containing the review of the Company’s records relating to  export of Gold Jewellery during 
2007-08 and 2008-09. The audit findings on the subject are reproduced at Appendix-I.   
 
3. According to the Audit, the Company on being approached by three merchant 
exporters/ traders (associates) decided in July 2007 to enter into a new business of export of 
gems and gold jewellery on post -shipment basis without opening letter of credit. As per the 
arrangement agreed for new business, the associates were required to select foreign buyers, 
obtain export orders and export the articles in the name of the Company and the Company 
was required to pay up to 80 percent of the export bill to the associates as advance by 
discounting the bills from the bank and the balance 20 percent was released to the associates 
on collecting the full value of the export proceeds from foreign buyers. During 2007 -08, gold 
jewellery worth Rs.260.63 crore was exported to 29 foreign buyers in Dubai under the above 
arrangement with the three associates and the entire export proceeds were fully recovered. 
The Company received Rs. 3.91 crore as service charges in the above business. In 2008 -09, 
six associates (including three of 2007 -08) exported gold j ewellery worth Rs. 638.20 crore to 
47 foreign buyers with the insurance coverage from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of 
India Limited (ECGC) and ICICI Lombard (ICICIL).  46 foreign buyers did not pay their dues 
amounting to Rs.598.63 crore.  An amount  of Rs. 611.79 crore remained unrecovered from 
the associates towards the advances paid to them and related financial charges incurred by 
the Company. The Company lodged claims with the insurers for non -payment of dues by the 
foreign buyers. However, the claims were rejected by both the insurers. 
 
4. The various aspects relating to the subject matter in the light of audit observations  
have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report. 
 
A. New business of export of Gold Jewellery 
 
5. According to the information furnished to the Committee, MSTC had appointed a firm 
of consultant viz. National Productivity Council (NPC) to prepare a Corporate Plan for short, 
medium and long term (10 -12 years horizon)  and the report was submitted by NPC in April,  
2007.  
 

6. In their subsequent note, the Ministry of Steel stated that the Corporate Planning study 
submitted by National Productivity Council in April 2007 was approved by the Board of 
Directors in their 225th meeting held on 28.09.2007 (Item no. 225/19) . The NPC analysis 
revealed prospects for trading in various commodity groups and accordingly MSTC diversified 
into many commodities and sale figures during the relevant financial years are as mentioned 
below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. On being enquired about the steps taken by the company to familiarize itself before 
entering in the new business of export of gold jewellery, the Company in its written note, inter-
alia stated as under: 
 
“a) The p roposal for diversification of business to export gems and gold jewellery 
was discussed in several meetings among the officials of  MSTC. In the meeting 
a detail report of NPC was discussed and the proposal was accepted. 
 
b) A workshop was organized on credit insurance, in the office of MSTC on 
13/06/2007 where Insurance consultant of MSTC, representative of M/s. Willis 
BA (insurance broker empanelled by ECGC) and the representative of The 
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. were present. Several rounds of discussion 
took place and correspondences were exch anged between officials of ECGC, 
The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd and MSTC before entering the export 
business on D/A (Documents on Acceptance) basis. 
 
c) The MOA entered into by State Trading Corporation (STC) and the party and 
the export documents such as  export Invoices, Packing List, Hall marking 
certificate, Air Way Bill, GR Form, Valuation Certificate, Transit Insurance 
Certificate, Copy of Export Order and Forex Realization Certificate were 
examined and MOA was drafted which was an improvement upon th e STC 
MOA as it was envisaged in MSTC MOA that the document would be routed 
through the banking channel.  
 
d) There was inherent risk in exporting on DA basis. After the presentation made 
by the Insurance Co and Consultant, it was then decided to obtain appro val of 
the Board and formulate a policy of Export of Gems and Gold Jewellery. The 
New Business in the Export Front was placed before the Board in its meeting 
held on 19.06.2007. Board while agreeing the proposal in Principle, wanted a 
separate note on risk  management and payment procedure with reference to 
RBI guidelines which was circulated to all directors. 
 Sale ( Rs. In Crore ) 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodity 07-08 08-09 09-10 10-11 11-12 
1. Coal 1219.35 2078.72 2064.81 2517.35 2019.9 
2. Steel 1445.40 1518.39 555.63 1354.09 1883.8 
3. Iron Ore 1053.42 1266.27 1374.90 1830.75 450.83 
4. Manganese Ore - 9.72 - 152.43 68.23 
5. Oil & Natural Gas 2626.27 3019.44 2157.52 - - 
6. Petroleum 
Products 
- - 205.19 - 1294.0 
7. Gems & Jewellery 260.63 638.21 - - - 

 
e) After analysis of the risk and payment procedure as per RBI guidelines, the item 
was again placed before the Board of Directors in the form of Resolution by 
circulation. Perceptible risks involved in the transaction were annexed to the 
note. The resolution was passed by circulation. Accordingly resolution was 
passed on 07.07.2007.” 
 
8. In the light of the fact that the decision to enter into the new business was taken 
through a resolution by circulation rather than placing the same before the Board of Directors 
in a meeting, the Committee desired to know about the procedure generally followed in 
similar cases, the Secretary, Ministry of Steel in h is deposition before the Committee on 19 th 
April, 2012 stated as under: 
 
 “ Sir, the correct procedure is that ‘by circulation’, only those extremely urgent  and 
 routine types of matters should be brought up for circulation……………  ………My 
 personal view is that such a serious decision should have been  done after a lot of 
 discussion amongst the Board Members but unfortunately it  was just circulated.” 
 
9. When asked why the important matter relating to risk management and payment 
procedures for new business was not discussed and deliberated upon in formal Board 
meeting, the then CMD of MSTC during his deposition before the Committee on 11 January, 
2013 stated as under: 
  
 “As far as I recall in the note placed before the Board it was clearly stated that the 
proposal was for export on D/A basis and not on the basis of L/C. It was also stated 
that MSTC would take export credit insurance policy to cover its risk. The Board after 
deliberations, as far as I recall advised us to examine if this was compatible with R BI 
regulations and to recast the note accordingly. Obviously the Directors did not feel the 
need for further deliberations in a regular Board meeting, in which case they would not 
have approved it. I may mention that approval by circulation requires the ap proval of 
every Director, (including the Ministry’s nominee) while in a Board meeting approval 
of a majority of the Directors present suffices.” 
 
10. As regard the  factors taken into consideration for granting approval for the new 
business of export of gems and gold jewellery, the Company in its written note stated that the 
then Board of Directors of MSTC Ltd. had taken the following factors into consideration: 
 
a) The procedure of export i.e. to associate with the manufacturers/traders who export 
gems, jewellery etc. 
b) Exporter would be MSTC 
c) Associates would make shipment while MSTC would be the Exporter. 
d) Associate would make shipment against the export order at their own cost. 
e) On receipt of export document duly accepted, MSTC would pay upto 85% of export 
value towards supply of material. (Though ultimately up to 80% of the export value was 
paid.) 
f) There was inherent risk in exporting on DA basis. After the presentation made by the 
Insurance Co and Consultant, it was decided to obtain approval of the Board a nd 
formulate a policy of Export of Gems and Gold Jewellery. The New Business in the 
Export Front was placed before the Board in its meeting held on 19.06.2007. Board 
while agreeing the proposal in Principle, wanted a separate note on risk management 

and pa yment procedure with reference to RBI guidelines which was circulated to all 
directors. 
g) After analysis of the risk and payment procedure as per RBI guidelines, the item was 
again placed before the Board of Directors in the form of Resolution by circulation . 
Perceptible risks involved in the transaction were annexed to the note. 
h) In the event of non -payment by the overseas buyer, the claim would be lodged to 
Insurance Co/ Underwriter as per standard procedure. 
i) The two risks were involved in the business of export of gems and jewellery. 
 
a) Risk of Performance i.e. actual export of material to buyers as per the Purchase 
Order satisfying quality and quantity requirements and 
b) Risk of realization of export proceeds. 
 
11. The first risk was covered by paying for the cist of material exported only after the 
unconditional acceptance by the buyer without demur and routing the document through the 
banking channel. The payment of cost of jewellery was also partial i.e. up to 80% of the value. 
 
12. The second risk was cover ed by taking insurance from Insurance Company namely 
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation and ICICI Lombard General Insurance Company 
against three eventualities - Protracted Default by the overseas buyer, Insolvency of the 
overseas buyers and thirdly Political and Commercial Risks. ECGC in their web site as well as 
in their advertisement urge exporters to export and they claim to undertake the responsibility 
for the credit payment. Accordingly, MSTC’s model took care of all perceivable risk factors 
before going for this new business.”  
 
13. Asked whether the approval of the Ministry was also obtained for the new business, the 
Company in its written reply stated that the decision to enter into the new business was taken 
at the level of the Board of Directors of MSTC Ltd., in which, the representatives of the 
Ministry of Steel, were members. 
 
14. On the prudence of the decision to  venture in to a  new business of export of gold , the 
then CMD (Shri Malay Sengupta) during his deposition before the Committee on 11 J anuary, 
2013 stated as under:- 
 
 “This Company was a canalising company of the Government of India till 1991 
February. Once that business was de -canalised, as far as I know, the Government 
never gave us any mandate to do anything. They never defined any ro le for us. The 
things came to such a pass that in 1998 the company got referred to the Disinvestment 
Commission and the Disinvestment Commission recommended that this company 
would soon enter into loss and, therefore, either you sell it off hundred per cen t or you 
close it down. At that point, I had taken over as CMD in November 1997. We started 
two ventures both of which were totally new. We said that we had been importing scrap 
as a canalising agency as scrap market was terrible at that time. So, we re -defined our 
role as a bulk importer. We said: How can we help the company to survive and how 
can we prosper? So, we re -defined our role as a bulk importer. In between 1991 -98 
when the company was trying to exist as a merchant importer of scrap, there was a 
deal in which scrap was imported and had to be sold at loss some time in 1995 
because the international prices had come down. On that, the CBI inquiry continued for 
ten years. We found that if the international market falls and there is a loss, we have to 
answer. So, how do we insulate ourselves from this market fluctuation? So, we 

adopted an import policy. We adopted this e -auction business because we were 
physical auctioneers. We developed this so that we could earn a reasonable profit. I 
may point out that both these ventures were immensely successful. The Company was 
founded in 1964. It continued till 1998. In 34 years, it had made a total profit of about 
Rs.50 crore. From 1998 -2009, in 11 years it made a profit of more than Rs.350 crore. 
The average prof it earned during my tenure was around Rs.30 crore. As I mentioned, 
in all these years the Government never said that this is the mandate for your 
company, this is what you are required to do. We were a business venture. We were 
very much left on our own to  do whatever we could. The only role that we could 
envisage for ourselves was that of a merchant trader, that of an international trader. 
Imports were our mainstay. Now the international trading house which does not have 
an export portfolio is a kind of an  oxymoron. So we had all along wanted to export. We 
had all along wanted to develop an export portfolio but simply did not know how. In 
2005, a professional market research agency was appointed to suggest what type of 
diversification in our trading basket we should make. They recommended that gold 
jewellery would be one item which we could try to export. They had a logic for that. The 
three topmost items of export from India are petroleum products, engineering products 
and gold and jewellery. As far as petr oleum product is concerned, it is the preserve of 
four or five refineries. As far as engineering products are concerned, mostly after the 
auto ancillaries have come, the export has boomed. And it is very much dependent on 
process inspection and the designs . That left us with gold jewellery. We also found at 
that time that the State Trading Corporation was already into this business from 2005 
and we followed exactly the model followed by the State Trading Corporation”. 
 
15. Elaborating further, he stated as follows:- 
 
 “............. We followed the model followed by the STC as far as possible with certain, in 
my opinion, improvements only. Besides, this market is strong. The National 
Productivity Council drew up a corporate plan for MSTC and they put a time frame in 
which this gold jewellery export was to take place.  They put as an item of 2007-08. We 
are consistently being asked that to develop an export portfolio. When all these things 
coincided, there is the market research firm recommending export of gol d jewellery. 
There is the National Productivity Council telling us to export gold jewellery. The STC, 
a corporation more experienced than us and bigger than us is already in this business. 
People are approaching us to start this business. So, all the thing s are there, the 
opportunities are there and 100 per cent insurance coverage is available. That was the 
biggest point. If we had not obtained insurance coverage, we would not have exported. 
I reiterate that it was only post -shipment the procedure adopted w as the jewellery will 
be exported, shipped physically, and invoice on Indian Rupees will come to us based 
on which we will raise an invoice in US dollars, a Bill of Exchange in US dollars, send it 
across to the buyers through the banking channel, it will b e received by the buyer 
through the banking channel, he will sign, his signature will be attested by his banker, 
the documents will come back via banking channel, and only after we receive the 
documents did we pay 80 per cent of the money”. 
 
16. While referring to the firms engaged for study before venturing into the new business of 
export of gold jewellery, ex -CMD of MSTC (Shri Malay Sengupta) stated in a written 
submission as under:    
 

 “Both ORG -India and NPC had spent a long time in making the study, had held 
detailed discussions at various levels within MSTC, had submitted draft reports which 
were also discussed with officers and thereafter finalized the reports. If my memory 
serves me rightly, NPC had taken a long time to print and submit their final  report after 
finalizing it. The recommendations were therefore known to MSTC much before April. 
ORG-India had probably made their study in 2005.” 
 
B. Role of MSTC and associates in the export of gold jewellery 
 
17. The Audit paragraph br ought out that as per the agreement entered into by the 
Company with the associates for export of gold jewellery, the latter was required to identify 
the foreign buyers, obtain export orders from them in the name of the Company, export gold 
jewellery and prepare relevant documents showing the Company as an exporter. The foreign 
buyers were required to pay the export proceeds after 170 days (due date) from the date of 
dispatch. The associates were required to monitor and ensure realization of export proceeds 
from foreign buyers on due date. MSTC was required to release advance up to 80 per cent of 
the invoice value to the associates immediately after export and the balance amount was 
required to be paid only after realization of full value of export proceeds. The associates 
ultimately had to bear all the expenses to be incurred by the Company for such export 
business. It was also stipulated that the associates would bear all the risks and costs in the 
event of non -payment of export proceeds by the foreign buyers. T hus, instead of playing the 
role of an exporter, the Company was to provide only post shipment finance to its associates, 
who were the actual exporters.  
 
18. While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Steel on 19 th April 
2012 stated as under: 
 
“They are calling it export transactions but actually in my understanding – because I 
have spent five years in the Banking Division in Government of India - the way this 
entire transaction has been structured, my impression is that actually the M STC acted 
like a bank and not like an exporter although the transaction is structured as if they are 
the exporter of gold jewellery.” 
 
19. When asked how MSTC would justify that it acted as an exporter and the Associates 
as shippers, as the export order s were actually executed by the Associates, the Company in 
its written reply stated that para 39, Chapter 9 of Exim Policy defined a merchant exporter as 
a person engaged in trading activity and exporting or intending to export goods.  MSTC 
wanted to be safer and hence made the associates responsible for the shipping also. But it 
did not dilute the function of MSTC as a Merchant Exporter. A merchant exporter may always 
obtain supplies and avail services from its associate supplier. In the instant case, the 
Associate Suppliers sold the gold jewellery to MSTC by raising sale invoices on MSTC for the 
gold jewellery shipped/delivered by them to the overseas buyers on behalf of MSTC. 
Associate suppliers shipped gold jewellery on –“ A/C – MSTC LTD”. In the export orde r also,  
the status of MSTC  and its Associates, was disclosed in clear terms as exporter and shipper 
respectively. The associate suppliers raised the sale Invoice on MSTC upon shipment of gold 
jewellery( A/C – MSTC LTD)  to the overseas buyers for the gol d jewellery delivered by them. 
Consequently, they are to be paid as per contract. Thus, MSTC purchased the gold jewellery 
from the Associate Suppliers and paid up -to 80% of the invoice value to them, as part 
payment of the purchase consideration of gold je wellery, shipped/delivered by the Associates 
to the overseas buyers on behalf of MSTC for which the Associate Suppliers raised sale 

invoices on MSTC. It is a matter of record that it is MSTC and not the Associate Supplier 
which drew ”invoices” and “Bills o f Exchange” in foreign exchange on the overseas buyers. It 
is a matter of fact that in this business of export of gold jewellery, the export proceeds of gold 
jewellery were received in foreign currency in MSTC’s accounts, maintained with a public 
sector bank and Standard Chartered Bank. 
 
20. Regarding the role of the Company and associates in the export of gold jewellery , ex-
CMD of MSTC (Shri Malay Sengupta) in a post evidence reply stated as under:- 
 
“I beg to submit that the crux of the matter is whether MSTC was a purchaser from the 
associates or a mere financier; it could not have been both. If MSTC were not the 
purchaser the ownership of goods would never be with MSTC, in which case MSTC 
could not h ave passed on the ownership to the foreign Buyers, and the invoice and 
Bill of Exchange drawn by MSTC would be invalid. Had that been the case MSTC 
would have no locus standi in the Courts of Dubai and its claim for export proceeds 
from the Buyers would have been thrown out and it would not have got the awards in 
26 cases. The documents being exactly similar in all cases it is reasonable to hope 
that MSTC will get favourable judgments in the remaining cases which remain 
pending also. The books of accounts o f the company showed these transactions as 
Sales-Purchase, and internal audit, statutory audit or CAG audit never objected to the 
same. Only if MSTC had acquired the ownership, it could have passed on the 
ownership to the foreign buyers and thus only MSTC could have been the exporter.   
Indeed if MSTC was not the exporter, I wonder, how the foreign buyers acquired the 
ownership of the goods since there is no document, as far as I know, evidencing 
transfer of ownership from the associates to foreign buyers. 
 
C. Selection of Associates 
 
21. According to the Audit, the Company decided in July 2007 to venture into the business 
of financing the export of gold jewellery on the basis of proposals received in April 2007 from 
three associates viz. Space Mercantile Co.  Pvt. Ltd. (Space), Ushma Jewellery & Packaging 
Export Pvt. Ltd. (Ushma) and Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd. (Bonito) and the business was carried 
out during 2007-08 with them only. Subsequently, the Company received in July/August 2008 
proposals from three more as sociates viz. K.A. Malle Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KA Malle), Joshi 
Bullion Gems &  Jewellery Pvt. Ltd. (Joshi)   and  Bond Gems Pvt. Ltd.  (Bond)  and the 
business was carried out with the above six associates during 2008 -09. The acceptance of 
the proposals from these associates was done without properly verifying their credentials. No 
physical inspection of the offices/manufacturing premises of the associates were carried out 
by the Company before entering into agreements with them. Two of the above associate s 
(Bonito and KA Malle) were engaged, respectively, in the business of building materials and 
pharmaceutical intermediaries for animals and had never been in the business of gold 
jewellery. Four associates were having related party relationship (Space with  KA Malle and 
Bond with Joshi). Therefore, the above export business was in fac t carried out through four 
parties only. 
    
22. When asked why MSTC selected the associates without verifying their credentials, the 
Company in its written reply stated that MSTC did carry out full scrutiny and credentials of the 
business associates. For verification of credentials of the Associates, the following documents 
were obtained: 
 

(i). Last 3 years Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account. 
(ii). Brief report on the organization. 
(iii). Documentary evidence of prior export / dealing in gold jewellery etc. 
(iv). Company’s Income Tax / Sales Tax registration. 
(v). Memorandum and Article of Association. 
(vi). Name and address of the bankers. 
(vii). Copy of PAN under Income Tax. 
(viii). EXIM Code number. 
(ix). RCMC from Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion  Council. 
(x). Name and address of the Board of Directors.  The past experience of similar b usiness 
with other PSUs such as STC.  
 
23. Prior experience of the Associates with STC was examined from the following 
documents: 
 
1. Export Invoices 
2. Packing List 
3. Hall marking certificate 
4. Air Way Bill 
5. Shipping bill 
6. GR Form 
7. Valuation Certificate 
8. Transit Insurance Certificate 
9. Copy of Export Order 
10. Forex Realization Certificate. 
 
24. In all the cases, credential certificates were obtained from the banks of the Associates. 
All the banks had given satisfactory report. With the confirmation of receipt of goods by the 
foreign buyer along-with unqualified acceptance of liability (through banking channel) to pay to 
MSTC on due date by fo reign buyers, the performance of Associate supplier was completed. 
After that MSTC released part payment towards purchase consideration of gold jewellery to 
the Associates. MSTC did not release payment to the Associate suppler before the gold 
jewellery were received by the overseas buyers and before the overseas buyers accepted the 
liability to pay MSTC. 
 
25. Responding to the Audit observations that one of the two related associates (Space 
with KA Malle) enjoyed a high credit exposure during 2008 -09 by carrying out 53 per cent of 
the total export of gold jewellery , MSTC in its written reply stated that r egarding business 
exposure on the associate suppliers, it has been explained in detail that no exposure / risk 
was taken on the Associate Suppliers. MSTC di d not release any payment to the Associate 
Suppliers in advance. MSTC did not release payment to the Associate suppl ier before the 
gold jewellery were received by the overseas buyers and before the overseas buyers 
accepted the liability to pay MSTC through  banking channel. Thus, in the instant model of 
export of gold jewellery, the element of risk came into existence after the Associate Suppliers 
delivered the gold jewellery. So, the question of enjoying high credit exposure by the  
Associate Suppliers does not hold good as there was no exposure at all on the Associates.  
Regarding carrying out export transaction with each other, it may be noted that it came to the 
knowledge of MSTC that M/s. Space Mercantile Pvt. Ltd and KA Malle Pharmaceuticals Pvt. 
Ltd were companies which had a common director.  However, no transaction was allowed to 
be carried out between these two companies in which MSTC was a party.  When M/s. Joshi 

Bullion Gems and Jewellery Private Ltd was being considered as associates by MSTC, it 
came to notice that one director of M/s. Joshi Bullion was also a director of some  overseas 
buyers to whom shipment had already been  made by other associate suppliers of MSTC. 
Hence, it was decided that M/s. Joshi Bullion Gems and Jewellery Private Ltd would  not be 
allowed to make shipment to those overseas buyers where there was common director. It is a 
matter of fact that no shipment was made by M/s. Joshi Bullion Gems and Jewellery Pvt. Ltd 
to those overseas buyers who had common directors with it. 
  
26. Audit has also  observed that three associates viz. M/s Ushma, M/s Space and M/s 
Bonito were already doing the business with State Trading Corporation Limited (STC) on 
similar lines but were in default during the period 2007 -08. As MSTC was aware of the 
dealings of the three associates with STC, it should have checked their performance vis -à-vis 
STC when it renewed their memorandum of Agreements with three associates in August 
2008. MSTC, thus, did not take due care in selecting the associates. Rather, it ext ended 
undue favour to them by allowing to carry out the export transactions with each other and thus 
they enjoyed higher credit exposure. 
 
27. When asked why MSTC did not check the performance of three associates’ in its 
business with STC while renewing their Memorandum of Agreements with the se associates, 
the Company in its written reply stated  that it may please be noted that, MSTC had taken 4 
(four) Associate Suppliers in 2007 -08 and all four were doing business with STC as per the 
documents submitted by them.  
 
28. Prior experience of the Associates with STC was examined from the following 
documents: 
 
1) Export Invoices 
2) Packing List  
3) Hall marking certificate 
4) Air Way Bill 
5) Shipping bill 
6) GR Form 
7) Valuation Certificate 
8) Transit Insurance Certificate 
9) Copy of Export Order 
10)  Forex Realisation Certificate. 
 
29. In the financial year 2007 -08, MSTC exported gold jewellery worth Rs. 260 Crore 
through the Associate Suppliers. The export proceeds were realized in full, in foreign currency 
through banking channel. Thus,  for obvious reason, as the business was going smooth and 
export proceeds were paid, no need was felt for cross verification with other organization. 
Since the associate suppliers and the overseas buyers performed the contracts flawlessly 
during financial year 2007 -08, MSTC thus did not think of any other cross verification. 
However, all due diligence was made at the time of selection of associate suppliers as per the 
standard practice of MSTC.  It may be appreciated and noted that 29 out of 36 overseas 
buyers, which failed to pay the proceeds of export made in the financial year 2008 -09, had 
imported gold jewellery from MSTC in the financial year 2007 -08 and had paid the export 
proceeds in full. Unfortunately the same overseas buyers miserably failed to pay the export 
proceeds to MSTC in the very next year. Moreover, MSTC was taking insured exposure on 
foreign buyers and not on associates. 

   
30. When asked whether MSTC had framed any policy and guidelines for selection of 
associates, the Company in its written reply stated  that MSTC did not have separate 
guidelines for selection of associates for export business. But we had an elaborate marketing 
manual which contains guidelines for scrutiny of associates for import business. MSTC did 
follow those guidelines.  Moreover, there was no risk of non -performance by associate in our 
model. It was post shipment payment. So no exposure were taken on associates. It may 
please be noted that MSTC has explored the export of gold items for the first time, based on 
the report  of existence of potential future growth opportunity, as envisaged by National 
Productivity Council (NPC). Due to not having a regular export item, no general standard 
operating procedure could be formulated but separate formalities / procedure for export of 
gold jewellery was formulated and approved by the Board of Directors of MSTC. 
 
D. Identification of foreign buyers 
 
31. Audit has brought out that the foreign buyers were identified by the associates and the 
Company did not verify their credentials. The  associates also arranged to obtain export order 
in the name of MSTC. There was no agreement between MSTC and the foreign buyers for 
the export and even MSTC did not make any official communication with them before such 
export. It was observed that out of 47 foreign buyers related to export of gold jewellery during 
2008-09, 18 were dealing either in wholesale business of stainless steel, food stuff, building 
materials or garments but 39 per cent of the total export of gold jewellery during 2008 -09 was 
made to them. It was observed that in respect of 20 foreign buyers, ownership was 
concentrated in the hands of a few persons. Further, Director of one associate (Joshi) was 
also owner/director of 4 foreign buyers* and three of them received gold jewellery from Space 
and another from Ushma during 2008 -09. The existing related party relationship of Bond and 
KA Malle (other two associates) with Joshi and Space, respectively, indicated that the above 
five associates were having transactions between themselves. It wa s also observed that eight 
foreign buyers to whom gold jewellery worth of Rs. 99.78 crore was exported were found not 
traceable. It was, further, observed that the principals of 13 foreign buyers refused to accept 
any liability of export dues of Rs. 187.13  crore on the ground that gold jewellery was actually 
not received by them. Thus, MSTC did not carry out due diligence in identifying the foreign 
buyers and left it completely on the associates who were the ultimate beneficiaries in the 
export business by receiving 80 per cent of the export proceeds as advance from MSTC. 
 
32. When asked why the credentials of the foreign buyers were not verified by the 
Company itself, MSTC in its written reply stated  that MSTC was new in the field of gold 
jewellery having no past experience. It neither had any client base in overseas market nor had 
any supplier base for gold jewellery in India.   So, for obvious reason, it entered into MOA with 
experienced Associate Su ppliers who were business associates of another PSU viz. STC, 
and had knowledge in export business. Accordingly, as per the terms of MOA, the Associate 
suppliers introduced the foreign buyers and arranged export orders from them in favour of 
MSTC. However, MSTC did not take such overseas buyers on its face value. MSTC obtained 
several documents on the overseas buyer including the D&B/TCM report, Chartered 
Accountants certificate of past experience before sending the proposal for due diligence and 
further scrutiny on the overseas buyers to ECGC for their approval and sanction of credit limit 
against each such potential overseas buyer for export of gold jewellery as they had adequate 
experience in credit insurance business. In its application for insurance cov er from ECGC for 
export of gold jewellery, MSTC clearly mentioned / declared that it was new in gold jewellery 
business having previous export turnover of gold jewellery as “NIL”.  ECGC made the due 

diligence on each such potential overseas buyer and sanct ioned the credit limit against each 
such potential overseas buye r for export of gold jewellery.  ECGC had taken the fees for 
carrying out due diligence on each such approved buyer. ……..  
 
………..ICICI Lombard specified the names of the buyers and their limit in the factoring 
mode. Hence both the insurance companies carried out the due diligence on individual buyers 
and also specified individual limits of exposure on the foreign buyers It is a matter of record 
that export orders were entered by MSTC with such overseas buyers only after the insurers 
approved the overseas buyer and assigned a credit limit against such overseas buyer. MSTC 
exported the gold jewellery valued within the sanctioned limit. 
 
33. When asked why MSTC allowed the export of gold jewellery t o foreign buyers owned 
by the Associates, the Company in its written reply stated MSTC did not allow export of 
jewellery to any overseas buyer by an associate who had common directors with the same 
overseas buyer. It revealed that   out of total thirty six  foreign buyers in ECGC mode only 
three foreign buyers viz. M/s. Himalaya Diamond FZE, M/s. Leo Diamond and M/s. Superior 
General Trading had a director who was also a director of the associate viz. Joshi Bullion 
Gems & Jewellery Pvt. Ltd. MSTC did not per mit any export from M/s Joshi Bullion to those 3 
foreign buyers. Exports to those foreign buyers had been made earlier by other associate 
suppliers. In fact, Joshi Bullion  Gems & Jewellery Pvt. Ltd was not an associate supplier of 
MSTC at all when these s hipments took place. It came to light only at the time of processing 
the proposal of M/s. Joshi Bullion Gems & Jewellery Pvt. Ltd for considering them as an 
associate supplier of MSTC. It is a matter of record that gold jewellery was shipped to 
Himalaya Di amond FZE by M/s. Ushma Jewellry and Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd. and gold 
jewellery to other two buyers viz. M/s. Leo Diamond and M/s. Superior General Trading were 
supplied by M/s. Space Mercantile Co.Pvt. Ltd. 
 
34. Regarding due diligence of associates an d foreign buyers, Shri Malay Sengupta, Ex -
CMD of MSTC in a written reply stated that s ince the associates were not paid anything 
before they performed, i.e.no credit was ever extended to them, too rigorous a scrutiny was 
not considered necessary. However, the usual diligence drill for buyers in case of the 
procurement portfolio was followed for associates too.  As regards the buyers, whatever 
documentary information was considered necessary by ECGC, including DNB reports were 
obtained and given to ECGC. We p rovided whatever information was desired by them. From 
amongst the list of Buyers submitted by MSTC, ECGC rejected a few, fixed individual credit 
limits for those accepted by them, and also changed these limits (enhanced) from  time 
to time.  In other word s Insurers decided the pre -sanction credit limit for buyers individually 
within which MSTC always operated. They also charged processing fee from MSTC to carry 
out the exercise. In this connection I may be allowed to make a reference to a recent interview 
given by the present chairman ECGC, published in The Telegraph dated 24.12.12. In this 
interview he mentioned that ECGC is restructuring the rating system to improve its 
assessment of overseas buyer risk. ECGC has a score card system wher e the risk 
assessment of an overseas buyer is made based on the nature of its business, its financials, 
experience with the buyer in the past, and industry outlook.  ECGC had thus assessed the risk 
associated with the foreign buyers individually in this case also and had iss ued the insurance 
coverage for each individual buyer. It may be mentioned that ECGC had taken exposure on 
the buyers and not on MSTC or associates.  The performance risk was thus covered by 
making payment to the associates only after export, and the credit risk through the insurance 
policies. 
 

35. When asked whether MSTC has framed any policy for selection of foreign buyers, the 
Company in its written reply stated that MSTC made a methodology for doing business being 
new business including selection of forei gn buyers.  The methodology of business was 
approved by the Board at that time before the export of gold jewellery took place. In this case 
MSTC carried out due diligence by obtaining following documents about the foreign buyer: 
 
1. Name and address of the foreign buyers 
2. Banking details of the foreign buyers 
3. Report from D&B,/TCM report, past business experience with the  foreign buyer by the 
associate supplier of MSTC.  
 
36. With this the proposal were forwarded to ECGC for further scrutiny and sanction of 
credit limit within which MSTC should take individual exposure.  The ECGC applied its mind 
and in some cases they have rejected and in some cases enhanced or reduced the exposure 
limit after due diligence. The chart below will explain the position: 
  
1 Applications made for credit Limit 76 
2 Applications approved as per applied limit 22 
3 Applications approved with modified limit 43 
4 Applications rejected 2 
5 Applications rejected initially, then approved after some time 2 
6 Application status not communicated, hence considered 
rejected  
7 
 
37. ICICI Lombard specified the names of the buyers and their limit in the factoring mode. 
Hence both the insurance companies carried out the due diligence on individual buyers and 
also specified individual limits of exposure on the foreign buyers MSTC did business with the 
foreign buyers only after approval and sanction of credit limit by ECGC as per guidelines 
approved by the Board of Directors of MSTC and the tenets of the insurance policy document. 
   
E. Safeguarding of the financial interest 
 
38. The Audit has observed that as per agreement, the associates were required to bear 
all the risks and costs in case of non-payment of export proceeds by the foreign buyers. Since 
advance up to 80 per cent of the export proceeds was payable to the associates immediately 
after export, the Company should have taken adequate measures to safeguard its financial 
interests before releasing such advance. Contrary to this, MSTC modified (August 
2007/September 2008) original clause of the agreement enabling the Company to encash 
Post-Dated Cheques (PDC), covering equivalent amount of advance payable to associates in 
the event of non -receipt of export proceeds from the foreign buyers. As per modified clause, 
the PDCs could have been encashed only in the event of non -payment by the foreign bu yers 
due to disputes with the associates relating to quantity, quality and price.  
  
39. It was also observed that there was no provision in the agreement to obtain collateral 
security from the associates to cover the amount of advance payable to them. The  financial 
position of the associates was also not considered while fixing their credit exposure as the 
advances given by MSTC during 2008-09 ranged between 7 and 111 times of their net worth.  
 

40. When asked about the advance steps taken by MSTC to safeguard its financial interest 
from the associated risks involved in the business, the Company in its written reply stated that 
the following advance steps were taken by the company to safeguard the financial interest: 
 
1. Supply Risk mitigation: MSTC did not ha ve any experience in the export of Gold 
Jewellery business. Hence it has entered into MOA with the manufacturers/traders 
(associates) of Gold  Jewellery who export gems, jewellery or other materials to 
 foreign buyers. The Associate of MSTC would make the shipment as per export 
order at their own cost.  
 
2. Performance Risk Mitigation:   Here again, to be on the safer side, the purchase 
consideration was not released immediately after  export. MSTC released part payment 
only after ensuring the followings:  
 
i)  Receipt of the gold jewellery by the overseas buyers, 
ii)  Declaration by the overseas buyer that there was no dispute  regarding quality / 
quantity /specification etc. 
iii)  The invoice value was accepted by the overseas buyer 
iv)  Acceptance of Bill of Exchange by the overseas buyer undertaking  the liability 
to pay to MSTC on due date. 
 
3. Buyers Risk Mitigation:- Due diligence by the insurer and pre-approved, pre-sanctioned 
limit of exposure for each and every foreign buyer.  
 
4. Payment Risk Mitigation : MSTC took the insurance policies to cover all the probable 
risk of non-realization. Insurance Policies were taken to cover the following risks: 
 
i)  Protracted Default by overseas buyers  
ii)  Insolvency of overseas buyers 
iii) Political and Commercial Risks. 
 
41. It was also stated that the insurance policy undertaken by MSTC, did not cover  the risk 
of repudiation by the overseas buyers. MSTC did not release payment before receipt of gold 
jewellery by the overseas buyers and acceptance of the liability to pay to MSTC by the 
overseas buyers. It means, in the extant model of export of gold jewellery the element of “risk” 
comes into existence only after receipt of gold jewellery by the overseas buyers.   All the 
above acceptances by the overseas buyer were veri fied / authenticated and confirmed by the 
overseas buyer’s bank. Overseas banks communicated such acceptance directly to MSTC’s 
bank in India.  Thus, MSTC did not release payment to the associate suppliers before 
delivery/ shipment and receipt of gold jewe llery and acceptance of Bill of Exchange by the 
overseas buyer. Standard commercial practice demands that, once gold jewellery had been 
received by the overseas buyers, the purchase consideration was to be paid for the full 
invoice value of the gold jewell ery, delivered by the associate suppliers.  Here again, to be 
safer side, MSTC released only up -to 80% of the invoice value to the associate suppliers. 
Thus, 20% of the export value  remained invested by the Associate Suppliers with MSTC; 
because after  shipment, it would be MSTC, in whose account 100% of the export 
invoice value would be received. In this process a security deposit equivalent to 20% of the 
invoice value was inbuilt in the business model itself. 
 

42. When asked why MSTC modified the clause of the contract that enabled the Company 
to encash Post -Dated Cheques furnished by the Associates in the event of non -receipt of 
export proceeds from the foreign buyers, MSTC in its written reply stated that in the insurance 
policies issued by ECGC, the ris k of repudiation was deleted because MSTC did not release 
payment to the Associate supplier before the gold jewellery were received by the overseas 
buyers and the overseas buyers accepted the liability to pay MSTC. It may be noted that 
MSTC did not take th e risk of repudiation by the overseas buyers. PDCs were accepted to 
cover the performance risks of associate suppliers. However, till the acceptance of jewellery 
without dispute on quality, quantity, price etc and acceptance of liability of payment by the 
foreign buyers a risk of non -acceptance existed which was not covered by the insurance 
policy. To cover this risk, PDCs were accepted from the associate supplier. Upon acceptance 
of jewellery and the liability for payment by the overseas buyer, there exist ed only the risk of 
default by the overseas buyer which was covered by the insurance policy. Thus, to cover this 
contingency of repudiation for non -acceptance quality, quantity and specification of gold 
jewellery or any other disputes, the PDCs were taken.  Since, there was no dispute or non -
acceptance by the buyer, the PDCs were not encashed, as the PDCs were submitted for this 
specific purpose and the Associates did not agree to the PDCs being encashed for payment 
failure of the foreign buyers, which was c overed by the insurance. That is why the Agreement 
had to be amended. Also, the retention of PDCs for payment failure by the overseas buyers, 
might have made the insurance policies infructuous. Payment risk of the foreign buyers was 
hedged through insuranc e policy and PDCs of associate suppliers were to hedge the 
performance risk of associates. …….. 
 
43. It was further stated that MSTC did not release payment to the associate suppliers 
before delivery / shipment, receipt of gold jewellery and acceptance of Bill of Exchange by the 
overseas buyer,  undertaking the liability to pay to MSTC on due date. . Therefore, it was not 
an advance paid to the Associate Suppliers. …… 
 
…….In the instant case, it was a part payment towards purchase consideration of the 
gold jewellery, already supplied by the associate suppliers and which was received by the 
overseas buyer, whose acceptance was confirmed through banking channel. It may be 
appreciated that, in the commercial world no body would deliver full material and 
simultaneously provide PDCs as well. Thus, Post Dated Cheques were provided by the 
Associate Suppliers as a security only to cover the risk of non -performance by the associate 
suppliers, who were the shippers of such gold jewellery. Non -Performance was defined as  
dispute regarding quality, quantity, specification, price, documentation and/or any sort of 
dispute which may arise between overseas buyers and associate suppliers, who were the 
shippers of such gold jewellery. It may be evident from the MOA that this ver y objective / 
purpose, for which the associate suppliers agreed to give PDC to MSTC, was not reflected 
from the wordings of the relevant clause. As per the clause of the MOA (before amendment), 
it would appear that the Associates Suppliers provided PDCs to  cover the loss arising out of 
non-payment of export proceeds by the overseas buyer; where as, the Associate Suppliers 
had already supplied / shipped the gold jewellery and the receipt of the same was confirmed 
by the overseas buyers. Thus, the performance  of the Associate Suppliers was over in full 
satisfaction. Still, if the Associate Suppliers had to provide PDC for recovery of loss, which 
might be suffered by MSTC due to non payment by the overseas suppliers, then there was no 
need of taking any insuran ce cover to mitigate the loss arising out of non -payment of export 
proceeds by the overseas buyers and the Associate Suppliers also would not have agreed to 
bear the expenses in the form of Insurance premium. ……. 
 

……..So, for obvious reason, the relevant c lause of the MOA needed suitable 
amendment, to reflect the true spirit / purpose for providing PDCs by the Associate Suppliers. 
It may be observed from the correspondences with the insurers in regard to settlement of 
claims that, the insurers did raise the issue of having PDC with MSTC to take care of loss. It is 
amply clear that ECGC would not have paid in case of non -existence of the addendum, 
modifying the clause of PDC, in the MOA. In this regard, Para 5 (i)  of the letter of ECGC 
dated 14/05/2011 in which ECGC repudiated the claim of MSTC may be referred. This would 
also be vouched from the letter dated 29.04.2010 and letter date 03.03.2011, from another 
insurer viz. ICICI Lombard General Insurance Ltd, on this issue of having PDC with MSTC. 
 
44. When a sked why the c ontracts entered with the Associates did not include the 
provision of collateral security from the Associates to safeguard against the risk attached with 
the amount of advance paid to them, the Company in its written reply stated MSTC did not  
pay advance to associate suppliers. MSTC had paid part of the purchase value to associate 
suppliers after shipment and on acceptance of foreign buyers…….  
 
45. With regard to the question of security deposit, it was also stated that in the 
commercial world, the question of “security deposit” comes into existence with an object to 
secure/ guarantee of delivery of an indented service / delivery of an indented material in a 
future date from the date of such advance.  As enumerated in the above paragraph, in t he 
instant business model, no advance was paid at all to any body.  The associate suppliers 
delivered the gold jewellery and the same was received by the overseas buyers also. Such 
receipt of gold jewellery and acceptance of liability to pay to MSTC by the overseas buyer, 
was verified / authenticated   and confirmed by the overseas buyer’s bank. Then only 
payment for purchase consideration was made to the associate suppliers. Standard 
commercial practice demands that, once gold jewellery had been received by  the overseas 
buyers, the purchase consideration was to be paid for the full invoice value of the gold 
jewellery, delivered by the associate suppliers.  Rather, to be on the safer side, MSTC 
released only up -to 80% of the invoice value. Thus, 20% of the ex port value remained 
invested by the Associate Suppliers in the process. This was because of the fact that after 
shipment, it would be MSTC, in whose account 100% of the export invoice value would come 
in. In this process, a security deposit, equivalent to 20% of the invoice value, was built in the 
business model itself.  In this context, it may be kept in mind that the quantum of 
indemnification assured under the insurance policies was 90% of the export invoice value 
against each overseas buyer, where as, MS TC released a part payment to its Associates 
Suppliers up -to 80% of the invoice value, as purchase consideration for the gold jewellery, 
shipped by the Associate suppliers on behalf of MSTC. Thus, there was also an inbuilt 
mechanism to realize security dep osit, to the extent of 10% out of 20% security deposit as 
stated earlier, through insurance policy which was in place. Thus, it may be noted that MSTC 
did not pay any advance to the associate suppliers. Part payment towards purchase of Gold 
jewellery was m ade after completion of performance by the associates. So no collateral was 
proposed.  Moreover in case of taking collateral security against the release of purchase 
consideration to them there would not have any insurable interest and that might have been  
jeopardized which existed to take care of failure of foreign buyers and the insurance policy 
would have been infructuous. However after default by the overseas buyer took place MSTC 
insisted and obtained wherever provided, the collateral securities to mit igate the losses as per 
the tenets of the insurance policy.” 
 

46. On the question of a dequate financial safeguards  to cover the risks involved in the 
business, ex-CMD of MSTC stated that risks involved were adequately studied, understood, 
and safeguarded. 
 
a) The first risk involved in such a contract is that of non -performance by the associates. 
To safeguard it, it was decided that no pre -shipment /  mobilization advance will be 
given. MSTC was acting as a merchant Exporter, and in such cases pre -shipment 
advance is often asked for and agreed to. It was further decided that the documents 
related to the export will be sent by MSTC through its Bank to the Buyer’s Bank 
abroad, where the Buyer will take the document, sign it as a proof of his having 
received the do cument and hence ownership of the material without complaint, the 
signature will be attested by his Banker and the same will be returned by his Bank to 
MSTC’s Bank in India. Only thereafter the Associate will be paid 80% of the amount 
(purchase considerati on) due to him. It may be mentioned that customarily the 
documents reach the Buyer’s Bank much after the Goods have reached the destination 
and hence based on the advance copy the Buyer would have received the material 
well before the documents were accept ed and signed by him. Hence only 80% of the 
purchase consideration was paid to the suppliers after getting accepted document from 
the Buyer through banking channels against Insurance coverage of 90% of the sale 
proceeds. Non-performance by the associates was therefore not an issue. 
 
b) Nomenclature used by MSTC to describe such payment, “Advance” was certainly 
unfortunate. However even before MSTC sent the documents to its Bank, it would 
receive the sales invoice from the Associate in INR, based on which MSTC’ s Invoice 
and Bill of Exchange would be prepared in US $ which would be part of the documents 
received by the the Buyer through his Bank. It is therefore clear that the 80% payment 
was made well after the associate had sold the material and the ownership h ad been 
transferred from the associate first to MSTC and then to the foreign buyer. Any 
payment made by a buyer to a seller against an Invoice, after the goods and the title in 
ownership have been transferred can only be regarded as part Payment, and by no  
means as an “advance” as understood in accountancy.  
 
c) The biggest and obvious risk was of course non -payment by the buyers. MSTC 
entered into this venture only because Insurance could be taken against such risks. In 
the first year of the operation the int ention was to limit the exports to Rs. 300 Crore. 
This could be done by taking a policy of Rs. 300 Crore. However, since the Insurance 
Company put a maximum loss limit of 30%, it was seen that in the event of non -
payment by buyers exceeding Rs.90 Crore MSTC would be left with no recourse. It 
was therefore decided to take a policy for Rs. 1000 Crore so that MSTC’s exposure in 
no case would exceed the maximum loss limit of the policy. The associates, who were 
required to bear the premium, were naturally aggri eved but they were persuaded to 
agree. It may be mentioned that in the second year of operation, ECGC increased the 
maximum loss limit to 50% from 30%, and a policy for Rs. 1200 Crore was taken.  The 
original decision of taking Post dated cheques from asso ciates covering full value of 
consignment to be encashed in the event of non -payment by Buyers, in addition to the 
insurance, by way of abundant caution had to be given up as we were advised by 
Insurance Consultant that this would render the insurance poli cy infructuous and the 
relevant clause of the agreement was modified. 
 

d) That left MSTC with two minor and rather improbable risks. A buyer could raise a 
dispute about quality, damage of goods, or delay in supply.  Obviously such a dispute 
would have to be r aised before he made the payment (170 days). To cover this 
performance related risk post dated cheques were taken from the associates, 
encashable only in the event of a dispute, mainly because the Buyers were identified 
by those associates.  Another risk w as faulty documentation jeopardizing MSTC’s 
possible claim with ECGC. Hence recourse was kept to make a claim on the 
associates in the event of any loss suffered by MSTC including non -payment by 
Buyers.  This, I believe, is in conformity with the underlyin g obligation of an insured to 
make all the endeavour to minimize loss through recovery from all available avenues. 
Needless to mention that as per the Insurance policy, all the recoveries and legal 
decrees are to be subrogated in favour of Insurer after se ttlement of claim. Thus this 
approach cannot be said to have prejudiced Insurers in any way.  I, therefore, submit 
that the risks were understood and safeguards taken. 
    
47. When asked whether MSTC has framed any policy and guidelines for taking adequate  
measures for safeguarding its financial interests in such a high -risk business, the Company in 
its written reply stated that this was the first time that the company ventured into the export of 
gold jewellery and after protracted discussion a procedure wa s formulated with the approval 
of the Board which was the policy / guidelines. However, no further guidelines / policies has 
been made and no export business has been undertaken since the export of Gold jewellery. 
Exim policy of Govt. of India permits expo rt of jewellery on DA basis (Document against 
Acceptance) which is as follows: (Handbook of Procedure 2004 -09, Vol. 1, Chapter 4, Para 
4A.11 Terms of payment) “Export of Gold/silver/platinum jewellery and articles thereof shall 
be against irrevocable lette r of credit, payment of cash on delivery basis, Documents Against 
Acceptance (DA) basis for advance payment in foreign exchange.”It may be noted that as per 
Sec. 13C .18 of Chapter -13 (Export of Goods, Software, etc.) PART – C (Authorized Dealer’s 
Obligation) of Foreign Exchange Management Manual (FEMA), an authorized dealer 
(nominated banks) may write off the outstanding bill, in case of settlement of claim of 
unrealized export proceeds by ECGC.  It may be noted that the whole export turnover of 
MSTC was b acked by ECGC and other insurance co. MSTC took the insurance policy to 
cover all the probable risk of non -realization. Insurance Policies were taken to cover the 
following risks: 
 
i)  Protracted Default by overseas buyers  
ii)  Insolvency of overseas buyers 
iii)  Political and Commercial Risks. 
 
………….Further, to minimize the overall exposure on D/A basis export business as a whole, 
MSTC  entered into a “Receivable Purchase Agreement” with Standard Chartered Bank, 
through which, the said bank purchased the future receivables of MSTC from the overseas 
buyers, on account of export of gold jewellery on D/A basis. It had helped MSTC to go one 
step farther, in its mission, to hedge its exposure on overseas buyers. It should also be 
appreciated that, had the e xtant export business on D/A basis with insurance back -up, not 
been a conceivable safe business model,  a renowned first class scheduled foreign bank like 
Standard Chartered Bank, having age old experience in disbursement of  advances and 
commercial credit ,  would not have agreed to purchase the future receivable of MSTC on 
account of such export of gold jewellery .In view of the above laid down rules and regulations, 
this particular business model had been developed. The similar model already existed with 
another public sector company viz. State Trading Corporation (STC). MSTC’s model has 

certain improvements over that of STC. The entire risk was hedged with the insurance 
companies through the policies issued by them. Based on its present experience, MSTC h as 
decided to discontinue export of gold jewellery and also any exports on DA basis with 
insurance coverage. 
   
F. High risk exposure and return not commensurate with the risk 
 
High risk exposure 
 
48. The Audit has brought out  that although MSTC decided to finance the associates for 
the export of gold jewellery, it did not ascertain the volume of its risk exposure before entering 
into such business. It was observed that during 2007 -08 and 2008-09, the credit exposure of 
the Company, by way of adv ancing finance to the associates, was high and the same was 80 
per cent and 185 per cent respectively of its net worth of the respective previous years. MSTC 
also did not obtain any security from the associates before releasing such advances to 
mitigate the risk of non-recovery of advances. 
 
Return not commensurate with the risk 
 
49. According to Audit, the financial risk involved in the above business was 80 per cent of 
the export proceeds along with the cost of financing in the event of non -payment of due s by 
the foreign buyers and consequential non -realisation of the same from the associates. The 
return of MSTC was, however, only 1.25 to 1.5 per cent of the entire export proceeds. Thus, 
the quantum of return was not commensurate with the size of the risk involved. It was 
observed that the Company earned a service charge of Rs. 3.91 crore only from financing the 
export of gold jewellery worth of Rs. 260.63 crore in 2007 -08 which was only three per cent of 
the profit for that year. Further, due to non -realisation of export proceeds, the Company did 
not earn any service charge during 2008 -09. Thus, the decision of the Company to venture 
into the above business with a meagre return was not economically justified. 
 
50. Asked why MSTC entered into a high risk bus iness of export of gold jewellery with 
meagre returns as the same was not economically justified, the Company in its written reply 
stated MSTC made a model to mitigate the risks involved. MSTC as a trading Company 
worked on a fixed margin without exposing itself to the price volatility in the market thereby 
protecting itself from high risk. In this segment all PSU Trading Companies have very thin 
margins. A Comparative study of all three major PSU trading co. proved that MSTC is the 
most profitable of all t hree. The model of any business house is based on credit exposure. 
This is true to any banking business as well as trading houses business like STC, MMTC and 
so on. MSTC’s net worth on 1.4.2008 was 271 Cr ore. While debtors were Rs. 2935 Cr ore 
which gives a Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of about 9% which is same as CAR followed by 
most of the banks and financial institution. For Banking Industry , CAR is an important factor 
i.e.  no. of times of capital to be advanced to the customer in order to protect the in terest of 
depositors/customers. Moreover every trading house takes exposure based on their financial 
limits available from Banks. In this connection Comparative figures of some trading hou ses 
are given below for 2008-09: 
 
Name of 
Co. 
Net Worth 
31.03.2009 
Total Volume of 
trading Business 
Volume of Business to net 
worth 
STC 570.28 20137.01 3531.07% 
MMTC 1123.38 36820.76 3277.61% 

PEC 160.69 10274.78 6394.16% 
MSTC 342.37 8507.44 2484.56% 
 
51. Comparative figure of percentage of profit which is highest in MSTC as evident from 
the chart below: 
 
Financial Results for the Year 2010 – 11 
         Rs In Crore 
 MMTC STC MSTC 
 
Turnover / Volume of 
Business 
 
69056.00 20475.65 14100.77 
Gross Margin 204.25 82.70 150.70 
Profit before Tax 191.78 79.63 149.40 
Profit after Tax 121.64 56.44 99.16 
Capital Employed 1096.64 673.05 489.39 
Net Worth 1379.74 679.46 505.20 
Gross Block 207.95 93.16 31.52 
 
 
 
 
In % age 
 
In % age 
 
In % age 
Gross Margin Ratio ( Gross 
Margin / Net Sales) 
0.30 0.40 1.07 
Profit before Tax / Sales 0.28 0.39 1.06 
Profit after Tax / Sales 0.18 0.28 0.70 
Profit before Tax  to Capital 
Employed 
17.49 11.83 30.53 
Profit after Tax to Capital 
Employed 
11.09 8.39 20.26 
Net Profit to Net Worth (PAT 
/ Net Worth) 
8.82 8.31 19.63 
Sales / Gross Fixed Assets 332.07 219.79 447.36 
Profit before Tax per 
Employees 
0.11 0.09 0.47 
Source: (Published Balance Sheet in respective wave sites) 
 
52. Moreover, MSTC has not taken any risk exposure on the associate supplier. They have 
been paid 80% of material value only after supply of material and acceptance of the same by 
the foreign buyer. The export transaction was fully covered by Insurance and in the second 
year the bills were purchased by SCB who also had insured the transactions. Thus in the 
event of failure by the foreign buyer to make payment, the insurance Companies would have 
to pay up to 90% which covered the advance paid to the associates. As regards exp osure on 
foreign buyers, the Concerned Insurance Co has done the due diligence and they have given 
the limit of exposure against each buyer.  MSTC did not cross the exposure limit at any point 
of time and fully complied with the policy conditions. 
  
53. On the aforesaid audit observation, Shri Malay Sengupta in his written submission 
stated that M/S Oriental Insurance and M/S ECGC had both agreed to cover the risk of the 
Exporter in the event of Insolvency or protracted default by the Buyers by charging a p remium 
of 0.3% with maximum Loss limited to 30% of the face value of the Policy. This meant an 
exporter could take a policy of Rs.100 Crore, export to the tune of Rs. 100 Crore but in the 
event of his loss due to Insolvency or protracted default of the Buyer(s) exceeding Rs. 30 
Crore, the Insurer will limit the claim for payment to Rs. 30 Crore. This effectively works out to 

a premium of 1%. (MSTC finally took the policy from ECGC and not Oriental) .  In the 2nd year 
of operation of the scheme M/S Standard C hartered Bank purchased the receivables covered 
by ICICI Lombard under a factoring scheme at 1%.   M/S STC who operated a scheme similar 
to that of MSTC also charged a margin which was comparable to that charged by MSTC.  
 
54. The then CMD of MSTC further stated that this clearly establishes that Banks and 
Insurance Companies whose job is to assess and price commercial risks did not consider the 
risk of non -payment very high and considered a 1% margin as adequate. Post -insurance 
MSTC’s risk due to non -payment by buyers was certainly lesser and therefore a higher than 
1% margin net of the insurance premium cannot be considered inadequate. 
    
G. Assessment of demand of gold jewellery in foreign markets 
 
55. The Audit  has observed that MSTC did not analyse the demand of gold jewellery in 
foreign markets before venturing into the export business. The global market for gold jewellery 
was favourable in 2007 -08. However, the demand for the same started declining globally 
(including UAE# & Middle East) from the first quarter of 2008 -09. The export of gold jewellery 
to the above countries was, however, increased by 143 per cent during 2008 -09 compared to 
2007-08. 
 
56. When asked why MSTC did not assess the market demand before venturing in to new 
business, the Company in its written reply stated that before the start of new line of business, 
MSTC engaged NPC for assessment of demand, volatility etc. MSTC did find that demand for 
export of Gold Jewellery did exist in 2007 when decision to sta rt this new segment was taken. 
There was good demand of Gold jewellery as evident from the export orders received by 
MSTC and increase in export of Gold jewelley from India. The healthy market situation in 
2007 is also proved from the fact that 100% paymen t of exports made by MSTC in the 
financial year 207 -08 was realized.   The sudden downfall of the world economy in 2008 -09 
could not be predicted by IMF, World Bank and other economist. The prices of gold and gold 
jewellery in the market have gone up continuously since exports were made. Hence the 
observation that the company  did not analyze the demand is not true. A graph showing price 
trend of 24K gold jewellery in UAE market shows that while in 2007 it was AED 71.25, in 2008 
it was AED 82.00 and in 2009 it was AED 102.75. The Occasional Paper no. 138 published in 
Feb’2010 b y Exim Bank , entitled “ Indian  Gems & Jewellery : A Sector Study” inter -alia 
states -- “ During the year 2008 -09, the export of gold ( or jewellery) has witnessed a growth 
rate of 51.1% over the previous year, from USD 4.3 billions to USD 6.5 billions….”  . Further it 
states that -- “ Main export destination of gold jewellery  include UAE, Singapore, Hongkong”. 
From This it can be concluded that export of gold jewellery from India to UAE showed an 
increasing trend in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.Hence, this also co nfirms that the demand for gold 
jewellery was increasing in 2007 -08 and 2008-09.In this context, it may be noted that for any 
trader, the need for assessment of market demand, primarily comes into play in case of 
purchase of material, because the materials need to be sold in the market in a future date and 
the then market demand for the material would play the most vital role in such cases. MSTC 
already had confirmed demand in the form of Purchase orders by the foreign buyers. MSTC 
paid for the jewellery to  the associate suppliers after selling the same in advance to the 
foreign buyers. Therefore, there was no question of not having the demand and purchase of 
jewellery paid for by MSTC. In case of export of gold jewellery, MSTC did not pay for any gold 
jewellery, which was intended to be sold in the market in a future date.  In other words, MSTC 
took the exposure on the overseas buyers only after the export was completed.  MSTC 
exported on confirmed order. Thus, it would be the responsibility of the overseas buyer to get 

buyers for such gold jewellery imported by them from MSTC. Moreover, As explained in 
earlier paragraphs, MSTC did not release payment to the Associate suppler before the gold 
jewellery were received by the overseas buyers and before the overse as buyers accepted the 
liability to pay MSTC through banking channel. It may be noted that the insurance policies of 
MSTC did not undertake the “risk of repudiation by the overseas buyers”. Should MSTC 
release payment before receipt of gold jewellery by th e overseas buyers and should MSTC 
take the risk of repudiation by the overseas buyers, then only MSTC would have taken risk 
and exposure on the future market condition for gold jewellery and the question of assessing 
the future demand of gold jewellery wou ld have been relevant. Because, in such case, MSTC 
would have paid for the purchase of gold jewellery which might not be accepted by the 
overseas buyers at a price at which MSTC had purchased. Needless to say, in such 
eventualities, MSTC would have to sell  the gold jewellery at a price lesser than its purchase 
price culminating to loss. 
 
57. To take care of such eventualities, MSTC released part payment only after ensuring 
the followings:  
 
i)  Receipt of the gold jewellery by the overseas buyers, 
ii)  Declaration by the overseas buyer that there was no dispute regarding quality / 
quantity /specification etc. 
iii)  The invoice value was accepted by the overseas buyer 
iv)  Acceptance of Bill of Exchange   by the overseas buyer undertaking the liability 
to pay to MSTC on due date. 
 
58. All the above acceptances by the overseas buyer were verified / authenticated   and 
confirmed by the overseas buyer’s bank. Overseas banks   communicated such acceptance 
directly to MSTC’s bank in India.  Thus, in the extant mode l of export of gold jewellery 
business, risk was not on the purchase of gold jewellery from the Associates but on the 
probability of default by the foreign buyers, after receipt of the goods by them to their 
satisfaction and after accepting the liability t o pay to MSTC by the overseas buyers, which 
was confirmed by the overseas buyer’s bank through banking channel. It is a matter of fact 
that no overseas buyer even after such above -said acceptance of liability to pay to MSTC 
through banking channel, approached MSTC for taking back the gold jewellery for any ground 
/ reason what so ever. Rather, the overseas buyers not only accepted the liability to pay to 
MSTC on due date but reiterated their obligation to pay to MSTC and sought / requested for 
some more tim e to pay off. Although, the market condition vis -à-vis demand of gold in UAE 
during the subject period has been stated in earlier paragraph, now, even for argument sake, 
if the overseas buyers were not able to sell the gold jewellery in UAE due to fall of demand for 
gold jewellery ( as commented in audit report), then the overseas buyers should have  
returned the gold jewellery to MSTC and MSTC might have brought back those gold jewellery  
to India or would have sold the gold jewellery in UAE itself. In thi s context, it may be kept in 
mind that M STC had released part payment ( upto 80% of invoice value) to the Associate 
suppliers, towards purchase consideration of gold jewellery shipped to the overseas buyers 
on behalf of MSTC. It may be noted that gold price  could not have gone down by more than 
20% at that period, so that, MSTC would not have incurred loss, even if the gold jewellery 
would have been returned back unsold by the overseas buyers to MSTC. 
 
59. To a question whether any demand  survey was undertaken, Shri Malay Sengupta, Ex - 
CMD of MSTC stated that a direct survey is almost never undertaken but inferences are 
drawn from secondary sources. The Report itself mentions that in 2007 -08 the global market 

was favourable but the demand started slackening f rom the 1 st quarter of 2008-09. This data 
could not have been available in real time and was certainly too late for deciding business 
plans for 2008-09. 
 
H. Insurance coverage of export of gold jewellery 
 
60. The Audit has brought out that as per agreement, MSTC would arrange to insure the 
risk of non-realization of the export proceeds from the foreign buyers. The insurance premium 
was to be recovered from the associates. The Company accordingly insured the risk of non -
payment of export proceeds of 2007 -08 with ECGC. This insurance policy was renewed 
(September 2008) for the exports of 2008 -09 to cover the risk of non -payment of dues by the 
foreign buyers whose bills (Rs. 453.54 crore) were to be discounted through four bank s. In 
addition, the Company took (August 2008) another insurance policy from ICICI Lombard 
General Insurance Co. Ltd. (ICICIL) to cover the risk of non -payment of export dues (Rs. 
184.66 crore) for which loan from Standard Chartered Bank (SCB) was obtained. 
  
61. When asked to furnish a detailed note on the Insurance policy taken by MSTC with 
ECGC stating inter-alia its terms and conditions, the extent of payment of insurance premium, 
liability on the parties concerned in the event of default by the potential overseas buyers, etc., 
ECGC in a written reply stated that o n 29 th August, 2007, MSTC submitted a proposal to 
ECGC, for issuing insurance cover against non -payment by the foreign buyers and/or the 
country of import. In the Proposal form, MSTC has given an undertaking that they were not 
aware of any circumstances which may adversely influence acceptance of risks by ECGC and 
also declared and certified that they had not misrepresented or omitted any material fact 
which might have a bearing on the policy to  be issued to them and agreed that such 
representations and facts informed formed the basis of policy to be issued to them and that 
the truth of such representations as facts and due performance of each and every undertaking 
given by them and stated in the Policy to be issued shall be condition precedent to any liability 
of the Corporation under the policy issued to them. Pursuant to the receipt of proposal made 
by MSTC, a customized Export Turnover Policy (ETP) numbered ETP. No. 0050007043 with 
a Maximum Liability of Rs. 300 Crore for the period 29/08/2007 to 31/08/2008 was issued by 
ECGC on 5.9.2007. The customization in the ETP was done with reference to Exclusion of 
Repudiation Risk Cover,  Approval of Low Fixed Rate of Premium on Actual Export Turnover 
and Fixed amount of Minimum Premium of Rs. 1.50 Crore. At the request of the exporter, the 
Maximum Liability under the Policy was increased to Rs. 600 Crore w.e.f. 15.7.2008, with an 
additional Minimum Premium of Rs.0.60 Crore. This insurance Policy was further renewed for 
the period 01/09/2008 to 31/08/2009 with higher Minimum Premium of Rs. 2.40 Crore. The 
major terms and conditions of the customized ETP Policy issued to MSTC were as under: 
 
(a) Percentage of Cover: 90 
(b) Risk Covered: Protracted Default and Insolvency of Buyer (Cl.  a (i)  and (ii))and 
Political Risks (Clause a (iv) to (viii)) 
(c) Premium Rate: 0.30% on export turnover 
(d) Declaration of Shipments: The exporter to declare all shipments mad e to all 
buyers without any exception to ECGC (Whole turnover principle) – Clause 11 
of the Policy. 
(e) Exporter (MSTC) to apply for and obtain Credit Limits on each Overseas Buyer 
approved by ECGC. (Clause 19) 
(f) The exporter to declare all material facts and circumstances having a bearing on 
the risks insured to ECGC.  

(g) Other Terms as applicable to Normal ETP. 
 
62. The actual premium paid by MSTC under the policy was Rs.1.81 Crore during 
29.8.2007 to 31.8.2008 and Rs.0.38 Crore during 1.9.2008 to 31.8.2009. ECGC’ s liability 
under the Policy was to indemnify up to the insured percentage of the insured loss specified 
or up to the amount of relevant credit limit available on the insured buyer whichever is lower, if 
any insured buyer fails to pay the insured debt by r eason of insured perils, viz., Protracted 
Default or Insolvency (Commercial Risks) and Inconvertibility, Contract Frustration, Contract 
Cancellation, Import Restriction and Shipment Diversion (Political Risks). The indemnity given 
is subject to the exporte r complying with all terms of the Policy which, inter alia, included 
disclosure of material facts having a bearing on the risks insured, existence of insurable 
interest of the exporter, buyer not disputing his liability and availability of right of recours e 
against the overseas buyer for recovery. 
 
63. Responding to the question what exercise  was undertaken in ECGC to as sess the 
“insurable interest" of MSTC , the ECGC in post evidence information furnished to the 
Committee stated that MSTC had covered certain exports with ECGC till 30th April 2007 under 
an Export Turnover Policy. Additionally in the policy proposal MSTC’s status was given as 
‘one star trading house’. Thus, ECGC was aware that MSTC is a PSU “Merchant Exporter”.  
ECGC issues policies to Merchan t exporters and Trading houses in normal course of 
business. Generally, Merchant Exporters and Trading houses negotiate and conclude orders 
from the overseas buyers with a clause in the order enabling them to outsource procurement / 
production / supply /ex ecution to a third party. While the third party may get paid by the 
merchant exporter / trading house as per their bilateral arrangement, the merchant exporter / 
trading house will have ‘insurable interest’ as the merchant exporter will take the risk on th e 
foreign buyer, take a part of the risk on his books, negotiate and facilitate export trade, have 
full responsibility for export performance and monitor and ensure realization of dues from 
buyer, will have only procurement relations with the supplier and not any financing 
arrangements and he will also bear the cost of insurance.  When any exporter seeks policy 
cover, it is presumed that he has an insurable interest in the transaction and accordingly 
cover is issued. It is for the exporter to disclose to the  insurer the details of arrangement / 
agreement, if any, with the suppliers in case certain clause of the agreement has a bearing on 
the insurance cover.  In the subject case, since MSTC declared them as the exporter, we had 
no reason to not believe that M STC had insurable interest for the goods sourced from the 
supplier as MSTC is a one star trading house with experience in international trade and credit 
insurance cover. It was only later, when the Memorandum of Agreement was submitted on 
November 17, 2008  (i.e. much after the Issue and Renewal of policy), ECGC came to know 
through the preamble (in page 2) of the agreement and the terms (clause no. 1.1, 1.3, 1.6, 5.b 
(4), 11 b, 11 c and 11 d) of the Agreement that MSTC was merely acting as a “ Financing 
Company” (clause 5.1 to 5.4) at the post shipment stage in the subject transaction and that 
MSTC had recourse to suppliers in the event of non -payment of bills by overseas buyers. It 
may be mentioned that as per the credit insurance requirement indicated by M STC and in the 
proposal submitted by MSTC, gold jewellery is one of the items of export along with other 
items of exports, such as Building materials, Ceramic related products, Iron, steel & other 
allied products/articles. 
 
64. The Committee noted that ECG C granted a concession of reduced premium to MSTC 
in this case. 
 

65. When further asked what specific factors weighed with ECGC for granting a 
concession of reduced premium to MSTC, ECGC in a  post evidence information furnished to 
the Committee stated that the following factors were taken into account while quoting the 
premium to MSTC: 
 
1. MSTC was a Government of India Company with ‘mini -ratna’ status and a one star 
trading house. 
2. ECGC’s experience with MSTC until 30 th April, 2007 was satisfactory,  with no 
incidence of claim.  
3. In the proposal for new policy, the exporter had indicated an anticipated export 
turnover of Rs.1000 Crore and the destination countries as UAE, Singapore, Hong 
Kong, Turkey, UK, Spain, Germany and Romania and it offered reaso nable spread in 
terms of volume and country risk. 
4. Break-up of anticipated turnover for Countries classified in A1 group is Rs.255 Crore 
and A2 group is Rs.710 Crore and B1 group is 35 Crore   
5. Exclusion of Repudiation Risk 
6. Fixed Minimum Premium of Rs.1.50 Crore. 
7. All Buyers were subject to ECGC assessment and no discretionary limits were to be 
issued to MSTC. 
 
66. In a post evidence reply, ECGC further elaborated that ECGC assesses the credentials 
on Buyers based on external agency reports received on the buyers. The non-financial factors 
taken into account include buyer’s year of establishment of business, number of employees, 
legal structure, line of business, office setup, status (wholesaler/retailer), etc. The financial 
factors such as Capital, Sales, Operating profit, Margin, Net profit, Liquidity ratio, Tangible net  
worth, Agency rating, etc are taken into account, to the extent available. ECGC’s experience 
with buyers available on ECGC’s record, details available in the credit Limit Application 
received from the exporter(s), etc. are also taken into account. ECGC lists the positive and 
negative factors from the above and based on the request for limit from the exporter(s) and 
assessment of credit limit requirement, the exposure limit on the buyer is fixed”. 
 
67. Audit observed that export business with four foreign buyers (during 2008 -09) was 
covered under these two insurance policies. This was, however, not disclosed to the  insures. 
It was also stipulated in the above policies that the Company should exe rcise reasonable care 
and prudence in granting credit to the foreign buyers. It was, however, observed that the 
Company did not carry out due diligence in identifying the foreign buyers. It was, further, 
observed that the Company also did not disclose the insurers about the contractual 
obligations of the associates to bear the entire risks and costs in the event of non -realisation 
of export proceeds from the foreign buyers.  Audit has also pointed out that as per terms and 
conditions of the policy with ECGC,  the whole export proceeds of the Company were to be 
insured. It was also specified in the policy of ICICL that the company should not enter into any 
other export trade insurance policy without the consent of the insurer. 
 
68. In this regard, when asked w hether MSTC was  also required to apprise ECGC about 
the contractual obligation enshrined in the insurance policy of ICICL , ECGC response in a 
written reply was as under:-  
 
 “In the Preamble  of the Policy issued to MSTC, it has been specifically stated that  
MSTC has submitted a proposal in writing and applied to us for indemnity in respect of 
the whole of its export trade with overseas buyers and it was also specifically 

mentioned in Clause 11 of the Policy that MSTC will declare to ECGC all shipments 
made during the relevant declaration period under the policy, thereby cumulatively for 
the entire period of the policy. The Schedule attached to the Policy Bond specifically 
mentions Shipments made against Letters of Credit, Shipments to associates and 
Shipments made on Consignment basis are not covered under the policy. Considering 
that MSTC has agreed to offer their entire export turnover for cover, ECGC had agreed 
for a special lower rate of premium than the rate usually charged for similar policies for 
other exporters. Further, if MSTC intended to cover a part of its export turnover with 
any other insurer, it should have taken specific written consent from ECGC. MSTC not 
seeking ECGC’s consent was in violation of the undertaking given by them in the 
proposal form viz. 
  
“We hereby declare and certify that all statements made in the application are true and 
that we have not misrepresented or omitted any material fact which might have a 
bearing on the policy, and we agree that such representations and facts shall  form the 
basis of and be incorporated in the policy and that the truth of such representations as 
facts and due performance of each and every undertaking contained herein or in the 
policy shall be condition precedent to any liability of the Corporation he reunder and to 
the enforcement thereof by us” 
  
and non-fulfillment of obligations of the exporter expressed in Clause 1 under “Terms 
and Conditions” of the Policy which warrant notification of any change in material facts 
and circumstances to ECGC and to act with the utmost good faith at all times.  
  
Thus the terms of policy issued by ECGC also makes it obligatory for MSTC not 
to enter into any other export trade insurance policy, without its consent”. 
 
69. When asked why MSTC did not disclose the fact to both the insurers (ECGC & ICICI 
Lombard) that the associates would bear all the risk and cost in case of non -realisation of 
export proceeds, the Comp any in its written reply stated  that before taking up the Insurance 
there was detailed discussion with ECGC. ECGC offered MSTC a Multi Buyer Exposure 
policy which MSTC accepted. The first offer received from Insurance Company is as back as 
16.07.2007. On t he basis of offer there was further discussion and again on 17.07.2007, 
ECGC confirmed the documents required at the time of claim processing while the actual 
policy was issued on 29.08.2007. The copy of draft MOA was produced to them before 
issuing the policy.  Again on 17.11.2008, the copy of executed MOA was sent to ECGC.  The 
responsibility of a company/exporter to realize payment from the overseas buyers is to be 
judged solely as per the guidelines of the RBI and not what contract has been entered  int o 
between merchant exporter and supporting supplier. The RBI had been following up with the 
company for realization of export proceeds and has issued letter/notices and seeking reasons 
for non-realization of payment. The Insurance with ICICI Lombard was ta ken by the Standard 
Chartered Bank as lead insured where MSTC was co -insured. Standard Chartered Bank has 
purchased the export receivable of MSTC which were insured by ICICI Lombard. 
 
70. When asked to elaborate on the aspects on which correspondence was e xchanged 
between officials of ECGC and MSTC before entering the new export business, ECGC in a 
post evidence reply stated that a spects on which correspondences (including discussions) 
were exchanged with MSTC, its Consultant and insurance broker are as follows: 
 
 

- Estimated / Projected turnover: Rs.1000 Crore for  one year period  
(policy year) i.e. 29.08.2007 to 
31.08.2008 
- Minimum   Premium (INR  1.5 Crore) /  
Committed Turnover:   
INR 500 Crore or 50% of estimate 
Turnover 
 
- Commodities / Items to be exported: Hallmarked Gold jewellery, Tiles, 
Agricultural Commodities, Processed 
food materials, Fruits pulp etc. 
(Additional products can be added 
which will be informed to ECGC and 
consent obtained). 
- Mode of Payment: DA 180 days 
- No. of Buyers: 40 to sta rt with which is expected to 
grow around 60 -70 by the policy year 
end 
- Destination Country: UAE, Singapore, Hong Kong, Turkey, 
UK, Germany, Gulf, Romania,  Africa 
(Other countries will be added subject 
to insurer’s prior consent) 
- Broad Guidelines : Salient features of Policy (Export 
Turnover Policy (ETP), Multi Buyer 
Export Policy) (MBEP) 
- Percentage of Cover: 90 % 
- Risks to be covered: mainly Protracted default, Insolvency  
of Buyer, and Political risk 
- Risks to be excluded: Repudiation by buyers 
- Details of procedure of Policy as well as procedure of settling Claims  
 
- Premium rate  
- Maximum Liability/Aggregate Loss: INR Rs.300 Crore. 
- Transaction modalities: Buyer limit, export documents, 
acceptance by buyers, identifying 
buyers’ signature by overseas banks 
etc. 
- Prospective buyers in 8 countries with 
estimated/ projected turnover:   
UAE Rs.700 Crore , Singapore Rs.25 
Crore, Hong Kong Rs.10 Crore, 
Turkey Rs.30 Crore, UK Rs.100 Crore, 
Spain Rs.50 Crore, Germany Rs.80 
Crore and Romania Rs.5 Crore and  
current status of Buyers:  limits to be 
fixed by ECGC, default list etc. 
Appointment of Advance Risk Solutions India Private limited (ARSIPL) as credit 
insurance Consultants  by MSTC and authorizing ARSIPL and its associates to 

structure, discuss and  plan insurance programme (including buyer limit and 
premium)  with the underwriter. Decision on final placement of business to be 
taken by MSTC.  
 
 
71. To a specific question whether MSTC sought the opinion of ECGC on its insurable 
interest in the proposed new business of export of gold jewellery through associates on post 
shipment and document of acceptance (DA) basis, ECGC in a written reply stated that  as per 
available records, MSTC has not specifically sought any opinion of ECGC on its insurable 
interest.  As per the Industry practice, details given in the proposal submitted by the applicant 
(MSTC) and the correspondences exchanged as mentioned in resp onse to item 1 (a) above 
were accepted  in good faith and policy was issued accordingly. 
 
72. When asked  about the reasons for taking  insurance coverage of four foreign buyers 
under two insurers (ECGC & ICICI Lombard) without informing both the insurers th ereby 
violating the conditions in insurance policies, the Company in its written reply stated that the 
insurance policy of ECGC and ICICI Lombard are mutually exclusive. In the ECGC the Insurer 
is MSTC while in the case of ICICI Lombard, lead insurer is St andard Chartered Bank who 
has purchased the export Receivable from MSTC. In this case, MSTC is only the coinsurer. 
The fact was referred to Mr. Gopal Subramanium, Solicitor General of India for opinion. It was 
opined that unless and until the policy has an y express terms or clauses which prohibits any 
such arrangement of apportionment, the buyer, the Bank as well as the insured would have 
the option to adopt such arrangement. In other words it is an arrangement which is internal to 
the buyer, the bank and t he insured. However, an insurer can provide by an express 
stipulation that if a factoring mode arrangement is being adopted prior consent of the insurer 
should be obtained. In the Insurance policies with ECGC, there is no such clause. In view of 
the fact t hat there is no such clause, it appears that the Company is justified. It was opined 
that ECGC has taken buyer specific insurance and liability of ECGC would arise with 
reference to the default committed by individual buyers and that ought to be one of the  
contingencies on the basis of which the insurer will have to proceed to settle claims. He also 
opined that Clause 5 of the Insurance policy of ICICI Lombard does not in any way suggest 
the factoring mode arrangements entered into are precluded. In fact fa ctoring mode 
arrangements are to be permissible both on the face of the ECGC policy as well as ICICI 
Lombard policy. The fact is that there are 4 foreign buyers under two insurers. Attention of 
Solicitor General India was drawn on this issue. He opined tha t “even in respect of these 4 
buyers where policies have been taken out both from ECGC as well as ICICI Lombard, it is 
clear that it is not the same claim which has been insured, but in fact, different extents of pay - 
ability have been ensured. Since the p riority of the insurer in point of time is that of ECGC the 
first claim will lie in favor of ECGC and in respect of any additional credit limit or pay -ability 
risk which was covered by ICICI Lombard, ICICI Lombard will have to settle the claim. Thus 
even in respect of this 4 buyers even though they have been subjected to two policies - one 
from ECGC and the other from ICICI Lombard – it is clear that since the policies are buyer 
specific, it is not exactly a case of double insurance. It is further opined tha t an additional 
factor in favour of such an interpretation is that there is no common bill. In view of the fact that 
both ECGC and ICICI Lombard had conducted due diligence before offering the policy and 
also having regard to the fact that such claims are based upon trade volumes, that 
creditworthiness is not the sole factor for limiting the insurance cover. Hence it is possible for 
the company to contain that both the policies were intended to be complementary to each 
other and one was not intended to be r eplaced or subsumed by the other. Thus the question 

of double insurance should not be attracted in this case. The opinion of the Solicitor General 
of India is enclosed as annexure. 
 
73. To a pointed question what has been t he impact of Additional Insurance  availed by 
MSTC with ICICI Lombard , ECGC in its post evidence reply stated that it was observed that 
the arrangement entered into by MSTC with ICICI Lombard which was prohibited as per 
ECGC Policy conditions also included common buyers. Beyond the credit limit assessed by 
ECGC, if the transactions under ICICI arrangement are also taken i nto effect, the overall 
exposure on the buyers got enhanced. MSTC had covered six buyers with ECGC and these 
buyers were also again included in the factoring facility availed by MSTC for fourteen buyers.  
It was found that the aggregate exposure on these b uyers were exceeding by 25%, 35% and 
even over 100% compared to the credit limits approved by ECGC.  The total outstanding on 
account of some buyers were more than twice the credit limits fixed by ECGC. This led to 
overtrading and over exposure beyond the credit worthiness or the payment capacity of those 
buyers, resulting in stress and ultimate default. 
  
74. When asked about the normal practice followed in this regard in its other business 
dealings, the Company in its written reply stated that t he Company did not take Multi buyer 
policy from any insurance Company. This is first time MSTC has taken ECGC policy covering 
insurance perils arising out of  
 
1. Protected Default by the overseas Buyer 
2. Insolvency of the Overseas Buyer 
3. Other political risk.  
 
75. In other business dealings like Import, MSTC takes Marine Insurance policy for the full 
shipload of material and insurance of properties and stock. In case of import/procurement of 
material and sell to domestic customers, as per the model, materials are kept under the 
control of MSTC through custodian and materials are released on piecemeal basis on receipt 
of payment from customers. Hence no credit insurance is taken to cover payment risk of 
customers. 
 
I. Non-payment of dues by the foreign buyers 
 
76. The Audit has observed that during 2008-09, gold jewellery worth Rs. 638.20 crore was 
exported by six associates to 47 foreign buyers and the last batch of export was made in 
November 2008. MSTC discounted export bills worth Rs. 453.54 crore from four banks and 
also obtained loan from one of the above banks i.e. Standard Chartered Bank, against the 
balance bills worth Rs. 184.66 crore. Six associates were paid Rs. 501.55 crore as advance. 
46 foreign buyers did not pay their dues of Rs. 598.63 crore to the banks o n the due dates. 
The Company paid Rs. 68.78 crore as interest, bank charges and discounting charges to the 
banks. Further, Fixed Deposit Receipt (FDR) of the Company amounting to Rs. 25 crore as 
security against the bank loan was encashed (April 2009) by t he Standard Chartered Bank. In 
addition, the Company had to incur crystallisation loss of Rs. 53.06 crore as deducted by 
banks. The Company could realize only an amount of Rs. 10.48 crore from the associates 
thus, an advance amounting to Rs. 528.49 crore ( including crystallisation loss) remained 
unrealized. Even the post dated cheques deposited by them could not be encashed as the 
non-payment by the foreign buyers was not due to disputes relating to quantity, quality and 
price. 
  

77. MSTC subsequently recei ved (November 2008) two Bank Guarantees (BGs) 
amounting to Rs. 62 crore from two associates (Ushma - Rs. 32 crore and Space Rs. 30 
crore) as security towards the exports to be made in future i.e. after December 2008. Since 
there was no export after November 2008, the above BGs could not be encashed. Further, 14 
FDRs amounting to Rs. 100 crore issued by Pen Co -operative Bank (PCB), a non -scheduled 
urban co-operative bank, were received (April 2009) from Ushma (Rs. 52 crore) and Space 
(Rs. 48 crore) with the condition to encash the same on maturity (between October 2010 and 
June 2011) only. The Company placed (03 September, 2010) six FDRs maturing on 28 
October 2010 amounting to Rs. 30 crore (Rs. 15 crore pertaining to Space and Ushma each), 
to PCB for encashment. In the meantime, the Reserve Bank of India precluded the PCB, with 
effect from 22 September 2010, from incurring any liability or granting/renewing any 
loans/advances or making any payments or discharging any liability or obligation, vide its 
directives dated 21 September 2010. The Company, as such, could not encash these FDRs. 
It was worth mentioning that the above bank was having a meagre deposit of Rs. 400 crore 
only and one of its Directors was an ex-Director of an associate (Space). 
 
J. Rejection of claims by insurers 
 
78. According to Audit, insurance claims were lodged (November 2009/January 2010) with 
ECGC and ICICIL for non -realisation of export proceeds from the foreign buyers. Both the 
insurers, however, rejected such claims on the ground tha t as per the agreement with the 
associates, all the risks and costs in this business was to be borne by them in the event of 
non-payment by the foreign buyers and as such MSTC did not have any insurable interest. 
Further, the insurance policies would cover  only the risk of non - payment by the foreign 
buyers and in this case the risk of the Company arose due to non -realisation of advances 
from the associates who were the actual exporters. 
 
79.   On being asked to  furnish a note giving detailed reasons for re jection of insurance 
claim lodged with ECGC along with the provisions of the policy under which such rejections 
have been made , ECGC in a written reply stated that  MSTC lodged 37 claims aggregating 
Rs.452.81 Crore under customized ETP No. 0050007043.  Out of these 36 claims amounting 
to Rs. 446.64 Crore pertained to 35 buyers in UAE and one buyer in Singapore. On one buyer 
viz., Mine Gold and Jewellery LLC, UAE, two claims of Rs. 6.71 Crore and Rs. 1.95 Crore 
were lodged. The claims have be en lodged against shipments made during the period from 
15.04.2008 to 18.12.2008. 
 
80. The shipments  to the buyers were made by three A ssociates with whom MSTC Ltd.  
had signed Memoranda of Agreements. The details of the Associates are as under: 
 
1. M/s Ushma Jewellery & Packaging Exports Pvt. Ltd. 
2. M/s Space Mercantile Company  Pvt. Limited. 
3. M/s Bonito Impex Pvt. Limited. 
 
81. The claims were lodged with ECGC during the period from 31.03.2009 to 
17.11.2009.The claims were regretted by the Corpor ation vide lett er no. HO/  Pol. 
Claims/ER/2010 dated 14/05/2010.  The reasons for rejection of claims are as under: 
 
(i) Non-existence of “Insurable Interest” under the Policy:  
 

 ECGC was not aware of the clauses in Memorandum of Agreement between 
MSTC Limited and its Associ ates (MOA) which makes its Associates responsible for 
the losses in non -realisation of export proceeds in exchange for the amount advanced 
to them by MSTC.  If ECGC were to know of the details of the arrangement, ab -initio, it 
would not have issued such a policy as there was no “insurable interest of MSTC 
Limited”.  Insurable interest over a property is “such interest as shall make loss of the 
property to cause pecuniary damage to the assured”. In the instant case, insurable 
interest of MSTC Limited, if any , lied in the failure of Associates to repay the advance 
given by MSTC to them and not in the failure of the overseas buyers to pay the export 
proceeds. 
 
MSTC was required to pay an advance of 80 % of invoice value to the Associate 
on acceptance of the bill  of exchange by the overseas buyer and balance was to be 
paid to the Associate after receipt of export proceeds from the buyer. In the event of 
non-realization of payments from the buyer , the Associate was responsible for all 
costs, risks and consequences.  
 
  Clause 5(b) 4 of MOA states: 
 
  “a post -dated cheque covering the issuance period for the equivalent amount of 
advance shall be encashed by MSTC in the event of non -receipt of export proceeds on 
the due date”.   
 
 Clause 11 (c) of MOA states:  
 
 “It is clearly understood by the parties that the export contract is an integral part of this 
MOA. In the event foreign buyer fails to honour its contractual obligations, the 
Associate alone shall bear all the risks, costs and consequence for the same”.  
 
  Quite contrary to the requirements under ECGC’s Insurance Policy, MSTC had 
no control whatsoever over any of the aspects of the exports.  MSTC had no proximate 
insurable interest on the ‘buyer failure’. MSTC’s proximate cause of loss was actually 
the ris k of failure of those exporters on whom MSTC was advancing money on the 
security of their export bills and their post-dated cheques. 
 
(ii) Losses arising due to the risks not covered 
 
 The proximate cause of loss is default on the part of the “Associates” as pe r the 
MOA between MSTC Limited and the Associates which is not covered by ECGC under 
the policy. MSTC had paid advance to the Associate against the invoices raised on the 
overseas buyer and the Associate failed to recover the export proceeds from the 
Buyer. Hence the failure of the Associate to recover the payment which resulted in loss 
to MSTC is a risk not covered under the policy.   MSTC extended the advance to the 
suppliers with recourse to them  as per Clause 5 (b) (4) of MOA and Bank Guarantee 
executed by Associates in favour of MSTC.   T he defa ult, if any, will arise if the 
suppliers in India fail to repay the advance granted by MSTC.  The policy issued does 
not cover risk of the failure of the suppliers (Associates) in India.  
 
(iii) Violation of “ Whole turnover”  Principle:  
 

  Under the policy issued to MSTC, MSTC  is required to declare, in the format 
prescribed, the Gross Invoice Value ( GIV) of total export turnover for each of the 
declaration periods specified in the schedule.  The ECGC was informed after a delay of 
10 months  by  MSTC that  they had availed finance under a factoring arrangement 
with Standard Chartered Bank  for shipments  worth  Rs.187 Crore  made during 
September to November, 2008 which were  insured by ICICI Lombard  for credit ris ks.  
This is violation of the conditions stated under the preamble, Clause 11 (a) and 11 (b) 
of ECGC Policy.   MSTC had to insure all his shipments to all buyers without any 
exceptions (Whole-turnover Principle). 
 
        The Preamble of the policy states: 
 
 “You have completed a Proposal in writing and applied to us for indemnity in 
respect of whole of your export trade with buyers  in the countries specified in the 
Schedule (Schedule of Countries) save and except those that are specified as 
excluded in this POLICY and we have agreed to give you such indemnity subject to all 
the terms and conditions contained in the POLICY including the payment of premium 
and other charges specified in the Schedule (“Premium Schedule”).” 
        
 Clause 11 (a) of the policy states: 
 
 “You must declare to us in writing in the format prescribed by us the GROSS 
INVOICE VALUE of your export turnover for each of the Declaration Periods  
specified in the Schedule giving full details of all the shipments made/ Invoices raised 
by you during the relevant Declaration Period.” 
        
 Clause 11 (b) of the policy states:  
 
 “It is a condition precedent to our liability that completed declarations giving full 
details of all the shipments DESPATCHED by you  during each of the Declaration 
Periods specified in the Schedule must be submitted to us in our prescribed form after 
the last day of the relevant Declaration Period within such number of days specified in 
the Schedule.” 
(iv) Non-Disclosure of material information at the time of proposal  
 
  The policy holder did not submit a copy of the Memorandum of Agreements 
(MOA) and Addendum to the MOA dated 16.08.2007 at the time of submission of the 
policy proposal.  MOA was submitted by MSTC vide letter dated 17.11.200 8 and 
Addendum was submitted vide letter dated 14.01.2009 .  MSTC availed Factoring 
facility during September to November 2008 with Standard Chartered Bank. This was 
informed vide letter 22.07.2009.  The non -disclosure of any material fact a t time of 
submitting proposal cover is a violation of the clause 1 under “Terms and Conditions” 
of the policy. The clause states that: 
 
 “You also warrant that you will immediately notify us of any material change to 
the information supplied in the Proposal form or any ot her material facts affecting the 
POLICY. 
 

  These warranties do not limit any legal obligation or duty (at common law or 
otherwise) on you to disclose to us all material facts and circumstances and to act with 
the utmost good faith at all times. 
 
  At the time of any amendment, change, variation and/ or addition to the Policy 
you must disclose to us all material facts and circumstances and your failure to do so 
will render the amendment, change, variation and/or addition void ab initio.” 
 
  Thus, procurement of insurance policy by MSTC through active suppression  / 
non-disclosure of material information had rendered the Policy issued void ab initio. 
 
(v) Disputed Liability: 
 As per “Exclusions” defined in the policy document, ECGC is not liable to any 
losses arising out of disputes with buyer.  
 
   In the instant case, buyers have disputed the quality of the shipments made 
and also disputed the order itself. They informed that their name was used by some 
other person, who in turn promised to pay a fixed commission for the purpose. 
 
   Clause 2(d) under “Exclusions of the policy states: 
 
 “We shall not be liable for any losses arising Buyer Risks where there is an 
unresolved dispute between you and the INSURED BUYER unless we have agreed 
otherwise in writing” 
 
(vi) Possibility of fraud:  
 
MSTC vide their letter No. MWR/EGJ/2009 -10/5275 dated 22.03.2010 provided 
the details of discussions held between officials of MSTC Limited  and Dubai Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry, Dubai which indicates that buyers were i nduced to only 
lend their names purportedly by the representatives of suppliers in India (Associates) / 
MSTC’s Agent /Consultant. On this ground, the Buyers had disowned the liability, 
although they had signed the documents against acceptance at the point of time when 
documents were submitted. 
   
The Clause 12 (a) of the policy states: 
 
 “If you make any claim knowing it to be false or fraudulent in any way the Policy 
will be void and all claims under it will be forfeited. ........ In such circumstances, we 
shall be entitled to retain all the premiums paid by you under the Policy”.  
 
 The Corporation submits that there is in existence preponderance of 
circumstances and information that suggest that whole or a substantial part of the 
export transactions in respect of which the claim had been made by MSTC were 
fraudulent and that several of the so called export bills were mere accommodation bills.  
The Corporation is in the business of export credit insurance for more than fifty years 
now and never ever in its history had it come across a case where 35 out of 36 buyers 
in one place had at a stroke uniformly failed and defaulted.” 
 

82. On being asked if ECGC raised a red flag at that time,  MSTC would not have exported 
it or would not have gone into this , CMD, ECGC during his deposition before the Committee 
stated as under:-  
   
 “Sir, whatever information was available at that time to me, I had no reason to raise 
any red flag because since I was not aware of the clauses in the MoU between the 
MSTC and its associates, everything was okay at that particular point of  time when we 
issued the policy.  Had we known the clauses in the MoU, yes, I would not have issued 
the policy at that time itself.  I would have told the exporter to come.  We were not 
aware of the MoU clauses.” 
 
83. When asked whether ECGC conducted due diligence before covering risks on 
overseas buyers, CMD. ECGC during his deposition before the Committee stated as under:-  
    
“Yes, Sir.  Here I am saying that whatever we do for any other exporter, we have done 
totally for MSTC also in terms of conducti ng the due diligence on the overseas buyers.  
What has not come to our notice is that here in effect I was not really covering the 
overseas buyer’s risk.  After reading the MoU, I came to know, what I am covering is 
the Indian exporters associate’s risk.  Whatever amount the exporter has given to 
associate, if he does not pay then he is coming to us.  It is not the overseas buyer’s 
risk because he has covered himself totally with the buyer.  He has asked for PDC 
from the exporter.  If a trading house is tra ding, how can he take PDC?  Normally, the 
PDC is taken when a buyer has to give to the seller.  But here the reverse has taken 
place.  MSTC is supposed to be the buyer, who has to export, has taken PDC from the 
exporter.  It is very important point.” 
 
84. Adding further, representative of ECGC during her deposition before the Committee 
stated as under:- 
  
“We have been with the organisation for 30 years.  I am just taking the liberty to say 
that never ever in the history of ECGC or never ever in the history  of any other export 
credit institution have defaulted.  At the same time, 40 odd buyers have defaulted.  
Secondly, as regards our policyholders, we have to do some basic due diligence, 
which are the KYC norms. If an exporter comes to me, he has in IE code.  We tell him 
to get his banker’s reference.  We verify it with the bank.  We check with the GDFT.  
We know he is a genuine exporter. That is what I would do.  The trading houses, 
normally who do not manufacture, have to procure through various suppliers.  I  cannot 
be going behind each supplier asking as to what kind of agreement he has, how does 
he get the goods, does he mark up the price and what is his commission. No.  That is 
not my role.  The role of the ECGC is to ensure the receivables from abroad.  So , my 
job is to do due diligence on the buyers. We have a laid down system for the buyers as 
to what kind of information to call for, which are the source, what if financial information 
is not complete, etc. etc”. 
 
85. With regard to Audit observation of non-disclosure of material information to ECGC, ex-
CMD of MSTC (Shri Malay Sengupta) in his written submission stated that all information 
sought by ECGC were supplied. They were informed that we would buy from the disclosed 
associates and export to the buye rs selected by the associates provided such buyers were 
approved by ECGC. All relevant information about the Buyers as demanded by ECGC were 
provided. If they thought any other information was required, it was for them to ask for it. 

MSTC never denied them  any information asked for.  Regarding the contention that two 
Insurance policies were taken from two different companies, without informing each of the 
other, and that it violated the conditions of insurance, I submit that this appears to be a mis -
construction of the clause. The purport of this clause, as far as I have been able to 
understand,  is that for the same failure of the same Buyer claims cannot be lodged under 
more than one policy. Since Standard Chartered Bank purchased the receivables pertaining  
to the Buyers covered by the ICICI Lombard policy obviously no claim would lie on ECGC. 
 
86. On rejection of insurance claims of MSTC, ex -CMD of MSTC in his written submission 
stated as under:- 
 
“As regards the applicability of Insurance policies or validity of MSTC’s claims, the  
matter I believe is sub -judice. However, MSTC not being the exporter, once again this 
contention is not right.  MSTC purchased the Jewellery from the associates as 
evidenced by their sales invoice in INR. MSTC raised its own invoice on the Buyers in 
US $, which is also a matter of record.  An exporter is the party who, in case of a cross -
border sales -purchase transaction, is entitled to receive the sales proceeds. It is a 
matter of record that MSTC and MSTC alone received the s ales proceeds (barring the 
cases of default). Such proceeds being in Foreign Currency the necessary formalities 
were carried out by MSTC. For non-receipt of sales proceeds in cases of default MSTC 
was asked to explain by RBI. I also understand that Dubai c ourt has unambiguously 
upheld MSTC’s right to receive the sales proceeds. These cases in Dubai were filed by 
MSTC on its own right and not as an agent of, or with any no objection certificate from 
the associates. MSTC is therefore clearly the Exporter. ……. 
 
87. In addition to above, ex -CMD of MSTC in his written submission stated that the 
defaults took place, the meltdown of the global Financial system, has not been mentioned 
even, let alone being examined. No comment has been made on the recovery process either.  
 
K. Legal Proceedings 
 
88. When asked about the exact quantum of losses suffered by the Company in the  extant 
export business, the Company in its written reply stated that t he volume of export made 
during financial year 2007-08 – Rs. 260 Crore. 
  
The volume of export made during financial year 2008-09:   
Under Discounting Mode (ECGC)    = Rs. 453.54 Crore. 
Under Factoring Mode (Standard Chartered  
Bank-ICICI Lombard):      = Rs. 184.66 Crore 
 
89. Full export proceeds for the financial year 2007 -08 were realized.   Against export in 
Financial Year 2008-09, an amount of Export Invoice of Rs. 22.77 Crore was realized from the 
overseas buyer under the Discounting/ ECGC Mode. An amount of export Invoice of Rs.16.80 
Crore was realized from the overseas buye r under the Factoring/ Standard Chartered Bank - 
ICICI  Lombard. Thus outstanding export Invoice value under Discounting mode insured by 
ECGC remained at Rs 430.77 Crore and outstanding export Invoice value under factoring 
mode factored by Standard Chartere d Bank and insured by ICICI Lombard remained at Rs. 
167.86 crore. However, in financial year 2008-09, a total amount of Rs. 475.45 crore was paid 
to the Associate suppliers towards part payment for the  purchase consideration of the 
above outstanding export of gold jewellery. Out  of the above said total part payment of 

Rs. 475.45 crore, an amount of Rs. 342.25 crore has been paid against export under 
discounting mode insured by ECGC and an amount of Rs. 133.20 crore has been paid 
against export under facto ring mode which was factored (paid) by Standard Chartered Bank 
who purchased, the receivables of export of gold jewellery from MSTC.  
  
90. When asked what legal action has been initiated against the defaulters, MSTC in a 
written reply stated that a rbitration against all the 6 (six) associates suppliers have been 
started since December 2009 and are still continuing.  Legal cases against the associates viz. 
M/S Ushma Jewellery have been initiated in the Bombay High Court for enforcing sale of the 
mortgaged collateral Securities.   Legal cases against all the 46 foreign buyers have been 
initiated/being initiated in the Courts of UAE, Singapore and Kuwait. Legal actions against 
foreign buyers are being taken as per advice of the Ministry of Law, Governmen t of India.   
Legal cases against ECGC have been initiated for transaction of all the 36 buyers insured by 
ECGC for payment of claim amount in National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, 
Delhi.  Legal case against The Pen Cooperative Urban Bank Limited  is being initiated for 
encashment of FDRs and BGs issued by them, subject to such advice by MSTC Counsel.  
Hence the entire gamut of transaction and securities are all presently sub-judice. 
 
91. Former CMD of MSTC stated in this connection in written submission that MSTC, I 
understand, has initiated legal proceedings against Buyers, associates as well as ECGC. 
Against the Buyers, I understand, MSTC has got several decrees and has not had its claim  
rejected in any case. Some are pending.  Against the associates also it has won a few awards 
and has not been denied any. Again a few proceedings are pending. Against ECGC 
proceedings are continuing. But, I understand, before commencement of the proceedin gs 
MSTC had obtained a legal opinion from the then Additional Solicitor General which 
supported MSTC’s claim. I, therefore, submit that MSTC has done no legal wrong and has to 
depend on the legal process to recover its dues. 
 
 92. When desired to know the extent of legal expenses hav ing been incurred in recovery 
action for gold jewellery matter , the Company in a written reply stated that the Company have 
spent the followings: 
 
 
DETAILS  OF  LEGAL EXPENSES  IN  RECOVERY ACTION  FOR  GOLD  JEWELERY  MATTER  U PTO  
NOVEMBER  2011 (Rs. INR) 
 
 CONSULTATION
FEES 
COST 
DISBURSEMNET 
TOTAL 
CASE AGAINST ECGC PAID PAID  
PAYMENT OF AMARCHAND 
MANGALDAS, KOLKATA 
49,14,553 4,63,222 53,77,775 
Additional Solicitor General  
(SR. COUNSEL), DELHI 
5,60,500  5,60,500 
CASES AGAINST FOREIGN BUYERS 
AL SHAMSI & PARTNERS, DUBAI 46,37,882 17,12,268 63,50,150 
AMARCHAND MANGALDAS, 
KOLKATA 10,36,716  10,36,716 
COURT FEE, DUBAI  65,01,734 65,01,734 
LEGALISATIONTION - UAE 
EMBASSY, DELHI  62,04,750 62,04,750 

LEGALISATION OTHERS, 
KOLKATA & DELHI  96,000 96,000 
 
CASE AGAINST ASSOCIATES     
 
ARBITRATION    
ARBITRATOR'S FEES(Shri Shiadas 
Banerjee),KOL. 9,09,880 29,400 9,39,280 
COUNSEL FEES (Sanderson & 
Sutanu),KOLKATA 
17,70,120  17,70,120 
PAYMENT TO SOLICITORS 
(SANDERSONS), KOL. 
3,69,944 71,257 4,41,201 
 
MUMBAI HIGH COURT 
 
   
LITTLE & CO. (SOLICITOR), 
MUMBAI 13,27,906 1,46,553 14,74,459 
POLICE AND EOW COUNSEL AT 
MUMBAI 70,000  70,000 
COURT FEES AT BOMBAY HIGH 
COURT  3,00,000 3,00,000 
PUBLIC NOTICE 98,329  98,329 
PAYMENT REGARDING 
OPINIONS AT MUMBAI  
 
4,96,900  4,96,900 
TOTAL 1,61,92,730 1,55,25,184 3,17,17,914 
 
93. When asked to specify the number of cases of legal action  initiated against ECGC for 
rejection of its claims, ECGC in a written reply stated that MSTC has filed 36 consumer 
complaints at National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission at New Delhi against 
rejection of its claim by ECGC. All these 36 complaints are clubbed together and scheduled 
for hearing on 25/04/2013. Pleadings are complete and E CGC has to file its affidavit of 
evidence on the next date.  
 
94. To a query as to what initiatives were taken by MSTC to recover the unrealized money 
before initiating legal action against the defaulters.  In the evidence held on 31st July 2012, the 
CMD, MSTC stated as under:  
 
“I along with my MSTC team went to Dubai, saw and met these people.  Out of 46 
buyers, I could meet about 25 of them because of Ramadan.  I went to their offices and 
each one of them promised me.  In 2008 -09 there was a world econom y slow down so 
they said that they were not in a position to pay, but they made a commitment that they 
will pay.  Some of them said that they will after Ramadan and some said that they 
would pay later on.  I obtained a commitment from them in writing and s ubmitted a 
report of this to the Government. Later on it was decided that we should also approach 
the Consular in Dubai because most of them were stationed at Dubai.  So, I met the 
Commercial Consular and Ambassador in Dubai.  He suggests that there is a D ubai 
Chambers of Commerce and they have the reconciliation procedure so the MSTC 
should make a complaint there.  Actually, we made 46 different applications to Dubai 
Chambers of Commerce to call these people because they owe this much of money to 

MSTC and they must pay. This procedure took a long time because they were called 
by Dubai Chambers of Commerce.  But the reconciliation procedure ultimately failed 
and the Dubai Chambers of Commerce gave in writing to the MSTC that the procedure 
has failed and that  it can approach the court for realisation of its dues.  They gave a 
clear indication that it will go in our favour.  Accordingly, we started lodging cases 
parallely……. 
 
 ....we will have to go for the legal process of execution. So, further legal cases will have 
to be taken.” 
 
95. On the steps being taken to recover the unrealized money, MSTC in a written reply 
stated that for realization of the outstanding, the Company has taken the following steps: 
 
1) Initiated Arbitration against the Associate Suppliers in terms of Memorandum of 
Agreements entered with them on 14.12.2009.  
 
2) Initiated legal action to recover the insurance claim from ECGC, which insured the risk 
of failure of the overseas buyer to pay the export proceeds in November, 2010. 
 
3) Took possession of title deeds of the immovable properties, mortgaged by on of the 
Associate suppliers to securitize the part payment released by MSTC to them valuing 
to Rs. 39.29 Crore as on June, 2010. 
 
4) Initiated cri minal action in May, 2011 against one of the Associate Suppliers which 
tried to sell out some of the immovable properties mortgaged in favour of MSTC. 
 
5)  Initiated legal action against the defaulted overseas buyers in the  competent Courts 
of Law in United A rab Emirates. On 13.12.2011,  the competent Court of Law in 
United Arab Emirates pronounced its judgement in favour of MSTC in the legal suit 
against one such defaulted overseas buyer. In the judgment, the Competent Court of 
Law in United Arab Emirates has directed the defaulted overseas buyer, to pay the 
export invoice value to MSTC. 
   
96. The power point presentation made by the MSTC during the evidence held on 31 st July 
2012 revealed the following information about the status of progress made for recover y of 
dues from buyers, associates and insurance agents that arbitration was invoked against each 
of the six associates as per Memorandum of Understanding to claim Rs. 655.51 crore 
including interest up to 8 th February 2010 and arbitration invoked with effe ct from 5 th 
December 2009 regular hearings are taking place. In respect of ECGC claim, MSTC had 
initiated 36 cases against ECGC for the buyers insured by them in National Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Commission (NCDRC) at various point of time during the las t two years.  
NCDRC in its hearing on 25 th July 2012 passed an order overruling the objection of ECGC 
that MSTC is not a consumer within the meaning of Consumer Protection Act. 
 
97. As regards the legal cases against foreign buyer, it was explained  that o ut of 46 cases 
filed against foreign buyers (44 in UAE, 1 in Singapore and 1 in Kuwait), judgement in 13 
cases have been received in favour of MSTC so far.  13 decrees awarded by foreign courts in 
favour of MSTC amounts to Rs. 216.11 crore.  
  

98. The Committee have also been informed that for execution of decrees in Dubai, 
MSTC’s lawyer in Dubai are taking action and in some cases already filed.  In the evidence 
before the Committee, the representatives from MSTC added that UAE courts have referred  
seven cases so far to experts to find out the genuineness of MSTC claim.  Out of seven, 
expert report in respect of two has been obtained and the opinion favoured MSTC claim.   
 
99. About the status of the case against Pen Urban Cooperative Bank/RBI, it s tated that a 
total sum of Rs. 162 crore  (FDR Rs. 100 crore + BG of Rs. 62 crore) has been claimed from 
the Pen Urban Cooperative Bank/RBI imposed restrictions on 22 nd September 2010 after 
MSTC complained them for non -issuance of balance FDR on 2 nd January 2010.  MSTC 
pursued the matter with RBI and Maharashtra Government.  It has been decided that a suit 
against Pen Bank and others for encashment of BG and FDR will be initiated to register 
MSTC’ claim.  Draft plan is being finalized and case will be filed shortly.   
 
100. As for Standard Chartered Bank, the Committee have been informed that out of total 
outstanding of about Rs. 600 crore, SCB had financed export of jewellery for about Rs. 185 
crore under a Receivable Purchase Agreement (RPA) with MSTC.  SCB  agreed to share 50 
percent of MSTC legal expenses against the foreign buyers under RPA.  SCB being 
principled insured has filed cases against ICICI Lombard against repudiation of their claim on 
flimsy ground.  SCB converted the loan against RPA to a debt and initiated a case on 
13.3.2012 against MSTC in Debt Recover Tribunal, Mumbai without giving MSTC a chance to 
explain and clarify their point of view.  MSTC has already submitted its Reply to the Tribunal 
denying the claim of SCB.  MSTC has filed a Decla ratory Title Suit in Kolkata court 
challenging the action taken by SCB at DRT, Mumbai, without exhausting their legal 
remedy/recourse against ICICI Lombard.  In the said Title Suit MSTC had also filed an 
application for injunction for restraining SCB from giving effect to their letter dated 10.3.2012 
to MSTC.  The Ld. Court has passed interim order valid till 24.8.2012.   
 
101. To sum up the recoveries made against the outstanding of export of gold jewellery 
amounts to Rs. 52 crore (39 crore received throug h remittance from foreign buyers already 
considered in dues of Rs. 598.63 crore) and 13 crore from interest on FD while the 
recoverable dues totals Rs. 486.62 crore with Rs. 162 crore from FDR and BG, Rs. 39 crore 
for original title deeds of properties in Raigarh District with MSTC -properties mortgaged in 
favour of MSTC as collateral security by M/s. Ushma Gem and Jewellery Limited, Rs. 216.11 
crore from 13 decrees in favour of MSTC awarded by foreign courts and Rs. 69.51 crore from 
arbitration award in favour of MSTC. 
 
102. Elaborating in this regard, th e CMD, MSTC during evidence on 19 th April 2012 stated 
as under: 
 
“MSTC had entered into a Memorandum of Agreement with Associates, and under that 
there was an arbitration clause. 
 
The Associates had undertaken it upon themselves to indemnify the MSTC.  But 
after the default occurred, we had started arbitration against them…….  
 
…….. this is the current status of our arbitration. We have already got the full award 
against the Bond Ge ms Private Limited and Joshi Bullion Gems and Jewelry Private 
Limited. For other Associates they are contesting; and they are at various stages in 
arbitration proceeding.” 

 
  Adding further, he stated as under: 
 
“………Sir, the cases against the foreign buyer s had been filed in batches well within 
their respective limitation period.  All the 46 cases have been filed – 44 in courts of 
UAE and one each in Singapore and Kuwait. The judgements have been received in 
five cases, four in UAE and one in Singapore and all are in favour of MSTC.” 
  
103. On being asked about the date on which first decree was awarded by the  Dubai court, 
the CMD, MSTC in the evidence held on 31 st July 2012 informed through a power point 
presentation as under: 
 
“In 13 cases we got the decree and the first decree we have received on 13 th 
December, 2011.” 
 
104. With regard to ECGC, the Chairman, MSTC while deposing before the Committee on 
19th April, 2012 stated as under: 
 
“After the ECGC repudiated the claim of the MSTC, the MSTC had tak en the legal 
opinion from the Solicitor -General of India and also from Mr. Anando Mitro, another 
senior advocate in Kolkata.  We have started the legal cases against ECGC for 
wrongful repudiation of our claim.  And, these cases have been admitted after 
prolonged discussion and hearing in the National Consumer Forum in New Delhi.” 
 
L. Referral of the case to Enforcement Agencies 
 
105. When asked whether any accountability has been fixed on any one for not following 
sound business principles and prudent commercial practices during the entire process, MSTC 
in their written reply stated  that t he matter is being investigated by CBI & ED and 
accountability will be fixed by them, if any. 
 
(i) Central Bureau of investigation 
 
106. Explaining how the case came up with them, Director, CBI during evidence before the 
Committee on 26th April, 2012 deposed as under: 
 
 “This case was registered on the source information report dated 23.9.2010 received 
 by CBI, ACB, Mumbai. Based on the registered source information report, verification 
 was conducted and the case was registered.”  
 
107. To a specific question w hat action has been taken by CBI against MSTC associates  
who were apparently involved in the export of jewellery acted with the inte nt of defrauding the 
Corporation, CBI Office in its subsequent written reply submitted that d uring the course of 
investigation accused persons (total 14) namely were arrested. 
 
(1)  Shri Shishir Dharkar, Chairman of Pen Urban Co. Op. Bank (He was in custody 
from. 25.11.2010 to 28.01.2011 and he was released on bail on 28.01.2011)  
(2)  Mrs. Gulraihna Omer, Wife of Shri Shishir Dharkar and Share holder of M/s. 
Space Mercantile Co. Pvt.  Ltd. (She was in custody from. 25.11.2010 to 
14.12.2010 and she was released on bail on 14.12.2010)  

(3)  Shri Premkumar Sharma, Advisor of Pen Bank, (He was in custody from. 
25.11.2010 to 14.12.2010 and he was released on bail on 14.12.2010)  
(4)  Shri R ahis Ahmed, Consultant (He was in custody from. 25.11.2010 to 
14.12.2010 and he was released on bail on 14.12.2010)  
(5)  Shri Jayesh Desai, Director of M/s. Joshi Bullions and owner of M/s. RKM 
General Trading LLC, (Consignee) and 4 buyers company at UAE (He was in 
custody from. 25.11.2010 to 14.12.2010 and he was released on bail on 
14.12.2010)  
(6)  Shri R. Mani, Consultant (He was in custody from. 25.11.2010 to  14.12.2010 
 and he was released on bail on 14.12.2010)  
(7)  Shri Malay Sengupta, Ex-CMD of MSTC, (He was in custody from.  29.04.2012 
 to 11.06.2012 and he was released on bail on 11.06.2012)  
(8)  Shri Tapas Basu, GM, MSTC, (He was in custody from. 29.04.2012 to 
 11.06.2012 and he was released on bail on 11.06.2012)  
(9)  Shri S.K.Sinha, Insurance Consultant of MSTC, (He was in custody  from. 
 29.04.2012 to 11.06.2012 and he was released on bail on  11.06.2012)  
(10)  Shri Utpal Sarkar, DGM, MSTC (He was in custody from. 02.05.2012 to 
 11.06.2012 and he was released on bail on 11.06.2012)  
(11)  Shri Rahul Bhomavat, Ex Director of M/s. Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd. (He 
was in custody from. 20.07.2012 to 08.08.2012 and he was released on bail on 
08.08.2012)  
(12)  Shri Vivek Vaidya, Director of M/s. Ushma Jewellery and Packaging Export Pvt. 
Ltd. (He was in custody from. 20.07.2012 to 08.08.2012 and he was released on 
bail on 08.08.2012) 
(13)  Shri Vinod Motwani, President of M/s. Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd. were arrested on 
20.07.2012 (He was in custody from. 20.07.2012 t o 08.08.2012 and he was 
released on bail on 08.08.2012) 
(14)  Shri D.K. Jain, Manager of M/s. Apollo Trading, Dubai, UAE and also working as 
Manager  with M/s. Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd. (He was in custody for one 
day i.e. on 30.08.2012 and released on bail on same day). 
 
108. When desired to know whether CBI has come across any evidence of former CMD, 
GM and AGM of MSTC having assets disproportionate to their known sources of income , CBI 
Office in their subsequent written reply stated that during the searches at the residential and 
office premises of former CMD, GM and DGM, MSTC, documents have been collected. 
Documents pertaining to investment, bank accounts and salary statements are under scrutiny. 
After completion of the scrutiny, competent authority  of CBI would take appropriate decision 
for registration of DA case against these officials if deemed fit.   
 
109. With respect to recovery efforts made by CBI, it was informed to the Committee that 
CBI has recovered movable and immovable properties worth Rs. 155 crore in cash and kind.  
After additional seizures, CBI is scrutinizing assets worth Rs. 172.62 crore.   
 
110. On the status of probe and action taken to file charge sheet, Director, Central Bureau 
of Investigation during his further evidence, stated as under: 
 
“Broadly, we have registered this case on our own information in September, 2010 and 
after that substantial progress has been made…….The six of the accused were 
arrested by the CBI and they were in police custody for 15 days and subsequen tly 

judicial custody for three months.  Then they came out on bail.  The court has granted 
them bail……. 
 
…….Normally, unless the charge  sheet has been filed, within 90 days, they get the 
bail. In this case, because of the foreign investigation involved, we  were not able to file 
a charge sheet at that stage. So, that is how they got the bail.” 
 
111. On the pending foreign investigation, CBI stated that Letter Rogatory was issued by the 
special court, Mumbai on 24 th April 2012 and LR is sent to Centre for Ara bic and African 
Studies School of Language, JNU for translation from English to Arabic Language.  The 
matter is being pursued with the University to expedite besides seeking police to police 
cooperation from Dubai through Inter.  As soon as the LR is execu ted in Dubai, the CBI has 
proposed to send the team to Dubai. 
 
112. When further asked if charge sheet had been filed since then and the reasons for delay 
if any, CBI in its subsequent written reply stated that a fter completion of investigation in this 
case, it was legally scrutinized in detail at various level of CBI and on the basis of the legal 
opinion it was decided by the competent authority that the charge sheet would be filed only 
after execution of Letter Rogatory at UAE. The Translation of the d ocuments in Arabic from 
the English is not yet completed by the Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi and the same 
would be received in due course. After receipt of the translated documents, the Letter 
Rogatory will be sent to the Competent Authority at U AE for its execution through Ministry of 
External Affairs, New Delhi.  
  
(ii) Enforcement Directorate 
 
113. The Committee were also informed by CBI that they had informed ED and IT on 23rd 
December 2010 about ongoing investigation of the suspected fraud in the export business of 
gold jewellery of MSTC.   
 
114. Explaining the steps being taken for expeditious investigation in the matter, Director, 
ED in the evidence held on 31st July 2012 stated as under: 
  
“Pursuant to the directions of this hon. Committee,  a Special Team was constituted for 
expeditious investigation of the subject case. As this hon. Committee is aware, the 
Enforcement Directorate is investigating the subject case under two laws, the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, that is, FEMA, and the Pr evention of Money Laundering 
Act, that is, PMLA. Under FEMA, we have recorded statements of a number of persons 
and investigation has been completed in one case, namely M/s Ushma Jewellers and 
Packing Exports Private Limited, and as per procedure a complai nt under FEMA has 
been filed before the adjudicating authority, that is, the Special Director of 
Enforcement, Mumbai.  The Special Director of Enforcement, Mumbai has issued a 
show-cause notice dated 26 th July, 2012 amounting to Rs.132. 96 crore for 
contravention of provisions of Sections 7 and 8 of FEMA read with Regulations 9 and 
13 of Foreign Exchange Management, Exports of Goods and Services Regulation, 
2000 and Regulation 3 of Foreign Exchange Management Realisation, Repatriation 
and Surrender of Foreig n Exchange Regulation, 2000 as amended from time to time. 
After this, the process of adjudication will be initiated along with penalties as prescribed 
under the Act.  Further under PMLA a number of people have been interrogated and 
more than 17 statements h ave been recorded and during the course of investigation, 

we got to know that certain proceeds of crime were secreted, which were placed by 
one of the associates, M/s Space Mercantile. So, we seized Rs.13 crore in a bank 
account which amounts to proceeds o f crime under the PMLA Act. We have also 
identified several properties and investigation is under progress. As soon as the CBI 
files the charge -sheet, we will initiate attachment proceedings against these 
properties.” 
 
M. Role of Ministry 
 
115. When asked what has been the role of Government/Government nominated Directors 
on the board of MSTC Limited in the entire business venture of the Company in dealing with 
the export of gold jewellery, the Company in its written reply stated that the decision to enter 
into the new business of export of gold jewellery was taken at the level of the Board of 
Directors of MSTC Ltd. The Government / Government nominated directors were the 
members of the Board of Directors which approved this export business along with the 
detailed procedure to be followed in the export of gold jewellery. 
 
116. When asked to highlight the salient features of the CVO Report, if any sought by the 
Secretary to fix the responsibility, the Secretary, Ministry of Steel in the evidence held on 31st 
July 2012 stated as under: 
 
“I will just read out a few of the more important points.  In June, 2008, the Board of 
Directors of MSTC authorized foreign currency loan of Rs. 800 crore for export 
business despite risks stated in the Board note.  So what he is saying is that despite 
the fact that the Board note stated that there were risks in this business, still the Board 
approved it.  That is the one point he is making. Foreign buyer evaluations were left to 
the discretion of, or conducted by th e insurers that are ECGC and ICICI Lombard.  So 
what he is saying is that because the payment is to be received by MSTC from the 
foreign party, thereby MSTC should normally have done the due diligence itself but 
they have given it to third party.  That is the point he is making. Then another point is 
this.  He has said already that the risk was high.  Now he says that the trade margins 
were very low, only 1.25 per cent for issuance period of 120 days and 1.5 per cent for 
170 days.  So what he is saying is that while on one hand the risk was high, the reward 
was very low.  Normally when the risk is high the reward should be high.  That was not 
the case here. Then the CVO has said more importantly that on account of the foreign 
purchasers having failed to make payments two of the associates, Ushma Jewellery & 
Packaging Exports Pvt. Ltd. and some Space Mercantile responded by trying to 
provide assurance to MSTC in the shape of collateral securities, in the shape of fixed 
deposits also.  But unfortunately these we re provided but they were provided by Pen 
Urban Cooperative Bank which was taken over by the Reserve Bank of India because 
the bank had collapsed.As far as the CVO report is concerned, the CVC directions with 
regard to taking action against the officers, o f course, the officers have been 
suspended, but I have to admit that they were not suspended at that time, which is 
extremely wrong. They should have been suspended immediately at the time when this 
happened, but they were suspended only in 2012. I would s ay to the Committee that 
this was a big lapse on the part of the Ministry as well as MSTC, mainly MSTC…Now 
they have been suspended. In 2009, they were not suspended. So, as far as 
suspension is concerned, that was late by at least three years according to me and that 
is not acceptable. The other point is with regard to taking action against people 
involved, there is a CVC guideline which says that no dual inquiry should happen when 

CBI is looking into the matter, and we have to wait for CBI report to take action. So, we 
are really waiting for the charge -sheet to happen. Once that happens, we will take 
action against all the people concerned. There is a CVC manual which actually says 
this. I have got a copy of that.”  
  
117. When desired to know the procedur e of reporting of the board proceedings to the 
Government, the Secretary, Ministry of Steel in further evidence held on 31 st July 2012 stated 
as under:  
 
“There is a system in which there has to be a detailed reporting of the board 
proceedings to the Gover nment. In this Ministry at that time there was no such habit, 
so, nobody was reporting. Since COPU has taken up this issue we have reiterated the 
earlier instructions of the Government that all the Directors on the Board of companies 
have to report any maj or decision taken by a company to the Government. In the 
period when this happened, unfortunately, that did not happen and there was no 
reporting to the Government.”  
  
N. Lessons learnt by MSTC 
 
118. When asked what lessons have been learnt by MSTC in car rying out such kind of 
business activities in the future In view of the Audit findings, the Company in its written reply 
stated that MSTC has learnt that no business should be undertaken on the basis of any credit 
insurance cover, even if the insurance cov er is issued by a Govt. of India undertaking. At the 
time of undertaking a  risk coverage, insurance companies neither raise any objection nor 
precisely point out the eventualities in which they would not settle claim; but after receipt of 
claim of the ins ured, they come out with all sorts of allegation / alibi/ pretext with an eye to 
disown the liability to pay. The insurance companies forget the basic need of the insured, for 
which, the insured paid the premium as demanded by the insurance companies. The 
insurance companies take the advantage of prolonged and time consuming judiciary system 
in India to delay and defer settlement of claims under insurance policies. Thus, the basic 
purpose of taking insurance cover is frustrated. In a word, the insurance com panies do not 
practice what do they preach / advertise. Rather, the advertisements of insurance companies 
have been misleading / misguiding the business men, without putting any onus on such 
insurance companies. 
 
119. When asked what reforms/safeguards/rem edial measures have been taken by MSTC 
for avoiding recurrence of such kind of lapses in the future, the Company in its written reply 
stated that i t has been decided that no business should be undertaken merely relying on 
credit insurance cover in future. Moreover, MSTC has taken a decision not to carry out any 
more business of export on DA Basis. 
 

PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The audit para 17.2 of the C & AG’s 2011 -12, Report No. 3 (Commercial) relating 
to MSTC’s export of  Gold Jewellery brought out that an amount of Rs. 611.79 crore 
(including financial charges) remained unrecovered after effecting exports during 2008-
09. The Committee’s examination of the audit para reveals that the entire gamut of the 
transactions and se curities are all presently sub -judice. In the 46 legal cases filed 
against defaulted foreign buyers in UAE, Singapore and Kuwait, 13 decrees amounting 
to Rs. 216.11 crore awarded so far by foreign courts in favour of MSTC. Arbitration 
against all the six a ssociates suppliers started in December, 2009 is still continuing. 
Legal action to recover insurance claims from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
(ECGC) is in progress. A suit against Pen Urban Corporative Bank for Rs. 162 crore for 
enforcing sale of mo rtgaged collateral securities is being initiated. It is observed that 
recoveries already made include Rs. 52 crore through remittance from foreign buyers, 
Rs. 13 crore from interest in Fixed Deposit (FD), Rs. 39 crore from mortgaged 
properties and Rs. 69.5 1 crore from arbitration award in favour of MSTC. In normal 
course, the Committee would not have selected a sub -judice matter for examination. 
The Committee, therefore, in conformity with parliamentary practice and in order not to 
prejudice the course of j ustice, refrain from making any observation on the substantial 
issues and bring out in most of the subsequent paragraphs mere facts of the case in 
the light of audit observations. 
2. During the course of the Committee’s examination of the subject, an impre ssion 
was sought to be created that undue haste was shown by MSTC in approving the 
business of export of jewellery in July, 2007 soon after submission of corporate 
planning study by the National Productivity Council (NPC) in April, 2007. According to 
the t hen CMD of MSTC (Shri Malay Sengupta), export of jewellery had been 
recommended by a Professional Market Research Agency (ORG -India) as early as in 
the year 2005. Looking at the MSTC’s foray into new businesses in totality, the 
Committee find that on the b asis of NPC study of April, 2007, export of jewellery was 
not the only new business started during 2007 -08 but there were four other new 
businesses of coal, steel, iron ore and oil & natural gas all of which commenced in the 
same year based on NPC report. It is a moot point as to how the allegation of undue 
haste can be singled out to only one item - ‘export of jewellery’. The Committee note 

that the sale figure during 2007-08 for the four commodities ranged from Rs. 1053 crore 
to 2626 crore whereas in the case of jewellery, the export figure stood much less at Rs. 
261 crore. It is observed that while business in respect of the four commodities 
continued in the successive years, export of jewellery was discontinued after 2008 -09 
due to the problem of non-recovery of dues.  
3. During  the examination of the subject, it was brought to the notice of the  
Committee that MSTC Ltd. did not carry out due diligence in verifying the credentials of 
the associates and foreign buyers before accepting the proposals for th e export 
business of gold jewellery as a result of which huge some of public money has been 
locked up in legal battle. MSTC has pleaded in this connection that credentials of the 
associates were verified through a numerous set of documents such as document ary 
evidence of prior export/dealing in gold jewellery, etc., Income tax/Sales tax 
registration, RCMC from Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council, documentary 
evidences regarding prior experience with STC, etc. MSTC reportedly obtained several 
documents on the overseas buyers including the D & B / TCM report, Chartered 
Accountants certificate of past experience. According to Audit, three out of six 
associates were defaulters in paying their dues to State Trading Corporation in the 
business of export of  gold jewellery in the year 2007 -08. MSTC has contended that the 
associate suppliers and overseas buyers performed the contracts flawlessly during 
2007-08 and did not think of any other cross verification and the Company relied on the 
due diligence made by the insurers regarding the foreign buyers.  
4. Audit has pointed out that there was meagre networth of the associates selected 
by the Company as compared to advances paid to them. MSTC has pointed out that it 
did not pay any advance to the associate suppliers. Part payment towards purchase of 
gold jewellery was made after c ompletion of performance by the associates – after 
shipment and on acceptance of foreign buyers. It is observed from the statement of 
comparison between total volume of trading business of PSUs and their networth, 
furnished to the Committee that exposure o f MSTC is one of the least and is much 
lower than the financial institution/banks. All PSU trading companies have very thin 
margins – MMTC 0.11%, STC 0.09% and MSTC 0.47% in 2010 -11. The MSTC’s Capital 
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) as on 01 -04-2008 was about 9% whi ch is stated to be the same 
as CAR followed by most of the banks and financial institutions.  
 

5. The Audit has observed that as per agreement, the associates were required to 
bear all the risks and costs in case of non -payment of export proceeds by the fo reign 
buyers. MSTC in September, 2008 reportedly modified original clause of the agreement 
enabling it to encash Post -Dated Cheques (PDCs) furnished by the associates in the 
event of non receipt of export proceeds from the foreign buyers. As per modified 
clause, the PDCs could be encashed only in the event of non -payment by the foreign 
buyers due to disputes with the associates relating to quantity, quality and price only. 
This is stated to have facilitated the associates to become risk free in the event of  non-
payment by the foreign buyers on any ground and the entire such risk was passed on 
to the Company / Insurers . MSTC has argued in this regard that the relevant clause of 
the MOA needed suitable amendment to reflect the true spirit / purpose for providi ng 
PDCs by the associate. The retention of PDCs for payment failure by the overseas 
buyers might have made the insurance policies infructuous. Payment risk of foreign 
buyers was hedged through insurance policy and PDCs of associate suppliers were to 
hedge the performance risk of associates.  
6. The Committee note that in addition to a Multi buyer insurance policy taken out 
with ECGC to cover the risk of non -payment of export proceeds from overseas buyers, 
the Company entered in to a factoring mode arrangeme nt with ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Company Ltd. in respect of four foreign buyers. The policy with the ICICI 
Lombard stipulated that the Company should not enter into any export trade insurance 
policy without the written consent of insurer. Regarding coverage of four foreign 
buyers under two insurance policies, the Company stated that the insurance policies of 
ECGC and ICICI Lombard are mutually exclusive and in the opinion of the Solicitor 
General it is not exactly a case of double insurance. Accordin g to Solicitor General, 
factoring mode arrangements are to be permissible both on the face of the ECGC 
policy as well as ICICI Lombard Policy.  
7. Out of 47 foreign buyers to whom gold jewellery worth Rs. 638.20 crore was 
exported during 2008-09, 46 foreign buyers did not pay their dues of Rs.598.63 crore on 
their due dates. The Company which paid Rs. 68.78 crore as interest, bank charges and 
discounting charges to the banks besides incurring crystallization loss of Rs. 53.06 
crore could realize only an amo unt of Rs. 10.48 crore from the associates after 
encashment of FDR amounting to   Rs. 25 crore which the Company received in April 
2009. The Committee have been informed that the Company had also received, in 

November 2008, two Bank Guarantees (BGs) amount ing to Rs. 62 crore from two 
associates as security towards exp orts to be made in future i.e. after December, 2008. 
However, since no export took place after November 2008, the aforesaid BGs could not 
be encashed. Further, the Company received 14 FDRs amou nting to Rs. 100 crore from 
two associates issued by Pen Co-operative Bank in April 2009 with the condition to 
encash the same on maturity between October 2010 and June 2011. These also could 
not be encashed because of RBI directive dated 22 September 2010  precluding the 
bank from making any payment or discharging any liability or obligation. During audit 
scrutiny, it was revealed that the bank was having a meag re deposit of Rs. 400 crore 
only and one of its Directors was an ex-Director of an associate (Space).  
8. The Committee have been informed that the Company has initiated legal action 
against all defaulters including associates, insurers and foreign buyers, invoking 
judicial provisions in force in the country and abroad and till November, 2011,  have 
incurred legal expenses of over Rs. 3.17 crore in recovery action for gold jewellery 
matter. Detailing about the steps taken for recovery of unrealized money through 
courts and otherwise, the Chairman and Managing Director of the Company during his 
deposition before the Committee stated that the Company has succeeded in securing 
13 decrees in their favour in the foreign courts during last six months at various point s 
of time. Beside, the Company has also put up their case strongly in the hearing of 
National Consumer Grievance Forum which agreed to treat MSTC as ‘consumer’ 
overruling the objection of ECGC in the consumer complaint against ECGC . The 
Committee however, note with dismay that the Company which received its first decree 
way back in 13th December, 2011 have not ensured its execution so far. The Committee 
express their strong displeasure over undue delay in this regard and desire that 
besides taking efforts for speeding up the legal process, the Company should also take 
necessary action to ensure execution of decrees in a time bound manner.  
9. The Committee note that besides initiating legal action , MSTC referred the case 
of defaulters to the CBI for a probe after repeated extensions sought by overseas 
buyers on flimsy grounds raising a suspicio n of criminal conspiracy . Based on the 
information gathered during investigation, CBI has stated that the extant case is 
indicative of foul play involving associates, insurers and foreign buyers. The agency 
further pointed out that as new links are also be ing unearthed, its domain of probe 
continues to widen procrastinating completion of the investigation process and task of 

sending the perpetrators of fraud to jail. The Enforcement Directorate also is 
investigating the case under the Foreign Exchange Manag ement Act (FEMA) and 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA). The Committee desire that CBI and ED 
must complete their investigations expeditiously and take the cases to their logical 
conclusion at the earliest, without compromising the interests of MSTC. The Committee 
also desire the Ministry of Steel to make a periodical review of the probe being 
conducted by the investigating agencies in the matter and ensure its completion with 
promptitude. 
10. Emphasizing the need for Government representatives in th e Board of PSUs to 
report to the Ministry about important developments in Board Meetings, the Steel 
Secretary deposed before the Committee that “all the Directors (Government 
nominees) on the Board of Company have to report any major decision taken by the 
Company to the Government. In the period when this happened, unfortunately, that did 
not happen and there was no reporting to the Government.” Further, the Committee 
were informed that Central Vigilance Commission in addition to CBI and ED are 
currently lo oking in to the suspected criminal conspiracy involving the officials of 
Ministry and MSTC and a  CVO report has also been  sought to fix the responsibility 
against the wrong doers . According to the report, collusion of s ome officials of the 
MSTC / Ministry  with the suspected persons  has been discovered and suspension 
order was issued .  However, the culprit remained scot -free for unknown reason for a 
longer duration. Taking a strong exception to the non -implementation of the decision 
to issue a suspension or der to a staffer in the Ministry, the Secretary, Steel, candidly 
admitted that this was a ‘serious lapse’ and  assured the Committee  that immediate 
action would be taken against the guilty in the matter. He added that since CVO report 
suggests that CBI inqu iry is still underway, the responsibility against the erring 
officials will be fixed as soon as the inquiry report is made public.   
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
29 April, 2013         Chairman  
9 Vaisakha 1935 (S)                                       Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

 
AUDIT FINDINGS AS CONTAINED 
IN PARA No. 17.2 OF  
C&AG’s REPORT  
NO.3  
(COMMERCIAL)  
OF 2011-12 ON  
EXPORT OF GOLD JEWELLERY 
BY  
MSTC Ltd. 
  

MSTC Limited 
17.2 Export of Gold Jewellery 
Introduction 
MSTC Limited (Company) is a Mini Ratna Category -I under the administrative control of the 
Ministry of Steel, Government of India. The Company was set up in 9 September 1964 to act 
as a regulating authority for export of ferrous scrap. MSTC became a subsidiary of SAIL i n 
1974. In 1982, it got delinked from SAIL and became an independent Company under 
Ministry of Steel. It was a canalizing agency for import of ferrous scrap till 1992. 
As on date, MSTC has two major portfolios of business i.e. procurement of industrial raw  
materials in bulk, mainly consumed by the steel industry  in the country, for its Principals and 
second which provides a virtual marketplace for domestic seller and buyers to do business in 
metal scrap (ferrous/non -ferrous), surplus stores, machineries, o bsolete spares, vehicles, 
Plants etc. 
The Company on being approached (April 2007) by three merchant exporters/traders 
(associates) decided in July 2007 to enter into a new business of export of gems and gold 
jewellery on post -shipment basis 1 without opening letter of credit (L/C). As per arrangement 
agreed for the new business, the associates were required to export the articles and the 
Company was required to pay up to 80 per cent of the export bill value to the associates as 
advance by discounting the bi lls2 from the bank and the balance 20 per cent was to be 
released to the associates on collecting full value of the bill from the foreign buyer on due 
date. During 2007 -08, gold jewellery worth Rs. 260.63 crore was exported to 29 foreign 
buyers in Dubai under the above arrangement with the three associates and the entire export 
proceeds were fully recovered. The Company received Rs. 3.91 crore as service charges in 
the above business. In 2008 -09, six associates (including three of 2007 -08) exported gold 
jewellery worth Rs. 638.20 crore to 47 foreign buyers 3 with the insurance coverage from 
ECGC4 and ICICI Lombard (ICICIL). 46 foreign buyers did not pay their dues amounting to 
Rs. 598.63 crore (August 2012). An amount of Rs. 611.79 crore remained unrecovered 
                                            
1 Material to be delivered to foreign buyers on acceptance of liability. 
2 Bill discounting is a type of lending where bank takes the bill drawn by customer and pays immediately deducting some amount as    
discount/commission. 
3 45 in Dubai, one each in Kuwait and Singapore. 
4 Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited, a Central PSU, was sep up to provide export credit insurance support to Indian 
exporters. 

(August 2010) from the associates towards the advances paid to them and related financial 
charges incurred by the Company. The Company lodged claims with the insurers for non -
payment of dues by the foreign buyers. However, the claims were rejected by both the 
insurers. 
Scope of Audit 
The theme audit was conducted to review the activities of the Company for export of gold 
jewellery during 2007-08 and 2008-09. 
Audit Objective 
Theme Audit of export of gold jewellery was taken up to ascertain whether: 
 The decis ion of the Company to enter into the business of export financing of gold 
jewellery was prudent and economically justified; 
 The Company carried out due diligence in selecting and indentifying the associates 
and foreign buyers; and 
 The Company took all prud ent measures to safeguard its financial interest from the 
associated risks involved in the above business. 
Audit Methodology 
After a preliminary study and collection of background information, field audit was conducted 
during June 2010 to August 2010. Audi t covered examination of the records of the Company 
relating to export of gold jewellery during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and the records 
maintained at the Head Office (Mumbai) of ECGC relating to the insurance policy of the 
Company. 
Audit findings 
17.2.1 Role of the Company and associates in the export of gold jewellery 
As per the agreement entered into by the Company with the associates for export of gold 
jewellery, the latter was required to identify the foreign buyers, obtain export orders from them 
in the name of the Company, export gold jewellery and prepare relevant documents showing 
the Company as an exporter. The foreign buyers were required to pay the export proceeds 
after 170 days (due date) from the date of dispatch. The associates were requir ed to monitor 

and ensure realization of export proceeds from foreign buyers on due date. The Company 
was required release advance up to 80 per cent of the invoice value to the associates 
immediately after export and the balance amount was required to be paid only after realization 
of full value of export proceeds. The associates ultimately had to bear all the expenses to be 
incurred by the Company for such export business. It was also stipulated that the associates 
would bear all the risks and costs in the event of non -payment of export proceeds by the 
foreign buyers.  
Thus, instead of playing the role of an exporter, the Company was to provide only post 
shipment finance 5 to its associates, who were the actual exporters. In view of the above, 
Management’s contention (October 2010) that the Company acted as an exporter and the 
associates acted as shippers is not acceptable as the export orders were actually executed by 
the associates. 
17.2.2 Economic justification and risk involved 
17.2.2.1 High risk exposure 
Although the Company decided to finance the associates for the export of gold jewellery, it did 
not ascertain the volume of its risk exposure before entering into such business. It was 
observed that during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, the credit exposure of the Company, by way of 
advancing finance to the associates, was high and the same was 80 per cent and 185 per 
cent respectively of its net worth of the respective previous ye ars. The Company also did not 
obtain any security from the associates before releasing such advances to mitigate the risk of 
non-recovery of advances. 
Management contended (October 2010) that the Company’s risk exposure was hedged 
through credit insurance policy. This is not acceptable as the risk involved was payment of 
advances to the associates without any financial security and non -recovery of the same in the 
event of non-realisation of export proceeds. 
17.2.2.2 Return not commensurate with the risk 
                                            
5 Post shipment finance is a kind of loan provided to an exporter against a shipment that has already been made. 
 

The financial risk involved in the above business was 80 per cent of the export proceeds 
along with the cost of financing in the event of non-payment of dues by the foreign buyers and 
consequential non -realisation of the same from the associates. The return o f the Company 
was, however, only 1.25 to 1.5 per cent of the entire export proceeds. Thus, the quantum of 
return was not commensurate with the size of the risk involved. It was observed that the 
Company earned a service charge of Rs. 3.91 crore only from f inancing the export of gold 
jewellery worth of Rs. 260.63 crore in 2007 -08 which was only three per cent of the profit for 
that year. Further, due to non -realisation of export proceeds, the Company did not earn any 
service charge during 2008 -09. Thus, the decision of the Company to venture into the above 
business with a meagre return was not economically justified. 
Management in their reply (October 2010) could not bring out any economic justification for 
the above. However, it was stated that the Company earned an average trading margin of one 
per cent approximately, even in its import trade with huge credit exposure. The contention 
was, however, not acceptable as in the import business, the risk of non -payment by the 
vendor was substantially reduced since the imported materials remain under the control of the 
Company till the receipt of final payment. 
Recommendation  
The Company should venture into such business where the return is commensurate 
with the risk involved. 
 
17.2.3 Assessment of demand of gold jewellery in foreign markets 
The Company did not analyse the demand of gold jewellery in foreign markets before 
venturing into the export business. The global market for gold jewellery was favourable in 
2007-08. However, the demand for the same started dec lining globally (including UAE 6 & 
Middle East) from the first quarter of 2008 -09. The export of gold jewellery to the above 
countries was, however, increased by 143 per cent during 2008-09 compared to 2007-08. 
Management stated (October 2010) that gold jew ellery was exported against purchase orders 
placed by the foreign buyers and no material was returned back. This contention was not 
acceptable as the Company was providing advances on post shipment basis to the 
associates and the realisation of such advanc es primarily dependent on the overseas market 
                                            
6 United Arab Emirates 

conditions. Thus, the Company should have assessed the demand of gold jewellery in the 
overseas market. 
Recommendation 
Assessment of demand of a particular commodity in the foreign markets may be 
made before entering into export business of that commodity. 
 
17.2.4 Selection of the associates 
The Company decided (July 2007) to venture into the business of financing the export of gold 
jewellery on the basis of proposals received (April 2007) from three associates  viz. Space 
Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd. (Space), Ushma Jewellery & Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd. (Ushma) and 
Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd. (Bonito) and the business was carried out during 2007 -08 with them 
only. Subsequently, the Company received (July/August 2008) pro posals from three more 
associates viz. K.A. Malle Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KA Malle), Joshi Bullion Gems &  Jewellery 
Pvt. Ltd. (Joshi)   and  Bond Gems Pvt. Ltd.  (Bond)  and the business was carried out with 
the above six associates during 2008 -09. The acce ptance of the proposals from these 
associates was done without properly verifying their credentials. No physical inspection of the 
offices/manufacturing premises of the associates were carried out by the Company before 
entering into agreements with them. Two of the above associates (Bonito and KA Malle) were 
engaged, respectively, in the business of building materials and pharmaceutical 
intermediaries for animals and had never been in the business of gold jewellery. Four 
associates were having related party relationship (Space with KA Malle and Bond with Joshi). 
Therefore, the above export business was in fact carried out through four parties only. Audit 
scrutiny also revealed that one of the two related associates (Space with KA Malle) enjoyed a 
high credit  exposure during 2008 -09 by carrying out 53 per cent of the total export of gold 
jewellery. Audit observed that three associates viz. M/s Ushma, M/s Space and M/s Bonito 
were already doing the business with State Trading Corporation Limited (STC) on similar lines 
but were in default during the period 2007 -08. As the Company was aware of the dealings of 
the three associates with STC, it should have checked their performance vis -à-vis STC when 
it renewed their Memorandum of Agreements with three associates in  August 2008. The 
Company, thus, did not take due care in selecting the associates. Rather, it extended undue 
favour to them by allowing to carry out the export transactions with each other (refer to para 
17.2.5) and thus they enjoyed higher credit exposure (refer to para 17.2.6). 

Management’s contention (October 2010), that the Company did not extend undue favour to 
any of the associates, was not acceptable in view of the manner in which the Company 
selected its associates. 
17.2.5 Identification of foreign buyers 
The foreign buyers were identified by the associates and the Company did not verify their 
credentials. The associates also arranged to obtain export order in the name of the Company. 
There was no agreement between the Company and the foreign buyers  for the export and 
even the Company did not make any official communication with them before such export. It 
was observed that out of 47 foreign buyers related to export of gold jewellery during 2008 -09, 
18 were dealing either in wholesale business of sta inless steel, food stuff, building materials 
or garments but 39 per cent of the total export of gold jewellery during 2008 -09 was made to 
them. It was observed that in respect of 20 foreign buyers, ownership was concentrated in the 
hands of a few persons. Further, Director of one associate (Joshi) was also owner/director of 
4 foreign buyers 7 and three of them received gold jewellery from Space and another from 
Ushma during 2008 -09. The existing related party relationship of Bond and KA Malle (other 
two associates) with Joshi and Space, respectively, indicated that the above five associates 
were having transactions between themselves. It was also observed that eight foreign buyers 
to whom gold jewellery worth of Rs. 99.78 crore was exported were found not tra ceable. It 
was, further, observed that the principals of 13 foreign buyers refused to accept any liability of 
export dues of Rs. 187.13 crore on the ground that gold jewellery was actually not received by 
them. 
Thus, the Company did not carry out due dilig ence in identifying the foreign buyers and left it 
completely on the associates who were the ultimate beneficiaries in the export business by 
receiving 80 per cent of the export proceeds as advance from the Company. 
Management stated (October 2010) that it  had relied on the due diligence made by the 
insurers regarding the foreign buyers. This contention was, however, not acceptable since as 
per the insurance policies, the Company was required to carry out due diligence in granting 
credit to the foreign buye rs and the insurers did not make any independent investigation in 
this respect. 
                                            
7 (i) Himalaya Diamonds (Rs. 17.54 crore by Ushma), (ii) Superior General Trading (Rs. 9.69 crore by Space), (iii) Golden Stock Electronics 
(Rs. 19.89 crore by Space), (iv) Leo Diamonds (Rs. 13.80 crore by Space) 
 

Recommendation  
The Company should exercise due diligence in selecting the associates/foreign 
buyers before entering into business transaction with them. 
 
17.2.6 Safeguarding of financial interest 
As per agreement, the associates were required to bear all the risks and costs in case of non -
payment of export proceeds by the foreign buyers. Since advance up to 80 per cent of the 
export proceeds was payable to the associates immediately after export, the Company should 
have taken adequate measures to safeguard its financial interests before releasing such 
advance. Contrary to this, the Company modified (August 2007/September 2008) original 
clause of the agreement enabling the Compa ny to encash Post -Dated Cheques (PDC), 
covering equivalent amount of advance payable to associates in the event of non -receipt of 
export proceeds from the foreign buyers. As per modified clause, the PDCs could have been 
encashed only in the event of non -payment by the foreign buyers due to disputes with the 
associates relating to quantity, quality and price. 
Thus, the financial interest of the Company was not safeguarded against protracted default by 
the foreign buyers. It was also observed that there was n o provision in the agreement to 
obtain collateral security from the associates to cover the amount of advance payable to 
them. The financial position of the associates was also not considered while fixing their credit 
exposure as the advances given by the Company during 2008-09 ranged between 7 and 111 
times of their networth. The Company, therefore, depended on the insurance coverage only, 
for safeguarding its financial interests towards recovery of advances from the associates in 
the event of non-realisation of export proceeds (refer to para 17.2.7). 
Management stated (October2010) that the associates did not agree to give PDCs for non -
payment as envisaged in the agreement originally and the relevant clause of the agreement 
was therefore amended. It was al so stated that the insurance coverage would not have been 
available had the Company accepted the PDCs from the associates for non -payment of 
export proceeds by the foreign buyer. 
The above contention of the Management was not acceptable as the insurance co verage was 
taken towards non -realisation of dues from foreign buyer only. Further, the advances paid to 
associates were as per the agreement entered into with them and therefore there was no 

relationship between the non -recovery of such advances and the in surance coverage. 
Management’s contention was also contradictory in view of the fact that the Company took 
insurance coverage irrespective of the clause of the agreement with associates that all the 
risks and costs of the export business would ultimately be borne by them. 
Recommendation 
The Company should take adequate measures to safeguard its financial interest 
before making any advance payment. 
 
17.2.7 Insurance coverage of export of gold jewellery 
As per agreement, the Company would arrange to insure the risk of non -realisation of the 
export proceeds from the foreign buyers. The insurance premium was to be recovered from 
the associates. The Company accordingly insured the risk of non -payment of export proceeds 
of 2007-08 with ECGC. This insurance polic y was renewed (September 2008) for the exports 
of 2008-09 to cover the risk of non -payment of dues by the foreign buyers whose bills (Rs. 
453.54 crore) were to be discounted through four banks. In addition, the Company took 
(August 2008) another insurance policy from ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. Ltd. 
(ICICIL) to cover the risk of non -payment of export dues (Rs. 184.66 crore) for which loan 
from Standard Chartered Bank (SCB) was obtained. The Company paid insurance premium 
of Rs. 4.37 crore during 2008-09 for the above policies. As per the terms and conditions of the 
policy with ECGC, the whole export proceeds of the Company were to be insured. It was also 
specified in the policy of ICICIL that the Company should not enter into any other export trade 
insurance policy without the consent of insurer. 
It was observed that export business with five foreign buyers (during 2008 -09) was covered 
under these two insurance policies. This was, however, not disclosed to the insurers. It was 
also stipulated in the a bove policies that the Company should exercise reasonable care and 
prudence in granting credit to the foreign buyers. It was, however, observed that the Company 
did not carry out due diligence in identifying the foreign buyers. It was, further, observed th at 
the Company also did not disclose the insurers about the contractual obligations of the 
associates to bear the entire risks and costs in the event of non -realisation of export proceeds 
from the foreign buyers. 

Management stated (October 2012) that there  was not condition in the policies, debarring the 
company to carry out export under any other policy and also not to enter into any other 
insurance policy without the consent of insurer. Management further, contended that the 
agreement of the Company with the associates was an internal arrangement between them 
and the  insurers were not party to the same and thus, there was no need to disclose such 
information to the insurers. 
The above contentions of the Management were not based on the facts as it was cle arly 
mentioned in the first para of the insurance policy of ECGC that the policy was meant to cover 
whole of the export trade of the Company with buyers in the specified countries during the 
policy period. Condition 5 (b)(i) of the  insurance policy of ICI CIL also clearly mentioned that 
the “Insured must not, without written consent of ICICI Lombard enter into any trade credit 
insurance policy that  indemnifies the insured in relation to the insured’s own Account”. The 
contention of the Management with rega rd to arrangement between the Company and the 
associates, specifying that the associate and not the Company would ultimately bear the loss, 
being an important fact, hence should have been disclosed to the insurers prior to taking up 
such insurance policies. 
 
Recommendation  
The Company should disclose all material facts to the insurer before taking up 
insurance coverage and also strictly adhere to the terms and conditions of the 
insurance policy. 
 
17.2.8 Non-payment of dues by the foreign buyers 
During 2008-09, gold jewellery worth Rs. 638.20 crore was exported by six associates to 47 
foreign buyers and the last batch of export was made in November 2008. The Company 
discounted export bills worth Rs. 453.54 crore from four banks 8 and also obtained loan fr om 
one of the above banks i.e. Standard Chartered Bank, against the balance bills worth Rs. 
184.66 crore. Six associates were paid Rs. 501.55 crore as advance. 46 foreign buyers did 
not pay their dues of Rs. 598.63 crore to the banks on the due dates. The Company paid Rs. 
68.78 crore as interest, bank charges and discounting charges to the banks. Further, Fixed 
                                            
8 Corporation Bank, United Bank of India, Indian Overseas Bank and Standard Chartered Bank 

Deposit Receipt (FDR) of the Company amounting to Rs. 25 crore as security against the 
bank loan was encashed (April 2009) by the Standard Chartered  Bank. In addition, the 
Company had to incur crystallisation loss 9 of Rs. 53.06 crore as deducted by banks. The 
Company could realize only an amount of Rs. 10.48 crore from the associates thus, an 
advance amounting to Rs. 528.49 crore (including crystallis ation loss) remained unrealized. 
Even the post dated cheques deposited by them could not be encashed as the non -payment 
by the foreign buyers was not due to disputes relating to quantity, quality and price. 
The Company subsequently received (Novermber 2008 ) two Bank Guarantees (BGs) 
amounting to Rs. 62 crore from two associates (Ushma - Rs. 32 crore and Space Rs. 30 
crore) as security towards the exports to be made in future i.e. after December 2008. Since 
there was no export after November 2008, the above BGs could not be encashed. Further, 14 
FDRs amounting to Rs. 100 crore issued by Pen Co -operative Bank (PCB), a non -scheduled 
urban co-operative bank, were received (April 2009) from Ushma (Rs. 52 crore) and Space 
(Rs. 48 crore) with the condition to encas h the same on maturity (between October 2010 and 
June 2011) only. The Company placed (03 September, 2010) six FDRs maturing on 28 
October 2010 amounting to Rs. 30 crore (Rs. 15 crore pertaining to Space and Ushma each), 
to PCB for encashment. In the meanti me, the Reserve Bank of India precluded the PCB, with 
effect from 22 September 2010, from incurring any liability or granting/renewing any 
loans/advances or making any payments or discharging any liability or obligation, vide its 
directives dated 21 Septem ber 2010. The Company, as such, could not encash these FDRs. 
It was worth mentioning that the above bank was having a meagre deposit of Rs. 400 crore 
only and one10 of if its Directors was an ex-Director of an associates (Space). 
Thus, an amount of Rs. 611. 79 crore remained unrecovered (August 2010) from the 
associates. The Company, however, referred (December 2009) the matter to arbitration. 
17.2.9 Rejection of claim by insurers 
Insurance claims were lodged (November 2009/January 2010) with ECGC and ICICIL for 
non-realisation of export proceeds from the foreign buyers. Both the insurers, however, 
rejected such claims on the ground that as per the agreement with the associates, all the risks 
                                            
9 Foreign currency loss due to difference in foreign currency rates prevailing on the date of discounting of bills and due date s of payment of 
such bills. 
10 Shri Shishir P. Dharkar, was Director of Space from August 2000 to June 2007 
 

and costs in this business was to be borne by them in the event of n on-payment by the 
foreign buyers and as such the Company did not have any insurable interest. Further, the 
insurance policies would cover only the risk of non - payment by the foreign buyers and in this 
case the risk of the Company arose due to non -realisation of advances from the associates 
who were the actual exporters. 
Management stated (October 2010) that the Company was considering to initiate legal action 
against the insurers and the foreign buyers. 
Conclusion 
The business of post shipment finance of e xport of gold jewellery was conceived by the 
Company on being approached by the associates only. The Company ventured into this 
business in spite of the fact that there was high risk  involved in the foreign market was 
meagre return. Moreover, the demand f or the gold jewellery in the foreign market was not 
assessed. The associates in fact controlled the entire export business by selecting the foreign 
buyers, obtaining the export orders and also exporting the gold jewellery in the name of the 
Company. The Co mpany financed to the extent of 80 per cent of the export proceeds to the 
associates immediately after export without any financial safeguard for recovery of the same 
in the event of non -receipt of export proceeds from the foreign buyers on due dates. The 
Company did not also verify the credentials of the associates and the foreign buyers. There 
was related party relationship amongst the associates themselves and also between one 
associate and four foreign buyers but the Company ignored their related party relationship. 
The Company ventured into this risky business without safeguarding its own financial 
interests. Thus, there were serious lapses on the part of the Management. 
Finally, the Company had to face a financial burden of Rs. 611.79 crore due to non -recovery 
of advance and related financial expenses, from the associates for gold jewellery exports 
during the year 2008 -09, as the foreign buyers defaulted to pay their dues. The insurer also 
refused to make good the loss on the grounds that the Company di d not have any insurable 
interest in the business as all the risks and costs in this business were to be borne by the 
associates only and also due to violation of terms and conditions of the insurance policies by 
the Company. 
The matter was reported to Ministry in November 2010; reply was awaited (February 2011). 

MINUTES OF THE 13th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19 th April 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1300 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘74’, Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Shri Ambica Banerjee 
Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 Shri Uday Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K. Patnaik Dy. C&AG 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer Director General (Commercial) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Steel and MSTC Limited   
 
1 Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary, Steel 
2 Shri S. Machendranathan Addl. Secretary & FA 
3 Shri J.P. Shukla Joint Secretary, Steel 
4 Shri S.K. Tripathi CMD, MSTC Limited 
5 Shri A.K. Basu Director, Finance 
6 Shri B.B. Singh Director, Commercial 
 
2.  The Committee met to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Steel 
and MSTC Limited in connection with examination of Audit Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report 
No. 3 of 2011-12 (Commercial) regarding Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited.  
 

3. At the outset, the representatives of the Office of C&AG briefed the Committee on the 
subject matter.   
 
4. The witnesses were then called in. 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Steel and MSTC Limited 
and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence 
before the Parliamentary Committees. The Members raised queries on various aspects 
pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the 
representatives of Ministry of Steel and MSTC Limited.  The representatives of MSTC Limited 
also made a brief power point presentation on the subject.   
 
6. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry of Steel and MSTC Limited for 
providing all the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. Verbatim record of evidence has been kept. 
 
8. On the basis of the information made available during the evidence, the Committee 
deliberated upon the need to take evidenc e of the officers in position in MSTC and Ministry of 
Steel during the period when the new business venture to export gold jewellery was 
undertaken.  Taking note of the fact that the matter is presently under investigation by the 
CBI, the Committee decided to take oral evidence of Director, CBI in the first instance at their 
sitting to be held on 26th April 2012.    
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE 14th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 2 6th April 2012 from 1 500 hrs to 1 615 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
4 Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
5 Shri Baijayant Panda ‘Jay’ 
6 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 Shri Uday Singh 
8 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
11 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri S. Bal Shekar  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
 
Representatives of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
 
1 Shri Amar Pratap Singh  Director, CBI 
2 Shri Abhin Dinesh Modak Dy. I.G., CBI, ACB, Mumbai 
3 Shri Saurabh Tripathi Dy. I.G., (Policy), CBI, Policy Division 
  
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer Director General (Commercial) 
3 Ms. Nandana Munshi Principal Director (Commercial) 
 

2.  The Committee met to take the oral evidence of the Director, Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) on the audit findings contained in Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 
2011-12 (Commercial) regarding Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited.    
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the CBI and drew their 
attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committees.   The representatives of CBI  then made a brief power point 
presentation on the subject.  
 
4.  During the power point presentation, the Chairman and Members raised queries on 
various aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were 
given by the representatives  of CBI.  Information on some of the points raised by the 
Members was not readily available with the representatives of CBI.  They were, therefore, 
asked to furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible.  
 
5.  The Chairman thanked the representatives of CBI for providing all the information on 
the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 (Verbatim record of evidence has been kept) 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE 2nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 15 th June, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8 Shri Vilas Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10 Shri Uday Singh 
11 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
12 Shri Anil Desai 
13 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
14 Shri Naresh Gujral 
15 Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri S. Bal Shekar  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Enforcement Directorate 
 
1 Dr. Rajan Katoch Director, ED 
2 Shri Balesh Kumar Special Director 
3 Shri Samir Bajaj Joint Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer Director General (Commercial) 

2.  The Committee met to take the oral evidence of the: (i) Director, Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) on the audit findings contained in Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 
2011-12 (Commercial) regar ding Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited; and (ii) 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx. 
 
The Committee accordingly proceeded with the evidence of Director, ED.    
 
3.  The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Enforcement Directorate (ED) and 
drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence 
before the Parliamentary Committees.   
 
The representatives of ED then made a brief power point presentation on the subject.  
During the presentation, the Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects 
pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifica tions on the same were given by the 
representatives of Enforcement Directorate. During the course of deliberation, the Committee 
expressed their concern over the slow pace of investigation by the Enforcement Directorate 
and desired that action in the case be expedited and completed within a definite time frame.  
The ED was also asked to furnish written replies on the points raised by the Members of the 
Committee to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest.  
 
4.  The Chairman then thanked the representative s of the ED for providing all the 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept) 
 
5. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx  
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE 5th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 st July, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs in 
Committee Room No. 74, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
6 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7 Shri Vilas Baburaoji Muttemwar 
8 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
9 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
10 Shri Tariq Anwar 
11 Shri Anil Desai 
12 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
13 Shri Naresh Gujral 
14 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri S. Bal Shekar  Additional Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer Director General (Commercial) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Steel 
1 Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary Secretary, Steel 
2 Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan Addl. Secretary & F.A. 
 
Representatives of MSTC Limited 
 
1 Shri S.K. Tripathi CMD 
2 Shir A.K. Basu Director (Finance) 
 

Representatives of Central Bureau of Investigation 
 
1 Shri A.P. Singh Director, CBI 
2 Shri Vineet K. Gupta Special Director, CBI  
3 Shri Abhin Modak D.I.G., ACB, Mumbai 
 
Representatives of Enforcement Directorate 
 
1 Dr. Rajan Katoch Director, ED 
2 Shri Balesh Kumar Special Director 
3 Shri Samir Bajaj Joint Director 
 
2.  The Committee met to take further evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Steel; 
MSTC Limited; Director, CBI; and Director, ED on the audit findings contained in Para No. 17.2 of 
C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 (Commercial) regarding Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC 
Limited. 
    
3.  At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Steel; MSTC 
Limited; Director, CBI; and Dir ector, ED and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions 
by the Speaker regarding evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.   
 
4. The representatives of MSTC Limited  then made a brief power point presentation on the 
steps being taken to rec over the money from the accused through courts and other agencies.  
During the presentation, the Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining 
to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the representatives of 
MSTC Limited / Ministry .  During the course of deliberation s, the Committee also expressed their 
dismay over the delay in execution of decrees received in favour of the Company from the courts 
at various points of time during the last six months and desired that action in all these cases be 
expedited and completed within a definite time frame.   
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of CBI made a brief power point presentation on the status 
of probe and action being taken to recover the unrealized m oney.  The Chairman and Members 
raised queries on various issues including the reason for delay in filing of charge sheet by CBI and 
the replies thereto were given by the representatives of CBI.  The Committee directed 
representatives of CBI  that action on  filing of charge sheet be completed within the shortest 
possible time frame.  The Committee also asked t he representatives of ED to take immediate 
action on attachment of properties of accused as  soon as the CBI files the charge sheet against 
the culprits.  
 
6.  The Chairman then thanked the representatives of Ministry of Steel; MSTC Limited; 
Director, CBI; and Director, ED for providing all the information on the subject matter as desired 
by the Committee. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept) 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

MINUTES OF THE 17th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 11 th January 2013 from 1500 hrs to 1745 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6 Shri Vilas Baburaoji Muttemwar 
7 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Anil Desai 
9 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
10 Shri Naresh Gujral 
11 Dr. V. Maitreyan 
12 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
 
1 Shri P. Sesh Kumar Director General (Commercial)-II 
2 Ms. Sandhya Shukla Principal Director (Commercial) 
 
 
(A) Official Witness 
 
Representatives of Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. 
 
1 Shri N. Shankar Chairman-cum-Manager Director 
2 Mrs. Geetha Muralidhar Executive Director 
3 Mr. Rohit Pandya General Manager 
4 Mr. Dharmarajan V. General Manager 
 
 

(B) Non-official Witness 
 
1 Shri Malay Sengupta Ex-CMD, MSTC Limited 
 
2.  The Committee met to take evidence of the representatives of Export Credit Guarantee 
Corporation of India Limited (ECGC) and Shri Malay Sengupta, Ex -CMD, MSTC Limited on the 
audit findings contained  in Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 (Commercial) 
regarding Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited. 
  
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of ECGC Limited and drew their 
attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committees.   
 
4. The representatives of ECGC Limited then made a brief statement on the subject matter.  
During their deposition, the Chairman and Members raised a number of queries including the 
criteria followed for fixing the credit limits of the foreign buyers, factors taken in to account while 
conducting the due diligence, the extent of responsibility on  ECGC due to default by the overseas 
buyers whose credentials were verified by it, etc. and the explanations/clarifications on the same 
were given by the representatives of ECGC Limited .  They also assured the Committee that 
written replies to the remainin g queries, which could not be responded then, will be furnished to 
the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
  (The witnesses then withdrew.) 
 
 (Non-official witness Shri Malay Sengupta was then called in.) 
 
5. The Chairman welcomed Shri Malay Sengupta, Ex -CMD, MSTC Limited and drew his 
attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committees.   
 
6. Shri Malay Sengupta while expressing his gratitude to the Committee for providing him the 
opportunity to put up his case on the subject matter made a detailed presentation on the audit 
findings as contained in the Audit Para.  During his deposition, the Chairman and Members raised 
several queries which included the rationale followed for undertaking the high risk export business 
of gold jewellery, reason for undue haste in firming up the contract with associate suppliers and 
the extent of due diligence conducted, reason for non -payment of export proceeds by the 
overseas buyers, and non -disclosure of  some material  information with ECGC leading it to 
rejection of insurance claims and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by him.   
 
7. The Chairman then thanked the Ex -CMD, MSTC Limited for providing all the information 
on the subject matter as desired by the Committee.  
 
 The witness then withdrew. 
 
(Verbatim record of evidence has been kept) 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26 April, 2013 from 1000 hrs to 1100 hrs in 
Chairman’s Chamber, Room No. 147, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
4.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
5.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Anil Desai 
8.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
9.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
10.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Ms. Sandhya Shukla Pr. Director (Commercial) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Audit officials to the Sitting of 
the Committee.   
 

3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Export of Gold 
Jewellery by MSTC Ltd. (based on audit para no. 17.2 of C&AG’s report no. 3 of 2011-12) and 
after some deliberation adopted the same without any changes. 
 
(The Audit officials then withdrew) 
 
4.   XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
5. XXXX    XXXX    XXXX  
 
  
6. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the basis of 
factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
  
7. As the Committee’s term will end on 30.04.2013, the Chairman thanked the members 
for their co -operation in smooth functioning of the Committee during the term and placed on 
record his appreciation for the valuable contribution and active participation of the members in 
the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX MATTER NOT RELATED TO THIS REPORT. 