 
C.P.U. No.  977 
 
 
 
THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
PAWAN HANS LIMITED 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Pawan Hans Limited) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.02.2014 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2014 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY 2014 / MAGHA 1935(S) 
  
 31 
 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER - l Report  
 
 
CHAPTER - lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government.  
 
 
CHAPTER - lII Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies.  
 
 
CHAPTER - IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
 
 
CHAPTER - V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of Committee held on 6 February 
2014 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha). 
 
 
 
  
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.   Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
4. Shri Sunny Goel Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-first Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Pawan Hans Limited. 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2012 -2013) 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April 2013.  
The action taken replies to all the 12 Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report were received from the Government on 6 November 2013.  The Committee 
on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 6 
February 2014. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (2012-13) of the Committee is 
given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 February 2014 Chairman 
18 Magha 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
                                                    
  

CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by th e Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (20 12-13) on Pawan Hans Limited which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April 2013. 
 
1.2 The Action taken replies to all the 12 Observations / R ecommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Government in November 2013.  
 
1.3. The replies have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1,6,7,8 and 9           (Total 05) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
(NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 2,3,5 and 10           (Total 04) 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in  respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V) 
Sl. Nos. 4,11 and 12           (Total 03) 
 
 
1.4 The Committee desire that response to their comments in Chapter I of the 
Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.  
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 1 
 
1.6 Taking note of  the drastic fall in  net profit of Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) from 
nearly Rs. 36 crore in 2009 -10 to Rs. 18.50 crore in 2010 -11 and further deterioration 
in its performance in 2011 -12 when it incurred a loss of over Rs. 10 crore , the 
Committee had recommended that PHL should ta ke urgent remedial measures to 
reverse its poor performance by optimizing cost and efficiency, ensuring safety of 
operations and effecting speedy recovery of outstanding dues. 
   
1.7 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that they had taken 
serious initiatives for improvement in performance by securing new customers, 
optimizing cost, improving efficiency and also by ensuring safety in operations during 
the year 2012-13.  As a result of this the revenue from operations improved by 8% from 
Rs.428.86 crores in 2011 -12 to Rs.465.24 crores, the operating profit drastically 

improved by 532% from Rs.6.27 crores in the year 2011 -12 to Rs.39.64 crores in the 
year 2012-13.  Further, there was an improvement in the net profit after ta x of 213% 
and as against net loss of Rs.10.35 crores in the year 2011 -12, the Company achieved 
net profit after tax of Rs.11.70 crores as per provisional / actual figures of the Accounts 
which are shortly going to be audited. Apart from higher revenue, red uction in 
operating expenses resulted in increased profitability. The Company during the year 
2012-13 further improved monitoring of the expenditure control system resulted in 
containing the overheads level. The improvement in Revenue was achieved through 
new contracts from Mizoram, Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh 
as also reduction in overall operating expenditure, through better monitoring of fleet 
availability to the customers.  The Aircraft on Ground (AOG) and LD was also reduced 
by Rs.2 crores by ensuring pilots and engineers on -time reporting and responsibility for 
providing helicopters in time.  Drastic control of overtime also resulted in improved 
financial discipline. Apart from this, the requirement of qualified Captains on Dauphin  
helicopters has been an area of concern and in order to improve availability of qualified 
pilots, Company made efforts for inter -fleet conversion of pilots for their effective 
utilization. Thus, the Company has been able to improve average flying performa nce of 
pilot from 300 hours (approx.) per year to 400 hours (approx.) per year. Further efforts 
were made for new contracts for 2 helicopters, 1 for Government of West Bengal and 1 
for IIT, Kanpur.  The process of improvement in the operational performance  of the 
Company is being continued.  One of the major milestone achieved for the year 2013 -
14 for cost reduction has been substantial reduction in insurance premium on the fleet 
of the helicopter for the period 1.8.2013 to 31.7.2014 on the present sum assu red 
value of Rs.1223.50 crores for Operating Helicopter fleet and inventory value of Rs.300 
crores, the annualized premium works out to Rs. 23.47 crores resulting in decrease of 
cash outflow by Rs.5.81 crores.  Overall net reduction of insurance cost over l ast year 
works out to 19.84% or say 20%. This has happened due to improve safety standards 
in the Company. 
 
1.8 The Committee note with satisfaction the slew of measures taken by PHL 
viz. reduction in operating expenses, better monitoring of the expenditure 
control system, bagging new contracts, control of overtime, reduction in 
insurance premium, etc. culminating in the Company not only turning around but 
also posting a net profit of Rs. 11.70 Crores in 2012 -13 as compared to th e net 
loss of Rs. 10.35 Crores in 2011 -12.  While appreciating the efforts made by PHL 
towards improving its performance  on various key parameters, the Committee 
hope that PHL would maintain this welcome growth and emerge as a dominant 
player in helicopter industry. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 2 
 
1.9 Having observed that huge outstanding dues amounting to over Rs. 196 crore 
as on 31 March, 2013 were the major reason for the distressing performance of the 
Company.  Having further noted that out of this outstanding Rs. 49 crore was more 
than one year old and had that been re ceived on time PHL would have registered a 
profit of Rs. 39 crore instead of being in red the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should impress upon the State Governments concerned at the 
highest level to take timely action in the matter on regular basis with the view to 
maintaining the financial health of PHL.   
 

1.10 In the action taken reply, it has been stated that with regard to outstandings from 
the customers, PHL has made efforts and outstanding of Government of Punjab has 
been realized, similarly, NE States have also started releasing funds upon release of 
budget by the MHA in the new financial year. PHL ha s informed that the real problem 
of outstanding are the cases of NE States and UT of Lakshadweep which relies heavily 
on MHA subsidy.  Further, with very limited budget of MHA itself, the dues of the 
current year again remain outstanding.  It is understood  that MHA has been allocated 
very limited subsidy budget this year also for NE states.  Similarly, in the case of UT of 
Lakshadweep, the budget of the financial year is utilized for clearing outstandings of 
previous year.  In order to expedite collections of old outstandings, PHL made efforts 
for recovery from Government of Bihar, HAL, A&N Administration, NE States and UT of 
Lakshadweep.  The Company has now set-up an Eastern Region with HQ at Guwahati 
for better focus on the business and recovery of outstanding in respect of Eastern part 
of the Country, more specifically the NE States.  GM(E astern Region) has been 
assigned the task to following the recovery of dues from NE States. The Company has 
recently on 16 September, 2013 sent reminder to the Sta te Governments of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim,  Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Jharkhand, MHA, A&N 
Administration, , for expediting clearance of outstanding dues. The Ministry of Civil 
Aviation is also being requested for taking up with the State Governments  for early 
clearance of outstanding due of Pawan Hans.  The Company is making continuous 
efforts for recovery of outstanding dues from various customers.  As against the 
outstanding amount of Rs.227.97 crores as on 30  September, 2013, the Company 
collected Rs.26.85 crores upto 15 October, 2013. 
 
1.11 The Committee are not happy at the apparent lack of tangible action by the 
Government on this Recommendation of considerable import.  The outstanding 
dues have increased from Rs. 196 crore as on 31 March 2013 to Rs. 227.97 crore 
as on 30 September 2013 .  With the recovery of a paltry Rs. 26.85 crore upto 15 
October, 2013, the outstanding  dues rather than getting reduced have climbed 
upto Rs. 201.12 crore.  What is more perturbing is the fact that inspite of the  
Committee,  on noting the failure of PHL in liquidation of outstanding bills, 
having asked the Ministry to take up the matter at the highest level for an 
expeditious solution, the Ministry  of Civil Aviation  are yet to take any action in 
that direction.  W hile strongly disapproving of this lapse of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, the Committee desire that the Ministry should intervene in the matter at 
the highest level without further loss of time and  ensure that the huge 
outstanding recoverables do not affect the financial health of PHL irretrievably.    
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 3 
 
1.12 Taking note of  the huge potential of growth not only in the civil aviation sector 
but new areas viz. emergency medical services, law enforcement, disaster 
management, etc.  and finding that PHL had already chalked out a road map for 
foraying into these areas as well as intracity transportation , news gathering, airports to 
city centres connections and projected a Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 10030 c rore 
for development of h elicopter industry in the Country during Twelfth Five Year Plan.  
Further noting that     Company has already embarked upon an expansion plan and 
more than Rs. 600 crores is being spent on acquisition of new helicopters , the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry Civil Aviation should take up the 
proposed expansion plan of PHL with Planning Commission for approval of its projects 

and also provide all possible help to PHL in its expansion plans and  address the 
budgetary constraints and issues regarding personnel management.   
 
1.13 The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their action taken reply have stated that during 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan Period (2012 -17) the projections related to Pawan Hans 
approved by Planning Commission are for Acquisition of 10 helicopters and 02 
seaplanes, import of equipments, creation of maintenance centre / JV, Building 
Projects and others for a tot al amount of Rs.725 crores through IEBR.   PHL has 
revised t he Twelfth Five Year Plan projections   to further augment the fleet by 
acquisition of 22 helicopters and 02 seaplanes at a cost of Rs.1189 crores.  The 
revised Plan has been submitted to the Minis try of Civil Aviation for onward approval 
from Planning Commission. The Pawan Hans Board has constituted a Techno 
Economic Evaluation Committee and further course of action is being taken by the 
Committee in this regard.  As far as the roadmap for foray in to new areas by Helicopter 
Industry and GBS of Rs.10,030 crore is concerned, response is awaited from 
concerned Ministries like Tourism, MHA, DONER, etc. 
 
1.14 The Committee regret to note that despite lapse of more than six months 
after presentation of their Report, the revised Plan projection of PHL for Twelfth 
Five Year Plan is yet to be finalized and approved by Planning Commission  
though the second year of the Plan  is coming to an end .  The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Government should get their 
act together and expedite the process of approval of PHL  Plan as any further 
delay would have an adverse impact on the Company ’s plans and performance .  
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should  make 
all out efforts for obtaining Gross Budgetary Support  from the Government and 
also vigorously pursue the matter with concerned ministries/departments so that 
the civil aviation sector receives the much needed boost and PHL forays into 
new areas of growth  at the soonest .  Furthermore, if the Company has to 
generate resources for expansion through Internal and Extra Budgetary 
Resources then the Ministry should ensure release of all the outstanding Bills of 
PHL from various State Gov ernments, etc. without any further delay  to facilitate 
the same.  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.4 
 
1.15 Disappointed over the snail’s pace at which efforts were being made towards 
realizing the potential of helicopter  services in the tourism sector as no specific survey 
had been carried out by the Ministry of Tourism or the State Governments for covering 
tourism sector s by helicopter services and even PHL had just carried out a joint 
preliminary study in this regard wi th few State Governments only, the Committee had 
recommended that a comprehensive study must be conducted by PHL without any 
further loss of time to explore the possibilities of exploiting the tourist potential for 
helicopter services in different parts of  the country and also for developing a healthy 
symbiotic relationship between tourism promotion on one hand and expansion of 
helicopter services on the other. 
 
1.16 In their action taken reply the Government have stated that PHL has already 
carried out preliminary feasibility studies for various States/sectors like Tamilnadu, 
Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Buddhist Sector in UP, Goa etc.  
Further, Pawan Hans is also in the process of selection of External Consultant f or 

preparation of Business Plan/Study.  PHL has floated an  EOI  and after evaluation, 
parties would be short listed for issue of RFP (Request for proposal) document.   
 
1.17 PHL has taken following actions f or expansion of helicopter services specially 
for Tourism: - 
- Recently signed an MOU with West Bengal and positioned one Dauphin 
helicopter at Kolkata for providing helicopter services in the State of West 
Bengal, initially for joy rides & charter purposes.  Pawan Hans is also exploring 
the possibility of connecting other sectors in consultation with the State Govt. of 
West Bengal/other agencies.    
- Provided one Bell 206 L4 helicopter to IIT Kanpur for connecting IIT Kanpur with 
the State Capital Lucknow and recently it has also been decided to extend t he 
helicopter service can be used by other passengers.   
- Started services on Delhi-Vrindavan sector by a Bell 206 L4 helicopter.  It is also 
exploring the possibilities of connecting Agra, Varanasi, Buddhist sector, etc. for 
promotion of tourism in the State.   
1.18 A team of PHL is planning to visit Shirdi & Tirupati to carry out the feasibility 
study for connecting Mumbai-Shirdi & Hyderabad-Tirupati sectors. 
 
1.19 While appreciating the efforts made  thus far, the Committee desire that 
conclusive action on several measures which are at preparatory stage , as of 
now, should be taken by the Company expeditiously.  The Committee expect the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation  to be not lagging behind in lending a h elping hand to 
PHL wherever required in these endeavours.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 5 
 
1.20 The Committee took note that  the request of PHL  / Ministry of Civil Aviation 
seeking waiver of Ministry of Finance claim for re -payment of Rs. 470.22 crore 
(principal of Rs.130.91 crore and penal interest Rs.339.31 crore) advance to PHL for 
acquisition of 21 Westland helicopters during 1986 -88 ha d not been agreed to , 
although the  helicopters were at no cost to Government of India as they were funded 
by grant from U.K. and had proved to be non -performing assets that incurred operating 
loss of Rs. 95.67 crore before being grounded in 1990 -91. Further taking note that the 
Ministry of Finance ha d reportedly sought in April, 2 012 PHL’s business plan for the 
future and a note as to how the MoF claim would be  an impediment to growth of PHL,  
the Committee had urged PHL to submit requisite details to MoF at the earliest  and 
had hoped that MoF would see reason and waive off the claim in overall interest of 
PHL’s growth and expansion of helicopter operations in the country. 
 
1.21 The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their action taken reply have stated that based 
on the meeting convened by AS (Budget), MoF on 29  April, 2012 regarding settlement 
of MoF claim, the Business Plan for Twelfth Five Year Plan was prepared by  SBI Caps 
with recommendations for options for settlement of MoF claim.  They have  submitted 
SBI Caps Report to Ministry of Civil Aviation vide letter dated 2  July, 2012 and the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation had taken up with the Ministry of Finance and a meeting with 
the Dy. Secretary (Plan Finance-II) in Ministry of Finance was called on 7 August, 2013 
and a copy of the Business Plan was again submitted to them.  PHL has informed that 
they are pursuing the matter with Ministry of Finance. 

 
1.22 The Committee strongly disapprove of the casual attitude of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation in resolving the matter of waiver of claim of the Ministry of 
Finance regarding Westland Helicopters. The chronology of events as contained 
in the reply of the Government is reflective of an inordinately sl ow pace at which 
the Ministry are handling this matter of critical importance for the health of PHL.  
The Ministry’s assertion that ‘PHL has informed that they are pursuing the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance ’ implies that the Ministry is not playing a proactive 
role in the matter. The Committee urge the Ministry to involve themselves in 
resolution of this vexed issue forthwith and convin ce the Ministry of Finance 
about the merits of PHL ’s stand in the matter to secure relief for the Company.  
  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 8 
  
1.23 Taking note of the fact that t here were five helicopter accidents involving PHL 
during the last three years  leading to two helicopters getting destroyed and another 
getting extensively damaged resulting in 25 casualties. Noting further that t he main 
cause of accidents was stated to be pilot error , the Committee had desired that DGCA 
should go into the root caus e of pilot error and tackle the problem with appropriate 
remedial measures with a view to  preventing accidents in future.  The Committee had 
also stressed upon special emphasis being laid on improving the training 
modules/methods in order to make them more effective in enabling pilots to negotiate 
difficult terrain and bad weather conditions. The Committee had also recommend ed 
that some of the steps mentioned in the proposed Civil Aviation Policy such as better 
training for Air Traffic Controllers, installat ion of webcams enroute, tracking of 
helicopters by satellites, etc. should be put into place immediately. 
 
1.24 In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that they have informed 
DGCA regarding the observations of the Hon’ble Committee to go into the root cause 
of pilot error in accidents and tackle the problem with appropriate remedial measures 
and they have also taken note of the suggestions on installati ons of web cam enroute, 
tracking of helicopters by satellites etc. and will take up the matter further with 
concerned authorities / agencies.  As suggested by the Hon’ble Committee, PHL is 
laying special emphasis on training of the crew and training method ology to enable 
pilots to tackle the emergent situations. Simulator training of all crew is also ensured 
which involves training on handling all kinds of critical emergencies so that pilots are 
better prepared to handle such emergencies while flying.  PH L has further informed 
that they have been imparting Simulator Training to its pilots on full motion simulator 
where critical emergency, specific area training and critical exercise including slope 
area taxing, vortex rig state, auto rotation are being impar ted.  Further, pilots are also 
exposed to situations of low visibility operations while undergoing simulator training.  
They have also started conducting knowledge enhancement conclaves where pilots 
along with engineers, technicians are given refresher tra ining on professional subjects 
through classroom lectures and interactive sessions.  These qualitative steps are 
introduced to raise the professional and skill level of both pilots and maintenance 
personnel and thus enhancing flight safety operations. 
 
1.25 While expressing satisfaction over the steps taken by PHL for enhancing 
flight safety operations , the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should go beyond m erely informing DGCA about the r ecommendation 

of the Committee and ensure that conclusive action is taken by DGCA in the 
matter without any further loss of time.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 10 
 
1.26 Taking note of the fact that the accident rate for PHL in 2011  which averaged 
2.92 per lakh flying hours over preceding five years as against 4.33  per lakh flying 
hours for US and global rate of 6.2  per lakh flying hours , the Committee had observed 
that though PHL’s accident rate vis -à-vis global rate and US rate is low, accidents r ate 
data of private companies within the Country which was not available with PHL  be 
collected by the Ministry of Civil Aviation  with a view to assessing the comparative 
performance of PHL vis-à-vis private companies. 
 
1.27 In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that DGCA was 
informed about observations of the Committee and that they have requested DGCA to 
take necessary action for assessing the comparative performance of PHL vis -à-vis 
private companies. 
 
1.28 The Committee regret to note that despite lapse of more than six months 
after presentation of their Report to Parliament, the Ministry  of Civil Aviation  
have not yet collected  and analysed data for assessing the comparative 
performance of PHL vis-à-vis private  companies, as recommended by the 
Committee. This should be done forthwith and the Committee be apprised of the 
outcome within a month of presentation of this Report to Parliament.   
 
Recommendation Sl. No.11 
1.29 The Committee were constrained to note that following a freeze on recruitment 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance , employees were being recruited in PHL on fixed 
term contract basis in order to meet the emergent operational requirements and that 
out of the total strength of PHL’s 980 employees as on 31 October, 2011, almost half of 
them i.e., 461 employees were serving on contract basis . The Committee were further 
dismayed to observe that no scientific study ha d been conducted to assess the 
manpower requirement of the Company to meet its expansion and diversification plans. 
The Committee had urged PHL to ensure that the study proposed by it for 
organisational restructuring be completed at the earliest and followed up with action on 
it.  
 
1.30 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that PHL has informed 
that at present there are 477 regular employees and 440 contractual employees in the 
Company on fixed term contract basis. Since almost 80% business of the Company 
depends on tender for fixed period for lease of helicopters to different cu stomers and 
there is stiff competition with the private helicopter operators , therefore, there is need 
to keep the employees on contract basis.  
 
1.31 PHL has further informed that in order to undertake this study a number of 
reputed institutions have been  explored and expression of interest shall be shortly 
invited from them. 
 
1.32 In the absence of the promised study on organizational restructuring , the 
Committee are not in a position to comment upon the reply of the Government 

about the adequacy or otherwise of the extant human resource mix of regular 
and contract appointees in PHL.  They, therefore, desire that PHL should get the 
study conducted at the soonest and revert to the Committee with the outcome of 
the study and action taken , thereon, to en able them to take a final view in the 
matter.  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.12 
 
1.33 Noting with regret that a proposal for creation of three functional directors – one 
each for Operations, Finance and Business development and nomination of three 
independent directors in PHL had been awaiting decision for over two years and in the 
meantime, ONGC had reportedly sought to increase the number of their nominee 
directors in PHL Board from one to two following ONGC’s increase in PHL’s share 
holding from 21% to 49% with  DPE reportedly pointing out that ONGC representatives 
in PHL Board would be considered as a Government Director and the number of 
Government Directors on the Board of CPSE’s should be one -sixth of the total strength 
limited to maximum two, the Committee h ad desired that the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
should expeditiously resolve the issue of ONGC’s demand for two no minees and also 
decide about their own representatives on PHL’s Board in the light of DPE’s rider.  
 
1.34 The Government in their action taken reply have stated that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation  vide letter dated 30 August, 2013 forwarded  observations of  Hon’ble Minister 
in the proposed strength of Board of Directors of Pawan Hans in which it has been 
decided that apart from CMD, the Company  shall have two Functional Directors i.e. 
Director (Finance and Personnel & Administration) and Director (Operation and 
Marketing). Since ONGC is holding 49% equity in Pawan Hans therefore instead of 
One Director there would be Two Part Time Directors from  ONGC on the Board of 
Pawan Hans. PHL has further informed that regarding the Government Directors there 
will be only two Official part -time directors i.e. Administrative Joint Secretary and 
Financial Advisor of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Apart from t hese there will be three 
non-official independent directors on the Board. Accordingly, the total strength of the 
Board upon restructuring shall be 10 directors on the Board of Pawan Hans.  
 
1.35 The proposal after examination shall shortly be submitted by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation to the Department of Public Enterprises for the approval and once DPE 
approves the same final approval of ACC shall be sought. 
 
1.36 The Committee are not happy at the inordinate delay in  reconstitution of 
PHL Board.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should take  conclusive 
action in the matter with utmost promptitude so that the Board of PHL is  
reconstituted at the earliest  in consonance with the relevant guidelines of DPE 
and functions in a professional manner in the interest of the Company.  

CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 1 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that the net profit of Pawan Hans Limited 
(PHL) drastically fell from nearly Rs. 36 crore in 2009-10 to Rs. 18.50 crore in 2010 -11. 
The performance of PHL further deteriorated to turn red and incurred a loss of over Rs. 
10 crore in 2011 -12. The Company was expected to break even in 2012 -13. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actual profit/loss during 2012-13. One of the 
reasons for PHL’s poor performance is the huge outstanding dues pending recovery for 
over one year. In Committee’s view PHL should take urgent remedial measures to 
reverse its poor performance by o ptimizing cost and efficiency, ensuring safety of 
operations and effecting speedy recovery of outstanding dues. The Committee hope 
that necessary steps will be taken soon in this regard under intimation to the 
Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has i nformed that they had taken serious initiatives for improvement in 
performance by securing new customers, optimizing cost, improving efficiency and also 
by ensuring safety in operations during the year 2012 -13.  As a result of this the 
revenue from operati ons improved by 8% from Rs.428.86 crores in 2011 -12 to 
Rs.465.24 crores, the operating profit drastically improved by 532% from Rs.6.27 
crores in the year 2011 -12 to Rs.39.64 crores in the year 2012 -13.  Further, there was 
an improvement in the net profit after tax of 213% and as against net loss of Rs.10.35 
crores in the year 2011 -12, the Company achieved net profit after tax of Rs.11.70 
crores as per provisional / actual figures of the Accounts which are shortly going to be 
audited. Apart from higher reve nue, reduction in operating expenses resulted in 
increased profitability. The Company during the year 2012 -13 further improved 
monitoring of the expenditure control system resulted in containing the overheads level. 
The improvement in Revenue was achieved through new contracts from Mizoram, 
Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh as also reduction in overall 
operating expenditure, through better monitoring of fleet availability to the customers.  
The Aircraft on Ground (AOG) and LD was also reduce d by Rs.2 crores by ensuring 
pilots and engineers on -time reporting and responsibility for providing helicopters in 
time.  Drastic control of overtime also resulted in improved financial discipline. Apart 
from this, the requirement of qualified Captains on  Dauphin helicopters has been an 
area of concern and in order to improve availability of qualified pilots, Company made 
efforts for inter -fleet conversion of pilots for their effective utilization. Thus, the 
Company has been able to improve average flying performance of pilot from 300 hours 
(approx.) per year to 400 hours (approx.) per year. Further efforts were made for new 
contracts for 2 helicopters, 1 for Government of West Bengal and 1 for IIT, Kanpur.  
The process of improvement in the operational per formance of the Company is being 
continued.  One of the major milestone achieved for the year 2013-14 for cost reduction 
has been substantial reduction in insurance premium on the fleet of the helicopter for 
the period 1.8.2013 to 31.7.2014 on the present sum assured value of Rs.1223.50 
crores for Operating Helicopter fleet and inventory value of Rs.300 crores, the 
annualized premium works out to Rs. 23.47 crores resulting in decrease of cash outflow 

by Rs.5.81 crores.  Overall net reduction of insurance cos t over last year works out to 
19.84% or say 20%. This has happened due to improve safety standards in the 
Company. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 6 
 
The Committee note that since 1989, PHL has remained a major player in 
providing helicopter services in the North East Region (NER) of the country.  Keeping 
in view the socio -economic development of NER, the Government of India has been 
subsidizing 75 % of  the operational cost to the company.  Of late, availing benefit of 
such scheme of the Government, the private operators have also started helicopter 
operations in the region on regular and dedicated basis on behalf of north -east states 
which have started awarding such contracts through tenders.  PHL has requested that 
keeping National Security and strategic importance of the NE, PHL, being a national 
carrier, may be considered for awarding the contract for entire NE Region on 
nomination basis.   PHL has als o made similar request with reference to the global 
tender floated by Indian Coast Guard. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has pointed out that 
PHL has been getting the contracts awarded through tender process being followed by 
north-eastern and other State Governments/Government Agencies. The Committee felt 
that it is not for PHL to raise the bogey of National Security which should be left to the 
Ministries of Home Affairs and Defence to decide. PHL can serve better by improving 
safety and efficiency of its operations and providing economical operations in 
competition with private players.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pawan Hans has informed that at present they have deployed 6 Nos. 
helicopters in the North Eastern Sector (most of these contracts have been got through 
competitive tenders) with various State Govts. – Sikkim, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Arunachal Pradesh and one helicopter provided to Ministry of Home Affairs.  Pawan 
Hans has been making efforts for getting contracts covering entire North East Re gion.  
Recently in the month September 2013 Pawan Hans has been shortlisted by 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh for deployment of one more Mi -172 helicopter.  
New contracts are being won under competitive conditions with improved safety and 
operational efficiency. 
PHL has informed that t o consolidate operations & services, in  the beginning of this 
year 2013 they have exclusively empowered this area by creating a separate Region in 
the name of Eastern Region with it's Head Quarters at Guwahati to serve better by 
proper monitoring & coordination with the respective State Govts./customers. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 7 
 
The Committee have been informed that despite owning 49 percent equity in the 
PHL, ONGC has been resorting to open tendering process in awarding contracts for 
helicopter services required by it in carrying out off shore oil exploration operations and 
in a recent global tender prescribed the vintage of helicopter as five years. PHL has 

pleaded that it cannot meet the criteria unless the stringent condition of five years 
vintage is relaxed. The Committee do not think that it would be appropriate for ONGC 
to g rant any relaxation or preferential treatment to PHL just because of its equity 
participation in PHL. As already stressed in a preceding paragraph, PHL will do well to 
improve its operational efficiency and bag all ONGC’s contracts in a competitive 
environment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that observations if the Committee has been Noted. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 8 
 
There were five helicopter accidents in respect of PHL during the last three 
years. In two cases, helicopters got destroyed and in another helicopter got extensively 
damaged resulting in 25 casualties. The main cause of accidents is stated to be pilot 
error. The Committee desire that DGCA should go into  the root cause of pilot error and 
tackle the problem with appropriate remedial measures with a view to preventing 
accidents in future.  Special emphasis must be laid on improving the training 
modules/methods in order to make them more effective in enablin g pilots to negotiate 
difficult terrain and bad weather conditions. The Committee also recommend that some 
of the steps mentioned in the proposed Civil Aviation Policy such as better training for 
Air Traffic Controllers, installation of webcams enroute, tr acking of helicopters by 
satellites, etc. should be put into place immediately. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pawan Hans has informed that they have informed DGCA regarding the 
observations of the Hon’ble Committee to go into the root cause of pilot error in 
accidents and tackle the problem with appropriate remedial measures and they have 
also taken note of the suggestions on installations of web cam enroute, tracking of 
helicopters by satellites etc. and will take up the matter further with concerned 
authorities / agencies.  As suggested by the Hon’ble Committee, PHL is laying special 
emphasis on Training of the crew and Training methodology to enable pilots to tackle 
the emergent situations. Simulator training of all crew is also ensured which involves 
training on handling all kinds of critical emergencies so that pilots are better prepared 
to handle such emergencies while flying.  Pawan Hans has further informed that they 
have been imparting Simulator Training to its pilots on full motion simulator where 
critical emergency, specific area training and critical exercise including slope area 
taxing, vortex rig state, auto rotation are being imparted.  Further, pilots are also 
exposed to situations of low visibility operations while undergoing simulator training.  
They have also started conducting knowledge enhancement conclaves where pilots 
along with engineers, technicians are given refresher training on professional subjects 
through classroom lectures and interactive sessions.  These qualitative steps are 
introduced to raise the professional and skill level of both pilots and maintenance 
personnel and thus enhancing flight safety operations. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 

 
Recommendation at Sl. No.9 
 
The Committee note that in the aftermath of the helicopter accidents, Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had conducted a comprehensive safety audit wherein 
several observations have been made with regard to deficiencies / inadequacies in 
operations and maintenance/engineering departments of the PHL.  PHL has stated that 
it had complied with the findings / observations of DGCA and submitted action taken 
report to DGCA. It has further taken initiatives and set up monitoring mechanism to 
ensure implementation of safet y preparedness in the organization. The Committee 
trust that the safety initiatives and the monitoring mechanism that has been put in place 
by PHL would be implemented both in letter and spirit.  They also desire that a safety 
culture and a sense of ever s afety preparedness should be inculcated which shall 
permeate into the organization so that the recurrence of accidents is reduced to the 
bare minimum possible, if not totally eliminated.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that many of the Safety initiatives have already been 
implemented and comprehensive internal audits of all operational bases of PHL is 
carried out by PHL team. Safety Meetings are conducted at all detachments 
periodically wherein all safet y issues are debated in detail and action taken wherever 
required.  PHL has informed that there has been a considerable improvement in sense 
of safety preparedness and safety culture of the organisation. However, the process is 
continuous and now part of PHL business policy.  Regarding observations of DGCA on 
deficiencies / inadequacies in maintenance, Pawan Hans has already complied with 
the findings / observations of DGCA and action taken report was submitted to DGCA.  
The safety initiatives and monitorin g mechanism are being implemented.  To fulfil the 
above objectives, safety audits as mentioned in MOE are being strictly followed.  
Quality audits of organizational procedure, quality audits of aircrafts and remedial 
action procedures as per C.A.R. 145 -A 3 0-C are being followed.  All Engineering 
Department Heads at Regions, Quality Manager, Maintenance personnel at Bases / 
Detachments have been advised to promptly ensure compliance as per the above 
C.A.R. and ensure proper and timely corrective actions on t he reports of internal 
audits.  The Accountable Manager is also being informed for his further corrective 
action.   
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 2 
 
One of the glaring reasons for PHL’s distressing performance has been  the 
huge outstanding dues which, as on 31 st March 2013, was as much as over  Rs. 196 
crore out of which nearly Rs. 49 crore i.e. 25 per cent was more than one year old. The 
Committee hardly need t o point out that had PHL received the one year old dues in 
time the Company would not have gone into red and would have made a profit of about 
Rs. 39 crore in 2011 -12. The long pending dues relate to north -eastern states, Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Punjab. It appears that the problem largely lies with State Governments 
of north-east in timely submission of documents to the Ministry of Home Affairs against 
75 % subsidy and in releasing 25 per cent non -subsidy amount. The Committee feels 
the Minister of Civil Aviation should impress upon the State Governments concerned at 
the highest level to take timely action in the matter on regular basis with the view to 
maintaining the financial health of PHL. The Committee hope that necessary action in 
this regard will be taken at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to outstandings from the customers, PHL has made efforts  and 
outstanding of Government of Punjab has been realized, similarly, NE states have also 
started releasing funds upon release of budget by the MHA in the new financial year. 
PHL has informed that the real problem of outstanding are the cases of NE states and 
UT of Lakshadweep which relies heavily on MHA subsidy.  Further, with very limited 
budget of MHA itself, the dues of the current year again remain outstanding.  It is 
understood that MHA has been allocated very limited subsidy budget this year also for 
NE states.  Similarly, in the case of UT of Lakshadweep, the budget of the financial 
year is utilized for clearing outstandings of previous year.  In order to expedite 
collections of ol d outstandings, PHL made efforts for recovery from Government of 
Bihar, HAL, A&N Administration, NE states and UT of Lakshadweep.  The Company 
has now set -up an Eastern Region with HQ at Guwahati for better focus on the 
business and recovery of outstanding  in respect of Eastern part of the Country, more 
specifically the NE States.  GM(Estern Region) has been assigned the task to following 
the recovery of dues from NE States. The Company has recently on 16.9.2013 sent 
reminder to the State Government of Arun achal Pradesh, Sikkim, MHA, A&N 
Administration, Tripura, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Jharkhand for expediting clearance 
of outstanding dues. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is also being requested for taking up 
with the State Governments for early clearance of o utstanding due of Pawan Hans.  
The Company is making continuous efforts for recovery of outstanding dues from 
various customers.  As against the outstanding amount of Rs.227.97 crores as on 
30.9.2013, the Company collected Rs.26.85 crores upto 15.10.2013. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
 

Recommendation at Sl. No. 3 
 
The Committee note that there is a huge potential for growth and expansion in 
the civil aviation sector, not only in the scheduled air transport but  also in new growth 
areas such as emergency medical services, law enforcement, disaster management 
etc. In this regard PHL has informed the Committee that they had chalked out a road 
map for foraying into new areas such as medical evacuation, law enforceme nt, news 
gathering, intra -city transportation connecting airports to city -centers in major cities, 
corporate travel, hotline washing of power insulators, etc. The Committee have also 
been informed that Gross Budgetary Support of Rs.10,030 crores has been p roposed 
forming part of a concept paper for development of helicopter industry in India during 
Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The CMD, PHL stated that the Company has already 
embarked upon an expansion plan and more than Rs. 600 crores is being spent on the 
acquisition of new helicopters.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry Civil 
Aviation should take up the proposed expansion plan of PHL with Planning 
Commission for approval of its projects and also provide all possible help to PHL in its 
expansion plans a nd address the budgetary constraints and issues regarding 
personnel management.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that during the 12 th Five Year Plan Period (2012 -17) the 
projections related to Pawan Hans approved by Planning Commission are for 
Acquisition of 10 helicopters and 02 seaplane, import of equipments, creation of 
maintenance centre / JV, Building Projects and others for a tota l amount of Rs.725 
crores through IEBR.  PHL has revised t he 12th Five Year Plan projections   to further 
augment the fleet by acquisition of 22 helicopters and 02 seaplanes at a cost of 
Rs.1189 crores.  The revised plan has been submitted to the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
for onward approval from Planning Commission. The Pawan Hans Board has 
constituted a Techno Economic Evaluation Committee and further course of action is 
being taken by the Committee in this regard.  As far as the roadmap for foray into n ew 
areas by Helicopter Industry and GBS of Rs.10,030 crs. is concerned, response is 
awaited from concerned Ministries like Tourism, MHA, DONER, etc. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.5 
 
The Committee note that the request of PHL/the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
seeking waiver of Ministry of Finance claim for re -payment of Rs. 470.22 crore 
(principal of Rs.130.91 crore and penal interest Rs.339.31 crore) advance to PHL for 
acquisition of 21 Westland helicopters during 1986 -88 has not been agreed to so far. 
The Committee note that Westland helicopters were at no cost to Govt. of India as they 
were funded by grant from U.K. and had proved to be non -performing assets that 
incurred operating loss  of Rs. 95.67 crore before being grounded in 1990 -91. In April, 
2012, the Ministry of Finance has reportedly sought PHL’s business plan for the future 
and how the MoF claim would be an impediment to growth of PHL. The Committee 
urge PHL to submit the requi site details to MoF at the earliest. The Committee hope 
that MoF will see reason and waive off the claim in overall interest of PHL’s growth and 
expansion of helicopter operations in the country. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that based on the meeting convened by AS (Budget), MoF on 
29.4.2012 regarding settlement of MoF claim, the Business Plan for 12 th Five Year 
Plan was prepared by  SBI Caps with recommendations for options for settlement of 
MoF claim.  They have  submitted SBI Caps Report to  Ministry of Civil Aviation vide 
letter dated 2.7.2012 and the Ministry of Civil Aviation had taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance and a meeting with the Dy. Secretary (Plan Finance -II) in Ministry of Finance 
was called on 7th August,2013 and a copy of the Business Plan was again submitted to 
them.  PHL has informed that they are pursuing the matter with Ministry of Finance. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.10 
 
The Committee have been informed that the accident rate for PHL in 2011 
averaged over preceding five years has been 2.92 per lakh flying hours as against 4.33 
for US and global rate of 6.2. The committee observe that though PHL’s accident rate 
vis-à-vis global rate and US rate is  low, they  are constrained to note that accidents 
rate of private companies within the country is not available with PHL. The Committee 
suggest that Ministry of Civil Aviation should collect data in this regard with a view to 
assessing the comparative performance of PHL vis-à-vis private companies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that DGCA was informed about observations of the 
Committee and requested DGCA to take necessary action for assessing the 
comparative performance of PHL vis-à-vis private companies. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 

CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.4 
 
The Committee are disappointed over the snail’s pace at which efforts are being 
made towards realizing the potential of helicopters services in the tourism sector.  So 
far no specific survey has been carried out by the Ministry of Tourism or the State 
Governments covering t ourism sector by helicopter services.  Even PHL has just 
carried out a joint preliminary study in this regard with few state Governments only.  
The Committee find that there are many sectors waiting to be tapped like Buddhist 
Tourist Circuit, Mumbai -Shirdi services, Hyderabad -Tirupati services, etc.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a comprehensive study must be conducted by 
PHL without any further loss of time to explore the possibilities of exploiting the tourist 
potential for helicopter services in different parts of the country and also for  developing 
a healthy symbiotic relationship between tourism promotion on one hand and 
expansion of helicopter services on the other. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pawan Hans has already carried out preliminary feasibility studies for various 
States/sectors like Tamilnadu, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Buddhist 
Sector in UP, Goa etc.  Further, Pawan Hans is also in the process of selection of 
External Consultant for preparation of Business Plan/Study.  PHL has floated an  EOI  
and after evaluation, parties would be short listed for issue of RFP (Request for 
proposal) document.  PHL has taken following actions f or expansion of helicopter 
services specially for Tourism: - 
 
- Recently signed an MOU with West Bengal and positioned one Dauphin 
helicopter at Kolkata for providing helicopter services in the State of West 
Bengal, initially for joy rides &  charter purposes.  Pawan Hans is also exploring 
the possibility of connecting other sectors in consultation with the State Govt. of 
West Bengal/other agencies.    
- Provided one Bell 206 L4 helicopter to IIT Kanpur for connecting IIT Kanpur with 
the State C apital Lucknow and recently it has also been decided to extend the 
helicopter service can be used by other passengers.   
- Started services on Delhi-Vrindavan sector by a Bell 206 L4 helicopter.  We are 
also exploring the possibilities of connecting Agra, Varanasi, Buddhist sector 
etc. for promotion of tourism in the State.   
 
A team of Pawan Hans is planning to visit Shirdi &  Tirupati to carry out the 
feasibility study for connecting Mumbai-Shirdi & Hyderabad-Tirupati sectors. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
  

Recommendation at Sl. No.11 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that out of the total strength of PHL’s 
980 employees as on 31.10.2011, almost half of them i.e., 461 employees are serving 
on contract basis.  It has been state that employees are being recruited on fixed term 
contract basis in order to meet the emergent opera tional requirements, following a 
freeze on recruitment imposed by the Ministry of Finance. According to the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, the freeze did not have any adverse effect on the PHL functioning. The 
Committee are dismayed to observe that no scienti fic study has been conducted to 
assess the manpower requirement of the Company to meet its expansion and 
diversification plans. It is only now PHL has proposed to undertake a study on the 
organizational re-structuring which also include review of manpower norms to optimize 
manpower resource to organizational needs. The Committee urge PHL to ensure that 
the study is completed at the earliest and take follow up action under intimation to the 
Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PHL has informed that at presen t there are 477 regular employees and 440 
contractual employees in the Company on fixed term contract basis. Since almost 80% 
business of the Company depends on tender for fixed period for lease of helicopters to 
different customers and there is stiff comp etition with the private helicopter operators 
therefore, there is need to keep the employees on contract basis.  PHL has further 
informed that in order to undertake this study a number of reputed institutions have 
been explored and expression of interest shall be shortly invited from them. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.12 
 
The strength of PHL’s Board as on 31.3.2013 is six comprising CMD, two 
representatives from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and one each from DGCA, ONGC 
and Air Force. The Committee regret to note that a proposal for creation of three 
functional directors - one each for Operations, Finance and Business development and 
nomination of three independent directors in PHL ha s been awaiting decision for over 
two years. In the meantime, ONGC has reportedly sought to increase the number of 
nominee directors in PHL Board from one to two following ONGC’s increase in PHL’s 
share holding from 21 % to 49 %. DPE has reportedly pointed  out that ONGC 
representative in PHL Board would be considered as a Government Director and the 
number of Government Directors on the Board of CPSE’s should be one -sixth of the 
total strength limited to maximum two. The Committee desire that the Ministry o f Civil 
Aviation should expeditiously resolved the issue of ONGC’s demand for two nominees 
and also decide about its own number of representatives on PHL’s Board in light of 
DPE’s guidelines and DPE’s view that ONGC’s nominee to be considered as a 
Government Director. The Committee would like to be apprised of the Government’s 
decision in this regard and final reconstitution of the Board of Directors of PHL. 
 
  

Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation vide letter dated 30.8.2013 forwarded  
observations of  Hon’ble Minister in the proposed strength of Board of Directors of 
Pawan Hans in which it has been decided that apart from CMD, the Company shall 
have two Functional Directors i.e. Director (Finance and Personnel & Administration) 
and Director (Operation and Marketing). Since ONGC is holding 49% equity in Pawan 
Hans therefore instead of One Director there would be Two Part Time Directors from 
ONGC on the Board of Pawan Hans. PHL has further informed that regarding the 
Government Directors t here will be only two Official part -time directors i.e. 
Administrative Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
Apart from these there will be three non -official independent directors on the Board. 
Accordingly, the total str ength of the Board upon restructuring shall be 10 directors on 
the Board of Pawan Hans.  The proposal after examination shall shortly be submitted 
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Department of Public Enterprises for the approval 
and once DPE approves the same final approval of ACC shall be sought. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(OM No.30020/33/2013-GA dated 5th November 2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 February, 2014 Chairman, 
18 Magha, 1935(S)              Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX-I   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th February 2014 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Room No. 147 (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House (Third Floor), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
6.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
8.  Shri Uday Singh 
9.  Shri Bhisma Shankar Alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10.  Shri Anil Desai 
11.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
12.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
13.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri G. C. Prasad Deputy Secretary  
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar DG (Commercial) 
2. Shri Jayant Sinha Principal Director (RC) 
3. Ms. Atreyee Das Principal Director (C) 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG 
to the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
 
(i). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX; 
(ii). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX, 
(iii). Report on action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report on Pawan Hans Limited. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports on  the 
basis of factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS 
/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON PAWAN HANS LIMITED. 
 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
12 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,6,7,8 and 9 ] 
  
 Percentage of total  
05 
 
 
41.67% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies  
 
Percentage of total  
NIL 
 
 
 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee [vide 
Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,3,5 and 10] 
 
Percentage of total.  
 
04 
 
 
 
33.33% 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government 
is still awaited [vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4,11 and 12] 
 
Percentage of total 
03 
 
 
25% 
 
 