 
 
 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
16 

CPU. No. 949 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the  Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Steel Authority of India Limited) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2013 / Phalguna 1934 (S) 
 
16 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
17 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
47 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
49 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
54 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting 55 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Sixth Report of COPU (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Steel Authority of India Limited’ 
 
57 
 
   
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
 
   Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Tariq Anwar * 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
21.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
22.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri Sunny Goel Executive Assistant 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
 
*   Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his appointment as Union Minister w.e.f. 
28.10.2012. 
 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -sixth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Steel Authority of India Limited”. 
 
2. The Twenty -sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha  / laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 29 April, 2008.  Replies of the Government to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 12 May 2011.  The draft 
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on             
30 January 2013.   
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 March 2013        Chairman, 
13 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  
  

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (2007 -2008) on “Steel Authority of India 
Limited” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th April 2008.  The report contained 
25 observations/recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8, 9,10,11,12,13,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,  
24 and 25       (Total 21) 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
 Sl. Nos. 5 and 15                     (Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect o f which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
 Sl. Nos. 6 and14                              (Total 2) 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited (Chapter V)                             (Nil) 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 2 
 
A.  Blast Furnace Productivity 
 
4. The Committee in their Report had observed as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that SAIL has a lower productivity of blast furnace when 
compared to other major private/public steel producers of the country like Tata 
Iron & Steel Company (TISCO) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), the 
reason attributed therefore ostensibly is inferior quality of iron ore content and 
higher impurities.  The Committee have been further informed that the blast 
furnace productivity will improve with the induction of state of the art technology 
as part of the mod ernization and expansion plans.  The Committee, feel that 
SAIL being a navratna company should not lag behind other private companies 
in terms of increasing its blast furnace productivity on the pretext of 

7 
 
improvement after modernisation and desire that th e blast furnace productivity 
of SAIL steel plants should be brought at par with the major private/public steel 
producers of the country.” 
 
5. In their action taken reply, the Government stated as under: - 
 
“SAIL is installing new Blast Furnace with state-of-art technology having useful 
volume of 4060m 3 at IISCO Steel Plant, Bhilai Steel Plant and Rourkela Steel 
Plant. Also reconstruction and upgradation of the existing Blast Furnaces (BF) is 
being taken up to improve the productivity. BF Productivity  is expected to go up 
to a level of 2.25 t/m3/day in new Blast Furnaces. As BF productivity is also 
dependent on quality of iron ore, early clearances is required from State Govt. to 
start development activities at the earliest at mines of Chiria, Rowghat,  Taldih & 
Thakurani for providing better input quality to BFs.“ 
 
 
6. Taking note of lower productivity of Blast Furnace (BF) in SAIL, the 
Committee had in their earlier report recommended that the BF productivity of 
SAIL Steel Plants should not lag behind other major private/public steel 
producers of the country.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel have  
stated that SAIL is installing new blast furnace in two steel plants with state -of-
art technology besides taking up reconstruction and upgra dation of the existing 
blast furnaces to improve the productivity.  The Committee are, however, 
constrained to observe that rather than providing specific information as to 
when SAIL will be able to bring its BF  productivity at par with major steel 
producers in the country, the Ministry has tried to remain non -commital on this 
aspect by adducing the argument that BF productivity is also dependent on 
quality of iron ore and early clearances are required from State  Government to 
start developmental activities at certain mines for providing better input qualities 
to blast furnaces.  While expressing their displeasure over the manner in which 
this issue is being tackled by the Ministry, the Committee wish to emphasise that 
concerted efforts need to be made to increase BF productivity of SAIL steel 
plants at the earliest so as to bring it at par with the major/private/public steel 
producers in the country.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
concrete steps taken in this regard.  
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 6 
 
B. Grant / Renewal of Captive iron ore mining leases 
 
7. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
  
“The Committee note that captive iron ore mining is the main source of iron ore 
for SAIL. SAIL has some captive iron ore mines, chief of which is the Chiria Iron 
Ore Mine in Jharkhand. The Committee further note that the existing iron ore 
resources with SA IL are limited and would exhaust within the next few years. 
Chiria mines has been identified by SAIL as the only potential source which can 
cater to the increased production requirements of 26 million tonnes by 2010. 
Apart from Chiria, SAIL would also requ ire new iron ore resources to meet its 
growth plan. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that the issue of 
grant/renewal of Chiria iron ore mining lease to SAIL has been long pending 
because of some reservations of the State Government of Jharkhan d and the 
matter is presently sub -judice and pending in Court. Meanwhile, the efforts 
made by SAIL/Ministry of Steel for amicable solution of the issue has also not 
yet yielded any positive result in the matter.  
 
The Committee observe that due to increasi ng boom in the steel sector, 
the issue of grant/renewal of iron ore mining leases is becoming very complex 
issue due to conflicting interests between various stake holders like mining 
companies and exporters, steel producers and the concerned State 
Governments. In view of this, the Committee feel that there is a need for a clear 
national policy to address the concerns of the stake holders particularly the 
producers contributing immensely to national economy. Keeping in mind the 
basic national interests and national goal of economic growth as enunciated 
broadly in XI Plan document an appropriate National Mineral Policy must 
determine the contours which can facilitate Navaratnas like SAIL to use its full 
potential. Careful consideration needs to be given to th e views of the key 
operators like SAIL in this regard. The Committee feel that there is of course a 
need to augment the revenues of States by increasing the royalty rates. At the 
same time, the Committee like to add that in the present case SAIL has got a 
legitimate case for retaining Chiria iron ore mine as it has already developed 
various infrastructure there besides absorbing an accumulated loss of Rs. 910 
crores during amalgamation of Indian Iron & Steel Company (IISCO) with SAIL 
in 2005. It is well kno wn that IISCO alongwith its properties Chiria and Gua iron 
ore mines were available for disinvestment from 1996 -2001 but not a single 
global/domestic player had shown any interest in it during that period. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend with all the conviction that the 
Government of India should deal with this issue of national interest at the 
highest priority for grant of mineral concession of Chiria iron ore mine to SAIL. 
 
The Committee also note that the Government of India is presently 
amending the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR) 

9 
 
Act 1957 for streamlining the procedure for grant/ renewal of mining leases in 
the country. The Committee feel that any delay in grant/renewal of mining 
leases would immensely harm SAIL and overall national interests.”  
 
8. The Government in its reply stated as follows: 
 
“With depletion of iron ore reserves in existing mines, Chiria is the only deposit 
with SAIL which can be developed as a large mine with state -of-art technology 
for a capacity of about 35 -40 Million tonnes per annum to meet the enhanced 
requirement of SAIL steel plants located in the Eastern sector at Bokaro, 
Burnpur, Durgapur & Rourkela. In view of the above, renewal of mining leases 
of Chiria mine is critical for SAIL and in the broader national interest. Continuous 
effort is therefore, being made by SAIL for early renewal of mining leases at 
Chiria so that further action for development of mine can be undertaken.  
 
In the meantime, the Jharkhand State Government has accorded in -
principle approval for renewal of Budhaburu (Mc -Lellan) lease of Chiria on 
23.10.09. 
 
Action taken by SAIL & Ministry of Steel pertaining to renewal of Chiria & 
Gua lease after grant of in -principle approval by Jharkhand State Government for 
renewal of Budhaburu lease of Chiria on 23.10.09: 
 
 On 28.10.09, Chairman SAIL, during his  meeting with Hon’ble Governor, 
Advisor to the Governor and Chief Secy, Jharkhand requested for renewal of 
other leases of Chiria & Gua. 
 On 18.11.09, SAIL informed Jharkhand Govt. to renew leases corresponding 
to 1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases  of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in 
the present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. 
 Secretary (Steel) held meeting with Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand on 
17.2.10 on the issue of renewal of mining leases including Chiria & Gua mines 
of SAIL. 
 Secretary Steel vide letter dated 14.7.10 requested Advisor to His Excellency, 
Governor of Jharkhand for his intervention for renewal of under deemed 
extension  leases of Chiria & Gua in view of Rule 24 B of MCR 1960. 
 Chairman SAIL met His Excellency Governor of Jharkhand and Chief 
Secretary Jharkhand on 20.7.10 and requested for early renewal of Chiria & 
Gua leases. 
 SAIL vide letter dated 22.7.10 requested Secretary Mines & Geology, 
Jharkhand for renewal of under deemed extension leases of Chiria & Gua.  
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 28.7.10, requested His Excellency, Governor 
of Jharkhand for early renewal of five under deemed extension leases of 
Chiria & Gua. 
 For early renewal of Chiria leases, MD, BSL met Advisor to the Hon’ble 
Governor of Jharkhand on 10.8. 10. As discussed in the meeting, MD, BSL 
vide letter dated 28.8.10, communicated the available iron ore reserves vis -à-

10 
 
vis iron ore requirement for next 50 years in view of ongoing and future 
expansion plans of SAIL.  
 Hon’ble Minister of Steel, vide letter  dated 5.10.10 solicited Chief Minister, 
Jharkhand’s intervention for early action by State Govt. for formally renewing 
the mining leases at Dhobil and Ankua of Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore 
and Jhillingburu-II of Gua and also for computing one billion  tonne of deposits 
to be immediately allocated to SAIL from Chiria-Gua belt.  
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 20.12.10 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter d ated 23.12.10 requested Hon’ble Chief Minister 
Jharkhand for his intervention for immediate renewal of the five mining leases, 
namely Dhobil & Ankua at Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore & Jhillingburu -II 
at Gua and also requested for initiation of subseque nt discussion on renewal 
of balance four leases namely Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur & Tatiburu at Chiria & 
Jhillingburu-I at Gua.  
 Vide letter dated 26.1.11, Hon’ble Chief Minister, Jharkhand assured SAIL that 
State Govt. will take necessary actions to ensure th at SAIL does not suffer 
from deficiency of any raw materials required in the State. 
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jharkhand on 10.3.11 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 
Pending renewal of min ing leases, following activities have been initiated 
for development of a large mechanized mine: 
 
 Environment Clearance 
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF has already considered the 
environment clearance proposals pertaining to Budhaburu, Ajitaburu, Dhobil & 
Sukri-Latur leases of Chiria.  MOEF has since accorded environment 
clearance for Budhaburu lease on 23.3.2011. 
 Forest Clearance 
MoEF, GoI vide letter dated 7.3.11 granted Stage -I forest clearance for 
diversion of: 
 153.04 ha of forest land in Ajitaburu lease.  
 379.228 ha of forest land in Budhaburu lease. 
 33.40 ha of forest land in Sukri-Latur lease  
Dhobil lease already have a valid forest clearance for 29.11 ha. 
 Preparation of DPR   
To develop a state -of-the art mine at Chiria with a capacity of 7 MTPA, M/s 
Hatch Associates, Australia have been appointed as consultant. Preparation of 
DPR is under progress and likely to be completed by September’2011. 
 Land for Processing Plant 
For setting up a processing plant at Patherbasa, Manoharpur, land has been 
identified and an application for acquisition of 405 Ha in the said area has 
already been submitted to DC, Chaibasa on 24.9.09.  
 Mining Plan 

11 
 
 Mining Plans of Ajitaburu, Budhaburu, Dhobil & Sukri-Latur leases of Chiria 
 have already been approved by IBM, Nagpur. 
 
9. Taking note of the fact that the issue of grant/renewal of Chiria iron ore 
mining lease to SAIL has be en long pending due to certain  reservations of the 
State Government of Jharkh and and the matter being sub -judice, the Committee 
had in their Report observed that there is a need for a clear national policy to 
address the concerns of the stake holders particularly the producers 
contributing immensely to national economy. The Committee had, therefore , 
recommended that the Government of India should deal with the issue of grant 
of mineral concession of Chiria iron ore mines to SAIL by according highest 
priority as any delay in grant/renewal of mining leases would immensely harm 
SAIL and overall national interests.  
  
In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Steel has stated that the 
Jharkhand State Government has accorded in - principle approval for renewal of 
Budhaburu (Mc -Lellan) lease of Chiria, for which environment clearance has 
been obtained. Moreover, the matter is being vigorously pursued at various 
levels, which include communications at the level of Hon’ble Governor and Chief 
Minister of Jharkhand, for the renewal of mining leases of other Chiria and Gua 
mines.  While appreciating these efforts, the Committee wish to point out that a 
lot of time has been spen t in dealing with the issue of grant/renewal of mining 
lease for other Chiria and Gua mines, and they urge the Government to resolve 
this issue at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 7 
 
Development of iron ore mines 
 
10. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that in order to ensure availability of iron ore for steel 
production, the development of iron ore mines is of paramount importance, 
which depend on the timely grant/renewal of captive iron ore mining leases  and 
obtaining forest & environment clearances. The Committee are unhappy to note 
that though the Ministry of Steel is in continuous dialogue with Ministry of 

12 
 
Environment and Forests, respective state Governments and other nodal 
agencies to expedite forest and environment clearances for the mines, there has 
been inordinate delays in granting these clearances by the concerned agencies. 
Even the expansion and modernization  of existing mines  is also being  delayed 
due to the lengthy , cumbersome and time -consuming  procedures associated 
with getting these forest and environmental clearances. The Committee 
recommend that the number of stages and the levels in the processing of 
applications should be considerably reduced and forest and environmental 
clearances should be granted within a pre -specified time frame. The Committee 
further recommend that the Government should examine the feasibility of 
adopting international norms in this regard, which stipulate fixed timeframe for 
grant of various clearances.” 
 
11. The Government in its reply stated as follows: 
 
“Mining operations at Ajiataburu, Budhaburu & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria are 
stopped since June’94, Dec’05 & Mar’09 for want of forest clearance. Recently 
on 7.3.11, MoEF has granted Stage-I forest clearance for Ajiataburu, Budhaburu 
& Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria. Production in these leases will start only after 
compliance of conditions that are stipulated in Stage-I forest clearance order. 
 
Presently mining operations at Barsua - Kalta and Boalni mines are 
continuing on the strength of Temporary Working Permission (TWP) and will 
continue till 5.4.11 and 10.4.11 respectively. Stage -I forest clearance for Barsua 
-Kalta and Bolani mines were granted by MoEF on 8.3.11 and 12.11.10 without 
the approval for contin uation of mining operation in already broken area. MoEF 
has already been requested for grant of approval for continuation of mining 
operation at these mines before April’11. Ministry of Steel has also taken up the 
matter with MoEF in this regard.  
 
Fixed t ime frame for grant of statutory clearances is essential for 
development of iron and steel industry. In case, the clearance is not given in 
time, then it could be treated as deemed granted. This is one of the solutions for 
timely grant of statutory clearances.  
 
The Ministry of Steel takes up the matter of delayed forest and 
environment clearances  and  extension of temporary working permission (TWP) 
for different mines, with the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)  
on several occasions  and th rough appropriate interactions the early forest 
clearance (Stage-I) and Environment clearance  have been received as a case 
of Budhaburu lease of  Chiria etc.”  
 
12. The Committee in their original report recommended that the number of 
stages and the levels in the processing of application for Captive Iron Ore mining 
leases should be considerably reduced and forest and environmental clearances 

13 
 
should be granted within a pre -specified time frame.  The Committee further 
recommended that the Government should examine the feasibility of adopting 
international norms in this regard which stipulate  fixed time frame for grant of 
various clearances.  In response, the Government have, inter-alia, stated that the 
Ministry of Steel takes up the matter of delayed forest and environmental 
clearances and extension of temporary working permission for different mines 
with the Union Ministry of Environment and Forest on several occasions and 
through appropriate interaction.  Early forest clearance (Stage -I) and 
Environment clearance have reportedly been received as a case of Budhaburu 
lease of Chiria etc. 
 It appears from the reply of the Government that the Ministry of Steel have 
not taken up with the Ministry of Environment and Forest the question of fixing a 
time frame for processing applications for captive iron ore mining leases and 
also to examine the feasibility adopting international norms in this regard.  The 
Committee would urge t he Ministry of Steel to pursue this matter with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest and apprise the Committee of the outcome. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 8 
 
C. Export of Iron Ore  
  
13. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
 
“As regards the export of iron ore, the Committee note that there has been a 
high level of export or iron ore from India.  As per the information made available 
to the Committee during 2006 -07, India produced 180.66 millions tonnes of iron 
ore out of which 93. 79 million tonnes was exported.  The Committee are 
apprehensive that the continued export of iron ore will affect the long term 
availability of iron ore for domestic steel production and may even lead to a 
situation, wherein, the country may have to import  iron ore for producing steel.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion that all out efforts be made to conserve 
the scarce iron ore to safeguard the future steel requirements of the country.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government may take 
all necessary steps to discourage the export of iron ore, may be by means of 
putting in place some stringent fiscal measures like hike in export duty etc. 
and/or other suitable policy measures.” 
 
 

14 
 
14. The Government in its action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
 “The Government of India recently increased export duty on iron ore of all sorts 
(except pellets) to 20% ad-valorem. The effect of this increase on the quantity of 
iron ore export has to be observed for some time, before it can be conc luded as 
to whether this export duty is sufficient to restrict the export of iron ore from the 
country or further measures are required for restricting export of iron ore.” 
 
15. In the light of high level of export of iron ore from India, the Committee had 
in their earlier report  expressed the view that all out efforts should be made to 
conserve the scarce iron ore to safeguard the future steel requirements of the 
country and accordingly, recommended that the Government might take all 
necessary steps to di scourage the export of iron ore by means of putting in 
place some stringent fiscal measures like hike in export duty etc. and/or other 
suitable policy measures.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated that 
the Government of India recently increased export duty on iron ore of all sorts 
(except pellets) to 20% ad -valorem.  Although the effect of this increase on the 
quantity of iron ore export has to be observed for some time before it can be 
concluded as to whether this export duty is suffic ient to restrict the export of 
iron ore from the country, the Committee express their satisfaction over the 
steps taken and hope that this increase in the rate of export duty will go a long 
way in discouraging the export of scarce iron ore to safeguard the  future steel 
requirements of the country. 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 14 
 
D. Merger / Acquisition of Steel PSUs  
 
16. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows:  
 
“The Committee note that consolidation/merger of steel PSUs will help PSUs to 
acquire global size of operation in order to attain global scale and synergize 
operation and bring down cost of production. The Committee are of the view that 
the merger of steel  PSUs with SAIL would bring far reaching benefits like 
consolidating their strength in terms of competitiveness and distribution of raw 
material among the steel PSUs etc,. The Committee feel that strong backward 
and forward linkages are required to effectively cope with the powerful dynamics 
of a globalised steel industry. The Committee note that the proposal for merger 
of Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL), Maharashtra Electroskmelt Ltd. (MEL), 
etc. with SAIL are under the active consideration of the Minis try of Steel. The 

15 
 
Committee recommend that these proposals should be expedited and should be 
pursued to their logical conclusion. The Committee further recommend that the 
complexities involving these mergers should also be sorted out soon. The 
Committee al so feel that while merging smaller companies with SAIL, due 
considerations should be given to the economies and financial impact thereof on 
SAIL without ignoring the interests of workers and social obligations entrusted to 
public sector undertakings in the country. 
 
As regards the merger of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) with SAIL, 
the Committee have been informed that the proposal for merger of RINL with 
SAIL is not presently under active consideration. The Committee desire that the 
merger of RINL with SAIL should be revisited to see if any new consensus could 
be reached in the present steel scenario.” 
 
17. In response to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the 
Government stated as follows: 
 
“The Government while considering the induction of strategic partner in 
Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd. and implementation of Phase II of the Neelachal 
Steel Plant had earlier decided the merger and acquisition of NINL by SAIL as 
recommended by the Committee of Secretaries.  Ministry of Steel, however, has 
revisited the proposal and it has been found that the acquisition of NINL by RINL 
will have better synergy as compared to merger with SAIL.  Accordingly, it had 
then been decided with the approval of the compet ent authority, that NINL be 
acquired by RINL by purchase of 51% of the shareholding of NINL from MMTC 
and other PSUs.  RINL will remain committed to taking over all assets, liabilities, 
raw material tie -ups and concessions extended to NINL with a binding 
commitment for taking up and completing implementation of Phase -II of the 
Steel Plant within 24 to 30 months with a stipulated time table and with clear 
mile stones, as were to be taken over by SAIL.” 
  
Status of merger of MEL with SAIL 
 
“Subsequent to the approval of the expert group that MEL should be merged 
with SAIL, Board of Directors of SAIL and MEL in their 314 th meeting held on 
25.5.06 and in the 193 rd meeting of MEL Board held on 26.5.06 have accorded 
in-principle approval for the merger of MEL with SAIL. It has been decided that 
to make the process of merger tax -effective, SAIL shares shall be issued to all 
the private shareholders of MEL. 
 
The merger process required various issues to be resolved with the State 
Government of Mahar ashtra (GoM) like obtaining No Objection for transfer of 
MEL land in favour of SAIL etc. Accordingly, SAIL/MEL applied for the NOC 
from GoM in February, 2007.  After continuous follow -up and review meetings 
with Government of Maharashtra, (GoM), as well as  persuasion by MoS at the 
highest level, SAIL received a conditional clearance from District Collector, 

16 
 
Chandrapur, GoM on 5 th June, 2009. After signing the required affidavits by 
SAIL/MEL, accepting the terms and conditions stipulated by GoM, the final order 
for transfer of MEL land to SAIL was issued by District Collector, Chandrapur in 
July, 2009.  
 
Subsequently, the Scheme of Amalgamation of MEL with SAIL was 
approved by SAIL Board in their 353rd meeting held on 18th August, 2009 and by 
the MEL Board in their 217 th meeting held on 27 th August, 2009. After obtaining 
clearances from the Ministry of Steel, the Stock Exchanges, the application for 
merger was filed by SAIL and MEL with MCA on 13.01.2010. The first hearing 
on the merger was done by MC A on 05.05.2010 and the order was received 
from MCA on 2 nd June, 2010 for obtaining the approval of the shareholders of 
SAIL and MEL, and conditional waiving of secured and unsecured creditors 
meeting. Both SAIL and MEL obtained the respective shareholders  approval in 
the AGM held on 30 th September, 2010 and 25 th August, 2010 respectively. The 
confirmation petition was filed with MCA in October, 2010 and the second 
hearing was done by MCA in November, 2010. The order for final hearing on 
8.3.2011 was received from MCA on January, 2011. In pursuance of the hearing 
on 8 th March, 2011, the ‘Written Submissions’ on behalf of SAIL and MEL was 
filed with MCA on 15th March, 2011.  
 
It is expected that the final order from MCA is likely to be received shortly 
and the merger process shall be completed in all respects by May, 2011.” 
 
18. While observing that merger of steel PSUs will help them to acquire global 
size of operation, the Committee had in their earlier report made specific 
recommendation that the issue of m erger of Rastriya Ispat Nigam Limited (RINL) 
with SAIL should be revisited to ascertain whether new consensus could be 
reached in the present steel scenario.  The Committee regret to note that the 
Action Taken Reply of the Government is completely silent on this aspect.  While 
reiterating their earlier recommendation on revisiting the proposal for merger of 
RINL with SAIL, the Committee desire the Government to clearly specify its stand 
on the issue and apprise the Committee of the same.  
  

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Capacity Utilization 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the capacity utilization of the majority of 
steel plants of SAIL is above 100%.  Keeping in view the fact that domestic demand for 
steel in construction sector has been steadily growing in recent times and is estimated 
to grow further, the Committee recommend that SAIL should strive to further improve 
its techno -economic parameters and achieve higher capacity utilization an d expedite 
measures for upgradation and expansion to meet the growing demand of steel in the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to maintain predominance in the steel sector and to face global 
competitiveness, SAIL has taken up Modernisation & Exp ansion Plan for its five 
integrated steel plants and special steels plants. The Modernization & Expansion Plan 
envisages production of crude steel to be enhanced from base level of 12.84 Mtpa to 
21.4 Mtpa. Besides this, the plan adequately addresses the ne ed of SAIL Plants 
towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy savings, enriching product 
mix, pollution control, developing mines & collieries to meet higher requirement of key 
inputs, introduce customer centric processes and have matching infra structure facilities 
in the Plant to support higher production volumes. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Blast Furnace Productivity 
 
The Committee note that SAIL has a lower productivity of blast furnace when 
compared to other major private/public steel producers of the country like Tata Iron & 
Steel Company (TISCO) and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL), the reason attributed 
therefore ostensibly is inferior quality of iron or e content and higher impurities.  The 
Committee have been further informed that the blast furnace productivity will improve 
with the induction of state of the art technology as part of the modernization and 
expansion plans.  The Committee, feel that SAIL b eing a navratna company should not 
lag behind other private companies in terms of increasing its blast furnace productivity 
on the pretext of improvement after modernisation and desire that the blast furnace 
productivity of SAIL steel plants should be brou ght at par with the major private/public 
steel producers of the country. 
 

18 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SAIL is installing new Blast Furnace with state -of-art technology having useful 
volume of 4060m 3 at IISCO Steel Plant, Bhilai Steel Plant and Rourkela Steel  Plant. 
Also reconstruction and upgradation of the existing Blast Furnaces (BF) is being taken 
up to improve the productivity. BF Productivity is expected to go up to a level of 2.25 
t/m3/day in new Blast Furnaces. As BF productivity is dependent on qualit y of iron ore, 
early clearances is required from State Govt’s to start development activities at the 
earliest at mines of Chiria, Rowghat, Taldih & Thakurani for providing better input 
quality to BFs.     
  
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 6 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Coke Rate 
 
The Committee have been informed that the coke rate according to SAIL means 
the amount of coke consumed per tonne of hot metal produced in the blast furnace.  
The Committee note that the coke rate of SAIL is higher than the coke rate of major 
steel producers such as RINL, TISCO.  The Committee have been further apprised that 
to reduce the coke rate, SAIL has taken various steps such as maximizing the usage of 
sinter, using pulverized coal injection and installing bigger volume blast furnace etc.  
The Committee believe that the reduction in coke rate is a key factor for i ncreasing the 
profitability of the Company and therefore expect that the reduction in coke rate shall 
be achieved by 2010 as claimed by SAIL authorities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With installation of state -of-art technology BFs and upgradation of existing BFs 
with alternate fuel injection in all furnaces and better quality of iron after commissioning 
of beneficiation facilities at mines, Coke rate has reduced from the level of 533 kg/thm 
(2007-08) to 518 kg/thm (2009 -10) and is expected to reduce f urther to less than 450 
kg/thm in new Blast furnaces. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Project Implementation 
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that some of the major projects currently 
under execution are unlikely to be commissioned as per schedule due to delays on the 
part of suppliers in supply and erection of equipment and delay in timely handling over 
of site due to operational requirement etc.  The Committee strongly feel that speedy 
implementation of the above projects is essential to reap the benefits of the ongoing 
favourable market situation and full use of the expansion programme of SAIL.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the issue of timely delivery of equipme nts and 
handing over of sites should be taken up with the concerned suppliers at different 
levels.  The Committee further recommend that suitable deterrent measures be 
incorporated in the agreements with the suppliers to take care of avoidable delays on 
the above issues. 
 
As regards the other aspects of project implementation, the Committee are 
happy to note that the status of various projects is strictly monitored on day -to-day 
basis.  The major projects are found to be further reviewed at the level of Sec retary, 
Ministry of Steel and also Minister of Steel on quarterly basis.  Although effective 
monitoring mechanism is already in place yet the Committee feel that further strong 
measures are required to be taken to eliminate delays at various stages of the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SAIL has taken up many measures to expedite the tendering process & 
implementation and to ensure completion of the Modernisation & Expansion Plan 
within stipulated time as indicated below:  
 
 Pre-bid conferences and consultation with technology suppliers & their 
partners were organised for ensuring wider participation and increased 
response in the tenders. Based on their suggestions and due diligence within 
the organization, revision/streamlini ng of project manuals, Standard Bidding 
Document and procurement procedure etc. was carried out.  
 Repackaging by breaking into supply, civil, structural & auxiliary packages 
for wider participation being done as per requirement. 
 Issue of steel by SAIL for civil & structural work. 
 Issue of Letter of Award within a week of final approval. Signing of contract 
within a month by preparing the Draft Contract by SAIL itself instead of the 
practice of getting the draft contract from the contractor which was taking a 
couple of months earlier. 
 SAIL has simplified its purchase and contract procedures. The new 
procedure aims at meeting the expectations of internal and external 
customers, transparency requirements, improving the speed of decision 
making, instilling confidence amongst the decision taking authorities, etc. for 
timely implementation of ensuing projects. 

20 
 
 Implementation of Integrated Project Management System and online project 
monitoring system through project monitoring software ‘Primavera’. 
 Enhancing delegation of powers at various levels for faster decision making 
 Standing Committee of Directors constituted to address the issue of co -
ordination across plants in implementation of Expansion Plans of SAIL and 
they are meeting regularly. 
 
In order to expedite t he projects implementation, the projects are monitored on 
day-to-day basis by the respective Project Managers of the Plants and the Project 
Heads. The Project In -charges and various monitoring committees, both at plant and 
corporate level, analyse the prog ress of respective packages w.r.t. delays and suggest 
corrective actions to be taken from time to time. Further, the project is monitored by the 
Plant Level Standing Committee comprising of Head of Projects, Head of Works and 
Head of Finance on a monthly b asis. This Plant Level Standing Committee submits its 
action plan to the Managing Director/ Chief Executive of the Plant for remedial actions, 
if any, to be taken to ensure that the projects are completed in time. Managing 
Director/Chief Executive of the P lant reviews the projects every month for timely action 
to complete the projects on schedule. The physical and financial progress on projects 
is also reviewed by SAIL Board in the Board meeting on regular basis. 
 
A Board Sub -Committee, comprising of two in dependent Directors, Director 
(Technical) and Managing Director of the Plant, has been constituted to review the 
major projects (Rs.50 Crore & above).    
 
Apart from SAIL, all major projects including expansion projects are also being 
monitored by Ministry of Steel. During the review,  the physical and financial progress 
of the projects are monitored and alongwith the reasons for  time over run and cost 
over run if any.  For timely completion of the projects in time, necessary advisories are 
issued to PSUs and Ministry attempts to resolve impediments in implementation of 
projects by taking up with concerned Ministry/Department/Agency.   
  
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Development of iron ore mines 
  
The Committee note that in order to ensure availability of iron ore for steel 
production, the development of iron ore min es is of paramount importance, which 
depend on the timely grant/renewal of captive iron ore mining leases and obtaining 
forest & environment clearances. The Committee are unhappy to note that though the 
Ministry of Steel is in continuous dialogue with Mini stry of Environment and Forests, 
respective state Governments and other nodal agencies to expedite forest and 
environment clearances for the mines, there has been inordinate delays in granting 
these clearances by the concerned agencies. Even the expansion and modernization  
of existing mines  is also being  delayed due to the lengthy , cumbersome and time -

21 
 
consuming  procedures associated with getting these forest and environmental 
clearances. The Committee recommend that the number of stages and the levels in the 
processing of applications should be considerably reduced and forest and 
environmental clearances should be granted within a pre -specified time frame. The 
Committee further recommend that the Government should examine the feasibility of 
adopting international norms in this regard, which stipulate fixed timeframe for grant of 
various clearances. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Mining operations at Ajiataburu, Budhaburu & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria are 
stopped since June’94, Dec’05 & Mar’09 for want of fore st clearance. Recently on 
7.3.11, MoEF has granted Stage -I forest clearance for Ajiataburu, Budhaburu & Sukri -
Latur leases of Chiria. Production in these leases will start only after compliance of 
conditions that are stipulated in Stage -I forest clearance order.  Presently mining 
operations at Barsua - Kalta and Boalni mines are continuing on the strength of 
Temporary Working Permission (TWP ) and will continue till 5.4.11 and 10.4.11 
respectively. Stage-I forest clearance for Barsua -Kalta and Bolani mines were granted 
by MoEF on 8.3.11 and 12.11.10 without the approval for continuation of mining 
operation in already broken area. MoEF has alr eady been requested for grant of 
approval for continuation of mining operation at these mines before April’11. Ministry of 
Steel has also taken up the matter with MoEF in this regard.  
 
Fixed time frame for grant of statutory clearances is essential for development of 
iron and steel industry. In case, the clearance is not given in time, then it could be 
treated as deemed granted. This is one of the solutions for timely grant of statutory 
clearances.  
 
The Ministry of Steel takes up the matter of delayed for est and environment 
clearances  and  extension of temporary working permission (TWP) for different mines, 
with the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)  on several occasions  and 
through appropriate interactions the early forest clearance (Stag e-I) and Environment 
clearance  have been received as a case of Budhaburu lease of  Chiria etc.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 12 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
Recommendation No.8 
 
Export of iron ore 
  
  As regards the export of iron ore, the Committee note that there has been a high 
level of export or iron ore from India.  As per the information made available to the 
Committee during 2006 -07, India produced 180.66 millions tonnes of iron ore out of 

22 
 
which 93.79 million tonnes was exported.  The Committee are apprehensive that the 
continued export of iron ore will affect the long term availability of iron ore for domestic 
steel production and may even lead to a situation, wherein, the country may have to 
import iron ore for producing steel.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that all out 
efforts be made to conserve the scarce iron ore to safeguard the future steel 
requirements of the country.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Government may take all necessary steps to discourage the export of iron ore, may be 
by means of putting in place some stringent fiscal measures like hike in export duty etc. 
and/or other suitable policy measures.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Government of Indi a recently increased export duty on iron ore of all sorts 
(except pellets) to 20% ad -valorem.  The effect of this increase on the quantity of iron 
ore export has to be observed for some time, before it can be concluded as to whether 
this export duty is suf ficient to restrict the export of iron ore from the country or further 
measures are required for restricting export of iron ore. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 11th May 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 15 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Gainfull utilization of fine iron ore 
 
 As regards the utilization of fine iron ore, the Committee are unhappy to note 
that the fines are  not gainfully utilized by SAIL. The Committee note that as part of the 
current expansion plan, SAIL has planned to set up new Sinter plants and new pellet 
plants for higher usage of fines. The Committee further note that though the new 
technology in steel  making such as Corex which have the potential to use fines for 
steel making has been commercialized even in India, the same has not yet been 
applied by SAIL in its plants but only under examination for its corporate strategy 
beyond the year 2010. The Committee therefore while expressing their concern at such 
sluggish  approach of SAIL  towards adoption of high end technologies, recommend 
that SAIL should timely induct such new technologies of steel making for increasing the 
gainful utilization of fine iron ore.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Iron ore fines with more than 60% Fe are regularly used in SAIL plants for sinter 
making. Utilisation of ore fines through sinter is the most effective and economical 
technology used all over the world. 

23 
 
 
In order to gainfully utilize low grade iron ore fines and slimes, SAIL is taking 
action to install pellet plants at mines.  
 
Apart from this, SAIL is examining setting up Steel Plants under Joint Venture 
using ITMK3+finex technology.  For ITMK3, SAIL is i n discussion with Kobe Steel for 
preparing feasibility report.  For finex technology, it is in advance stage of discussion 
with POSCO to set up 1.5 MT Plant at Bokaro. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
Coking Coal 
 
Acquisition of coking coal equity abroad 
 
 The Committee note that due to poor availability of indigenous coking coal from 
Coal India Ltd. (CIL), around 75% of the coking coal requirement of steel PSUs is 
being met by imports.  The quality of India coking coal is also not suitable for steel 
production.  Thus the acquisition of coking coal equity abroad is essential for the raw 
material security of SAIL. 
 
 The Committee note that SAIL explored the possibilities of participating i n 
acquiring stakes in coking coal projects in Australia, Mozambique, Russia, Poland etc., 
but could not acquire any stake as none of the companies abroad wished to dilute their 
equity stakes in favour of other partners.  In fact most of those coking coal c ompanies 
are found to be in the acquisition mode rather than in the disinvestment mode.  The 
response to SAIL’s issue of expression of interest, inviting overseas coal mining 
companies to offer equity has also been lukewarm.  The Committee have been 
informed that a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in which SAIL has invested Rs.1000 
crores is being set up for securing coking coal from foreign countries.  The Committee 
feel that the proposed SPV should have been set up a couple of years earlier.  In the 
present scenario where global mergers & acquisitions have already taken place for 
securing raw materials, the Committee doubt the possible success that the SPV could 
achieve in securing coking coal.    The Committee nevertheless recommend that the 
SPV should begin  its operation immediately and should follow suitable modalities for 
achieving its objectives.  The Committee further recommend that the SPV should act 
on war footing for acquiring coking coal mines abroad. 
 
 The Committee note that the National Steel Poli cy has suggested that in terms 
of future policy, exports of iron ore, especially high grade lumps would be leveraged for 
imports of coking coal.  Keeping in view large scarcity of coking coal, the Committee 
feel that this is a good proposition and therefor e recommend that the Government 
should make efforts to secure such agreements from those countries. 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The ICVL has been the special initiative of the Government to leverage strategic 
raw material security overseas through different route :   
(a) Prospecting route  
(b) other initiative methods; and 
(c) market operations.  
  
ICVL is engaged in G2G dialogue with few countries to seek coal mines under 
Government agreements. A MoU was signed between ICVL and the provincial 
Governor of K alimantan, Indonesia on 25 th January, 2011 which envisages direct 
allocation of mineral resources in the Province for ICVL.  
 
Based on the approval given by the Government, International Coal Ventures 
Pvt. Ltd. (ICVL) has been incorporated as a Joint Venture Company on 20th May, 2010.  
The two major promoters of ICVL are SAIL and CIL, with RINL, NMDC and NTPC as 
its other three promoters.   
 
ICVL has started functioning as an independent organization.   
 
It has participated in bidding processes for acquisition of coal assets in Australia 
and is now in the process of finalizing acquisition of an equity stake in a large thermal 
coal mine in Indonesia.   
 
As part of the G2G efforts, ICVL has entered into an MoU with the Provincial 
Government of Central Kalimantan (GoCK), Indonesia under which GoCK would 
directly allocate concessions for coal, both coking and thermal, iron ore and limestone 
on nomination bas is.  ICVL or its promoter companies (either one or more), would in 
turn explore setting up a steel processing facility/ steel plant.   
 
ICVL is also looking at acquisitions of prospective coal blocks and coal 
companies including equity stakes and developme nt of coal assets as joint 
development projects in Mozambique and USA.  The other target countries are USA 
and Colombia.   
 
The focus of acquisition continues to be Australia, though the available 
opportunities, particularly for coking coal are very limited.   
 
Efforts are on to make a few acquisitions during the Financial Year 2011-12.   
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
  

25 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Tapping new resources of coking coal within India 
 
 The Committee note that SAIL would require 23 million tonnes(MT) of coking 
coal by 2010, as part of its corporate plan as against the present requirement of 15 
million tones per annum(MTPA). The Committee also note that around 75% of the 
present requirement is being met by imports. The Committee therefore feel that there is 
an urgent need to tap new resources of coking coal within India. The Committee have 
been informed that SAIL is acquiring new coking coal blocks such as Tasra block, 
Sitanala block etc. T he Committee further note that SAIL is also entering into a joint 
venture (JV) with Tata Steel for developing medium coking coal blocks. The Committee 
recommend that such proactive steps should be pursued to their logical conclusion.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to reduce dependence on imported coal, SAIL has planned to increase 
domestic availability of coking coal to the level of 8 -10 MTPA during next 5 -6 years. In 
this regard, SAIL is looking at opportunities for acquiring new coking coal blocks for 
development as well as entering into partnership with BCCL and other strategic 
partners for acquisition/ development of new coal blocks. Updated status of steps 
taken by SAIL in this regard is as follows: 
 
a) Development of new captive coking coal blocks: 
 
i)   Tasra coking coal block:  
 
 All statutory clearances for mine development have been obtained. Planned 
mine capacity is 4 MTPA (ROM) to produce about 2 MTPA of clean coal. 
Approval of Terms of Reference (TOR) in connection with Environmental 
Clearance for new washery is under consideration at MoEF. Selection of Mine 
Developer cum Operator (MDO) is in progress.  In the meantime, small scale 
production has been started from November’2009.  Around 77,000 tons of coal 
has been mined from the Tasra block till now. 
 
ii)  Sitanala Coking Coal Block:  
     
All statutory clearances for mine development have been obtained. Mine 
planned for production of 0.3 MTPA (ROM). Issue of revised NIT in process for 
selection of Mine Developer cum Operator (MDO).  
 
b) Allocation of new coking coal blocks   
 
SAIL has identified following three numbers coking coal blocks in Jharkhand and 
requested Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Coal for allocation under Govt. 
dispensation : 

26 
 
i) Jhirki/ Jhirki (West) block 
ii)  Routpara block 
iii) Routpara along with Rhone Routpara (West) block  
 
Hon’ble Minister of Steel has requested Hon’ble Minister of State for Coal 
in February’2010 to allocate these coking coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. 
dispensation route. Ministry of Ste el has again requested Ministry of Coal in 
December’2010 for allocating these blocks to SAIL. 
 
c)  Partnership with BCCL: 
 
Kapuria Block: The Block has a mineable reserve of about 37 MT, which can be 
developed  into a modern mine of about 2 MTPA capacity. After long persuasion, 
the Board of BCCL has cleared the proposal in June’2008 for formation of a joint 
venture company of SAIL & BCCL for development of Kapuria block. BCCL has 
sought clearance of Coal India Ltd. (CIL) before signing of MOU. However, CIL is 
not in favour of formation of Joint Venture Company of SAIL & BCCL for 
development of Kapuria block.  
 
d)   Partnership with Tata Steel: 
 
SAIL & Tata Steel have formed a 50:50 JV company in September’08 in the name 
of “S& T Mining Co. Pvt. Ltd”. As a first step, JVC has initiated the process for 
acquisition and development of coal assets in India. JVC has been short listed for 
submission of bid for revival of old/ abandoned mines of CIL. JVC has been 
engaged to develop Bhut goria mine of BCCL. The mine is estimated to produce 
0.36 Mtpa (ROM) coking coal at full capacity which will be shared between SAIL & 
Tata Steel. The company has submitted tender to BCCL for construction of 
washery at Dugda for Non Linked Washery (NLW) coa l. The company is also 
exploring possibility to install a stand alone washery for Non Linked Washery 
(NLW) coal for metallurgical use.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Thermal Coal 
 
 The Committee note that thermal coal is another important raw material required 
for operating captive power plants of SAIL. With implementation of Corporate Plan, 
SAIL’s power requirement will increase substantially to around 18 million tones per 
annum (MTPA) against 4 -5 MTPA. The Committee also note that SAIL had submitted 
18 applications to Ministry of Coal for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However, none 
of the blocks have been allocated to SAIL, which are allotted by the process of 
competitive biddi ng. The Committee have been informed that the process of 
competitive bidding will hurt the interest of SAIL as the production costs of the mineral 

27 
 
will increase, thereby affecting SAIL’s competitiveness, both in domestic and 
international market. Moreover the process of competitive bidding will prove 
disadvantageous to the PSUs as compared to private sector due to their prevailing 
procedural complexities. Considering the social obligations entrusted to public sector 
undertakings in the country, the Committee recommend that SAIL  may be allocated  at 
least 2-3 thermal Coal Blocks on nomination basis with reserves of about 1200 -1500 
million tones to meet their captive coal requirement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With growth in hot metal production capacity, SAIL’s power requirement will 
increase substantially. In order to meet power demand additional 500 MW generation 
capacity has been added at Bhilai. Additional captive generation capacity is also under 
consideration to meet increased power demand. Thermal c oal requirement is 
estimated to increase to 12 MTPA by 2012-13 against present level of 7 MTPA. 
 
In order to ensure security of thermal coal availability SAIL along with its two 
Joint Venture Power Companies had submitted 18 applications to Ministry of Coa l in 
2007 for allocation of thermal coal blocks. However, none of the blocks was allocated 
to SAIL. 
 
SAIL has further identified following six numbers thermal coal blocks and 
requested Ministry of Steel and Ministry of Coal for allocation of 2 -3 coal blocks under 
Govt. dispensation : 
 
i) Tentuloi- Orissa 
ii) Ghogharpalli & Extension – Orissa 
iii) Bankhui – Orissa 
iv) Gand Bahera Ujheni – UP 
v) Puta Parogia – Chhattisgarh 
vi) Pindrakhi – Chhattisgarh 
 
Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Hon’ble Minister of State for Coal in 
February’2010 to allocate these thermal coal blocks to SAIL through Govt. 
dispensation route. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
Expansion and modernization programme 
 
Corporate plan 2010 
 
 The Committee note that SAIL has embarked on expansion and modernization 
programme involving total investment exceeding Rs. 50,000 crores. According to 

28 
 
SAIL’s corporate plan 2010, the target of annual production has been fixed at 26 million 
tones (MT) of hot metal as against the present 13MT. The Committee also note that 
the Corporate plan envisages annual growth rate return of more than 8% compounded 
annual growth rate during the plan period. Beside capacity enhancement, the growth 
plan adequately a ddresses the need of SAIL plants towards eliminating technological 
obsolescence, energy savings, enriching product mix, pollution control, developing 
mines and collieries to meet higher requirement of key inputs, to introduce customer 
centric processes and  matching infrastructure facilities in the plants to support higher 
production volumes. In this regard, the committee noted that SAIL has taken up various 
measures like strengthening of project organization, coordination across plants, 
interactions with gl obal suppliers, across the table discussions for faster tendering 
process, etc. to complete the expansion plan in time. 
 
 The Committee, however, are concerned to note that the implementation of 
Corporate Plan-2010 faces a number of impediments like non-renewal of mining leases 
of Chiria and Gua by Jharkhand, delay in grant of prospecting licence to Thakurani 
itron ore mine, delay in obtaining clearances for Rowghat iron ore mining project in 
Chhattisgarh, non -allocation of thermal coal blocks to SAIL for c aptive power plants, 
inadequacy of rail network, ports etc. which are the key concerns in the implementation 
of Corporate plan. 
 
 The Committee are extremely concerned to note that if leases  of Chiria mine 
are not renewed immediately, SAIL will have serio us problem in proceeding with 
modernization and expansion plan. The Committee  are of the view that the renewal of 
chiria mining leases is extremely essential for the profitable sustenance of SAIL. The 
Committee also note that delay in forest and environme ntal clearances could affect the 
expansion plan. The Committee  are apprehensive that the Chiria issue and the issue 
of  delay in clearances would determine the fate of SAIL. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Government of India should address all these issues with utmost 
seriousness and help out the SAIL  at this critical juncture by making all out efforts in 
this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Development of new iron ore mines at Chiria, Rowghat &  Thakurani are 
essential to ensure long term security of iron ore for SAIL.  Keeping in view delay in 
renewal of leases for Chiria mines, grant of Prospecting License for Thakurani and 
development of Rowghat mines, a contingency plan has been drawn for exp ansion of 
production capacity of existing mines up to their maximum potential. Expansion and 
modernization of the existing iron ore mines is under progress. To meet the enhanced 
capacity of 23.46 MT of hot metal, the iron ore requirement would increase fro m the 
level of 24 MTPA in 2009 -10 to 39 MTPA by the year 2012 -13 and estimated to 
increase to 100 MTPA by 2020. Hence, to achieve the increased target of hot metal, 
ensuring security of iron ore availability by early development of mines at Chiria, 
Rowghat and Thakurani is a must. Further delay in renewal of leases for Chiria mines, 
grant of Prospecting License for Thakurani and development of Rowghat mines will 

29 
 
have adverse impact on expansion plan of SAIL. Allocation of iron ore mining leases to 
VISP and SSP is also required.  
 
 In order to enable SAIL to augment indigenous coking coal availability, 
allocation of new coking coal blocks is needed. In this regard, SAIL has already 
identified three potential coking coal blocks in Jharkhand State and requested  Ministry 
of Steel and Ministry of Steel for allocating these blocks to SAIL under Govt. 
dispensation. Moreover, for security of thermal coal availability, SAIL is also required to 
be allocated 2-3 thermal coal blocks for captive mining. SAIL has already i dentified six 
thermal coal blocks and requested Ministry of Mines for allocating 2 -3 blocks to SAIL 
under Govt. dispensation. Ministry of Steel has also made requests to Ministry of Mines 
to such allocation.  
 
 Ministry of Steel regularly take up the issue  of renewal of Chiria Mines with 
Government of Jharkhand at appropriate levels. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.16 
 
Marketing 
 
 The Committee note that the market share of SAIL in finished  long products is 
only 14.4% during 2006-07 in the domestic market.  As regards the flat products, SAIL 
has a share of approximately 28% in the domestic market.  The Committee also note 
that SAIL is not a major player in the finished long products (i.e. ba rs and rods) in the 
domestic product.  While appreciating the fact that SAIL constitutes over 90% share of 
the Railway materials, the Committee are unhappy to note that the market share of 
SAIL in Bars & Rods and Structurals is around 8% and 19% only and t he market share 
of SAIL has not increased during the last two years due to non -availability of additional 
steel.  However, the additional steel available after 2010 would be marketed by 
evolving future marketing strategies like E -sales, value added steel f or high -end 
customers, Retail outlets, etc. and as such, there will be improvement in the market 
share of SAIL after the implementation of Expansion Plan in 2010. 
 
 As regards the steps taken for popularizing SAIL products in the rural market, 
the Committee note that SAIL has taken a massive plan of increasing the distribution 
network in every district of India by way of appointing district dealers for marketing 
mainly Thermo Mechanically Treated Bars (TMT) and Galvanized Plain/Galvanized 
Corrugated Sheets (GP/GC), which are used by rural customers for their requirement.  
In this direction, the SAIL has already covered 602 out of 603 districts with appointment 
of dealers and subsequently process is also on to reach the material to sub -block 
levels for easy availability to ultimate consumers in the rural market. 
 
 In the above backdrop, the Committee recommend that SAIL, an integrated 
steel major, should pull up its socks and come out with some aggressive marketing 

30 
 
strategies at the earliest, to mainta in its pre -eminent position in the competitive steel 
market especially in finished long products.  While appreciating the initiatives made by 
SAIL to penetrate rural market, the Committee also desire that in order to promote 
steel consumption in rural area s, SAIL should organize Grameen Ispat Melas in 
villages. The Committee further desire that SAIL should try to increase its exports by 
opening marketing offices abroad also.  The Committee hope that the marketing share 
of SAIL would improve, once additional  steel is available, after the expansion plan is 
completed in 2010. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There has been substantial creation of new / additional capacities in the last few 
years in the country, particularly in Long products where setting up of re rolling mills for 
bars & rods and structurals is less capital intensive. However SAIL has achieved 
growth in sales in the domestic market as  given below: 
 
Quantity in ‘000 
tonnes 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-10 Growth 
Domestic Sales 
(including Plant sales) 
 
11883 11028 11818 7% 
 
Increase in market share of SAIL for finished steel is envisaged with additional 
availability of steel coming after completion of modernization plans.  
 
Simultaneously, SAIL has taken various measures to increase supplies of Finished  
Long Products, some of which are given here under: 
 
 Increasing conversion of Semis and supplying more finished steel like bars and 
structurals. 
 
 Decoiling and straightening more TMT Coils and increasing supplies of TMT in 
straight length to dealers and project customers.  
 
The performance figures for Conversion and De -coiling &straightening of TMT Coil 
are given below. 
 
Year 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Conversion 261834 561942 669452 
De-coiling 116030 286860 267732 
 
 SAIL is also adjusting its product mix to increase production/supply of items 
needed for growing segments like infrastructure.  
 
 Increasing availability of TMT bars and Structurals for dealers to improve reach 
of these Long Products in remote areas. 

31 
 
 
Further, SAIL is taking the following strategic initiative on a continuous basis 
with a view to maintain/strengthen its market position – 
 
Expansion of Marketing Network : SAIL already has the widest network of marketing 
outlets in the country among steel producers. In order to reach steel materials to a 
wider cross-section of consumers, our distribution outlets have been expanded.  SAIL 
has completed opening of Warehouses  in all State Capitals. Details of SAIL marketing 
outlets in the country are as given below:   
 
Marketing outlet 1-4-2007 1-4-2008 1-4-2009 1-4-2010 
Branch Sales office (BSO) 34 37        37        37 
+Warehouses 51 58        65        67 
Customer contact offices 
(CCOs) 
26 24 24          26 
Total 111 119 126 130 
         
Expansion Of Dealer Network :  The SAIL Dealer Network  as on 1 -3-11 has 2606 
dealers, spread over 637 districts covering all the states and Union Territories of India. 
The Dealers’ Network has been expanded with a view to make available items of mass 
consumption like SAIL TMT bars, SAIL  Jyoti GP/GC sheets and Light Structural 
required by common man. 
 
Details of expansion of SAIL Dealer network is given below: 
 
    As on  1.4.2006 1.4.2007 1.4.2008 1.4.2009 1.4.2010 1.4.2011 
No. of Dealers 200 653 1897 2406 2508 2649 
 
SAIL and its Dealers have undertaken various promotional activities to 
propagate brand “SAIL” in the every part of the country. The Company has tried to 
build awareness and propagate usages of SAIL TMT, SAIL Jyoti GP/GC and Lt 
Structural amongst the general consumers specially in the rural areas by: 
 
 Promotional incentive is given to dealers for putting up hoardings, wall paintings 
etc and publicizing the brand “SAIL” along with its products like SAIL TMT and 
SAIL Jyoti GP/GC 
 Wall Paintings and Advertisements of SAIL TMT and SAIL Jyoti GP/GC have 
been displayed in hoardings and other outdoor media through out the length and 
breadth of the country in various highways and hinterlands 
 Distribute product literatures like folders, leaflets, brochures explaining the 
product attributes in non technical and local vernacular language with the idea of 
reaching out to the general public. 
 A campaign for TMT and GP/GC has been designed for Hoardings, bus backs, 
banners etc in English as well as Hindi, which is  sports oriented, keeping in 

32 
 
mind the Commonwealth Games and the World Cup Cricket. This has been 
done to poularise SAIL TMT, as sports is a theme that appeals to all age 
brackets across all sections of society. 
 Dealer Appointment Advertisements along with  application forms have been 
regularly uploaded in the SAIL website for convenience of every applicant. 
Retail executives of SAIL constantly visit potential locations for appointing 
dealers particularly in the hinterlands. 
 Priority is given to dealers of r ural areas and backward districts during 
appointment. Security deposit of rural dealers has been reduced from Rs 
500/tone to Rs 100/tone. Material is reached to rural areas at our own cost 
including unloading. 
 A Dealer Film has been produced which showcase s the various aspects of 
dealership along with the products in its fold. This film is shown in various 
meets, exhibitions etc and it promotes “SAIL” effectively. 
 A jingle has been recorded in Hindi in order to appeal to the masses, which is 
played in vario us occasions and is also used in ringer tones in order to 
popularize ‘SAIL” innovatively. 
 A Dealer Directory with details of the SAIL Dealer Network was published during 
the 23rd National Steel Consumer Council Meet 
 SAIL has regularly organized Dealer, Arc hitects and Masons meets along with 
its dealers to impart technical knowledge about its products and their end 
usages. 
 Advertisements have been displayed on Trains like ‘Rajdhani’ and Railway 
Stations 
 
From time to time SAIL Dealers have participated in va rious exihibitions, Melas, 
Industrial Fairs etc to popularize SAIL products. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.17 
 
Research and Development 
 
 The Committee feel that R&D plays a vital role in the steel sector in designing 
and development of new technologies, development of new value added products, 
improvement in productivity and quality and reduction in consumption of raw material.  
The Committee are happy to note that SAIL has an elaborate  research facility 
comprising 15 major laboratories and have achieved distinction in various fields such 
as coal carbonization, iron making. Sinter making, continuous casting, steel making, 
energy conservation, information technology, etc.  The Committee h owever note that 
R&D expenditure of SAIL as a percent of turnover is barely 0.2%.  The Committee 
therefore recommend that SAIL should spend more on R&D, so that it can achieve 
global competitiveness, not only in terms of cost and quality but also in terms of global 
benchmarks of efficiency and productivity. 
 

33 
 
 The Committee further note that SAIL could not invent any breakthrough 
technology for the using of low grade coal for manufacturing of steel in a large way.  
The Committee therefore desire that the  R&D unit of SAIL should take more pro-active 
steps for using low grade bituminous coal, which is available in plenty in India, for the 
manufacturing of steel. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 During the period April -Feb’11, SAIL spent an amount of Rs.129.26 crore  on 
Research & Development compared with expenditure of Rs.107 crore during the 
financial year 2009 -10. R&D expenditure as a percentage of net turnover of SAIL was 
0.30% in April -Feb’11 which was higher as compared with 0.26 % of net turnover for 
the year 2009-10. 
 
Under CMPDIL, CIL and RDCIS, SAIL joint project on effective utilization of low 
rank and low volatile high rank Indian coking coals for BF coke making, following have 
been carried out : 
 
(a) Detailed laboratory investigation with five low grade coking coals for washability 
and laboratory characterization including determination of coking properties. 
(b) Identification of two coal sources from above study for generation of clean coal 
samples in bulk quantities and pilot carbonization studies. 
 
The targeted expenditure on R&D as % of gross margin for the MoU (2011 -12) 
of SAIL has been kept at 1%. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No 18 
 
Export Performance 
 
 The Committee note that SAIL continues to be primarily a domestic player.  The 
value of exports of SAIL in 2006 -07 has declined to Rs.941 crore from Rs. 977 crore in 
2005-06 though the Government is providing export incentive by way of Duty 
Entitlement Passbook Scheme t o SAIL.  The Committee f urther note that SAIL’s 
exports are mostly directed towards neighbouring markets like Bangladesh, Myanmar, 
Nepal and Sri Lanka.  The Committee are not convinced  with the export performance 
of SAIL.  The Committee are unhappy to note that a Navratna compan y of the stature 
of SAIL is exporting a very limited range of products covering mainly Semis and Plates.  
The Committee feel that the export performance of SAIL needs further improvement.  
The Committee recommend that SAIL should take more proactive steps by increasing 
its presence in global markets as well as including new value added steel products in  
its export basket. 
 

34 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Exports which had declined considerably during 2008-09 (2,51,400 Tons) due to the 
global financial crises, had picked up slightly in 2009-10 (3,23,500 Tons). In 2010-11, 
exports are expected to show a growth of 2.3% over the previous year. 
 
SAIL is predominantly a domestic player and its exports has been limited to less than 
5% of production of saleable steel.  However, SAIL’s capacity is set to increase by 10 
Million Tons in the next 3-4 years.  The expansion also includes products like CR Coils, 
Rebars, High Carbon Wire Rod Coils and Universal Beams which shall be export 
worthy.  Given this scenario, SAIL proposes to steadily increase both the quantity and 
the reach of its products globally. 
 
As part of expanding its reach, SAIL is also proposing to evaluate the need 
/requirement to have offices in other SAARC countries like Bangladesh, Bhutan, Sri 
Lanka etc. where SAIL would have a logistics advantage and better price realization 
and an office in Dubai for a better access to the Middle-East & Africa which are 
growing markets. 
 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
Energy Conservation 
 
 The Committee note that energy conservation is one among the important 
techno-economic efficiency parameters of a steel plant.  In this regard, the Committee 
note that SAIL is exploring the possibility of using Natural Gas (NG) as an auxiliary fuel 
in blast furnaces to reduce expensive coking coal consumption and  has already 
signed a MoU with GAIL for supply of gas to steel plants and is also exploring a 
possibility of tie-up with ONGC for supply of Coal Bed Met hane (CBM) to SAIL Plants.  
The Committee are happy to note that the issue of alternate sources of energy such as 
NG and CBM will reduce the operating cost and increase the profitability of the 
Company.  To facilitate the above tie up, the Committee recomm end that the Ministry 
of Steel should take up this issue of supply of  gas with the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, for making available CBM from ONGC to SAIL’s plants.  In addition to that 
SAIL may also explore the feasibility of sourcing CBM and N atural Gas from private 
companies.  The Committee are also happy to note that SAIL has installed pulverized 
coal injection and Coal tar injection as a step to reduce the consumption of coking coal.  
The Committee recommend that SAIL should install this pul verized coal injection/Coal 
tar injection facility in all its blast furnaces within the stipulated time frame as planned 
under the expansion and modernization programme i.e. by 2010. 
 

35 
 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SAIL requested Ministry of Steel in June 2009 to take up with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural gas for supply of natural gas from KG basin to SAIL steel plants. 
MoS in March, 2010 requested MoPNG to allocate 1.541 MMSCMD natural gas for 
SAIL before expansion and 4.0 MMSCMD after implementation of the SAIL’s 
expansion plans.  In March, 2011, MoS has requested additional 2.10 MMSCMD gas 
for sponge iron making facility & downstream facilities at Jagdishpur Steel Plant. 
Hon’ble Minister of Steel has recommended to MoPNG for allocation of this quantity to 
SAIL 
 
Hon’ble Minister of Steel has also requested Minister of Power in March, 2011 
for requesting MoPNG for allocation of 5 MMSCMD natural gas for the 1050 MW gas 
based combined cycle power plant at Jagdishpur, application of which has been 
already submitted to Central Electricity Authority. 
 
The pulverised coal injection facilities have been installed recently in BF -3&4 of 
Durgapur Steel Plant and BF -2&3 of Bokaro Steel Plant and are under 
implementationin BF-4 of Rourkela Steel Plant.  Further, in the expansion plan of SAIL, 
Pulverised coal injection has been envisaged to be installed in the new Blast Furnaces.  
 
Besides Coal Dust injection facilities, SAIL has envisaged many state of the art 
and energy efficient technologies under its modernization & expansion plan. Some of 
these are given below: 
 
 Coke dry quenching facilities in Coke ovens;  
 Top pressure recovery turbine in Blast Furnaces;  
 Hot Metal Desulphurization;  
 Secondary refining facilities for cleaner steel 
 Continuous casting technology 
 Replacing low yield and energy intensive units with high yield and energy saving 
facilities 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011]  

36 
 
Recommendation No. 20 
 
Environment Protection 
 
 The Committee note that the process of steel making has significant 
environmental ramifications like Air Pollution, Water Pollution, Noise Pollution & Solid 
Waste generation.  The Committee are happy to note that SAIL has taken various 
measures to check/abate environmental pollution.  To check air pollution, SAIL has 
taken various steps such as regular maintenance of Coke Oven Batteries, cleaning of 
coke oven doors, installation of various pollut ion control equipment like Multi Cyclones, 
Bag Filters, setting up Gas Cleaning Plants in steel plants etc. .As regards water 
pollution control, SAIL has taken various steps such as recycling the effluents, 
meticulous maintenance of the effluent treatment plants etc.  To curb noise pollution, 
SAIL has provided the employees with ear plugs/ear muffs etc. and on soild waste 
management, selling steel plants wastes to outside agencies, recycling of hazardous 
wastes etc., have been done.  Further, SAIL has made significant progress in reducing 
Green House Gas emissions by taking various steps such as phasing out of the  old 
energy intensive process with cleaner technologies, replacement of conventional 
motors with energy efficient motors, Commissioning and operat ion of Coal Dust 
Injection (CDI) in Blast Furnaces (BF), use of solar energy in their premises, planning 
new installations with high energy and material efficient technology under 
modernization plan etc. 
 
 The Committee are, however, concerned to note that  despite all the laudable 
steps taken for protecting environment, SAIL has received three adverse reports from 
West Bengal Pollution Control Board with respect to water and air quality.  The 
Committee recommend that SAIL should strictly monitor all the air  and water quality 
parameters in all its installations. As India has certain commitments towards ‘Climate 
Change’ in the post Kyoto protocol period, the Committee desire that SAIL should 
strive for meaningful reductions in Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Air Quality and Water Quality 
 
As per the laid down statutory regulations, SAIL is carrying out periodical 
monitoring of air quality from the stacks as well as of ambient air. The effluent water 
quality from the outfalls of the plants to the receiving body is also measured regularly. 
 
In order to know the emission levels to the atmosphere during the process in a 
continuous manner, on-line stack monitors have also been installed in the major stacks 
of Bhilai Steel Plant, Durgapur Steel Plant, Rourkela Steel Plant, Bokaro Steel Plant 
and IISCO Steel Plant.  
 
In addition to the above, ambient air quality (AAQ) stations at Bhilai Steel Plant, 
Rourkela Steel Plant & IISCO Steel Plant have been installed and functioning to know 

37 
 
the air quality in and around the plant premises. The provision for AAQ stations at 
Durgapur Steel Plant and Bokaro Steel Plant are under progress.  
 
Reduction in Green House gas Emissions: 
 
SAIL’s Corporate Environmental Policy envisages “Conducting our operation  in 
an environmentally responsible manner to comply with applicable regulations and 
striving to go beyond”. Further SAIL recognises its commitment towards the Climate 
change in the pre and post Kyoto protocol period. 
 
SAIL as a responsible corporate entity, has been taking initiative continuously in 
implementing different schemes /projects at their plants, leading to consistent reduction 
in Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. A number of projects have been implemented 
in the recent past, which has result ed in substantial reduction in GHG emissions.  
Some of the implemented schemes are use of By product gases for Power generation, 
Multi slit Burners at Sinter Plants, Heat Recovery from Sinter Plants, Injection of coal 
dust and coal tar injection in Blast F urnaces, Thysristorization of Motor Generator sets 
etc. These projects have resulted in annual reduction of GHG emission to the tune of 
0.80-0.85 million tons per year. 
 
Following projects are being implemented in SAIL Steel Plants, which have 
potential to reduce GHG emissions: 
 Coke Dry Quenching 
 Installation of Blast Furnace Top Pressure recovery Turbine for power 
generation 
 Energy Recovery from Sinter Cooler  
 Use of  CO gases for Power Generation  
 Installation of Heat recovery from New Sinter machines  
 Waste Heat Recovery from Blast Furnace stoves 
 Energy Efficient shaft kiln for Refractory material Plants 
 Installation of walking beam furnace  
 100% production of steel through BOF route 
 Installation of Continuous Caster 
 
Implementation of such schemes in the  coming 1- 3 years at different locations 
of SAIL would lead to an annual emission reduction of around 3 -3.5 million tonne of 
Green House Gases. 
  
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.21 
 
Manpower 
 
 The Committee note that the manpower strength of SAIL is 119009 (excluding 
IISCO merged in 2005) during 2006 -07 and another 700 engineers as well as 

38 
 
employees in Class II, Class III and Class IV are being added through recruitment to 
take care of capacity expansion. 
 
 As regards the labour productivity, the Committee note that the labour 
productivity has almost gone up by six times since the mid eighties.  The Committee 
however note that the labour productivity of SAIL is comparatively lower than  some 
other steel plants in the country as well as by international standards.  The Committee 
recommend that the Company should put in place incentive schemes for employees to 
improve their efficiency.  The Committee also desire SAIL to ensure that the ski lls of 
employees are continuously upgraded by regular training in the areas like process 
control, quality management, latest adopted technologies in order to further improve 
the productivity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The manpower strength of SAIL as on 1. 3.2011 was 111226.   In order to meet 
the requirement of skilled manpower for taking care of Expansion Projects, recruitment 
of technical personnel; Diploma holders and ITI Certificate holders, shall continue to be 
carried out. 
 
The Labour Productivity of SAIL in 2010 -11 (upto Feb.11) was 239 T/M/Y. It is 
envisaged that after Expansion / Modernization, higher Labour Productivity will  be 
achieved with the expected increase in production level to 23.46 MT of Hot Metal with 
lesser manpower. 
 
Various Incentive  Schemes for employees, based on monthly performance, 
annual performance and other contemporary business priorities of relevance, are 
already in place. 
 
Skill Enhancement Training in SAIL 
 
The focus of all our HRD activities in SAIL is to develop knowledge  and skills of 
employees and to improve the productivity.  In this endeavor, efforts have been made 
for implementing the concept of “multi -skilling” across Company.  Also, use of IT 
particularly, “e-learning” has been taken up for enhancing the knowledge o f employee 
and exposing them with modern and contemporary thoughts. 
 
Skill Enhancement Training in SAIL is done under two broad categories: 
 
A. Technical Skill Enhancement        
B. Managerial Skill Enhancement 
A. Technical Skill Enhancement  
  
SAIL has a well established infrastructure for training at all the plant/unit location.  
The following Training Modules are organized by Plants / Units for enhancement of 
Technical Skill of employees: 

39 
 
 
i) In-house Training Modules  such as Unit Training (UT), Enhancing 
Engineering Skills (EES) Training, Attachment Training etc. 
 
(a)   Unit Training 
Unit Training (UT) is a system for On The Job Training, which aims at 
achieving standard performance. 
 (b)  Enhancing Engineering Skills (EES)   
EES Modules refers to in house training modules for capacity building 
and enhancing skills in maintenance areas.  
ii) Multi-skill Training 
In order to enable our technical workforce to widen their skill base, a scheme of 
multi-skill training has been implemented in SAIL.  In this scehme, an employee 
already conversant in one skill is trained and certified in additional one or two 
skills. 
iii) External Training to our employees is done by: 
 Identified Specialized Training Agencies  
 Technology Suppliers (Foreign and Indian) 
 Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM)/Suppliers (Foreign and Indian) 
 SAIL has entered in MOUs with expert organisations like SKF (Bearing), 
Siemens (for PLC, Automation etc.), Bosch Rexroth (Hydraulics) for 
providing specialised training in critical skills area. 
 
B. Managerial Skill Enhancement 
The various Training Modules organized by Plants / Units for enhancement of 
Managerial Skill of employees are under the  
 Supervisory Development Programme (SDP) for non-executives 
 Management Development Programmes (MDP) for executives 
 Other managerial Skill Enhancement Programmes like Management of 
Systems & Monitoring, Negotiation Skills, Communication & Presentation Skills, 
Counseling Skills, Problem -solving & Decision -making, Marketing Decision -
making, HRD Skills for Shop -floor Managers and Time Management, Managing 
self & Team and Leadership through Principles, Quality Management Training 
 Collaboration was made with reputed academic Institutions such as IIM, 
Indore and Ahmedabad, MDI, Gurgaon, ISM, Dha nbad for conducting 
advanced management programme, Joint Research and Development 
(R&D) of case studies, Plant interface workshops etc. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.22 
 
Safety Measures 
 
The Committee note that SAIL has taken various safety measures such as 
putting in place a safety policy, setting up of standardization committee on safety, 

40 
 
internal & external safety audits, preparation of on -site disaster management plans, 
mandatory safety training to employees and contractor workers also.  Despite all the 
laudable steps that have been taken by SAIL, Committee note that fatal accidents have 
continued to occur year after year.  The average number of fatal accidents that have 
occurred in SA IL’s plants is found to be 23 in a year.  The Committee have been 
informed that SAIL has been making consistent efforts to reduce the accident rate to 
‘Zero accident rate’. 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that given the accident cases reported in 
SAIL, the measures taken/being taken by SAIL have not been found to be adequate.  
Although SAIL has made tall claims about their safety measures, yet it has not been 
able to achieve zero accident rate.  The Committee would like to emphasize that 
accidents are not only disastrous to the workers and the people nearby but also cause 
damage to the assets of the company.  The Committee therefore recommend that SAIL 
should further strengthen its safety measures and ensure that their strict compliance so 
that the intended objective of achieving ‘zero accident rate’ in all its units is achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Improvement in Safety standards in a company is a continuous process and 
management of SAIL is committed to achieve the target of zero fatal accident.  A 
number of steps have been taken by the company to promote awareness amongst the 
employees as well as contractor workers. 
 
SSP, VISL, MEL and ASP have achieved zero fatality for many years.  
Integrated Steel Plants like RSP, DSP & BSP have also achieved t he target in the year 
2001, 2007 & 2010 respectively. 
 
With continuous efforts to ensure proper upkeep of plant & equipment, strict 
adherence to Standard Operating & Maintenance Practices and eliminating human 
errors by correcting unsafe behaviour of people, fatal accident rate is likely to reduce. 
 
To further improve safety, Steel Plants/units of SAIL have initiated some new 
measures as mentioned below: 
 
 As a tool for systematic approach of safety management and continuous 
improvement, some of plants &  units (BSP, BSL, DSP, RSP & SSP) have 
acquired OHSAS-18001 certification while remaining Plants/units have initiated 
actions in this regard. 
 
 While analyzing the root cause of accidents which occurred over the years, it 
has been observed that majority of them have occurred due to unsafe behaviour 
& lack of proper communication.  We have accordingly initiated steps to tackle 
this issue as a part of our future efforts.  Training programmes on ‘Behaviour -
based safety’ are being organized. 
 

41 
 
 Compliance audits f or evaluating the status of implementation of past fatal 
accident’s as well as safety audit’s recommendations have been started. These 
are further reviewed at different levels in plants and during Heads of safety 
meetings organized on quarterly basis to ensure their timely compliance. 
 
 Past experience reveals that all of the earlier modernization/expansion activities 
were accomplished by an increasing rate of fatalities involving contractor 
workers.  Keeping this in view, all Head of Works (HoW), Head of Sa fety (HoS) 
& Head of Projects (HoP) have been advised to remain vigilant & take proactive 
actions to avoid any untoward happening during ongoing & upcoming 
modernization/expansion projects.  Some of the new initiatives in this area 
include: 
 
a) Auditing of  project sites of plants/units by SAIL Safety organization 
(conducted at BSL, RSP, ISP, BSP, DSP & SSP) 
 
b) Strengthening of Safety set up in Project areas by Plants to ensure 
proper job supervision and monitoring. 
 
c) Regular review of safety measures by Projec ts & Safety Engg. Deptt. of  
Plants/units. 
 
d) Introduction of stiff penalty for contractors in Project area. 
 
e) Consolidation of ‘Project Safety guideline’ covering hazards and control 
measures by SSO and its dissemination to all Plants/Units. 
 
f) Organizing trai ning/workshop on identified areas contributing to higher 
rate of accidents like ‘Working at Height’, ‘Gas Safety aspects during Iron 
Making’, ‘Projects safety’ etc. by plants & SSO. 
 
 All fatal accidents are analyzed periodically w.r.t. their causative factors by SSO 
and regular communication are being maintained with HoW of Plants/units 
highlighting specific areas of concern pertaining to that plant/unit and the 
necessity of taking timely actions to prevent accidents. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No.23 
 
The Role of Ministry – National Steel Policy 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Steel has an important role to play in 
Policy formulation regarding  production, distribution, pricing of iron & steel and ferro 
alloys.  The Committee further note that the Government have announced a National 
Steel Policy -2005 (NSP) to create a modern and efficient steel industry of world 

42 
 
standards.  The Committee note t hat National Steel Policy has a strategic goal of 
achieving indigenous production of steel at the level of around 110 MT per annum by 
2019-20, which implies a compounded annual growth of 7.3 percent per annum.  
Raising rural consumption of steel from 2 kg per capita per annum to 4 kg per annum 
by 2019 -20, encouraging exports, making available critical inputs such as iron ore, 
coking coal, natural gas, making available good infrastructural facilities such as roads, 
railways, ports, power, enhancing R & D exp enditure, human resources etc., are the 
major objectives of the NSP. 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that NSP does not purpose any concrete 
mechanism to address important issues such as problems faced in obtaining 
grant/renewal of mining leases and ino rdinate delay in obtaining forest/environment 
clearances etc., which hamper the growth and development of steel industry.  The 
Committee note that all ‘Corporate Plans’ and ‘Expansion Plans’ of steel PSUs such 
as SAIL, RINL, and private steel companies, th at are being implemented in pursuance 
of the goals of NSP will be adversely affected if the above -mentioned difficulties are 
not addressed in the right earnest. 
 
The Committee are disappointed to find that the NSP is too inadequate in 
addressing the burnin g issues.  As regards the delays in obtaining clearances, the 
Committee note that the NSP proposes a single window clearance for large projects, 
to be followed by statutory clearances by the concerned ministries.  The Committee 
however note that NSP does n ot clearly spell out a time frame within clearances 
should be granted. 
 
As regards the issue of grant/renewal of mining leases, the NSP states that the 
Government would lay down priorities and guidelines for the State Governments to 
recommend fresh mining leases, having regard to the entrepreneur’s mining 
investment plans and technical and financial capabilities.  It has been further stated 
that State Governments would recommend renewal of existing leases only against 
credible mining investment plans in a specified period.  The Committee are of the view 
that this issue has not been properly addressed by the NSP, as no clear cut modalities 
have been spelt out.  The Committee are not sure whether the mineral rich States 
would follow the guidelines of the Centr al Government in a federal democratic set up.  
The Committee feel that the NSP is not a well structured policy.  The Committee 
understand that the NSP is under revision and hope that Government of India will 
definitely address to the above important issues  and propose a single window 
mechanism for all the clearances and timely and adequate availability of the steel to 
steel majors in the country and discouraging export of quality iron ore needed by our 
domestic steel producers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The National Steel Policy (NSP) sets out a broad roadmap for the Indian Steel 
Industry in its journey towards reform, restructuring and globalization.  The long -term 
goal of the NSP is that India should have a modern and efficient steel industry of world 

43 
 
standards, catering to diversified steel demand.  The focus of the policy is to achieve 
global competitiveness not only in terms of cost, quality and product -mix but also in 
terms of global benchmarks of efficiency and productivity. 
 
 In order to monitor th e NSP in close coordination with other Central Ministries 
and State Governments, an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has been constituted with the 
approval of the Hon’ble Prime Minister, IMG will monitor and coordinate issues 
concerning major steel investment s in the country and is headed by Steel Secretary.  
The other members of the IMG are Secretaries of Ministries/Departments of Mines, 
DIPP, Environment & Forest, Road Transport & Highways, Shipping and Member 
(Traffic) Railway Board as well as Chief Secreta ries of the concerned State 
Governments. 
 
 The broad Terms of Reference (TOR) of the IMG are to review and coordinate 
measure for early completion of major steel capacities and to address various -
problems concerning infrastructure; availability of raw mate rials; speedy environmental 
clearance; availability of other resources such as land and water; and issues 
concerning rehabilitation. 
 
        The observations of COPU have been noted and will be considered, if there is any 
revision to the national Policy, in future. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 12th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No 24 
 
Infrastructure Requirement 
 
 The Committee note that lack of adequate port infrastructure is one of the 
constraints being faced by SAIL.  The Committee also note that SAIL operates mainly 
at Haldia and Paradip ports.  These ports are used for import of coking coal and export 
of steel.  The Committee have been informed that the infrastructure available at these 
ports are inadequate to meet bo th the present and future requirements of SAIL.  The 
major  constraints at these ports are limited shore unloading facilities, inadequate 
railway rake availability etc., In this regard, the Committee note that SAIL has taken up 
the issues of development of  necessary infrastructure with Haldia Port and Paradip 
Port authorities.  The Committee feel that adequate port infrastructure is essential  for 
SAIL in view of the expansion plan currently underway.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that as a facilitat or, the Ministry of Steel should vigorously pursue this 
issue with the Department of Shipping. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 SAIL is an equity partner in the Special Purpose Vehicle formed 
for development of Paradip -Haridaspur railway line.  The railway line development will 
ease movement of imported coal from Paradip to SAIL steel Plants. SAIL signed the 

44 
 
Shareholders agreement and Traffic Guarantee Agreement & contributed its equity 
share amounting to Rs.5 crores. The railway line is expected to be completed by 2012. 
 
The updated position of infrastructure is as under:  
 
1. Vizag:  
 
Vizag Port Trust (VPT) has awarded a contract for development of the General Cargo 
Berth (GCB) at outer harbour against a concession agreement with BOT operator for a 
period of 30 years. The berth shall be mainly for Coal handling and will have increased 
draft of 18 meters, capacity of 15 million tonn es and capable of handling capesize 
vessels. The developmental work at VPT is going to be implemented in two years (by 
end 2012) wherein Cape handling facility is likely to be available in the outer harbour 
(GCB area).  
In addition to this VPT is also planning to increase the draft in the inner harbour to 12.5 
meters along with upgradation of other facilities, likely to be completed in 2011-12.    
 
2. Paradip: 
 
Paradip port Trust is developing a deep draft mechanized berth for bulk import 
handling through PPP mode against a concession agreement for 30 years. Though the 
concession agreement has been signed, it is understood that the Environmental 
clearance has not been received yet. The project may take about 2 years for 
completion after all the statutory cle arances are obtained. As per the plans, this berth 
shall be capable of handling smaller Capesize vessels with drafts upto 16mtrs. As of 
now, Paradip Port can handle vessels with 12.5 mtrs draft only 
Presently, pre berthing delay at the port is high.  The p ort has been operating priority 
berthing scheme for large customers like SAIL. However, it is understood that the 
scheme is being reviewed and may come out with certain amendments. SAIL 
represented *that the same may be continued in its present form.  
 
3. Haldia: 
 
a.     Haldia Dock Complex (HDC) has installed harbour Mobile cranes in two berths 
(No. 2 & 8) and the berths are operating with shore facilities from Sep’10. Haldia Dock 
Complex linked to minimum cargo commitment, has been offering priority berthing 
scheme for imports made by Steel Industries. SAIL is also availing this facility.   
 
b. HDC has taken initiatives to improve the draft by normal maintenance dredging 
and also opening up a new entry channel called Eden Channel. As per reports 
available, the Eden Channel may become functional this year and may offer draft upto 
9.0 meter as against present 7.5 meter.  Situation is being watched by port users.  
 
c. Transloading: 
 

45 
 
HDC has an EOI to undertake transloading/ transshipment operation from larger vessel 
to smaller vessels/ barges for moving additional quantity to Haldia. HDC has linked t he 
transloading project by tying up with construction of jetties out side lock gate. The Govt. 
of India has recently extended the port limit of KoPT upto Konika Sands for facilitating 
the Transloading Project. It is learnt that Govt. of Orissa has raised o bjection to such a 
move claiming that Konika Sands falls under Orissa’s jurisdiction and taken up the 
issue with the Central Govt. The development in this regard is being watched.  
 
Ministry is taking up the matter with Department of Shipping.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 25 
 
General 
 
Steel Authority of India Limited was established on 24th January,1973 with the 
objective of planning, promoting and organizing an integrated and efficien t 
development of the iron and steel industry, coordinating the activities of its subsidiaries, 
formulating and recommending to the Government a  national policy for the 
development of iron and steel industry etc., The Committee are happy to note that 
SAIL has made a turn -around and made significant improvements in its performance 
over the last 35 years. SAIL has obtained ’Excellent’ MOU ratings from the 
Government of India during the last 3 years. The Company also has the distinction of 
being India’s largest producer of iron ore. It is also owning India’s second largest mines 
network with a competitive edge in terms of captive availability of iron ore, limestone, 
dolomite, etc. SAIL has established a reputation for itself as a consistent and reliable 
supplier of world -class quality products in the international market as well. SAIL has 
also formed several joint ventures in different areas ranging from power plants to e -
commerce.  
 
While appreciating the above achievements of SAIL, the Committee find that in 
many aspects, such as reducing the coke rate, project implementation, raw material 
security, gainful utilization of fines, acquisition of coking coal equity abroad, 
development of iron ore mines, marketing, safety measures etc., its performance 
needs furth er improvement. The Committee observe that the steel industry at global 
level is witnessing phenomenal growth in demand and supply. Indian steel industry is 
also poised for a quantum jump in the next 15 years. The Committee feel that as the 
coming years wo uld be crucial for the growth of steel industry, SAIL has to prepare 
itself for technological and productivity improvements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The various observations and actions suggested by the Committee for 
improvements in the Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) have been incorporated 
into its growth plan.  SAIL has undertaken a modernization and expansion of its steel 

46 
 
plants and mines which will increase the installed capacity its hot metal production from 
13.82 MT to 23.46 Mt in the current phase. The modernization and expansion plan of 
SAIL plants besides capacity enhancement, adequately addresses the need towards 
eliminating technological obsolescence, bringing   down energy consumption, enriching 
product mix, developing mines and collieries to meet higher requirement of key inputs 
for achieving technological and productivity  improvements.  
 
Apart from above SAIL is also continuously p utting efforts for technological and 
productivity improvements in existing plants/facilities.  For improvement in coke rate in 
Blast Furnace (BF), Coal Dust Injection (CDI) in is being increased by improving hot 
blast temperature, oxygen enrichment of blas t, BF cooling system, chemistry, coke 
quality etc. which will also help in improving BF productivity. Further, quality of iron ore 
would be available with introduction of beneficiation facilities at mines after 
implementation of modernization and expansion  plan. SAIL has also plans to 
beneficiate the low grade Iron -ore fines as well as the process rejects/slime lying at 
SAIL mines. 
 
For achieving production as planned after modernization and expansion of SAIL 
plants, it is essential that statutory clearance s and renewal of leases for iron ore mines 
from the Govt. is accorded at the earliest for timely development of the iron ore mines. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 

47 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Financial Performance 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that SAIL has turned out into a profitable 
company from 2003-04 and has gone on to make a profit of Rs.6202 crore in 2006 -07.  
In this regard, the Committee note that 45% of the profit has come on account of 
market improvement i.e. increase in international steel prices, while 55% has come 
from internal efficiency parameters like increase in ca pacity utilization, reduction in 
energy consumption, increase in production of value added products and right sizing 
the number of employees etc.  While appreciating the company’s performance, the 
Committee are of the view that one of the factors that has contributed to the 
Company’s profit is availability of cheap iron ore from captive mines. In this regard, the 
Committee believe that in case SAIL do not get cheap iron ore from captive mines in 
future and if they have to buy it at international rates, it w ould certainly affect its 
profitability. The Committee therefore recommend that SAIL instead of caught napping 
should get itself prepared for a situation wherein they would have to source iron ore at 
high international prices and yet make profits. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     Availability of iron ore from captive mines is only one amongst the factors which 
contribute to the Company’s profit.  To meet the enhanced capacity of 23.46 MT of hot 
metal, the iron ore requirement would increase from the level of 24 MTPA in 2009-10 to 
39 MTPA by the year 2012-13 and estimated to increase to 100 MTPA by 2020.  
 
        Presently almost entire requirement of iron ore is being met from captive mines.  
In order to meet iron ore requirement for the expanded capacity of its steel plants, SAIL 
is in he process of expanding the production capacity of its existing mines and 
upgrading beneficiation plants.  Moreover, development of new mines at Chiria, 
Rowghat, Taldih & Thakurani, installation of beneficiation plant at Gua an d installation 
of pelletisation plants at mines/ plant locations are also planned.  However, 
development of Chiria is getting affected due to delay in renewal of leases for Chiria 
Iron Ore mine.  While all statutory clearances for development of Rowghat mi ne have 
been obtained, development of the mine is getting affected due to naxal activities in the 
area.  Despite regular follow-up, Prospecting License for Thakurani is yet to be granted 
by Orissa State Government and the matter is since sub -judice in Supr eme Court.  
Hence, meeting entire iron ore requirement from captive sources in future also is going 
to be a real challenge.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 

48 
 
Recommendation No- 15 
 
Setting up new steel plants 
 
The Committee are happy to note that SAIL intend to set up two new steel 
plants, one in the State of Jharkhand and the other in State of Chhattisgarh as a joint 
venture. As regards the setting up of steel plant in Jharkhand, the Committee note that 
an MO U is yet to be signed with the Jharkhand State Government. The Committee 
desire that the process of signing an MOU with the Jharkhand Government should be 
vigorously pursued ,as it would secure one billion ton of iron ore located in Chiria .The 
Committee h owever recommend that SAIL should assess the issue cautiously while 
making all out efforts to see that the Chiria lease is firmed up in favour of SAIL. 
 
As regards the status of steel plant in Chhattisgarh, the Committee recommend 
that necessary strategic initiative be expedited an hope that new steel plant will 
definitely yield the desired results.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SAIL had earlier planned to set up a 12 MTpa Greenfield steel plant in the State 
of Jharkhand subject to land allocation, allocation of iron ore leases and other 
clearances. The viability report on the project was submitted to the Jharkhand State 
Govt. on 8th October’2007 for allocation of land and signing of MoU. The Government 
response is still awaited. In its pursuit of setting up gr eenfield steel plant in the State of 
Jharkhand, SAIL approached Ministry of Fertilisers (MoF) in January’ 2010, for setting 
up a steel plant at the site of M/s Fertiliser Corporation of India Ltd.’s (FCIL) closed unit 
at Sindri. This unit is closed since March’ 2002 and has 6653 acres of land available on 
freehold basis. Sindri is very close to Bokaro. It has the requisite industrial 
infrastructure and the proposed Haldia -Jagdishpur Gas pipeline will also be passing 
through this area.  
 
SAIL intimated to Mo F that it is willing to setup a greenfield steel plant of 5.6 
MTpa capacity at Sindri if the land is allotted to SAIL on nomination basis. SAIL has 
also agreed to set up a 1.15 MTpa Urea plant at Sindri which is a precondition by MoF 
for allocation of land.  MoF has prepared a draft CCEA note dated January 19’2011 on 
the revival of  closed units of Hindustan Fertiliser Corporation Limited and Fertiliser 
Corporation of  India Ltd. including Sindri unit.  The note has taken cognizance of 
SAIL’s proposal. The note is still under discussion stage and will be submitted to 
Cabinet after finalization.  The other steel plant in state of Chhatisgarh was envisaged  
under joint venture with  NMDC & RINL. Since the Govt. of Chhatisgarh informed the 
proposed JV company i ts inability to offer either iron ore mines or the land for steel 
plant, a decision was taken by MoS that SAIL will not pursue this project. Therefore, 
SAIL has planned to set up only one Green field integrated steel plant in the state of 
Jharkhand. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 

49 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Grant / Renewal of Captive iron ore mining leases 
 
The Committee note that captive iron ore mining is the main source of iron ore 
for SAIL. SAIL has some captive iron ore mines, chief of which is the Chiria Iron Ore 
Mine in Jharkhand. The Committee further note that the exis ting iron ore resources 
with SAIL are limited and would exhaust within the next few years. Chiria mines has 
been identified by SAIL as the only potential source which can cater to the increased 
production requirements of 26 million tonnes by 2010. Apart fr om Chiria, SAIL would 
also require new iron ore resources to meet its growth plan. The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that the issue of grant/renewal of Chiria iron ore mining 
lease to SAIL has been long pending because of some reservations of t he State 
Government of Jharkhand and the matter is presently sub -judice and pending in 
Court. Meanwhile, the efforts made by SAIL/Ministry of Steel for amicable solution of 
the issue has also not yet yielded any positive result in the matter.  
 
The Committ ee observe that due to increasing boom in the steel sector, the 
issue of grant/renewal of iron ore mining leases is becoming very complex issue due 
to conflicting interests between various stake holders like mining companies and 
exporters, steel producers and the concerned State Governments. In view of this, the 
Committee feel that there is a need for a clear national policy to address the concerns 
of the stake holders particularly the producers contributing immensely to national 
economy. Keeping in mind th e basic national interests and national goal of economic 
growth as enunciated broadly in XI Plan document an appropriate National Mineral 
Policy must determine the contours which can facilitate Navaratnas like SAIL to use its 
full potential. Careful consideration needs to be given to the views of the key operators 
like SAIL in this regard. The Committee feel that there is of course a need to augment 
the revenues of States by increasing the royalty rates. At the same time, the 
Committee like to add that in t he present case SAIL has got a legitimate case for 
retaining Chiria iron ore mine as it has already developed various infrastructure there 
besides absorbing an accumulated loss of Rs. 910 crores during amalgamation of 
Indian Iron & Steel Company (IISCO) wi th SAIL in 2005. It is well known that IISCO 
alongwith its properties Chiria and Gua iron ore mines were available for 
disinvestment from 1996-2001 but not a single global/domestic player had shown any 
interest in it during that period. The Committee, ther efore, strongly recommend with all 
the conviction that the Government of India should deal with this issue of national 
interest at the highest priority for grant of mineral concession of Chiria iron ore mine to 
SAIL. 
 

50 
 
The Committee also note that the Government of India is presently amending 
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR) Act 1957 for 
streamlining the procedure for grant/ renewal of mining leases in the country. The 
Committee feel that an y delay in grant/renewal of mining leases would immensely 
harm SAIL and overall national interests.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With depletion of iron ore reserves in existing mines, Chiria is the only deposit 
with SAIL which can be developed as a large mi ne with state -of-art technology for a 
capacity of about 35-40 Million tonnes per annum to meet the enhanced requirement of 
SAIL steel plants located in the Eastern sector at Bokaro, Burnpur, Durgapur & 
Rourkela. In view of the above, renewal of mining leas es of Chiria mine is critical for 
SAIL and in the broader national interest. Continuous effort is therefore, being made by 
SAIL for early renewal of mining leases at Chiria so that further action for development 
of mine can be undertaken.  
 
In the meantime , the Jharkhand State Government has accorded in -principle 
approval for renewal of Budhaburu (Mc-Lellan) lease of Chiria on 23.10.09. 
 
Action taken by SAIL & Ministry of Steel pertaining to renewal of Chiria & Gua 
lease after grant of in-principle approval by Jharkhand State Government for renewal of 
Budhaburu lease of Chiria on 23.10.09: 
 
 On 28.10.09, Chairman SAIL, during his meeting with Hon’ble Governor, Advisor 
to the Governor and Chief Secy, Jharkhand requested for renewal of other leases 
of Chiria & Gua. 
 On 18.11.09, SAIL informed Jharkhand Govt. to renew leases corresponding to 
1000 million tonnes keeping all four leases of Gua & Ajitaburu of Chiria in the 
present form and redefining Budhaburu lease. 
 Secretary (Steel) held meeting with Chief Secretar y, Govt. of Jharkhand on 
17.2.10 on the issue of renewal of mining leases including Chiria & Gua mines of 
SAIL. 
 Secretary Steel vide letter dated 14.7.10 requested Advisor to His Excellency, 
Governor of Jharkhand for his intervention for renewal of under deemed extension  
leases of Chiria & Gua in view of Rule 24 B of MCR 1960. 
 Chairman SAIL met His Excellency Governor of Jharkhand and Chief Secretary 
Jharkhand on 20.7.10 and requested for early renewal of Chiria & Gua leases. 
 SAIL vide letter dated 22.7.10  requested Secretary Mines & Geology, Jharkhand 
for renewal of under deemed extension leases of Chiria & Gua.  
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 28.7.10, requested His Excellency, Governor of 
Jharkhand for early renewal of five under deemed extension leases  of Chiria & 
Gua. 
 For early renewal of Chiria leases, MD, BSL met Advisor to the Hon’ble Governor 
of Jharkhand on 10.8.10. As discussed in the meeting, MD, BSL vide letter dated 
28.8.10, communicated the available iron ore reserves vis -à-vis iron ore 

51 
 
requirement for next 50 years in view of ongoing and future expansion plans of 
SAIL.  
 Hon’ble Minister of Steel, vide letter dated 5.10.10 solicited Chief Minister, 
Jharkhand’s intervention for early action by State Govt. for formally renewing the 
mining leases  at Dhobil and Ankua of Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore and 
Jhillingburu-II of Gua and also for computing one billion tonne of deposits to be 
immediately allocated to SAIL from Chiria-Gua belt.  
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister, Jhar khand on 20.12.10 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 Chairman, SAIL vide letter dated 23.12.10 requested Hon’ble Chief Minister 
Jharkhand for his intervention for immediate renewal of the five mining leases, 
namely Dhobil & Ankua at Chiria and Duargaiburu, Topailore & Jhillingburu -II at 
Gua and also requested for initiation of subsequent discussion on renewal of 
balance four leases namely Ajitaburu, Sukri -Latur & Tatiburu at Chiria & 
Jhillingburu-I at Gua.  
 Vide letter dated 26.1.11, Hon’ble Chief Minister, Jharkhand assured SAIL that 
State Govt. will take necessary actions to ensure that SAIL does not suffer from 
deficiency of any raw materials required in the State. 
 Chairman, SAIL during his meeting with Chief Minister , Jharkhand on 10.3.11 
requested for expediting renewal of mining leases of Chiria & Gua mines. 
 
Pending renewal of mining leases, following activities have been initiated for 
development of a large mechanized mine: 
 
 Environment Clearance 
Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF has already considered the 
environment clearance proposals pertaining to Budhaburu, Ajitaburu, Dhobil & 
Sukri-Latur leases of Chiria.  MOEF has since accorded environment 
clearance for Budhaburu lease on 23.3.2011. 
 Forest Clearance 
MoEF, GoI vide letter dated 7.3.11 granted Stage -I forest clearance for 
diversion of: 
 153.04 ha of forest land in Ajitaburu lease.  
 379.228 ha of forest land in Budhaburu lease. 
 33.40 ha of forest land in Sukri-Latur lease  
Dhobil lease already have a valid forest clearance for 29.11 ha. 
 
 Preparation of DPR   
To develop a state -of-the art mine at Chiria with a capacity of 7 MTPA, M/s 
Hatch Associates, Australia have been appointed as consultant. Preparation of 
DPR is under progress and likely to be completed by September’2011. 
 
 Land for Processing Plant 
For setting up a processing plant at Patherbasa, Manoharpur, land has been 
identified and an application for acquisition of 405 Ha in the said area has 
already been submitted to DC, Chaibasa on 24.9.09.  

52 
 
 
 Mining Plan 
 Mining Plans of Ajitaburu, Budhaburu, Dhobil & Sukri -Latur leases of Chiria 
 have already been approved by IBM, Nagpur. 
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may please be seen at para no. 9 of chapter I 
of the Report 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
Merger / Acquisition of steel PSUs 
 
The Committee note that consolidation/merger of steel PSUs will help PSUs to 
acquire global size of operation in order to attain global scale and synergize operation 
and bring down cost of production. The Committee are of the view that the merger of 
steel PSUs with SAIL would bring far reaching benefits like consolidating their strength 
in terms of competitiveness and distribution of raw material among the steel PSUs etc,. 
The Committee feel that strong backward and forward linkages are required to 
effectively cope with the powerful dynamics of a globalised steel industry. The 
Committee note that the proposal for merger of Neelanchal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL), 
Maharashtra Electroskmelt Ltd. (MEL), etc. with SAIL are under the active 
consideration of the Ministry of Steel. The Committee recommend that these proposals 
should be expedited and should be purs ued to their logical conclusion. The Committee 
further recommend that the complexities involving these mergers should also be sorted 
out soon. The Committee also feel that while merging smaller companies with SAIL, 
due considerations should be given to the  economies and financial impact thereof on 
SAIL without ignoring the interests of workers and social obligations entrusted to public 
sector undertakings in the country. 
 
As regards the merger of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL) with SAIL, the 
Committee have been informed that the proposal for merger of RINL with SAIL is not 
presently under active consideration. The Committee desire that the merger of RINL 
with SAIL should be revisited to see if any new consensus could be reached in the 
present steel scenario.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government while considering the induction of strategic partner in 
Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd. and implementation of Phase II of the Neelachal Steel 
Plant had earlier decided the merger and acquisition of NINL by SAIL as recommended 
by the Committee of Secretaries.  Ministry of Steel, however, has revisited the proposal 
and it has been found that the acquisition of NINL by RINL will have better synergy as 
compared to merger with SAIL.  Accordingly, it had then been decided with the 
approval of the compet ent authority, that NINL be acquired by RINL by purchase of 
51% of the shareholding of NINL from MMTC and other PSUs.  RINL will remain 

53 
 
committed to taking over all assets, liabilities, raw material tie -ups and concessions 
extended to NINL with a binding c ommitment for taking up and completing 
implementation of Phase -II of the Steel Plant within 24 to 30 months with a stipulated 
time table and with clear mile stones, as were to be taken over by SAIL.    
 
B.  Status of merger of MEL with SAIL 
 
Subsequent to the approval of the expert group that MEL should be merged with 
SAIL, Board of Directors of SAIL and MEL in their 314 th meeting held on 25.5.06 and in 
the 193 rd meeting of MEL Board held on 26.5.06 have accorded in -principle approval 
for the merger of MEL with SAIL. It has been decided that to make the process of 
merger tax -effective, SAIL shares shall be issued to all the private shareholders of 
MEL.  The merger process required various issues to be resolved with the State 
Government of Maharashtra (GoM) like obtaining No Objection for transfer of MEL land 
in favour of SAIL etc. Accordingly, SAIL/MEL applied for the NOC from GoM in 
February, 2007.  After continuous follow -up and review meetings with Government of 
Maharashtra, (GoM), as well as persuasion by  MoS at the highest level, SAIL received 
a conditional clearance from District Collector, Chandrapur, GoM on 5 th June, 2009. 
After signing the required affidavits by SAIL/MEL, accepting the terms and conditions 
stipulated by GoM, the final order for transf er of MEL land to SAIL was issued by 
District Collector, Chandrapur in July, 2009.  
 
Subsequently, the Scheme of Amalgamation of MEL with SAIL was approved by 
SAIL Board in their 353 rd meeting held on 18 th August, 2009 and by the MEL Board in 
their 217 th meeting held on 27 th August, 2009. After obtaining clearances from the 
Ministry of Steel, the Stock Exchanges, the application for merger was filed by SAIL 
and MEL with MCA on 13.01.2010. The first hearing on the merger was done by MCA 
on 05.05.2010 and t he order was received from MCA on 2 nd June, 2010 for obtaining 
the approval of the shareholders of SAIL and MEL, and conditional waiving of secured 
and unsecured creditors meeting. Both SAIL and MEL obtained the respective 
shareholders approval in the AGM held on 30 th September, 2010 and 25 th August, 
2010 respectively. The confirmation petition was filed with MCA in October, 2010 and 
the second hearing was done by MCA in November, 2010. The order for final hearing 
on 8.3.2011 was received from MCA on January, 2011. In pursuance of the hearing on 
8th March, 2011, the ‘Written Submissions’ on behalf of SAIL and MEL was filed with 
MCA on 15th March, 2011.  
 
It is expected that the final order from MCA is likely to be received shortly and 
the merger process shall be completed in all respects by May, 2011.  
 
[Ministry of Steel, O.M. No. 9(10)/2007-S-CIP (Pt. file-II) dated 6th May 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comment of the Committee may please be seen on para 1 8 of chapter I of 
the Report. 
  

54 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 March 2013        Chairman, 
13 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 

55 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE 19th SITTING OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 30 th January, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 
1315 hrs in Committee Room ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3 Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
4 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
6 Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
7 Shri Uday Singh (In the Chair) 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Anil Desai 
9 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
10 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  Additional Director 
 
  The Committee first took up the draft Action Taken Report on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Fourteen th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2007 -2008) on “Steel Authority of India Limited” 
and adopted the same without any modification. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairman to present the same to Parliament after factual verification.  
 
(XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.) 
 
2. (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 
3. (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 

56 
 
      (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 
  
 
4. (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 
 
      (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 
 
5. (XXXX               XXXX               XXXX             XXXX             XXXX.)  
 
   
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX       Matter not related to this Report 
  

57 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Steel Authority of India 
Limited”. 
 
I Total number of recommendations  25 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos.  
1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23, 24 and 25   
Percentage of total  
21 
 
   84% 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies [vide recommendation at Sl. 
Nos. 5 and 15 ]             
 Percentage of total  
02 
 
  08 % 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee…(vide 
recommendations at Sl. Nos. 6 and14]  
Percentage of total.  
02 
 
  08% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
Percentage of total 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 