13 
 
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LIMITED  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2011-2012) 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


2 
 
C.P.U. No. 946 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  
Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (15th Lok Sabha) on 
National Aluminium Company Limited 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2011 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2011 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
19 December 2011/ 28 Agrahayana 1933 (S)  
 
13 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
5 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by 
Government 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government 
Replies  
 
38 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
 
47 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
50 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
Minutes of the sitting 51 
Appendix-II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the 5 th Report 
of COPU (15 th L.S.) on National Aluminium 
Company Limited 
 
53 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2011-2012) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4 Shri Ramesh Bais 
5 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
6 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7 Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
8 Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
9 Shri Baijayant Panda „Jay‟ 
10 Shri Adhalrao Shivajirao Patil 
11 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
12 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13 Shri Uday Singh 
14 Dr.  Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
16 Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
17 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
18 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
19 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut  
20 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
21 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
22 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
 
Secretariat  
1 Shri Ashok Sarin Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
   
   
 
 
 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings have been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present their 13th Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 5 th Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (15 th Lok Sabha) on National Aluminium Company 
Limited 
 
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings was present ed to Lok 
Sabha on 2 1st April, 20 10.  Replies of the Government to the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 20th October 2010.  The Committee on Public 
Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 21 October 
2011.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 5th Report of the Committee (2010-2011) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI: JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
21 October 2011       CHAIRMAN, 
Ashwina 1933 (S)      COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 

6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st April 
2010. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been receive d from the Government in respect of all the 
18 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, and 17         (Total 12) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: (Chapter-III) 
Sl. Nos. 10, 13 and 18               (Total 3) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which rep lies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: (Chapter-IV) 
Sl. Nos. 1and 2                                (Total 2) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: (Chapter-V)    
Sl. No. 16                 (Total 1) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of this Report as well as the recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished 
expeditiously.  
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
  

7 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Organizational Leadership 
 
5. The Committee in their 5 th Report have recommended the following with regard 
to the importance of stable organizational leadership; 
 
“For any PSU, a clear -cut organizational leadership is a sine qua non .  The  
Committee observe that NALCO during the past four years had been without a 
full-time Managing Director.  The Committee are distraught to note that the delay 
in appointment of a full -time CMD, as informed by the Secretary, Mines during 
the deposition, was due to a frivolous Vigilance Case against the selected 
candidate who was ultimately found to be innocent.  The Committee also note 
that high level appointments in most PSUs are often held to ransom by such 
vigilance cases against aspirants, most of which c uriously surface when the 
process of selection for appointments are in motion.  As it emerges, no vigilance 
enquiry is due or even contemplated till an officer reaches up to the post of CMD. 
There are two aspects to such a scenario. If something is amiss w ith regard to a 
particular officer, why is it that vigilance enquiry is done only when the issue of 
his promotion to the post of CMD comes up, or is it the case that till such time the 
particular officer gets away with irregularities? On the other hand a bona fide  
officer can fall prey to a motivated enquiry.  There do appear to be such 
cases/instances, as the Secretary, Mines conceded during the deposition.  The 
Committee, therefore, feel that the process of short listing prospective candidates 
for the pos t of a CMD, including vigilance clearance, should be completed well 
before retirement of incumbent CMDs. 
 
The Committee feel that in the selection of CMD, NALCO, the focus should have 
been merit and talent irrespective of the candidate being in -house or external. 
The Committee are also constrained to observe that the prolonged uncertainty 
that prevailed over the appointmen t of regular CMD in NALCO was bound to 
impact the performance of the company. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Mines should take 
steps to ensure that the absence of a full -time CMD, jeopardizing the 
organization to a possible state of disarray and adhocism, does not recur in 
future.  The Committee desire that the Ministry  should take concrete steps to 
work out a future strategy which rules out/minimize such situations.” 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. Ministry of Mines in their Action Taken reply on the above recommendation has 
stated as follows:-  

8 
 
 
 
“The Government of India  has laid down clear cut guidelines for filling up Board 
level posts i.e. Director and Chairman -cum-Managing Director (CMD), in a 
Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) like NALCO i.e. through selection 
interview by Public Enterprises Selection Board (PES B) and subsequent 
approval of the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet(ACC) after complying 
with all necessary pre-requisites.  
 
In view of allegations of sexual harassment made by a lady employee, the then 
CMD, NALCO was asked to proceed on leave in Febr uary, 2004. Additional 
charge arrangements for the post of CMD were made by appointing a functional 
Director in his place. In view of an injunction from the Delhi High Court, on a case 
filed by the Charged Officer (Shri C. Venkataramana), the process for r egular 
filling up of the post of CMD, National Aluminium Company Ltd.(NALCO), could 
not be initiated, till the expiry of the tenure of the charged officer on 25.6.2007. 
Requisition was placed with PESB for filling up the post on regular basis by 
treating 2 6.6.2007 as the date of vacancy. PESB conducted the selection 
interview for the post on 5.10.2007 and recommended 2 candidates. After receipt 
of vigilance clearance in respect of the recommended candidates, a Note was 
sent to Department of Personnel & Trai ning {DoP&T(ACC)} on 5.5.2008. In view 
of change in vigilance status of the candidate recommended at No.1 in the PESB 
panel, DoP&T requested for a fresh proposal on 26.5.2008. Subsequently, on 
receipt of vigilance clearance from Central Vigilance Commissio n(CVC), a 
proposal for regular appointment to the post of CMD, NALCO was moved to the 
DoP&T(ACC) on 5.6.2009. On receipt of approval from ACC, orders for 
appointing Shri Pradhan as CMD, NALCO on regular basis up to 30.9.2009, i.e. 
the date of his superannu ation was issued on 3.8.2009.  Subsequently, as 
approved by ACC, orders for appointing Shri A.K. Srivastava as CMD, NALCO  
w.e.f. 1.10.2009  for a period of 5 years or till the date of his superannuation or till 
further orders was issued on 11.8.2009. Afte r the superannuation of Shri 
Pradhan, Shri Srivastava has assumed charge as CMD, NALCO, who has been 
given a tenure of more than four years i.e. upto the date of his superannuation.     
 
It is apparent from the above that the delay in filling up the post o f CMD, NALCO 
on regular basis was first due to court case filed by Shri Venkataramana, former 
CMD, NALCO and later, due to some vigilance cases pending against Shri 
Pradhan(No.1 candidate in the PESB panel) i.e., extraneous circumstances 
beyond the control of the Ministry of Mines.  
 
Considering the importance of regular filling up of Board level vacancies in the 
CPSEs, the Government {Department of Public Enterprises(DPE)} has already 
laid down an effective procedure for timely filling up all such forthcoming 
vacancies. All Ministries and Departments are required to initiate action for filling 
up Board level posts coming under their administrative purview at least two years 
in advance of the date of occurrence of the vacancy in order to ensure that the 
PESB recommendations are available at least six months in advance of the date 
of vacancy so as to enable the Administrative Ministry for completing other 

9 
 
formalities and obtaining the approval of ACC well before the due date.  For 
regular monitoring of action initiated for filling up vaca ncies, which require 
approval of ACC (including Board level posts in CPSEs), concerned 
Administrative Ministry/Department are required to upload requisite data into the 
ACC Vacancy Monitoring System(AVMS) in the website of DoP&T. The 
Government by putting in place these measures, hopes to ensure timely filling up 
of all crucial posts which require approval of ACC, including Board level posts in 
CPSEs. 
 
In a recent development, Shri A.K.Srivastava, CMD, NALCO has been placed 
under suspension vide this Minist ry‟s order dated  26.2.2011 in view of his arrest 
by the CBI in a trap case.  Consequently, the Government has entrusted  
additional charge of the post of CMD, NALCO to the senior most functional 
Director in order to ensure that the working of the Company does not suffer due 
to the resultant vacuum”   
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated  20.10.2010) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
6. The Committee note that under existing procedures laid down by the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)  vide DPE/Guideline/II(b)/35 dated 27 th 
September 2005, all Ministries and Departments are required to initiate action for 
filling up Board level posts coming under their administrative purview at least two 
years in advance of the date of occurrence of the  vacancy to ensure smooth 
transition at top echelons of Public Enterprises. The Committee also note that the 
concerned administrative Ministries / Departments are required to upload 
requisite data into the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) Vacanc y 
Monitoring System (AVMS) in the website of DoP&T.  The DPE guidelines 
stipulating initiation of action for filling Board level appointments “at least 2 years 
in advance” were in place w.e.f. 27 September, 2005.  When it was quite clear that 
the then CMD (who was asked to proceed on leave in February, 2004 ) was 
scheduled to superannuate on 25.6.2007, the Committee are at a loss to 
understand as to why no action was initiated for filling  up the  post of CMD in 
October, 2005.  In this connection, the Committee regret to observe that in clear 
violation of the said guidelines, the process for filling up the post of CMD, 
NALCO, which was to fall vacant on 25.6.2007 was initiated only on 26.6.2007.  
Further more , when the  CMD was due to retire on 25.06.2007, the P ESB 
conducted the selection interview for the post on 5.10.2007 and note to DOPT 
sent only on 5.5.2008. This time lag of intervening seven months as also non 
initiation of any action in 2005 in the first place has not been explained for. The 
Committee are constrained to seek from the Ministry a full justification for such a 
serious lapse of procedure along with details, if any, of the action taken on those 
responsible for the same. The Committee would like to reiterate that the Ministry 
of Mines should take concrete steps to ensure that vacancies are uploaded in 

10 
 
time and action for filling up Board level post s are initiated „at least two years in 
advance‟ of the occurrence of vacancy.   
 
In a related matter, the Committee have been informed vide the Ministry‟s 
OM No. 29(17)/2008 -Met.I dated 24.5.2011 , which was in response to a further 
clarification sought by the Committee, that no action has been initiated by the 
Ministry to fill up the vacancy after the retirement of the present CMD who is 
currently under suspension and is due to retire on 31.1.2014.  The Ministry had 
also stated that the process for selection of next CMD of NALCO has not been 
started as more than two years are left for superannuation of the incumbent CMD. 
The Committee would like to point out that the DPE guidelines, with the objective 
of doing away with delays in appointment s to Board level posts in PSUs, ha d 
earlier stipulated a time frame of 6 months in advance of the occurrence of such 
vacancies in their guideline issued  on 30th July, 1999, revised it to 12 months on 
22.12.1999 and re -emphasized the importance of timely appointments vide a 
revised guideline issued o n September 2005 by stipulating that necessary action 
to fill up Board level posts should be initiated “at l east two years in advance of 
the date of occurrence of the vacancy with a stipulation that the PESB 
recommendations in respect of such Board level vacancies should be made at 
least six months in advance of the date of vacancy.”   
 
The Committee strongly emphasise that the key clause in the DPE 
stipulation is “at least two years in advance” which evidently means that the 
process of initiating action for filling Board level posts could commence even 
before the “two year advance period”.  In exigent circumstan ces, such as the one 
prevailing in NALCO, where their CMD is under suspension, there is all the more 
reason for considered advance action.  Under the circumstances, the Committee 
are constrained to observe that the Ministry‟s stance of delaying the initial  
process till within two years of the occurrence of vacancy i s a sluggish approach 
grounded on misinterpretation of the guideline , which is violative of the spirit of 
the guidelines.  The Committee desire that earnest steps should be taken so that 
timely action is initiated for all Board level posts in PSUs under the Ministry and 
they be apprised of tangible actions taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Checking frivolous and motivated investigations 
 
8. The Committee in their 5th Report had recommended the following with regard to 
the delay in finalization of appointments to top posts in PSUs due to vigilance cases. 
 
“The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the issue of 
frivolous vigilance cases particularly against aspirants for top jobs in PSUs at 
appropriate inter -ministerial fora and push for a viable mechanism to eliminate 
the element of vested interest s stalling the process of selection of CMDs.  In 
case there are serious complaints with substantial evidence, the investigations 
should be fast-tracked so that the process of selection is not delayed.” 
 

11 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. Ministry of Mines in thei r Action Taken reply on the above recommendation has 
stated as follows:  
 
“Keeping in view the concerns to scrutinize carefully the complaints received 
against Chief Executives and Functional Directors of the Public Sector 
Enterprises and CMDs and Function al Directors of Public Sector Banks and 
Financial Institutions, whether pseudonymous or otherwise, the Government  
{Department of Public Enterprises(DPE)} vide their OM  No. 15(1)/2010 -
DPE(GM) dated 11.3.2010 read with amendments made vide their OM No. 
15(1)/2010-DPE(GM) dated 12.4.2010 has decided to constitute a Group under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary(Coordination), Cabinet Secretariat to take a view 
on the same.  
 
In terms of the procedure laid down, complaints against these officials received 
by the C abinet Secretariat or the DPE or the Prime Minister‟s Office will be first 
scrutinized by the Group headed by the Secretary(Coordination) in the Cabinet 
Secretariat. If there is no substance in the complaints or the complaint is frivolous 
in nature, the Gr oup would close the complaint. In case the preliminary scrutiny 
of the complaint indicates that there is some substance in it or there are verifiable 
allegations, the Group may seek the comments of the Secretary of the concerned 
Ministry/Department or call for the concerned files or call for the relevant records 
including annual property returns, other reports, etc. The Group, on the basis of 
the appropriate inputs received, may either close the complaint if there is no 
substance in it, or make appropriate recommendation to the Disciplinary 
Authority regarding the nature of the investigation called for on the basis of 
substance found in the allegations made. The Group constituted will also be 
looking into the complaints received by the Cabinet Secretary from  Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) under the CVC Act or the Public Interest Disclosure 
Resolution and the CVC shall be kept informed at regular intervals about the 
status of the scrutiny/review undertaken by the Group into complaints forwarded 
by CVC.  
 
Although it may not be possible to stop complaints against aspirants for top jobs, 
however, with the constitution of a detailed mechanism by the Government as 
elaborated in the foregoing para, action on such complaints would now be 
expedited.”   
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee note that in an effort to check avoidable delays in 
appointments to top positions in PSUs, the government has decided to constitute 
a Group under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Coordination) Cabinet 
Secretariat, to address the concerns vis -à-vis judicious and expeditious scrutiny 
and processing of the complaints received against top executives of PSUs, as per 

12 
 
DPE OM No. 15(1)/2010 -DPE(GM) dated 12.4.2010. The Committee, while 
appreciating this initiative , are constrained to observe that no further action has 
been taken by the government as of 20.10.2010 in this direction. The Committee 
find it pertinent to emphasize here that howsoever laudable an initiative might be, 
the same would be meaningful only if it is effectively implemented. They, 
therefore, desire that the government should earnestly pursue the same and 
apprise them of the latest steps taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
National Policy on Aluminium  
 
11. The Committee in their 5th Report had recommended the following with regard to 
the absence of a National Policy on Aluminium.  
 
“The Committee note that there is no National Aluminium Policy in place to steer 
the course of the aluminium industry in the country.  The Committee further note 
that Ministry of Mines have taken initiatives in setting up a Centre for Techno -
Economic Mineral Policy Opti ons (C -TEMPO), which will involve all major 
sectoral  stakeholders in evolving policy options. 
 
The Committee recommend that the C -TEMPO should be made fully functional 
at the earliest and should be adequately strengthened to churn out viable policy 
options for the country so far as the minerals sector is concerned, including 
aluminum.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. Ministry of Mines in their Action Taken reply on the above recommendation has 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry of Mines has made fresh endeavors to frame aluminium policy as 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee. Aluminium Association of India  (AAI), 
the apex body representing the entire spectrum of aluminium industry has  
submitted a Mission Plan docume nt 2010-2020 to the Ministry for promotion of 
aluminium in the country. The Ministry of Mines is considering to organize a one 
day seminar with concerned stakeholders i.e. the primary aluminium producers of 
the country viz. NALCO, HINDALCO and Vedanta Grou p (BALCO, VAL & 
MALCO), downstream industries,   along with officials of concerned Ministries of 
Government of India as well as major bauxite producing States, in order to chalk 
out requisite policy level intervention by the Government to fulfill the objec tives 
for promotion of aluminium as outlined in the Mission Plan document submitted 
by AAI.  The seminar, would in a way,   be the 1 st step towards framing an 
aluminium policy.”   
 
 
 

13 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee, while appreciating the Ministry‟s „fresh endeavors‟ to 
frame the national aluminium policy , are disconcerted to note that even the 
proposed one day seminar with stakeholders, which was statedly under 
consideration as of 20. 10. 2010 , has yet to materializ e as on 22.03 2011, the date 
on which updated replies of the Ministry had been finalized. The Committee find a 
lack of interest on the part of the Ministry, which is indicative from the Ministry‟s 
inability to  even take what would have been the first step towards framing an 
aluminium policy for the country. The Committee re-emphasize the importance of 
having in place a national policy on aluminium, which, they believe, will go a long 
way in addressing the needs of the sector for an optimal planned growth  required 
to successfully meet the growing demands of the domestic market and also to 
maintain a global competitive edge.  The Committee, therefore, desire that urgent 
necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry in this direction. 
  

14 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
 
Selection process of CMD 
  
With regard to the recent filling up of the post of CMD in NALCO, the Committee 
observe that the officer who was at the second place in the panel  was allowed to take 
over as CMD in violation of all established norms, the validity of the panel in which he 
was placed second having lapsed by the time the incumbent was to retire.  The 
Committee find that the justification given by the Ministry of the need to allow the person 
who had held additional charge of CMD for the past four years to retire as CMD is 
irrelevant. The Committee suspect that certain circumstances were willfully created to 
facilitate elevation of the officer who was second in panel to take over as CMD.  
Needless supervising as evident herein points to attempts at short circuiting the 
recruitment process. 
  
The Committee take note of Ministry‟s clarification that the final call was taken by 
PESB and the Cabinet Committee.  The Committee feel that in real terms, the crucial 
factor in such cases is the recommendation made by the Ministry to CCA, and the 
Ministry cannot conveniently take refuge in the endorsements given on the matter by 
the PESB and the CCA. It appears that the full facts h ave either not been projected or 
glossed over while making requisite recommendations to the PESB and eventually to 
the Cabinet Committee on Appointments.  The Committee feel that the Ministry cannot 
be allowed to find a convenient scapegoat in the PESB and  CCA nor can they be 
allowed to get away with their inaccurate briefing of the PESB and the CCA.   The 
Committee, therefore, express grave concern over the irregular appointment of two 
candidates from the same panel as CMDs in succession, disregarding the fact that the 
validity of the panel had already lapsed, and apprehend that it could set an unhealthy 
precedent liable to be misused in future. 
 
 Considering the gross irregularity and the possibility of such a precedent being 
misused by vested interests in  future, the Committee recommend that the 
circumstances leading to the picking of two CMDs from the same panel may be 
thoroughly scrutinized by an appropriate authority with a view to fix accountability and to 
ensure that the potentially hazardous precedent being set in this case is revoked. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As already stated in action taken notes in respect of Recommendation No.1, it is 
reiterated that the Government has a very well defined and transparent procedure for 
making recruitment to Board level posts in CPSEs ie recommendation of a panel of two 
candidates made after selection interview by PESB and thereafter approval of ACC, in 
respect of the recommended candidate   by the Administrative Ministry . As per 
guidelines of PESB, Internal candid ates are generally given preference in respect to 

15 
 
external candidates unless the performance of the latter is remarkably better than the 
former. 
 
PESB after selection interview for the post of CMD, NALCO on 5.10.2007 had 
recommended a panel of two candidat es viz. Shri C.R. Pradhan and Shri A.K. 
Srivastava in the order of merit. It may be noted that Shri Pradhan was holding the post 
of Director(P&T), NALCO and also held the additional charge of CMD, NALCO since 
January, 2005. The Ministry of Mines had recommended the name of Shri C.R. Pradhan 
to the ACC for appointment as CMD, NALCO.  
 
 The ACC taking note of the fact that Shri C.R. Pradhan has been holding the 
additional charge of the post of CMD, NALCO since 1.2.2005 i.e. more than 4 -1/2 years 
with their ap proval and in view of his vast experience deemed it appropriate to appoint 
Shri Pradhan as regular CMD till his date of superannuation as he had just two months 
to retire on superannuation. Moreover, keeping in view the fact that the process of 
selection of a new incumbent would have taken at least six months, the ACC approved 
Shri A.K. Srivastava, Sl. No. 2 in the panel to be appointed as CMD, NALCO w.e.f. 
1.10.2009 i.e. after retirement of Shri C.R. Pradhan on 30.9.2009. Nothing irregular was 
committed given the fact that the ACC had also directed not to treat it as a precedent for 
future appointments. As far as PESB‟s recommendation is concerned, it recommended 
two names for the post of CMD, NALCO as per the existing policy.  
 
Two petitions were filed viz. W.P.(C) No. 13583 of 2009 filed in the High Court of 
Orissa and OA. No. 2711 of 2009  filed in  Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal 
Bench, New Delhi on the perceived illegality committed in the appointment of CMD, 
NALCO due to two appointments hav ing been  made from the same PESB panel. The 
Hon‟ble CAT after scrutinizing all relevant records   vide its order dated 27 th November, 
2009 dismissed the said application inter -alia on the grounds that the validity of the 
panel had not expired and appointm ent of Shri A.K. Srivastava, who had cleared all 
hurdles, would be in the interest of NALCO as he would have a tenure of nearly five 
years. A copy of the order dated 27 th November, 2009 is given at  Annexure. The other 
Writ application filed in the High Cou rt of Cuttack was dismissed on 6.1.2010, as it was 
not pressed by the petitioner.  
 
It may be appreciated that the perceived illegality in the appointment of CMD, 
NALCO has been scrutinized in a Court of Law and the same has been dismissed. As 
the appointment of Shri A.K. Srivastava as CMD, NALCO has already been upheld by 
the Hon‟ble CAT, it may not be appropriate to further scrutinize the same.         
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
  

16 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
Forward and Backward integration 
 
 A futuristic and forward looking vision is a sine qua non for any company/PSU to 
be competitive.  One of the crucial indicators of the existence of such a vision, the 
Committee feel, is in the integration of activities, both forward and backward. For 
instance, upstream units manufacturing caustic soda can  be set up instead of the 
company buying it from other producers.  Such backward integration could very well 
save some costs for the company besides generating a market for caustic soda. 
 
 Similarly, the company can explore the possibility of setting up do wnstream 
manufacturing units producing a host of value added products from its billets, i.e., 
primary aluminium. Such units would create an alternative market for the billets/ingots 
produced by the company and could save the company from high costs of hold ing 
stocks or dumping them at throw away prices when the LME prices are down.  Money 
saved through backward integration and on the other hand revenue generated through 
forward integration, would boost the economies of NALCO.  HINDALCO is a case in 
point. 
 
 The Committee are of the considered view that the Company could also work out 
better beneficial use of ash which is produced as a result of production of alumina.  
Besides achieving forward integration, this would also result in environmental benefits.  
On the other hand forward integration would also lead to peripheral development, which 
in turn would boost the goodwill for NALCO. 
 
 The Committee regret to note that NALCO had lagged behind private players in 
both areas of forward and backward integration of business.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that NALCO should expedite their plans for integration of  business 
activities, both backward and forward, and go into setting up both upstream and     
downstream manufacturing units around their refineries a nd smelters to generate local 
employment, contribute to periphery development, create  a cycle of demand and 
supply for their products and stimulate domestic consumption of aluminium. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NALCO has set plans in its Corporate Plan and Vision 2020, for integration of 
business activities, both backward and forward, and go into setting up both upstream 
and downstream manufacturing units around its refinery and smelter to generate local 
employment, contribute to periphery development, create a cycle of demand and supply 
for its products and stimulate domestic consumption of aluminium. Towards this 
direction, the following action has been taken:    
The Company has identified specific forward and backward integration projects 
for caustic soda,  coal tar pitch, aluminium alloy, fly ash based cement plant, specialty 
alumina, etc. Although actions for the projects were initiated during the period 2004 -08, 
the projects have not fructified due to variety of reasons. However, with renewed focus 

17 
 
and efforts since 2007, it is expected that the projects would materialize gradually. The 
present status of the projects is furnished below: 
 
 (i) Caustic Soda Project:  
The renowned chemical engineering consultants M/s. Lurgi was engaged who 
prepared the Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR) in 2007. Expression of Interest(EOI) was 
invited for establishment of caustic soda plant in 2007. 13 firms responded to the EOI 
invitation. As per the EOI respondents, value addition of derivative chlorine (by -product) 
is necessary for viability of the project. Presently, there is no use of chlorine for the 
volume expected from the plant, in eastern sector.  In absence of end use of chlorin e, 
disposal or use/transport of huge quantity of chlorine would be big problem.  Chlorine 
generated   {100,000 tonnes per annum(TPA)}  from the caustic soda plant can be 
utilized for production of two main derivatives which are ethylene dichloride (EDC) us ing 
ethylene from oil refinery, which is main raw material for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and 
synthetic rutile. In order to explore the possibility for end use of chlorine, discussions 
have been held with Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd. (HPCL). Chlorine can be used in the proposed petro -chemical complex of IOC at 
Paradeep. Further development would be possible after ensuring an end user of 
chlorine only. Over and above, shortage of raw materials like salt in Eastern India  would 
also be a constraint for establishment of the plant on east coast and scale would have 
to be adjusted. The progress therefore largely is linked to the progress of IOC petro -
chemical complex at Paradeep.  In case, the complex is further delayed, the location 
would be reconsidered on western coast.  Since the DFR is almost 5 years old, the 
financial analysis is being rerun with current figures. 
 
(ii) Coal Tar Pitch plant: 
EOI was invited in May, 2008 for selection of a joint venture(JV) partner for 
establishment of coal tar pitch plant. Eight (8) offers were received in response to the 
EOI. Four (4) firms were short listed to whom Request for Proposal (RFP) was issued. 
Offers received from the four short -listed firms are under evaluation . An understandin g 
has been reached with Neelachal Ispat Nigam Ltd. (NINL) for sourcing 30,000 million 
tonnes per annum (MTPA) crude tar to partly meet the raw material requirement of the 
plant. The plant is most likely to come up in aluminium park being set up in JV with 
State Government of Orissa. 
 
(iii) Fly ash based cement plant: 
More than 2 million tonnes of fly ash is generated in captive power plant (CPP) 
every year. For utilization of fly ash in cement, NALCO invited EOI in July, 2007. The fly 
ash based cement plant  at Angul was contemplated subject to grant of lime stone 
mining lease in Orissa. As of now, non-committed lime stone mines are available only in 
Malkanagiri district, which are not being allotted by State Government because of 
strategic reasons. Due to no n availability of lime stone resources in vicinity of CPP, 
Angul, the clinker is not viably sourceable for mixing.  
 

18 
 
However, some other cement manufacturers evinced interest to set up cement 
grinding unit (CGU) at Angul transporting lime clinker from near by States like 
Chhatishgarh. Pursuing this development, fresh action was initiated to set up a CGU in 
JV mode. Land for this purpose has been identified inside CPP premises. Accordingly, 
RFP was issued in March, 2010 for selection of the JV partner. Three proposals have 
been received and are under evaluation. 
  
Few cement manufactures have also shown interest to set up CGU in 
Damanjodi, if land for this purpose is made available. Land for the CGU has been 
identified. Two firms have submitted RFQ in response  to our EOI invitation. RFP has 
been issued to both the firms. Accordingly, RFP was issued in March, 2010 for selection 
of the JV partner. Three proposals were received. One of the firms has been 
provisionally identified for the project. Application has be en submitted to district 
authorities seeking permission for sub -leasing of land to the JV to be formed for the 
project.  
 Similarly, land has been identified to set Cement Grinding Unit at Damanjodi for 
utilization of fly ash. Two firms submitted RFQ in response to our EOI invitation. RFP 
issued to both the firms. However, only one firm has submitted commercial offer, which 
is under evaluation.  
 
Apart from setting up CGU in JV, some firms have also requested for su pply of 
fly ash on long term basis. Both the possibilities are being explored as well.  
 
(iv) Aluminium Alloy Plant: 
Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) was prepared for establishment of an 
aluminium  alloy ingot manufacturing plant in April, 2010. It is proposed to set up the 
plant in JV with firms having expertise in alloy manufacturing, particularly high end 
alloys or e nd user of the products. Action will be initiated for identification of suitable 
partner for the project after Aluminium park is established at Angul. 
 
(v) Aluminium Park: 
In order to facilitate, backward and forward integration of business activities of s melter 
and power plant and to promote establishment of medium and small scale industries 
around smelter plant based on aluminium, NALCO has collaborated with State 
Government of Orissa to set up an aluminium park at Angul. Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU)  was signed with Orissa Industrial Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (IDCO) in September, 2009. Memorandum and Articles of Association are 
under preparation. JV Company has been registered on 30 th July, 2010. The action for 
acquiring land has already been started.  
 
(vi) Specialty Alumina: 
Specialty alumina is niche products having good market realization. Alumina 
produced at Damanjodi refinery would be the input material for specialty alumina. 

19 
 
Market rates of  high end specialty alumina products are normally not influenced by 
commodity price fluctuations. In view of the intrinsic advantage, NALCO plans to set up 
a specialty alumina plant in JV with some strategic partner. EOI was invited in May, 
2008 to select the partner for the JV. Two short listed firms have submitted offers. The 
evaluation process got stuck due to one of the two proposers having gone with 
insolvency process. The process has been re -started and selection of JV partner would 
be done after due diligence. 
 
Ministry of Mines 
 (O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated  20.10.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
Inputs management 
 
 The Committee observe that NALCO‟s performance in inputs management 
warrants some serious review.  The primary inputs being bauxite and coal for power, 
the immense delay in the commencement of mining bauxite from Pottangi Mines and 
the protracted process hindering the company from mining coal from its allotted Utkal -E 
Block, the Committee feel, are completely unacceptable.  The Committee note that 
these delays are due to various factors involving different agencies, e.g., the 
Departments of Environment and Forests of th e State and the Centre for environmental 
clearance, the State government for granting mining leases, water tax, etc. and the local 
population for settling rehabilitation and  resettlement issues.  The Committee are left to 
ponder whether such outrageous delays are the norm with Public enterprises or despite 
their being Public enterprises.  In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry of Mines 
should have made more concerted efforts with the concerned agencies to minimize 
delays in both the projects. 
 
 The Committee while condemning the delay in commencement of mining of both 
Bauxite and Coal, recommend that the government should consider evolving a 
mechanism to issue single window clearances to allottee companies of captive/leased 
Mines in future to elimina te the huge time and cost escalations engendered by such 
delays. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 NALCO management has been continuously monitoring the consumption norms 
of various input materials used in the process of bauxite mining, alumina refinery, 
captive power plant and aluminium smelter. In fact, consumption norms have been fixed 
by a Board level Committee constituted specifically for this purpose. The actual 
consumption of various input materials are compared periodically with the consumption 
norms fixed . The variations, if any, are analysed for taking corrective action and the 
same is also placed before the CMD during the monthly review meetings and before the 
Audit Committee and the Board of the Company at regular intervals.  
 

20 
 
Even for procurement of various input materials, NALCO follows the tendering 
system for procuring the materials at the best possible rates.  
 
 
Status of ML for Pottangi mines 
 
NALCO had submitted the application for mining lease of Pottangi in 1992. The 
State Government of Orissa had conveyed its in -principle recommendation for grant of 
Pottangi Bauxite mines in favour of NALCO on 30.07.2004 with 5 conditions which were 
suitably clarified by NALCO on 27.02.2006 after several rounds of discussions. 
Thereafter, the Company has been pursuing with the State Government at its own level 
for expediting the mining lease. Gazette Notification was issued on 27 th April, 2007  by 
Government of India for reserving Pottangi deposit in favour of NALCO for 10 years. 
Thereafter, the Ministry of Mines has also been impressing  upon  the State 
Government from time to time for sending a proposal as expeditiously as possible for 
obtaining prior approval of the Central Government  for allotment of Pottangi bauxite 
deposits in favour of NALCO.   
 
Further, Government of Orissa vide letter dated 17.04.10 has agreed in principle 
for the reservation of Pottangi bauxite deposit area of Koraput for NALCO and has 
asked NALCO to give its consent to float a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for 
Peripheral Development with certain conditions:- 
 
The conditions put forward by the State Government  have been examined and 
the State Government has been replied to accordingly. The Company has requested 
the State Government to forward its mining lease case to Govt. of In dia for grant of 
mining lease under MMD&R Act, 1957.  
 
Status of Utkal-E coal block 
 
The coal block was allotted by Ministry of Coal, Government of India(GoI) in 
August, 2004. The approval of mining lease by the State Government got initially stuck 
up due to land dispute by M/s Tata Sponge Iron Limited (allottee of Utkal -F, located in 
Western boundary of Utkal -E) which required modification in mining plan. M ining lease 
application was recommended by State Government to Ministry of Coal, Government of 
India on 27.01.2010. The Ministry of Mines has taken up the matter with Ministry of Coal 
for expediting the same.  
 
  Environmental clearance  was granted by Ministry of Environment and Forest 
(MoEF), Government of India on 10th December, 2009 . For land acquisition, 6(1) 
declaration for all the affected 5(five) villages has been completed in February, 2010. 
Section 7 declaration  by Government of Orissa has been issued on 17.05.2010 for 
03(three) villages. The Forest De-Reservation Proposal (FDP) has been recommended 
by Govt. of Orissa, to Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forest, Govt. of Orissa, on 
25/09/2010 
 

21 
 
As per the progress made, the major milestones/action plan for commissioning of the 
project is as follows: 
Forest Clearance           30.11.2010 
Land Acquisition           31.12.2010 
Mining Lease                31.12.2010 
Nalla Diversion              31.12.2011 
Overburden Removal     31.03.2012 
Evolving of mechanism for miniming delays on grant of necessary clearances for 
captive leased mines to allottee companies 
  
So far as Ministry of Mines is concerned, there is already a Central Co -
ordination-cum- Empowered Committee for minimizing delays for grant of mineral 
concessions in respect of schedule I minerals(including bauxite).  Meetings are held 
with stakeholders including  Ministry of Environment & Forests , Ministry of Steel in the 
Central Government and concerned State Government, at regular intervals for keeping 
necessary checks on delays. In view of the specific concerns expressed by the 
Committee in this regard, the Ministry of Mines has impressed upon Ministry of Coal to 
evolve a similar mechanism for expediting necessary clearances in respect of execution 
of lease of coal mines.     
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
Alternate power source 
 
 The Committee appreciate the initiatives NALCO has taken to go into mining 
uranium in joint venture with the Uranium Corporation of India.  The Committee are 
apprised that efforts are on to gain access to rich uranium and   copper reserves 
abroad. 
 
 In view of the usef ulness of Uranium as an alternative source of power to coal, 
and given the grim coal situation in the near future, the Committee recommend that the 
company should earnestly pursue its uranium projects. The Committee further 
recommend that the Government should render all possible support to facilitate NALCO 
in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The vision of the Company envisages NALCO to be a reputed global Company in 
the metal and energy sectors.  In line with the same, NALCO is collaborating with 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL), a Public Sector Enterprise under 

22 
 
the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India for commercial power 
generation through a nuclear power plant.   
 
 In this regard, the Company has signed an Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with NPCIL on 26.11.2009 to form a 49% : 51% equity participation Joint Venture 
Company. The JV agreement has been negotiated and is expected to be signed. 
NALCO Board has recommended for approval of investment to Ministry of Mines. 
NALCO is also trying to pursue Company‟s interest in Uranium abroad in Mongolia, 
Namibia and other African Countries.  Discussions are going on with Uranium 
Corporation of India Ltd. to forge a Joint Venture to facilitate the process. A ll possible 
support is being provided by  Government of India to NALCO in this regard. 
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated  20.10.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
Diversification  
 
 The Committee note that NALCO is in the process of redefining the scope of its 
activities vide its Corporate Plan 2009 -2020 to go beyond Aluminium into other sectors 
like non -ferrous metals and power generation. The Committee also note that the 
Company‟s strengths in e ngineering and mining can gainfully be put to additional utility 
through diversification of activity into related fields/sectors like non -ferrous metals and 
power generation.  The Committee appreciate the rationale behind these initiatives, 
which combines the objective of growth with those of optimum utilization of resources 
and competencies gained. 
 
 The Committee therefore recommend that the company should proceed with 
their diversification plans, albeit after careful planning and thorough analysis.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Government should facilitate the growth plans of 
the Company by providing enhanced support and effective liaison between different 
ministries concerned on their behalf. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 NALCO has prepared Vision and Corporate Plan 2020 document and a plan to 
diversify into power and non -ferrous metal sectors after taking into account the 
strengths of the Company and considering the market opportunities. The said plan has 
been approved by the Board of NALCO in 2009 . It is expected that the experience 
gained by the Company over more than two decades in mining, mineral processing and 
in power generation could be leveraged to enter into new areas. The diversified sectors 
are expected to provide support to stability of operations as against exposure to a single 
commodity which is in turn subject to high degree of volatility in its prices.  
 

23 
 
The Ministry is supporting these initiatives of the Company to diversify its 
activities into power and non-ferrous sectors.  
 
 Diversification plan as spelt out in the Corporate Plan is being pursued 
vigorously. Diversifications projects, which are likely to fructify soon are Wind Power 
Plant and Nuclear Power Plant. Status of these projects is furnished below: 
 
(i) Wind Power Plant: 
Among the different renewable energy sources, wind has emerged as a viable 
and cost effective option for grid connected power generation. As part of its green 
energy initiative, NALCO is pursuing to generate power from the wind resources 
available in the country. Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) has been prepared for setting 
up of a 50 MW power plant at a suitable location any where in India having wind power 
potential. Estimated investment for the project is Rs. 300 crores.  
 
As the project has been found to be viable, action has been initiated for selection 
of the wind farm developer for the project. Tender was issued in May, 2010 and 
extended bid due date was 15 th Sep‟2010. Two offers received, out which one of the 
bidders was disqualified for not me eting the pre -qualifying criteria. The price bid of the 
qualified bidder has been opened. Consultant has been engaged for financial appraisal 
of the techno -economic evaluation report and legal due diligence of land. The Wind 
Power Plant is likely to be commissioned in end of 2011. 
 
(ii)        Nuclear Power Plant:  
 
Nuclear power is fast emerging as viable source of energy. Sensing the 
prospects in nuclear power generation, NALCO has been an initial mover in joining 
hands with Nuclear Power Corporation of India (NPCIL) for establishment of Nuclear 
Power Plant in JV. M oU has been signed with NPCIL in November, 2009. Nuclear 
Power Project, in which NALCO would participate, has been identified. JV agreement 
will be signed on receipt of approval from Govt. of India. NALCO Board has 
recommended for approval of investment to  Ministry of Mines. All possible assistance is 
being provided by Government of India to NALCO in this regard. 
 
(iii)      Kolar Gold Mines:  
 
Company has undertaken preliminary due diligence on taking over the gold 
mines at Kolar which was closed in 2001. A formal interest has been submitted to the 
Ministry of Mines for consideration.  Board of Directors of the Company in the 246 th 
meeting held on 20 th Nov‟10 deliberated on the matter of acquisition of BGML and 
decided to keep the proposal on hold as the sale of assets of BGML is sub-judice.  
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 

24 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
 
Capacity Expansion 
 
 The Committee note that while NALCO continues to deliver profits, its 
comparative performance vis-à-vis the private competitors raises some amount of 
concern.  The Committee also note with deep concern that the relegation of the 
Company, once the leader in the Aluminium sector, to third place in the domestic 
market was triggered by its failure to a dd adequate capacity in time to meet the strong 
private competition. 
 
 The Committee however feel that the lack of adequate capacity is reflective of a 
larger malaise of complacency, both of the management and the Ministry.  The 
Committee would like to cau tion that one cannot afford to be complacent merely by the 
fact that one is making profit.  The Committee wish to emphasise that NALCO needs to 
reclaim its position of market leadership in the Aluminium production industry. 
 
 At this juncture we would like to ponder over the present scenario and reflect as 
to what ails NALCO.  A dispassionate assessment reveals that the obvious and the 
likely factors are lack of vision in certain core areas; full time CMD post being vacant for 
a considerable time; NALCO‟s failing on the front of forward and backward integration, 
etc., which have led to NALCO‟s slide to third position.  On a positive note the 
Committee feel that once the malaise is diagnosed, recovery, if suitable timely 
measures are taken, cannot be far behind. 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that huge expansion projects are addressed at 
redressing the capacity constraint faced by the Company.  The Committee recommend 
that management should set up a concurrent monitoring unit f or its ongoing expansion 
work to ensure the most efficient and timely completion of its 3 rd Phase Expansion 
project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 After stabilization of units in 1987, the Company went for capacity addition of all 
operating units including up -gradation of technology for alumina and aluminium plant 
and up -gradation of port facility at Vizag at a project cost of Rs. 4200 crore. The 1 st 
phase expansion, which started in year 1997 ended with the commissioning of smelter 
plant in  2004.  
 
With successful commissioning of additional capacity of almost 100%, the 
Company went for 2 nd phase capacity addition (by about 30%) immediately thereafter. 
The 2 nd phase brown field expansion of existing units at a project outlay of Rs. 4402 
crore, which start ed in October, 2004, immediately after completion of 1 st phase 
expansion, is nearing completion. The smelter plant is fully commissioned since 
December, 2009. Out of  2 additional units of captive power plant, one unit of 120 MW  

25 
 
was commissioned since Aug ust, 2009 while the other unit of 120MW has been 
commissioned on 27 th August, 2010 . The works at mines and refinery complex is in 
advance stage of construction and is due for Mechanical completion by March‟2011. 
The plant capacities in the initial phase, after 1st phase and 2nd phase expansions 
are as under:- 
Sl 
No 
Operating unit UoM Installed production capacity 
Initial phase 1st phase 
Expansion 
2nd phase 
Expansion 
1. Bauxite Mine lakh MT 24 48 63 
2. Alumina Refinery lakh MT 8.5 15.75 21 
3. Aluminium Smelter lakh MT 2.18 3.45 4.60 
4. Captive Power 
Plant 
MW 600 960 1200 
MT- metric tonnes 
Further, upgradation of mines & refinery at a project cost of Rs. 409 crore has 
started since October, 2008, even before completion of 2 nd phase expansion. After 
completion, the mines capacity will increase to 68.25 lakh MT from 63 lakh MT and 
refinery capacity will be 22.75 lakh MT from 21 lakh MT. 
 
Thus, the rate of growth in production capacity since inception till date on 
commissioning of 2 nd phase expansion achieved is 4.5% in alumina and 3.6% in 
aluminium, on compounded annual growth rate basis. 
 
The capacity addition by the private players on other hand is through 
combination of expansion and acquisition of existing companies like M/s . HINDALCO 
acquiring INDAL and M/s. Vedanta Aluminium acquiring MALCO. The production of 
aluminium metal by the primary producers during the year 2009-10 is given below: 
Unit: tonnes 
Name of the Company Installed capacity 
of smelter 
Production (2009-10) 
HINDALCO Industries 5,46,000 560,346 
National Aluminium Company 
Ltd.(NALCO) 
4,60,000 431,471 
Bharat Aluminium Company 
Ltd.(BALCO) 
2,45,000 268,783 
Vedanta Aluminium Ltd.(VAL) 2,50,000 265,534 
 
As is apparent from the above, presently, NALCO is at No. 2 position in the 
production of aluminium in the country. Since, domestic demand of aluminium metal is 
less than its production, all the producers export part of their production. The  Company 
is ab out to complete its second phase expansion project  which would augment  its  
capacities of mines from 48 lakh tonnes  per annum (TPA)  to 63 lakh TPA, alumina 
refinery from 15.75 lakh  TPA to 21 lakh TPA, aluminium  smelter  from 3.45 lakh TPA  

26 
 
to 4.6  la kh TPA  and captive power plant from 960 MW  to 1200 MW. As noted by the 
Hon‟ble Committee, NALCO has initiated actions for augmenting capacity. The 
Company is exploring possibilities to further augment its various capacities in both 
overseas and domestic sectors subject to viability of the project. The rationale of setting 
up plants abroad is that power is available in some countries at cheaper rates as 
compared to within the country. The sites under consideration for setting up aluminium 
smelter alongwith  captive power plant in abroad are Indonesia and Iran, while in the 
domestic area, Western Orissa is being considered as a possible site. The Ministry 
does not apprehend that overseas plans of the Company would adversely affect its 
domestic performance.  
NALCO is confident, with the culmination of the various projects that are in 
pipeline and detailed below, the Company‟s turnover will jump to more than Rs. 25,000 
crore by financial year 2019-20. 
For 3 rd phase expansion, several works like preparation of d raft project 
report(DPR) for CPP has been completed and lab scale study of bauxite for technology 
selection and upgrading the amperage in smelter are underway. 
  
Considering, the growth of private players, it is a fact that the Company has been 
relegated to 2nd position in terms of domestic market share. However, NALCO continues 
to be a Company of Global repute in terms of quality and Company‟s efforts to meet 
commitments with all transparency. NALCO‟s operating cost is one of the lowest in both 
alumina and aluminium in the world. 
 Company‟s domestic share in last 4 years is noted here under: 
 
It is pertinent to note that, the Company has embarked upon for last over 3 years 
on fast growth path. Recently, Company has been given approval for bauxite mines in 
Andhra Pradesh. NALCO has plans to set up an alumina refinery based on the above 
mines for which several activities are going on. Similarly, the Company has already 
opened office in Indonesia for coal as well as smelter and power project in that country. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Percentage
Year
NALCO's Position in Domestic Market
HINDALCO
NALCO
BALCO
MALCO
VAL

27 
 
 
For a greenfield smelter and power plant in Western Orissa, although, the 
Company was conditionally granted permission by Government of Orissa in  2009, the 
same is on hold due to environmental stipulation of the region. The re -location of plant 
site is being considered.  
 Very recently, in April 2010, Government of Orissa has agreed to forward a 
proposal for allotment of Pottangi bauxite deposit. On allotment of the same, the 
Company will immediately go for 3rd phase capacity expansion of refinery. 
  
Besides above, the Company has also plans to diversify into energy sector with 
ambitious plans for wind power and nuclear power projects, for which concrete steps 
have been taken. 
 
Efforts are being made in backward and forward integration projects (detailed at  
reply to recommendation No.4).  
 
Concurrent monitoring unit for ongoing expansion work & timely completion of 3 rd phase 
expansion project: 
 A full fledged project monitoring unit  has been put in place at corporate level 
headed by Executive Director/ General Manager project under guidance of Director 
(Project & Technical). For monitoring of project, meetings with the agencies like Bharat 
Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) and consultants Engineers India Ltd. (EIL) and MECON 
Ltd.  are being held regularly and being closely monitored. Personnel from Corporate 
project are placed exclusively at site for direct monitoring and feedback. Meetings at 
CMD le vel of BHEL &  EIL is being conducted at regular intervals. For pursuing 3 rd 
phase expansion, dedicated teams are being set up at all concerned units. 
 
 NALCO management has taken a due note of concern expressed by Hon‟ble 
Committee and shall try to plan t he future expansion works for completion in scheduled 
time.  
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
Technology Upgrade 
 
 The Committee note that NALCO had acquired their smelting technology in 1981, 
which till then was the latest.  But by 1985, improved and better technology became 
available. 
 
 The Committee note that no perceptible efforts have been made to upgrade 
NALCO‟s smelting tech nology, whereas its competitor HINDALCO went ahead to 

28 
 
acquire the latest smelters. The Committee also learn that HINDALCO could adopt the 
latest smelting technology earlier because their plants reached the end of the lifecycle 
of installed technology earli er. As far as NALCO is concerned, the explanation put forth 
is that the company had reached the end of technology lifecycle only now and that they 
are now planning to adopt the latest smelting technology in their Green -field expansion 
projects. 
 
 The Committee are concerned that NALCO could not fully absorb the latest 
advances in technology due to the fact that it is not economically prudent to re -invest in 
technology acquisition while the installed technology is yet to run its full life -cycle.  
However, the Committee are skeptical of  NALCO‟s explanation that it lagged behind in 
adopting latest technology since the already installed technology is yet to run its full life 
cycle.  Such a perception, the Committee feel, reflects a laidback and status-quoist 
attitude of the management in the matter of urgent need for continuously updating 
technology in a competitive scenario.  The Committee are of the opinion that this 
technological lag substantially contributed to the Company sliding to third place 
domestically. 
 
 The Committee therefore appreciate the Company‟s plan to acquire latest 
technology for its Greenfield expansion projects. The Committee also recommend that 
the management should take all necessary steps to ensure that no undue disadvantage 
is borne by the company for want of the best and latest technology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NALCO has all along endeavored to adopt the latest technology for which it has 
got a Continuous Technology Assistance (CTA) agreement with M/s. Aluminium 
Pechiney(AP), France . All the latest developments in the AP –18 Technology are 
progressively incorporated in the Company. The very fact that the Company is one of 
the lowest cost producers of alumina and aluminium even today, proves the fact that 
adoption of AP -18 Technology d uring 1 st phase and 2 nd Phase expansion have not 
affected the competitive edge of the Company.   
  
In 1981, NALCO had adopted the then latest AP -18 technology in alumina -
aluminium from M/s. Aluminium Pechiney of France. 
 
For the 1 st Phase capacity expansio n of smelter from 2.30 lakh metric tonnes 
(MT) capacity, the Company had adopted the same robust and proven technology with 
some modifications, thereby improving the productivity.  
  
Over the years, the same is being upgraded due to CTA with the technology  
supplier. While implementing the 2 nd Phase brown field capacity expansion, after 
thorough deliberations, NALCO adopted “Improvement Proposal” from M/s. Aluminium 
Pechiney, the technical collaborator. This proposal envisages improved 

29 
 
equipment/process for the alumina refinery and smelter. Further, while procuring 
various equipments in general, NALCO had adopted strategy to bring in equipments 
based on the latest technology in the respective field. 
- Existing pot lines are operating satisfactorily using the AP-18 technology. 
- As part of phase -1 expansion complete carbon area except rodding shop where 
certain balancing equipment were added and installation of new baking furnace 
with two fires have been envisaged to cater the requirement of potline -4 
expansion (phase-2).  
 Since carbon area have already been expanded for accommodating phase -II 
expansion except above, going for new technology means the investment 
already made will be of no use. 
- Transfer and absorption of AP technology in the Indian operating conditi ons is 
already proven at Angul smelter. Any change in technology i.e. AP 30 at this 
stage of expansion may imbalance working conditions and manpower training 
and acquaintances. 
- Inter-changeability of output from associated facilities like pot room annexe, 
anode paste plant, anode baking furnace, anode rodding shop to pot line 4 from 
pot line 1, 2 and 3 vice versa is easy and smooth. 
- Inter-changeability of stem bracket assembly, cathode bar, handling equipment, if 
necessary.  
- Existing transfer gantry cathode  crane can be utilized for new pot line and vice -
versa. 
- Central passage and end passage will be utilized since building length, etc. will 
remain same. 
- Inventory of spare equipment and spare parts will be minimized. 
- Manpower and training needs will be curtailed to great extent. 
- Inter-changeability of manpower will not pose a problem. 
- Deployment of AP-foreign experts will be minimized. 
Improvement proposals undertaken at smelter plant are as under: 
i. Adoption of latest „Alpsys‟ pot regulation system for pot lines. 
ii. Switching over to semi -graphite form anthracite was done from 1995 onwards 
and trial with graphitized cathodes from semi -graphite pot lining, side walls to 
SiC, modifications in AlF3 hopper and pot super structures has been carried out. 
iii. Installation of fume treatment centre in bake ovens. 
iv. Integrated alumina and crushed bath  unloading and mixing system in carbon 
area. 
v. Revamping/upgrading of casting station in rodding shop. 
vi. Nitrogen plant in cast house. 
vii. Replacement of vibro-compacting unit in green anode plant. 

30 
 
 
Meanwhile, the Company has started implementation of the plans to upgrade the 
technology in terms of current carrying capacity from present 185 KA to 220 KA in a 
phased manner, as has been adopted by several other aluminium industries abroad. 
 
 However, for the proposed future „greenfield‟ expansions, NALCO has plans to 
adopt latest technology (350 KA and above) and the pre-feasibility report is under 
preparation. 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated  20.10.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.11 
 
Research and Development performance 
 
 The Committee, while appreciating the many projects and achievements in 
Research and Development in NALCO could not help but observe that the R& D 
expenditure in the Company has been fluctuating at a measly 0.11 to 0.08 percent of its 
turnover.  Considering the infinite possibilities of effecting economies and achieving 
advancements through R&D, the Committee recommend that more emphasis be laid on 
R&D sector in the future, and especially into indigenization of advanced and critical 
technology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NALCO has been concentrating all these years on stabilizing production, 
efficiency and solving various process related problems besides few Research and 
Development (R&D) activities taken up by Company. However, recently NALCO Board 
has approved implementation of a world class R&D Centre with an investment of Rs. 
88.00 crores in phase -I. Accordingly, various activities have been ta ken up for 
implementation of the Centre which will take about three years time to become 
operational. Consequently, the expenditure towards R&D will progressively increase in 
the subsequent years. In the R&D Centre, NALCO will concentrate on technological 
developments pertaining to bauxite, alumina and aluminium. 
 
Meanwhile NALCO has appointed a consultant for implementation of the centre. 
The package for the Main Building is under finalization for tendering in April, 2011. 
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
 (O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
Recommendation Serial No.12 
 
Promotion Policy 
 
 Manpower is an integral part of any PSU.  A motivated, efficient and effective 
manpower would go long way in the overall progress of a PSU.  One of the 
driving/motivating factor for any employee is timely and deserving promotions.  Any 
discrepancies or irregularities therein would not only have huge demoralizing effects on 
personnel, the same would also tend to shake the very edifice of the organization. 
 
 It has come to the notice of the Committee that there had been an instance 
where a junior General Manager level ranked official was placed at higher position 
superseding the in -house seniors including senior General Managers and Executive 
Directors.  The  Ministry themselves have conceded this fact and have assured the 
Committee about taking remedial measures.  Such instances, the Committee feel, 
would have a demoralizing effect over the personnel of the Company. 
 
 In fact, it is incumbent upon the Ministry to not only take notice of such instances, 
but also to redress these problems.  There is need for taking steps to ensure a just, fair 
and transparent Departmental Promotion Policy, and the Ministry have a paramount 
responsibility in this regard. 
 
 In the  context of manpower management, the Committee also note that some 
areas had also been outsourced causing resentment among the labour force of NALCO. 
 
 The Committee express their disdain over the instances of junior level officers 
being allowed to supersede in -house senior officers of the Company despite claims to 
have in place fair Departmental Promotions Policy for appointments and promotions 
below the Board Level.  Considering the immense demoralizing effect such instances of 
impropriety could have over employees of the Company, the Committee recommend 
that stringent measures should be taken to check the recurrence of such malpractices in 
future and accountability o f those responsible for effecting such irregularities should be 
fixed. 
 
 The Committee while recommending that the Ministry should evolve a 
mechanism for regular review of the Departmental Promotions Policies of Undertakings 
under its administrative supervision to ensure adherence to established guidelines 
express its strong resentment at s uch instances of favouritism shown in violation of all 
norms of propriety. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 From time to time, the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and Department 
of Personnel & Training (DoP&T) circulate guidelines to all Ministries regard ing filling up 
Board level posts in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). In accordance with the said 
guidelines, applications are invited from eligible candidates by Public Enterprises 
Selection Board (PESB) which after selection interview recommends a panel  of 2 
candidates. After obtaining clearance from Central Vigilance Commission, etc.  the 

32 
 
Ministry  forwards the name of one of the candidates for appointment as a Board level 
Director with the approval of the Minister concerned to DoP&T  for obtaining appr oval of 
the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet(ACC). After receipt of the approval of ACC, 
requisite orders are issued by the Ministry. This mechanism is followed by the Ministry 
of Mines for its CPSEs including NALCO . As such, there is already a transp arent, laid 
down mechanism/procedure for filling up Board level posts in all PSUs including 
NALCO. 
 
 As regards senior appointments, which are below Board level, the matter is 
within the purview of the Company‟s Board. Policy matters related to recruitment  and 
promotion of below Board level officers are put up to the Board as and when required 
for consideration where the Government has also its nominee Directors. 
 
 Although the Administrative Ministry is not directly involved in the promotion of 
officers of  below Board level of a CPSE, however in order to address the specific 
concerns expressed by the Hon‟ble Committee in this regard, the Ministry through its 
Government nominee has taken up the matter on the Board and HR Committee has 
been constituted by the  Board to examine promotion policy for taking steps to arrest 
possibility of error and subjectivity in the process of promotion.  
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.14 
 
Periphery Development 
 
 The Committee appreciate the Ministry‟s emphasis on periphery development, 
which is not only vital for developing the local economy but also strengthens the security 
around NALCO‟s plants by earning the local peoples‟ sympathy.  The Committee 
strongly feel that NALCO has not built up adequate good rapport with the local people 
around their plants.  The Committee  however take note of NALCO‟s recent plans and 
initiatives to set up some upstream as well as downstream manufacturing units around 
its smelter pl ants.  Integration of business activities, besides being commercially 
beneficial has the potential to substantially add to periphery development and 
improvement of local economy.  This could generate goodwill of the local population for 
the company, which in turn can also indirectly enhance the security of the company‟s 
plants by way of security sensitive information received from the locals. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company should make more 
efforts on the front of peripheral development besides expediting the execution of its 
ongoing periphery development plans and projects. 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Since 1998 -99, NALCO was allocating 0.5% of its net profit i.e. profit after tax 
(PAT) of the year for periphery development ac tivities of the succeeding year. 
Thereafter, since 2002 -03, the amount was doubled to 1% of its PAT. Out of this 
allocable fund:  
 40% is for Damanjodi sector, where the  mines and refinery are located;  
 40% is for Angul sector, where the smelter and power plant are located; and 
 20% is for other areas. 
 Peripheral development activities are taken up in villages within 10 kilometers 
radius of NALCO plants and also the district headquarters of Koraput and Angul. The 
Government of Orissa has constituted Rehabil itation and Peripheral Development 
Advisory Committee (RPDAC) for Damanjodi and Angul separately under the 
chairmanship of concerned Revenue Divisional Commissioner(RDC).  The RPDAC 
finalizes the annual peripheral development projects and its estimates.  T he RPDAC 
also decides the projects to be executed by the District Administration and by NALCO. 
The Company also takes up public utility projects at Bhubaneswar and other parts of 
Odisha depending upon requirements. 
 
The developmental activities undertaken by NALCO are divided into two categories: 
 
A) Constructional activities : include  construction and development of rural roads, 
culverts, bridges, construction and renovation of rural schools,  community halls, 
development of public  places, parks, development of  primary health  centers, 
drinking water schemes like supply of piped drinking  water, digging  of tube  
wells, open wells, water harvesting  schemes, development and  renovation of 
village ponds, etc. 
 
B) Non-constructional activities : include arranging health camps, animal health 
camp, mobile health care services, awareness programme on environment 
health and hygiene krishi mela, village sanitation programmes, arranging rural 
games, sports and cultural activities, etc. 
 
Due to above per ipheral development works of NALCO, the following impact/ 
benefits have been noticed: 
 
(i) Positive changes have been observed under road and communication sector, 
access to basic health services, everyday trade, availability of essential 
commodities, increase in frequency in transport and quality of livelihood of local 
people. 
 
(ii) Education sector  has experienced positive changes with regard to increase  in 
attendance of school  children, improvement  in quality of teaching, protection of 
school campus from tres passers and animals and  motivation of parents to send 
their children for  higher  education and skill development training. 

34 
 
 
(iii) Improvement has been observed in health sector in the areas of treatment of 
commonly occurred diseases, distribution of essential medicines, minimizing the 
loss of working days and doorstep services by doctors. Less dependence on 
local public health centers  (PHCs) could be possible due to health interventions 
made by NALCO. Improvement has also been noticed on child health and health  
of adult/old including women. 
 
(iv) Due to NALCO‟s intervention in drinking water sector some people of periphery 
villages could avail drinking water at their doorstep. Incidence of diarrhoea could 
also be minimized to some extent in those villages. 
 
(v) Fodder, fuel and bio -mass requirements of the project villages could be met to 
some extent due to plantation activities of NALCO in those villages. It also has 
impact on the rural environment 
 
(vi) Sports and cultural activities of NALCO is developing a sense of togethe rness 
and belongingness among the villagers in the area. The demand for organizing 
such events are largely on demand of local villagers. 
 
(vii) Pond renovation and pisciculture activities of NALCO led to marginal increase in 
fish production and lesser dependence on outside markets to some extent. 
 
(viii) Works related to creation of durable assets and infrastructure in the periphery 
villages, Angul and Koraput towns have been rated high by the people in those 
areas. 
 
 As a measure of social responsibility and to enrich the quality of life in the rural 
areas surrounding plant sites, the company has been undertaking various peripheral 
development activities. The Company is also taking up several developmental activities 
in and around Bhubaneswar on regular basis. The Company has also been providing 
additional fund from time to time, with special approval of NALCO Board depending 
upon requirement, for some special development works. 
 
 Amount provided by the Company for peri pheral development activities during 
last five financial years are as under: 
   Rs. in lakhs 
Year M&R Complex 
Damanjodi 
S&P Complex Angul Bhubaneswar 
& Rest Of 
Orissa 
Total 
2005-06 508.90 563.93 246.96 1319.79 
2006-07 624.88 624.88 312.44 1562.20 
2007-08 952.55 952.55 476.28 2381.38 
2008-09 652.61 652.61 326.30 1631.52 
2009-10 508.91 508.91 254.45 1272.27 
  
 Going a step further the Company has set up NALCO Foundation to exclusively 
deal with CSR activities with professional competence. The Foundation was registered 

35 
 
on 28 th July, 2010 under the Indian Trust Act, 1882. The Board has sanctioned 
additional 1% of PAT for executing peripheral projects through the Foundation, apart 
from the amount which is being spent through RPDAC for CSR activities. 
 
The CSR Foundation shall function based on the guidelines on Corporate Social 
Responsibility for Central Public Sector Enterprises, recently issued by the  Department 
of Public Enterprises,    Govt. of India. As directed therein, the expenditure range for 
CSR is: 
Net Profit in a Financial Year       % of profit for CSR  
(i) Less than Rs. 100 crore       3% – 5% 
(ii) Rs.100 crore to Rs. 500 crore      2% – 3% (Subject to a minimum of Rs. 3 Cr)  
(iii) Rs. 500 crore and above        0.5% – 2%  
  
 NALCO comes under the third category and supposed to spend 0.5% to 2% of its 
net profit for CSR activities. As may be observed, the Company has opted for the 
maximum, by setting up the Foundation. 
 
 Further, var ious plans and initiatives to set up some upstream as well as 
downstream manufacturing units around its smelter plants. Integration of business 
activities, besides being commercially beneficial has the potential to substantially add to 
periphery developmen t and improvement of local economy.  This could generate 
goodwill of the local population for the Company, which in turn can also indirectly 
enhance the security of the Company‟s plants by way of security sensitive information 
received from the locals. 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.15 
 
Planning and Vision Document 
 
 As the saying goes, a good plan today is better than a perfect plan tomorrow.  
Besides, it always pays to plan.  The Committee are baffled to note that NALCO had no 
concrete Corporate Plan prior to its elevations as a Navratna.   This reflects absolute 
lack of professionalism in management.  The Committee feel that a Company should 
always have a futuristic and forward looking vis ion.  The Committee note with relief that 
NALCO has now come up with a Vision & Corporate Plan 2010 -2020 to guide its future 
growth. 
 
 The Committee recommend that the NALCO management and the Ministry of 
Mines should together set up an effective monitorin g body which can ensure the proper 
implementation of the Vision & Corporate Plan 2010-2020 of the company. 
 

36 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NALCO had a Corporate Plan for the period 1995 -2005.  A draft Vision and 
Corporate Plan 2007-2012 was prepared in 2006.  However, on the advice of the Board, 
the present Corporate Plan and Vision 2020 was prepared with the help of external 
consultants in 2008-09.   
 
The implementation of Vision & Corporate Plan 2010 -2020 of the Company is 
being closely monitored by the Board and the Ministry. 
 
 An action plan has been prepared   to achieve the broad objectives envisaged in 
Corporate Plan 2020. The progress on the same is being reviewed at regular intervals 
by the Board and by the Ministry of Mines.  
 
 An action plan has been prepared to achieve the broad objectives envisaged in 
Corporate Plan 2020. The same is being reviewed periodically  by the Board and the 
Ministry of Mines.  
 
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
 (O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.17 
 
Expansion Abroad 
 
 In the context of planning expansion abroad, the Committee noted that NALCO is 
proposing to set up projects in Indonesia, Iran, etc.  The Committee also note that one 
of the proposals behind setting up the projects pertains to the aspe ct of low cost power 
availability there.  The Committee have also noted the Ministry‟s clarification that those 
proposed units would produce only that much quantity of Alumina which is required/or 
proposed to be exported. While appreciating this position, a point which needs to be 
stressed is that by setting up units abroad some people who would have gained 
employment in the country would be deprived of employment opportunities. 
 
 The Committee wish to stress in this context that in this country we have to 
pause and ponder not once, but a million times, before we start thinking about  
depriving/demoralizing our local work force. 
 
 The Committee therefore recommend that while the company should go ahead 
with their plans to expand abroad and continue to look f or opportunities to capitalize on 
availability of cheap input costs like power and raw materials, they should ensure that 
domestic growth is not neglected by making sustained efforts to generate more 
employment in the domestic market. 

37 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As already submitted in reply given to recommendations No. 4,6,7 & 8, the 
Company is exploring all opportunities to capitalize on the available  resources within 
the country. Expansion plans abroad are basically to take advantage of low energy 
costs in those countries. There are severe limitation on adding value to alumina, being 
exported presently, in the country due to low availability of electricity and sources of 
energy like coal or gas. 
 
 Expansion within the country has been the first priority of  NALCO. Company‟s 
investment proposals in India are not mutually exclusive of the investment proposals 
abroad. Company has been pursuing hard for the last few years to establish another 
smelter and power plant in India. Since, pithead power plant is almost  a mandatory 
requirement for viability of an aluminium smelter, NALCO is scouting for suitable 
location in Orissa, Chhatishgarh, etc.  
 
Company‟s proposal to set up a 0.5 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) smelter 
plant in Western Orissa was approved conditio nally by State Govt. in 2008. Further 
progress has not happened as the environmental studies conducted by the State 
Pollution Control Board do not recommend more smelter plants in that area. Alternate 
locations have been explored and discussions are held w ith State Govt. for allocation of 
water for the proposed project. NALCO‟s proposal for the alternate location in 
Sundargarh was placed before the Task force of State Govt. for Aluminium industries on 
14/12/2010. Committee concluded that availability of water will not be sufficient to meet 
the requirement of the project. It advised NALCO to explore locations in Koraput, 
Rayagada, Bolangir or Kalahandi districts. Viability study for the locations suggested by 
State Govt. is being done. Once commitment is received for water allocation, action 
would be initiated for approval of the project location, sanction of coal linkage, 
environmental clearance, etc. The estimated investment is Rs. 16,500 crores. 
 
Preliminary proposal was submitted to Govt. of Chhattisgarh to set up Aluminium 
Smelter and Power Plant at suitable location in Chhattisgarh. While welcoming 
NALCO‟s proposal to set up the smelter plant in the state, Govt. of Chhattisgarh 
expressed constraints in permitting more po wer plants in the state and suggested 
NALCO to explore options to source power through long term power purchase 
agreement. Chief Secretary, CG conveyed consent to allot land at Lara in Raigarh 
district near rail head, Ib valley coal reserves and nearest po int to Alumina Refinery at 
Damanjodi. Govt. of Chhattisgarh has  again been requested to reconsider our proposal 
for the smelter plant along with the power plant.  
 Apart from the smelter project, Company proposes to set up a 1.4 MTPA alumina 
refinery in Vishakapatnam district in Andhra Pradesh at an estimated investment of Rs. 
6000 crores. The refinery would be based on the bauxite reserve of Gudem and KR 
Konda blocks in Andhra Pradesh. The mining lease over five blocks in Gudem and KR 
Konda has been clear ed by GoAP and GoI in favour of NALCO. Mining plan is under 
preparation, which is a prerequisite for grant of mining lease. Concurrently, feasibility 
report for the refinery has been prepared. Application has been submitted to GoAP for 

38 
 
sanction of project location, allocation of water. Same is under consideration by 
concerned authorities in GoAP. The draft mining plans for Gudem Blocks I & IV  were  
submitted to Regional Controller of Mines, IBM, Hyderabad (without field survey & 
demarcation work) in the la st week of February‟11 for pre -scrutiny remarks. The other 
three blocks draft mining plans will be submitted after board resolution for PMCP. 
However, n o field activities in these mining block areas are to be taken as per the 
advice of MoM, in view of environmental concerns received from various quarters due to 
proposed bauxite mining activities in the region.  
 
 
 As can be seen from the above, the Company has not neglected domestic 
growth rather it is giving more importance to domestic growth to generate more 
employment. 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
 Benchmarking of performance 
 
 The Committee regret to note that international benchmarking of units‟ 
performances in the Company had only been carried out recently, that too, upon the 
insistence of the Ministry.  The Committee feel that mere generation of profits should 
never have been allowed to being in any sense of complacency into the Company.  In 
this regard, the Committee note that the Company had recently obtained the Brook Hunt 
Report, a report by a leading Internationa l consultancy Group, which conducts an 
independent benchmarking of performances of Aluminium Companies worldwide on all 
relevant parameters, and have studied its findings.  The Committee are apprised of the 
findings that showed NALCO‟s labour and repair co sts as high in comparison to other 
companies around the world. In response to queries, NALCO informed that while 
measuring manpower productivity, only regular workers are taken into account.  This is 
absolutely wrong since a suitable number of contract workers are also being engaged in 
NALCO in various operations which are having direct bearing on and contribution to 
NALCO‟s production performance.  While benchmarking manpower productivity of 
labour cost, the contract workers must also be taken into account  to get the correct 
reflection.  
 
 The Committee recommend that the Company should chalk out definitive action 
plans to bring about more efficiency in the processes where they are found lagging 
behind the best performers in the world. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has approved manpower sanction for its regular operation and 
maintenance of the plants. However, where such regular manpower has not been 
provided, the jobs which are mainly intermittent and not related to the core activities are 
given on contract to out side agencies, who in turn, engage their manpower for carrying 
out the jobs/works. 
 
 The Company is continuously reviewing the requirement of manpower. As a 
result of the reviews, the Company management has taken decision not to recruit 
full manpower requirements envisaged in the detailed project reports prepared 
for 1 st phase expansion and 2 nd phase   expansion, but to rationalize the 
manpower recruitment. 
 In spite of expansion projects entering commissioning phase, the required 
additional manpower will be recruited in phases over 2 -3 years to contain labour 
cost. 

40 
 
 Increase in manpower is proposed to be restricted at 15% as against capacity 
addition of 33% in smelter, 25% in CPP, 44.4% in alumina refinery and 42.2% in 
mines. 
 Recruitments are proposed to be restricted to the critical requirements. 
 Any additional requirement of non -technical/ministerial personnel is proposed to 
be sourced through internal redeployment without resorting to recruitment. 
 Engagement of contract labour is propo sed to be restricted to the barest 
minimum based on a study by industrial engineering. 
 Targets on adherence to specific consumption norms for raw materials will be 
incorporated in the incentive schemes for reduced earning on higher 
consumption. 
 During the ensuing wage negotiation for the 5 th long term wage settlement for 
non-executive employees, conditions for better cost control, and effective work 
practices will be introduced for increasing overall performance of the Company. 
 The executive performance rel ated payments are being linked to the profitability 
and the individual performance of the executives.  
 For reducing repair and maintenance cost, the Company is upgrading the 
technologies with the help of Aluminium Pechiney with whom NALCO has 
Continuous Te chnology Assistance (CTA) agreement. Since the Company has 
been in operation for over 2 decades, wear and tear of the equipment is more, 
thereby increasing expenditure on repair and maintenance cost. Wherever 
possible, the old and worn out equipments are b eing replaced with the latest 
technologically upgraded equipments with higher capacity. This will improve 
productivity of the equipments. 
 
 
The Brook Hunt report considered Aluminium / Alumina plants all over the world where 
different types of technologies  are adopted in different plants. When technology differs 
the operating parameters will also differ. For example the Refinery plant at Damanjodi 
operates at Atmospheric pressure digestion, which is unique in the world. And the 
Smelter plant at Angul operates on AP-18 technology. 
 
1. Based on the total cash cost in 2010-Q4, the report placed Nalco‟s Damanjodi Mines 
is 10 th (Among 37 Mines),  Refinery is at 16 th  (Among 65 Refineries) and Angul 
Smelter is at 18 th ( Among 156 Smelters) in the world. The ranking a re above all the 
major Aluminium producers in India except Mahan which has yet not started 
production.  
 
a. The cost of production of Bauxite is on the higher side due to increase in R&M & 
Royalty cost. This is due to major replacement of worn out cable belt and wire 
rope in 2010. The Royalty on Bauxite has also increased due to increase in LME 
price as Royalty is directly related to LME price.  
b. The reduction in Refinery position is due to misrepresentation of Energy cost in 
the report. This has been informed to authorities of Brook Hunt for necessary 
correction. With this correction it is expected that Nalco‟s position will improve 
substantially.  

41 
 
c. The position of Aluminium smelter of Nalco is above all the smelters in India 
except Mahan. Here it is reiterated that this is a misrepresentation since 
production from Mahan project has yet not commenced. Nalco‟s smelter 
compares favorably with all AP-18 technology user plants. The energy cost which 
is a major cause of relative low ranking of NALCO, is cheaper in oth er countries 
due to availability of power from low cost Hydro and Nuclear resources. 
 
2. The labour cost of Nalco is in higher side compared to its competitor because of 
existing practices followed in the PSUs. As Nalco is a PSU, we have to follow the 
agreement done with Unions. How ever all out efforts are on to reduce the cost. 
Following action plans are drawn to contain the cost. Nalco has the following action 
plans to improve the cost: 
 
a. The Company is continuously reviewing the requirement of manpower. As a 
result of the reviews, the Company Management has taken decision not to 
recruit full manpower requirements envisaged in the Detailed Project Reports 
prepared for 1st phase expansion and 2nd phase   expansion, but to rationalize 
the manpower recruitment. 
 
b. In spite of expansion projects having become operational in S&P Complex 
and entering commissioning phase in M&R Complex, the required additional 
manpower is being recruited in phases to arrest labour cost. Recruitments will 
be restricted to the critical requirements only. 
 
c. Increase in manpower is proposed to be restricted at 15% as against capacity 
addition of 33% in Smelter, 25% in CPP, 44.4% in Alumina Refinery and 
42.2% in Mines. 
 
d. Any additional requirement of non -technical/ministerial personnel is proposed 
to be sourced through internal redeployment without resorting to recruitment. 
 
e. Engagement of contract labour is proposed to be restricted to the barest 
minimum based on a study by Industrial Engineering. 
 
f. Targets on adherence to specific consumption norms for raw materials will be 
incorporated in the Incentive Schemes for reduced earning on higher 
consumption. Discussions with Union representatives are in progress. 
 
g. During the ensuing wage negotiation for the 5 th Long Term Wage Settlement 
for non-executive employees, conditions for better cost control, and effective 
work practices will be introduced for increasing overall performance of the 
company. Several round of discussion with Union representatives are over. 
The negotiation is in advance stage of finalization. 
 
h. The executive performance related payments are being linked to the 
profitability and the individual performance of the executives.  
 

42 
 
i. For reducing repair and maintenance cost, the Company is upgrading the 
technologies with the help of RTA (previously Aluminium Pechiney). 
Wherever possible the old and worn out equipments are being replaced with 
the latest technologically upgraded equipments with higher capacity. This will 
improve productivity of the equipments.  
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated   20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.13 
 
Unwarranted Security Expenditure 
 
 The Committee take note of the incident of naxal attack in April, 2009 aimed at a 
depot containing detonators and slurry.  In this context, the Committee further note that 
the type of explosives stored at NALCO‟s mining sites are in the form of slurry, which 
requires detonators to explode, and is practically inoperable as an explosive without the 
detonator device.  The Committee also note that mor e than 15 crore have been 
spent/earmarked by NALCO for securing the slurry and detonators.  It appears to the 
Committee that the target of the naxals seems to be detonators and not the slurry.  
Therefore, for securing the detonators, only a limited area wa s required to be protected.  
The Committee feel that incurring huge expenditure to the tune of 15 crore in the name 
of protecting slurry seems to be unwarranted. 
 
 The Committee are skeptical of the huge security arrangements that have been 
made, or are be ing planned, in response to the incident, in view especially of the fact 
that fool -proof security cover is necessary only around the magazine area, and not 
around entire plants. While appreciating the Ministry‟s intervention to have the outdated 
Explosives Act amended to facilitate better security arrangement, the Committee opine 
that unduly superfluous security arrangements are nothing but uncalled for burdens on 
the public Exchequer.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
ensure tha t the company takes optimal security measures without incurring any 
expenditure wastefully. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It may be difficult to ascertain the exact reasons for the Maoist attack on the 
mines of NALCO. Though looting of the explosives from the  mines magazine may be 
one of the ostensible reasons, several other causes could also be ascribed for the said 
Maoist attack, which are as under:- 
 
 *    To loot of arms and ammunitions of the CISF. 
 *  To create a sense of fear and panic among the people and employees.  
 
*  To cause damage and destructions to vital installation and properties of the 
profit making PSU, i.e. NALCO. 

43 
 
 
   *  To jeopardize production of bauxite, alumina and aluminium metal and 
causing loss to national economy. 
 
It may be observe d that the series of Naxal attack of Govt. Offices, School 
buildings, Communication Towers, Hydro Power Station etc. in the undivided Koraput 
district are done with a purpose to attack on soft targets. It is evident in the recent attack 
that the Naxal have  changed their attack strategies i.e. to destroy soft targets available 
in the operational areas. They have also declared to destroy all vital installations. 
 
To augment the security arrangement in the light of Naxal attack on 12.04.2009 at 
Damanjodi mines,  and the intelligence report of revenge attack from the said group, 
various short term, medium term and long term security arrangements have been taken 
up based on  the need and in consultation with CISF as well as in pursuance with the 
inputs recei ved from various meetings held at different levels including Secretary 
(Mines), Govt. of India, Chief Secretary, Govt. of Orissa, DG, CISF, DG, Orissa Police, 
Intelligence Bureau(MHA), Govt. of India, etc. 
 
The various actions for augmentation of security, which were to be initiated by the 
Company as per the decisions/ guidelines issued in earlier meetings held with security 
agencies and the State Government in the aftermath of the Naxal attack at the mines of 
NALCO in Damanjodi on 12 th April 2009 are being closely monitored and reviewed from 
time to time by the Central and State Intelligence/ security agencies. 
  
It may be indicated that 10 precious lives of CISF jawans were lost during the 
Maoist attack at Damanjodi mines on 12.04.2009. Under the present s ecurity scenario 
of the State, NALCO cannot over look the possibility of re -attack by the hostile Naxal 
group. Therefore to protect the precious human lives of employees, workers and 
security personnel and to protect such targeted areas/installations of th e national 
property (NALCO), which are under the hit list, adequate security augmentations are 
highly justified.  
 
Hon‟ble Committee may kindly appreciate that the expenditure incurred on 
security augmentations are not wasteful expenditure but essential 
investment/requirement. In fact so far, NALCO has not entertained any expenditure 
against non-security items. Very recently, the Company got security measures reviewed 
by Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Samay Ram, UYSM, AVSM, VSM who is a  Director on the Board 
of NALCO. He has presented his report to the Board and the recommendations made 
therein are under consideration of the Company management. 
 
DG, CISF held a review of security measures in Mines on 15/02/2011 when CMD, 
D(F), D(P&A) of Nalco & Maj. Gen.(Retd.) Samayram, an independent Director in the 
Board of Nalco were present. Decision was taken by DG, CISF, not to shift the 
Magazine, in view of measures already taken. This has reduced the expenditure by Rs. 
11 Crores. Other cost reduction measures, without compromising on security are being 
regularly examined. 
 
 

44 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
Recommendation Serial No.18 
 
Market analysis  
 
 The Committee wanted to know whether NALCO has engaged/or plans to 
engage specialist market analysts to help it schedule its production of aluminium and 
alumina based on the likely trends of fluctuations of the London Metal Exchange.  The 
Committee note that though the company has not felt the need to appoint consultants to 
study LME fluctuations, they have appointed a consultant, Metal Bulletin Research of 
U.K. to do a market study and suggest appropriate strategies for sale of aluminium 
metal. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee appreciate the steps taken by the company to 
evolve better market strategies for its exports by engaging a consultant and recommend 
that the findings of the consultant should be analyzed in the context of  NALCO‟s reality 
and appropriately made u se of.  The Committee further recommend that the company 
should seriously consider either employing in -house experts or engaging expert firms to 
help them understand the LME fluctuation better so that no losses accrue to the 
company on account of holding s tocks or for having to dump their products at throw 
away prices when the LME prices are low.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NALCO has not engaged any specialists in India or in London who study the 
LME market prices and who can speculate about LME prices of al uminium. Alumina is 
not traded on LME. Its prices are mostly derived from the LME prices for aluminium. 
 
 There are couple of leading analyst firms such as Commodity Research Unit 
(CRU), London, Metal Bulletin Research, Macquarie, Goldman Sachs, etc. who c arry 
out price projection from time to time. M/s. Reuters also holds semi -annual polls on 
aluminium price forecasts during January and July every year by different leading 
analysts. As a part of its commercial activity, NALCO also studies such reports name ly 
the Reuters daily news reports, CRU‟s monthly reports, etc. on a day to day basis to 
develop its own market perception. 
  
However, since last couple of years, it is seen that the aluminium prices in the 
London Metal Exchange are dependant not only on th e demand supply scenario but 
also on several other factors such as parity between U.S. Dollars and other major 
currencies, interest rate, freight market, input material costs, Government policies of 
major aluminium producing/consuming countries such as Chi na, etc. Moreover, other 
than the physical metal users, many financial companies, pension funds, hedge funds, 
are also investing in metal market which greatly influences the prices in the London 
Metal Exchange. In this background, while analysts do make pr ojections but such 
projections are revised from time to time and it does have a significant element of 
uncertainty.  

45 
 
 
In view of the above, NALCO has not engaged any Specialist for analysis of 
market (LME trends). Being a PSU, NALCO sells its product throu gh competitive 
bidding. For participation in such competitive bidding, NALCO invites the global players 
for registering with the Company through press advertisement, its own Website and 
through interaction during international seminars. Being a primary pro ducer and 
considering the need for evacuation of its products on a continuous basis and to even 
out the price volatility such export tenders are issued from time to time after taking care 
of the domestic requirement. The above procedure has been found to b e time tested 
and has been well accepted in the International Market. 
  
In fact, considering the transparency in NALCO‟s competitive bidding process, 
quite often, many analysts such as M/s. CRU, London, etc. use NALCO‟s tenders for 
price discovery. 
 
 The L ME price are volatile and dependent on various factors which could be 
broadly categorized as Economic and Fundamental some of which are listed below: 
 Demand & Supply 
 Imports to and from various countries of aluminium products or major inputs, 
namely, bauxite, alumina, etc. 
 Production curtailments 
 Currency fluctuations 
 Economic indicators like PMI, GDP, IP etc 
 Warehousing (on- or off- warrant) etc. 
 Global Interest rate scenario 
 Govt. interventions on tariff structure, licensing, environmental issues, Corpora te 
Social Responsibility, etc. 
 
Leading analysts and economists the world over analyze the market scenario and make 
various projections as regards to the London Metal Exchange(LME) prices from time to 
time. These forecasts are made in US dollars. The forecasts of some of the analysts are 
given below:- 
 
(i)     LME Forecast for 2009 and 2010 by Reuters Poll – Aluminium Metal 
Forecast Date 2009 (in $/T) 2010 (in $/T) 
January‟09 $1609 $1951 
July‟09 - Aug‟09 $1499 $1653 
January‟10 $1665 (Actual) $2094 
 
(ii) The Bank of America/Merrill Lynch Research Forecast - Average London Metals 
Exchange aluminum price for 2009, 2010 & 2011 –  
 
Forecast Date 2009 (in $/T) 2010 (in $/T) 2011 (in $/T) 
January‟09 $1653 - - 
November‟09 $1741 - - 
Actual (2009) $1665 - - 

46 
 
March‟10 - 2275 2100 
 
(iii)      Australian Commodities forecast -  
Forecast Date 2009 (in $/T) 2010 (in $/T) 
July‟09 $1510 $1745 
January‟10 - $1949 
Actual (2009) $1665  
 
(iv)      RBS aluminium forecast for 2009, 2010 in April 2009 was  
 
2009 new     2009 old     2010 new    2010 0ld                
$/tonne      $/tonne      $/tonne    $/tonne  
1,550       1,650         1,875       2,000 
 
    which was revised in March‟10 as follows (in $/t): 
2010 2,200 
2011 2,425 
 
(v)      Barclays capital has forecast the following - 
Forecast Date 2009 (in $/T) 2010 (in $/T) 
January‟09 $2024 $3199 
July‟09 $1427 $1700 
January‟10 - $2088 
 
(vi)      HSBC has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T) 2011 (in $/T) 2012 (in $/T) 
May‟10 $2005 $1939 $2028 
 
(vii)      NATXIS has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T) 2011 (in $/T) 
May‟10 $2370 $2490 
 
(viii) CITI has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 0-3 MONTHS 6-12 MONTHS 
May‟10 $2000 $2400 
 
 
(ix)     BERNSTEIN RESEARCH has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T) 2011 (in $/T) 2012 (in $/T) 
May‟10 $2091 $2000 $2200 
 
(x)      DEUTSCHE BANK has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T) 2011 (in $/T) 2012 (in $/T) 
March‟10 $2174 $2646 $2205 
 

47 
 
(xi)      MORGAN STANLEY has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T) 
(old) 
2010 (in $/T) 
(New) 
2011 (in $/T) 
(old) 
2011 (in $/T) 
(New) 
March‟10 $1852 $2160 $1940 $2226 
 
(xii)      CREDIT SUISSE has forecast the following -  
Forecast Date 2010 (in $/T)  2011 (in $/T) 
April‟10 $2204 $2425 
 
From the above, it is evident that analysts have been changing their forecasts 
depending on the anticipated changes in market dynamics. Therefore, hiring an expert 
firm to enable the Company to understand the LME fluctuations better would not provide 
any definite advantage as the market dynamics keep on changing and the forecasts 
change accordingly. Sometimes, the forecasts by di fferent experts are at wide variance. 
Moreover, NALCO has also subscribed to services of M/s Thomson Reuters for 
providing information on daily price -movements & trends, moving -averages, 
fundamental and technical analysis to better understand the LME price  fluctuations and 
assist concrete decision making on account of price -risk neutralization and efficient 
inventory management. NALCO, on its part, analyses the market & price forecasts 
made by the analysts & the data provided by M/s Thomson Reuters and devi ses a 
strategy of its own additionally considering the Indian Aluminium market dynamics. The 
strategies followed by the company have given it a competitive edge and NALCO‟s 
business practices related to exports have been considered as industry benchmarks b y 
various analysts. At the end of every financial year, average export realization for 
aluminium metal is compared with average LME and till date, the former is at a premium 
to later despite volatility in LME prices. 
 
However, the Company has employed M/s Metal Bulletin Research (MBR) as a 
consultant to study the alumina and aluminium business prospects/opportunities and 
suggest suitable marketing strategies. They have made a preliminary presentation 
before the Board. After detailed deliberation on the fina l presentation to be made before 
the Board, the same will be implemented by the Company. 
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Organizational Leadership 
 
 For any PSU, a clear -cut organizational leadership is a sine qua non .  The 
Committee observe that NALCO during the past four years had been without a full -time 
Managing Director.  The Committee are distraught to note that the delay in appointment 
of a full-time CMD, as informed by the Secretary, Mines during the deposition, was due 
to a frivolous Vigilance Case against the selected candidate who was ultimately found to 
be innocent.  The Committee also note that high level appointments in most PSUs are 
often held to ransom by such vigilance cases against aspirants, most of which curiously 
surface when the process of selection for appointments are in motion.  As it emerges, 
no vigilance enquiry is due or even contemplated till an officer reaches up to the post of 
CMD. There are two aspects to such a scenario. If something is amiss with regard to a 
particular officer, why is it that vigilance enquiry is done only when the issue of his 
promotion to the post of CMD comes up, or is it the case that till such time the particular 
officer gets away with irregularities? On the other hand a bona fide officer can fall prey 
to a motivated enquiry.  There do appear to be such cases/instances, as the Secretary, 
Mines conceded during the deposition.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the process 
of short listing prospective candidates for the post of a CMD, including vigilance 
clearance, should be completed well before retirement of incumbent CMDs. 
 
 The Committee feel that in the selection of CMD, NALCO, the focus should have 
been merit and talent irrespective of the candidate being in -house or external. The 
Committee are also constrained to observe that the prolonged uncertainty that prevailed 
over the appointment of regular CMD in NALCO was bound to impact the performance 
of the company. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Mines should take 
steps to ensure that the absence of a full -time CMD, jeopardizing the organization to a 
possible stat e of disarray and adhocism, does not recur in future.  The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should take concrete steps to work out a future strategy which 
rules out/minimize such situations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     The Government of India has laid down clear cut guidelines for filling up Board level 
posts i.e. Director and Chairman -cum-Managing Director (CMD), in a Central Public 
Sector Enterprise (CPSE) like NALCO i.e. through selection interview by Public 
Enterprises Selection Board (PESB) and subsequent approval of the Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet(ACC) after complying with all necessary pre-requisites.  
 

49 
 
In view of allegations of sexual harassment made by a lady employee, the then 
CMD, NALCO was asked  to proceed on leave in February, 2004. Additional charge 
arrangements for the post of CMD were made by appointing a functional Director in his 
place. In view of an injunction from the Delhi High Court, on a case filed by the Charged 
Officer (Shri C. Venka taramana), the process for regular filling up of the post of CMD, 
National Aluminium Company Ltd.(NALCO), could not be initiated, till the expiry of the 
tenure of the charged officer on 25.6.2007. Requisition was placed with PESB for filling 
up the post on  regular basis by treating 26.6.2007 as the date of vacancy. PESB 
conducted the selection interview for the post on 5.10.2007 and recommended 2 
candidates. After receipt of vigilance clearance in respect of the recommended 
candidates, a Note was sent to De partment of Personnel & Training {DoP&T(ACC)} on 
5.5.2008. In view of change in vigilance status of the candidate recommended at No.1 
in the PESB panel, DoP&T requested for a fresh proposal on 26.5.2008. Subsequently, 
on receipt of vigilance clearance from  Central Vigilance Commission(CVC), a proposal 
for regular appointment to the post of CMD, NALCO was moved to the DoP&T(ACC) on 
5.6.2009. On receipt of approval from ACC, orders for appointing Shri Pradhan as CMD, 
NALCO on regular basis up to 30.9.2009, i.e. the date of his superannuation was issued 
on 3.8.2009.  Subsequently, as approved by ACC, orders for appointing Shri A.K. 
Srivastava as CMD, NALCO  w.e.f. 1.10.2009  for a period of 5 years or till the date of 
his superannuation or till further orders w as issued on 11.8.2009. After the 
superannuation of Shri Pradhan, Shri Srivastava has assumed charge as CMD, 
NALCO, who has been given a tenure of more than four years i.e. upto the date of his 
superannuation.     
 
  It is apparent from the above that the delay in filling up the post of CMD, NALCO 
on regular basis was first due to court case filed by Shri Venkataramana, former CMD, 
NALCO and later, due to some vigilance cases pending against Shri Pradhan(No.1 
candidate in the PESB panel) i.e., extraneous ci rcumstances beyond the control of the 
Ministry of Mines.  
 
     Considering the importance of regular filling up of Board level vacancies in the 
CPSEs, the Government {Department of Public Enterprises(DPE)} has already laid 
down an effective procedure for timely filling up all such forthcoming vacancies. All 
Ministries and Departments are required to initiate action for filling up Board level posts 
coming under their administrative purview at least two years in advance of the date of 
occurrence of the vacan cy in order to ensure that the PESB recommendations are 
available at least six months in advance of the date of vacancy so as to enable the 
Administrative Ministry for completing other formalities and obtaining the approval of 
ACC well before the due date.   For regular monitoring of action initiated for filling up 
vacancies, which require approval of ACC (including Board level posts in CPSEs), 
concerned Administrative Ministry/Department are required to upload requisite data into 
the ACC Vacancy Monitoring System(AVMS) in the website of DoP&T. The 
Government by putting in place these measures, hopes to ensure timely filling up of all 
crucial posts which require approval of ACC, including Board level posts in CPSEs.   
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated  20.10.2010) 
 

50 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.2 
 
Checking frivolous and motivated investigations 
 
 The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should take up the issue of 
frivolous vigilance cases particularly against aspirants for top jobs in PSUs at 
appropriate inter -ministerial fora and push for a viable mechanism to eliminate the 
element of vested interests stalling the process of selection of CMDs.  In case there are 
serious complaints with substantial evidence, the investigations should be fast -tracked 
so that the process of selection is not delayed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the concerns to scrutinize carefully the complaints received 
against Chief Executives and Functional Directors of the Public Sector Enterprises and 
CMDs and Functional Directors of Public Sector Banks and Financial Institutions, 
whether pseudonymous or otherwise, the G overnment  {Department of Public 
Enterprises(DPE)} vide their OM  No. 15(1)/2010 -DPE(GM) dated 11.3.2010 read with 
amendments made vide their OM No. 15(1)/2010 -DPE(GM) dated 12.4.2010 has 
decided to constitute a Group under the Chairmanship of Secretary(Co ordination), 
Cabinet Secretariat to take a view on the same.  
 
In terms of the procedure laid down, complaints against these officials received 
by the Cabinet Secretariat or the DPE or the Prime Minister‟s Office will be first 
scrutinized by the Group headed by the Secretary(Coordination) in the Cabinet 
Secretariat. I f there is no substance in the complaints or the complaint is frivolous in 
nature, the Group would close the complaint. In case the preliminary scrutiny of the 
complaint indicates that there is some substance in it or there are verifiable allegations, 
the Group may seek the comments of the Secretary of the concerned 
Ministry/Department or call for the concerned files or call for the relevant records 
including annual property returns, other reports, etc. The Group, on the basis of the 
appropriate inputs received, may either close the complaint if there is no substance in it, 
or make appropriate recommendation to the Disciplinary Authority regarding the nature 
of the investigation called for on the basis of substance found in the allegations made. 
The Group co nstituted will also be looking into the complaints received by the Cabinet 
Secretary from Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) under the CVC Act or the Public 
Interest Disclosure Resolution and the CVC shall be kept informed at regular intervals 
about the st atus of the scrutiny/review undertaken by the Group into complaints 
forwarded by CVC.  
 
Although it may not be possible to stop complaints against aspirants for top jobs, 
however, with the constitution of a detailed mechanism by the Government as 
elaborated in the foregoing para, action on such complaints would now be expedited.   
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.16 
 
National Policy on Aluminium  
 
 The Committee note that there is no National Aluminium Policy in place to steer 
the course of the aluminium industry in the country.  The Committee further note that 
Ministry of Mines have taken initiatives in setting up a Centre for Techno -Economic 
Mineral Policy Options (C-TEMPO), which will involve all major sectoral  stakeholders in 
evolving policy options. 
 
 The Committee recommend that the C -TEMPO should be made fully functional 
at the earliest and should be adequately strengthened to churn out viable policy options 
for the country so far as the minerals sector is concerned, including aluminum.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Mines has made fresh endeavors to frame aluminium policy as 
recommended by the Hon‟ble Committee. Aluminium Association of India(AAI), the 
apex body representing the entire spectrum of aluminium industry  has submitted a 
Mission Plan docume nt 2010 -2020 to the Ministry for promotion of aluminium in the 
country. The Ministry of Mines is considering to organize a one day seminar with 
concerned stakeholders i.e. the primary aluminium producers of the country viz. 
NALCO, HINDALCO and Vedanta Grou p(BALCO, VAL & MALCO), downstream 
industries,   alongwith officials of concerned Ministries of Government of India as well as 
major bauxite producing States, in order to chalk out requisite policy level intervention 
by the Government to fulfill the objecti ves for promotion of aluminium as outlined in the 
Mission Plan document submitted by AAI.  The seminar, would in a way,   be the  1st 
step towards framing an aluminium policy.   
 
 
Ministry of Mines 
(O.M. No.   29(17)/2009-Met.I dated 20.10.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
21 October 2011   CHAIRMAN, 
Ashwina, 1933(S)                                COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 

52 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 7th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 21st October 2011 from 1130 hrs to 1200 hrs in 
Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Convenor 
Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
4 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
6 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
8 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
9 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
11 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
12 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
1 Shri A.K. Awasthi Dy. CAG (Commercial) 
2 Ms. Usha Sarkar Director General (Commercial) 
 
 
2. XXX   XXX   XXX. 
 
3. XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the following two draft action taken 
reports on: - 
 

53 
 
(i) XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the  5th Report of 15 th Lok Sabha on National 
Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO). 
 
The Committee adopted both the aforesaid Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications and authorized the Chairman to present the same to Parliament.   
 
5. XXX   XXX   XXX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

54 
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 5 TH REPORT OF COPU (15 TH L.S.) ON 
“NATIONAL ALUMINIUM COMPANY LIMITED.” 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of recommendations 18 
II. Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
(vide recommendations at Sl. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,12, 14, 
15, and 17) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
66.66 
III. Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies. 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 10, 13 and 18) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
3 
 
 
 
16.66 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 and 2) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
11.11 
V. Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
Percentage to total: 
 
1 
 
 
5.55 
 