 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POWER GRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH  REPORT 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  
20 

2 
 
CPU. No. 953 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
POWER GRID CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on 
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2013 / Phalguna 1934 (S) 
 
20 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
28 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
29 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government a re still 
awaited 
 
33 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting 34 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Tenth Report of COPU on ‘Power Grid 
Corporation of India Limited’. 
 
36 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
 
   Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri Haokip Kakai Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twentieth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Power 
Grid Corporation of India Limited”. 
 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 7 December 2010.  Replies of the Government to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 16 November 2011.  
Subsequently, updated replies were received from the Ministry on 12 December 
2012.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 19 March 2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)   

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2010 -11) on “P ower grid Corporation of India 
Limited” which was p resented to Lok  Sabha on 7th December, 20 10. The Report 
contained 12 observations/recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all the 
twelve observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been  
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10 & 12.         (Total 9)  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III)            Nil 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
 Sl. Nos.  6, 8, & 11.            (Total 3)
        
(iv) Observations/Recommendations to which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited (Chapter V)         Nil 
            
3. The Committee desire that response to their comments in Chapter I of the 
Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now de al with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 6 
 
AT&C LOSSES  
 
5. The Committee pointed out that while the states like Manipur, Jammu &  
Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh reported astronomically high percentage of Aggregate 
Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses to the extent of 81.01, 69.05 and 61.05 
respectively, the percentage of such losses in the states of Himachal Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh an d Tamil Nadu stood as low as 12.85 , 12.99 and 15.33 
respectively and required the Ministry of Power to formulate appropriate strategies to 
make use of experiences of better performing states in those states where the AT&C 
losses are in the highest brackets .  The Committee also recommend ed that the 
Ministry of Power should keep a strict vigil over the progress of Restructured 
Accelerated Power Development Reform Programme. 
 

7 
 
6.  In their action taken reply, the Government have stated that the responsibility 
of reduction in AT&C losses is with the State Utilities  and t o reduce the losses in 
their distribution sector, the State utilities have to initiate Technical and 
Administrative measures.  The Government have  further stated that under the 
technical measure, the distribution network should be strengthened to avoid frequent 
failure and overloading of system, under the administrative measure, the Distribution 
utilities should take stringent measures under the Electricity Act, 2003 legislated by 
Union of India which provides number of measures to check theft of Electricity.   
 
Regarding the Re -structured Accelerated Power Development and Reform 
Programme(R-APDRP), the Government have  inter-alia stated that t he Power 
Finance Corporation Ltd. (PFC) nodal agency for  R-APDRP on behalf of Ministry of 
Power, is regularly reviewing the   programme/  achievements with States in 
implementation of R -APDRP projects. In addition, the Steering Committee 
constituted by Ministry of Power under the chairmanship of Secretary (Power ) review 
the progress of R -APDRP schemes for expeditious implementation of schemes on 
regular intervals with the Nodal agency (PFC) and with the states officials and 
projects are sanctioned and disbursements are made evenly during the Year.  
 
Present Status of R-APDRP is stated to be as follows:- 
 
 Under Part -A of the Re -Structured APDRP 1402 projects worth of Rs 
5,196.50Crore, to cover almost the entire country for establishment of IT 
enabled Baseline System have been approved by the GOI. 
 Under Part-A total, SCADA Projects worth Rs 1,442.29 Crore. covering 63 
towns have been  sanctioned   
 Under Part –B, and 1132 projects worth Rs 25,684.91 Crore for 
strengthening and upgrading of sub - transmission distribution system, 
have been sanctioned so far. 
 The Ministry of Power has released an amount of Rs 6,502.10 Crore under 
the Restructured R -APDRP programme, out which Rs 6,304.97 Crore is 
the loan against Part -A and Part -B projects for disbursement to state 
utilities and Rs 197.13 Crore as grant ag ainst enabling component for 
implementation of R-APDRP”.  
 
7. Taking note of the high percentage of Aggregate Technical and 
Commercial (AT&C) losses in the country, the Committee had , inter-alia, 
recommended that Government should formulate appropriate str ategies to 
make use of experience of better performing States in respect of those States 
where the AT&C losses are very high.  The Government appears to have drawn 
satisfaction by stating that the responsibility of reduction in AT&C losses is 
with the State utilities.  The Committee are aware of this position.  What the 
Committee wanted was that the Ministry of Power should take some initiatives 
in the matter in national interest and take up the matter with the States 
concerned.   The Committee would li ke to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.   

8 
 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 7 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
8. Expressing concern over the delay in appointment of independent directors on 
the Board of PGCIL, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that an 
appropriate system should be put in place to ensure timely filling up of anticipated 
vacancies in the Board of Central Public Sector Enterprises.  
 
9. The Ministry of Power in their Action Taken Reply has stated that with the 
reappointment of four Independent Directors on the Board of Power Grid w.e.f. 
10.7.2010 vide GOI order dated 19.10.2010, the Bo ard comprised seven 
Independent Directors till 24.4.2011, w hen the tenure of two Independent Direc tors 
got completed on 24.4.2011. T he tenure of four Independent Directors and that of 
one Independent Director completed on 9.7.2011 and 3.8.2011 respectively .  The 
Ministry has further stated that two Independent Directors have been appointed on 
the Board w.e.f. 27.12.2011 and the proposal for appointment of five directors have 
been sent for the approval of ACC. 
 
10. There is nothing in the Government’s reply to indicate whether any 
action has been taken as recommended by the Committee to put in place an 
appropriate system to ensure timely filling up of anticipated vacancies in the 
Boards of Public Undertakings. The Committee would like to know whether the 
matter was taken up with the Department of Public Enterprises, and if so, the 
outcome thereof.  
 
Recommendation at Sl.No.8 
 
DIRECTOR’S SHAREHOLDING 
 
11.  The Committee note d that one of the independent directo rs in the Board of 
POWERGRID had disclosed holding of 1, 25,000 equity shares of the Company in 
individual capacity as on 31st March 2009  and desired to be apprised of the manner 
in which such a large shareholding of the Company was acquired by an Independent 
Director and the circumstances under which he was permitted for such an acquisition 
by Compliance Officer. The Committee also desire d the management of 
POWERGRID to examine the ethical and legal implications of such share 
transactions by an individual while working on the Board of the comp any as an 
Independent Director. 
 
12.  The Ministry of Power in their action taken reply has stated that the matter has 
been discussed with the concerned independent director. From the details given, it 
has been seen that he has not dealt in purchase/sale of shares, when the trading 
window was closed. During the period of trading window closure all employees & 
directors are prohibited from purchase/sale of shares of the Company, keeping in 
view of the price sensitive information during that period. 
 

9 
 
Further, it has been informed that on overall basis no profits have been made 
by him on account of trading in shares  of the company.  The quantum of share was 
0.00029% of the pre -FPO equity shares.  At the time of IPO all the independent 
Directors were eligible to apply under Employee quota. Further, there was no overall 
cap on acquisition except seeking pre -clearance f rom compliance officer for 
purchase of shares in excess of 10,000 for which, request for pre -clearance was not 
made. However, as stated above, the director has not purchased/sold shares during 
window closure period, nor made any profits out of the purchase /sale of shares of 
the company on overall basis.   
 
The Ministry has also stated that the tenure of the Director completed on 9th 
July 2011. 
 
13. The Committee had, inter-alia, desired to be apprised of the 
circumstances under which an Independent Director was permitted to acquire 
as many as 1,25,000 equity shares of the Company by compliance officer.  The 
Ministry of Power , while admitting that no request for pre -clearance for 
purchase of shares in excess of 10,000 was made by the Independent Director, 
has apparently shied away from taking any action against the Director for the 
lapse.  It appears that the Ministry of Power has taken the matter very casually 
even after the issue has been highlighted by the Committee.  The Committee 
would await an explanation of the Ministry of Power in the matter.  
 
Recommendation at Sl.No.11 
 
MEGA POWER PROJECT STATUS TO TRANSMISSION SYSTEM 
 
14. Taking note of the fact that the Government have  been extending Deemed 
Export Benefit under EXIM Policy to Mega and Ultra Mega Power Generation 
Projects, the Committee were of firm view that Deemed Export Benefits should also 
be extended to associated power transmission projects so as to reduce the 
transmission project costs to the ultimate benefit of the consumer. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that Ministry of Power should take up this matter with the 
appropriate authority at the earliest. 
 
15. In their action taken reply , the Government have stated that the proposal for 
according Mega Power Project to Transmission system was sent to Ministry of 
Finance as a part of pre -budget consultations.  However, t he same has not been 
acceded to.   
 
16.  The Committee had recommended that Deemed Export Benefits allowed 
to Mega and Ultra Mega Power Generation Projects should also be extended to 
power transmission projects associated with such Mega and Ultra Mega Power 
Generation Projects so as to reduce the transmission project cost to the 
ultimate benefit of the consumer . The Government have replied that the 

10 
 
proposal in this regard was sent to the Ministry of Finance and the same has 
not been acceded to .  The Committee regret to note that the Ministry of Power 
has not indicated the reasons for rejection and whether it is convinced of the 
same and if not, whether the matter would be taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance for its reconsideration.   The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the position.  
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNEMENT 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.1 
 
TRANSMISSION PROJECTS 
 
 The Committee have been informed that Government have  planned power 
generation to the extent of about 78000 MW and 1,00,000 MW during the 11th and 
12th Five Year Plan respectively and a number of power projects with large 
generation capacity are to be established at diverse places besides simultaneous 
capacity generation addition programs. During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Power deposed: “Today, the transmission capacity development is taking place faster 
and better than generation capacity addition.” The Committee are not inclined to 
accept this averment made by the Secretary, Ministry of Power as the scrutiny of the 
information furnished by the POWERGRID brings out that a number of transmission 
projects undertaken by the company have been plagued with delays due to one 
reason or the other with the result that even the implementation schedule of some of 
the envisaged transmission projects is lagging behind the targeted dates. Although a 
perspective transmission plan is stated to have been evolved for strengthening the 
regional grids and enhance the i nter regional power transfer capacity of National 
Grid, the Committee are constrained to observe and assert that the pace of 
implementation of transmission projects by POWERGRID will have to be accelerated 
matching with the ambitious power generation progr ams formulated for execution 
during the 11th and 12th Five Year Plan period. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should accord high priority to timely execution of 
transmission projects and take concrete action to remove bottlenecks cau sing delays 
in implementation of such projects by POWERGRID. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the precise steps taken by the government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (POWERGRID) is responsible for 
establishment of inter-state transmission system for evacuation of power from Central 
Generating Stations, IPPs, Ultra Mega Power Projects and system strengthening 
schemes. Development of transmission network has to be in tandem with the 
envisaged growth planned in the generation capacity. Accordingly the Transmission 
schemes are being planned and taken up by POWERGRID after the same are 
agreed in the Standing Committee on Power System Planning and the 
constituents/beneficiaries agrees for signing of Bu lk Power Transmission Agreement 
(BPTA)/Transmission Service Agreement (TSA).  
 
 However, POWERGRID has surpassed its capex target of Rs. 55,000 crore 
envisaged during the XI Plan and achieved Rs. 55,331crore. Further, POWERGRID 
also achieved its physical t argets as per MoU signed with MoP every year for 
Transformation Capacity (MVA) and Stringing (Ckm) during XI plan.  POWERGRID 
follows the Integrated Project Monitoring and Control System to implement 
transmission projects within the scheduled date of compl etion. POWERGRID 
accords high priority to timely execution of transmission projects and takes concrete 
and prompt action to remove bottlenecks causing delays in implementation of such 

12 
 
projects. In case there are delays in generation the associated transmis sion systems 
are taken up at a laterstage to match the generation schedule.  Generally, time and 
cost overruns in transmission projects are encountered on account of delays in 
generation, severe Right of way problems, Forest clearances, Land acquisition et c. 
However, there has been no bottling up of generation on account of delay in 
readiness of associated transmission systems.  
 
 At the beginning of current financial year, 82 schemes were under 
implementation for commissioning during 12 th Plan. Out of whic h 7 schemes are 
already complete. Majority of schemes are generally progressing on schedule except 
for those which are mainly affected due to the following reasons 
 
a) Due to revision in Generation Schedule Implementation of Associated 
Transmission System needs to be slowed down. 
b) Delay in Forest clearance/ Land acquisition. 
c) ROW problems. 
 
To overcome the delays in project execution, POWERGRID has taken several 
measures, some of which are as follows:- 
 
i) To expedite the land acquisition process, POWERGRID is requesting all State 
governments / District Magistrates to acquire land on negotiated settlement or 
consent award basis. A monitoring committee has been setup at thecorporate 
level to expedite land acquisition. Alternatively, POWERGRID has also started 
purchasing landdirectly on negotiated rate basis in association with local 
authorities on case to case basis, where excessive problems are being faced. 
ii) To curtail the bottlenecks of Forest clearance delays, detailed survey in forest 
stretch is to be carried o ut at the inception stage. Forest clearances, which 
generally take about 6 months to one year or more from the date of 
submission of proposal, are being pursued with the concerned authorities for 
timely implementation of projects. 
iii) Implementation of Enterpr ise Resource Planning (ERP) shall consolidate 
better project management and feedback mechanism.  
 
Ministry of Power accords utmost priority to timely completion of transmission 
projects.  The project implementation is monitored at the level of Secretary (P ower) 
through quarterly review meetings of the MOU targets set for every financial year.  
To facilitate the timely completion of projects whenever severe problems of Right of 
Way and forest clearance are brought to the notice of the Ministry of Power by 
PGCIL, the matter is taken up with the concerned State Government and with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests.   Minister of Power vide his DO letter of 
16.6.2011 also requested Minister of Environment and Forests to exempt 
transmission projects from th e purview of Forest Rights Act (FRA), as transmission 
projects are non polluting in nature running in hundreds of kilometers and no land is 
acquired or subject to any change in land use pattern.  
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Recommendation  at Sl.No.2 
 
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN TRANSMISSION  
 
 According to Ministry of Power, private investors have an important role to 
play in the power sector growth. Further the stipulations made under section 63 of 
Electricity Act 2003 provide impetus to the participation of private sector in 
generation and tra nsmission. The Committee have been informed that pursuant to 
issuance of guidelines by the Ministry of Power for encouraging competition in 
development of transmission projects and also guidelines for tariff based competitive 
bidding for transmission servi ces, an empowered committee constituted by the 
Government identified certain transmission works for implementation by private 
sector during 11th and 12th Plan period. Nevertheless the available information 
before the Committee, does not in the Committee’s view bring out a clear picture vis-
à-vis the criteria adopted by the empowered committee for selection of such projects 
and lines /sub -stations for execution through private sector participation in 
transmission of power. The Committee would, therefore, lik e to be apprised in clear 
terms the factors taken into account and the methodology adopted by the 
empowered committee for selection of transmission projects to be taken up through 
private participation.  
  
The Committee also feel that the role of a public sector enterprise like 
POWERGRID which has registered consistent growth over the years as largest 
transmission utility in the country and which has excellent rating, should not in any 
manner be undermined in the wake of private sector participation in powe r 
generation and transmission network. While emphasizing the need for ensuring 
transparency and competitiveness in power sector to protect the interests of the 
consumers, the Committee would like to emphatically hasten to caution the Ministry 
of Power in the matter of venturing into the domain of private sector participation in a 
sensitive area. Private Sector Participation in transmission network should be 
undertaken in a phased manner by executing pilot projects in specific areas. 
Needless to say that a s ubsequent review of the performance of such pilot projects 
will go a long way in determining the efficacy of private sector participation in 
augmentation of transmission network matching with planned power generation in 
the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Empowered Committee while recommending the transmission projects to 
be taken up through Tariff based competitive bidding keeps in view a balanced mix 
of both difficult and less difficult projects.  The nature of the terrain and issues 
relating to Right of Way, land to be acquired and issues involving in Environment and 
Forests clearances are material factors to determine difficult or less difficult projects.  
Further, for transmission lines to be built through tariff based bidding, a period  of 240 
days is specified for the two stage bidding process.  The time period required for 
constructing a 400 kV transmission line is about 30 months and for 765 kV line the 
time period is about 36 months after start of implementation.   Thus, total period  of 
about four years is required from the date of firming up for the transmission lines to 
be built through tariff based bidding route.  Therefore, only such transmission lines / 
projects were suggested which will be  required in a time frame of not earlie r than 
four years.  While suggesting System Strengthening Schemes, Empowered 

14 
 
Committee had also considered  that alternate parallel corridors were available / 
under implementation or would be implemented by PGCIL. 
 
 As per the existing tariff policy, all in ter-State transmission lines are to be 
implemented through tariff based competitive bidding w.e.f 6.1.2011.  However, 
exemption from the mandatory competitive bidding has been granted to the 
following: 
(i) First two experimental works for 1200 KV HVDC line. 
(ii) Works required to be done to cater to an urgent situation or which are 
required in a compressed time schedule by CTU/ STUs as decided by 
the Central Government on  case to case basis. 
(iii) The intra -state transmission projects by STUs will be exempted from 
competitive bidding route for further 2 years beyond 6.1.2011.  
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO.9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 3 
 
POSOCO 
 
 The Committee have been informed that in accordance with the provisions of 
the Electricity Act 2003 and the National Electricity Policy, the Government reviewed 
the arrangement of Regional Load Dispatch Centres and National Load Dispatch 
Centre functioning as part of POWERGRID and decided to set up a wholly owned 
subsidiary company of POWERGRID responsible for independent system operation 
with separate accounting and board structure. Accordingly, POWERGRID 
incorporated Power System Operation Company (POSOCO ) as its subsidiary on 
20th March 2009. Elaborating on the rationale for creation of POSOCO, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Power deposed during evidence that POWERGRID is largely 
performing two functions, one being construction of lines/substations etc., and the 
other being dispatch of electricity. While POWERGRID would carry on with major 
construction operations, its subsidiary POSOCO would function as an independent 
authority to oversee the operations of dispatch of electricity. The Secretary, Ministry 
of Po wer further clarified that the function of dispatch of electricity was earlier 
discharged by Central Electricity Authority before the same was assigned to 
POWERGRID where this function is being performed by an arm of POWERGRID 
which has now been carved out  as a subsidiary company. In the light of the fact that 
POSOCO would be made functional immediately after National Load Dispatch 
Centre and Regional Load Dispatch Centres are transferred to it, the Committee 
strongly recommend that appropriate and timely s teps should be taken to lay down 
clear rules and guidelines for independent system operations before POSOCO starts 
functioning. The Committee enjoin the Government to take appropriate steps with a 
view to ensure that there is no conflict or overlapping of authority between 
POWERGRID and POSOCO.  
  
Considering the fact that POSOCO will be gradually made independent from 
POWERGRID and will continue to function as subsidiary of POWERGRID only for 
five years, the Committee desire the Government to take appropriate measures to 
ensure that POWERGRID is ad equately compensated for the assets base provided 
by it in formation of POSOCO after the same is made independent.  
 

15 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Power System Operation Corporation Limited (POSOCO), a wholly owned 
subsidiary of POWERGRID was established for o peration of RLDCs and NLDC as 
per Government of India directive dated 4.7.2008.  The assets to be transferred to 
POSOCO were identified based on recommendation of Pradhan Committee and 
Satnam Committee.  These assets are mainly the equipment’s located in t he control 
centres of RLDCs & NLDC and are already in physical possession of POSOCO.  
The legal transfer to POSOCO w.e.f 1.10.2010 on net block amounting to Rs. 76 
crores (gross block Rs. 271 crores) has been carried out.  The employees of RLDCs, 
NLDC and System Operation Department have been posted in POSOCO on 
secondment basis on the same terms and conditions as applicable to POWERGRID.  
The operation of RLDCs and NLDC was entrusted to POSOCO with effect from 
01.10.2010 as per Gazette Notification dated 2 7.9.2010.  Since then, POSOCO is 
functioning satisfactorily.  
 
 As per the provisions of the Electricity Act, Central Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (CERC) has notified CERC (fees and charges of Regional Load 
Despatch Centre and other related matters) Regulations, 2009.  POSOCO has 
already filed petitions with CERC to determine the fees and charges for various 
RLDCs and NLDC.  Tariff orders for all RLDC's and NLDC were issued by CERC in 
March 2011 for the block period 2009 -14.  The books of POSOCO have already 
been bifurcated and separate auditors appointed.  As per the provisions of the above 
CERC Regulations, LDC Development Fund has been created to fund the CAPEX 
requirement for upgrading and modernizing the RLDCs and NLDC.  The Power 
System Operation Company may utilize the money deposited to the LDC 
development fund for loan repayment, if required servicing the capital raised in the 
form of interest and dividend payment, meeting stipulated equity portion in asset 
creation and margin money for raising loan from the financial institutions and for 
funding R&D projects. 
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December   12, 2012) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 4 
 
INTEGRATED POWER TRANSMISSION GRID 
 
 The Committee note that the existing inter -regional transmission capacity of 
about 20800 MW of POWERGRID connects northern, western, eastern and north -
eastern regions synchronously operating as a single grid and the southern region is 
interconnected with a single grid through asynchronous HVDC links. The Committee 
have been informed that synchronous inter -connection of Southern Region with rest 
of the all India Grid is planned to be achieved by 2014 -15 after commissioning of 
Krishnapatnam UMPP and 765 kV Raichur - Solapur line. The Committee 
recommend that the Government should rev up the implementing agencies to 
execute both the projects within the stipulated timeframe so that a synchronously 
integrated Grid is available for inter regional power transfer throughout the country. 
 
  

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Presently, Eastern, Western, Northern and North -Eastern regions  are 
operating as a single grid while Southern region is interconnected through 
asynchronous HVDC system. The present inter-regional capacity of the National grid 
is about 27,750 MW, which shall be enhanced to about 66,000MW by 2017. Further, 
synchronous i nterconnection of Southern region with rest of the Indian grid is 
envisaged through establishment of 765kV 2xS/c Raichur -Sholapur Inter -regional 
transmission lines. Out of this, one transmission line is being implemented by a 
private company under tariff b ased competitive bidding route and the other 
transmission line is being constructed by POWERGRID. Both the Transmission lines 
are scheduled for commissioning by first quarter of 2014.   
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO.9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Recommendation at Sl.No. 5 
 
RIGHT OF WAY PROBLEMS 
 
The Committee note with concern that POWERGRID has not been able to 
complete and commission some of its power transmission projects as per schedule. 
The Committee have been informed by POWERGRID that the m ain reason for delay 
in completion of these projects is attributable to the constraints being experienced in 
acquiring right of way which includes getting forest clearances etc., from Statutory 
Authorities. The process of obtaining such clearances has always involved a tortuous 
procedure with a number of official channels at state(s) and central government 
levels in terms of Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 and seeking of no objection 
certificates from concerned gram sabhas under Forest Rights Act 2006. Accor ding to 
the Ministry of Power, the following initiatives have been taken with a view to 
minimizing right of way requirements: 
 
 exploring new technologies like hybrid system comprising of HVDC and 
EHVAC system, 
 compact towers and extra high towers with multi circuits, 
 Upgrading and uprating existing transmission corridors etc. 
 taking up the matter of delay in execution with state administration at the 
highest level on case to case basis; and 
 organizing meetings between Secretary (Power) and Secretary 
(Environment and Forest) on regular basis to expedite the issues on 
environment and forest clearances. The Committee feels that the 
mismatch between demand and supply of power in the country can be 
narrowed down only when the hindrances coming in the way o f power 
projects under implementation are overcome in a timely manner. Now that 
the Government is encouraging private sector participation in transmission 
network projects, the Committee can very well foresee that this problem of 
right of way is likely to aggravate in future. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that an institutionalized mechanism involving all concerned 
agencies / stakeholders should be evolved with a view to removing the 
difficulties of recurring nature being encountered in timely execu tion of 
power projects so as to ensure that all such projects are implemented in 
time and in a cost effective manner to the best advantage of the country. 

17 
 
Yet another difficulty stated to be encountered by POWERGRID relates to the 
process of land acquisition besides general resistance on rate of compensation from 
the land owners both on the countryside and the urban areas. Although 
POWERGRID follows provisions of Land Acquisition Act 1894 as amended in 1984 
and has also adopted “Social Entitlement Framework ” based on National 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policies of 2003 and 2007, the Committee is of 
considered view that this problem needs to be addressed in a right perspective. 
They, therefore, recommend that the Government should undertake a review of t he 
relevant provisions of the Land Acquisition Act to facilitate smooth land acquisition 
for projects of national importance in the light of the present day scenario and bring 
about suitable amendments giving due consideration to the legitimate expectation s 
of the land owners who are made to part with their land holdings for national cause. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Transmission line projects are environmentally clean and do not involve any 
disposal of solid waste, effluents and hazardous substances in lan d, air and 
water.   
 Require approval under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, if the line is passing 
through notified forest area.  
 POWERGRID, as a responsible organization, is utilizing all available 
technological resources (GIS & GPS etc.) to optimize rout e alignment with 
emphasis on avoidance of forest, National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuary and other 
ecological sensitive areas  even to the extent of adopting more circuitous routes 
and setting up of state of the art substations en route. However, in a few case s 
line through forest area becomes unavoidable due to certain specific sites of a 
project and the overall topography of the area.  
 POWERGRID while finalizing the route of transmission lines follow the policy of 
Avoidance, Minimization and Mitigation with the following parameters: 
 As a rule, alignments are generally cited 10 -15 km away from major towns, 
whenever possible, to account for future urban expansion. 
 Similarly, forests are avoided to the extent possible, and when it is not possible, 
a route is sele cted in consultation with the local Divisional Forest Officer, that 
causes minimum damage to existing forest resources.  
 Alignments are selected to avoid wetlands and unstable areas for both financial 
and environmental reasons.  
 In addition, care is also  taken to avoid National parks and sanctuaries and any 
other forest area rich in wild life. 
 Transmission line projects are linear in spatial distribution and minimally 
invasive of permanent land use changes and are drawn substantially high 
above the ground  avoiding possible encounter with ecological sensitive areas 
as well as habitations.  
 For construction of towers, POWERGRID does not take possession of land it 
continues to remain in the possession of the original owners i.e. Forest 
department. 
 Only a widt h clearance of 3 meter is allowed below each conductor for the 
movement of tension stringing equipment, trees on such strips are felled but 
after stringing is completed, these spaces are regenerated (naturally and 
project interventions) with shrubs and sma ll trees thereby maintaining, and 
many a time even enhancing, the greenery. In addition to that, POWERGRID is 

18 
 
also bearing the cost of compensatory Forestation on twice the area of 
degraded forest land towards loss of vegetation.  
 Due to long drawn process of forest clearance involving different stages in State 
and at Ministry of Environment and Forests many projects got substantially 
delayed. 
 
 POWERGRID had taken many initiatives to expedite forest clearance by 
systemic approach like applying for forest c learance well in advance to meet the 
strict limitation of time. Moreover, when in 2006 the Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
stayed the constitution of Forest Advisory Committee of MoEF and no forest 
clearance were issued, POWERGRID moved to Supreme Court requesti ng for lifting 
of stay to complete the important national projects. While hearing the application of 
POWERGRID, Hon’ble. 
 
 Court ordered lifting of stay with certain additional conditions. This initiative 
has resulted in completion of many projects that we re held up for want of forest 
clearance. Apart from this POWERGRID management issued instructions to all 
regional heads and site official for proper follow up at each level of hierarchy ranging 
from Range Officer at field level to Secretary (Forest) at Sta te government level this 
has also helped in expediting the recommendation of forest proposal from state to 
MoEF and early approval.   During the FY 2011 -12 POWERGRID has obtained “in -
principle” approval from MoEF for approx. 480  hectares of forest land for  lines like 
400 kV Baripada – Mendhasal, Mundra – Vadavi, Maithan – Gaya,   etc. and “final 
approval” for 645 hectares of forest land after complying with the stipulated 
conditions of in -principle approval for lines like 400 KvWardha - Parli, Lonikhand – 
Kalwa, Maithon – Ranchi, Gerukamukh – Biswanathchariali, Mysore – Kozhikode. 
 
  However, with the issue of MoEF Circular dated 30/7/09 & 03/08/09 vide 
which written consent of concerned Gram Sabha has been made compulsory under 
the Scheduled Tribes and Othe r Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act 2006 (FRA, 2006) for the entire proposal involving diversion of forest 
land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 has further complicated the process 
of two-stage forest clearance that has resulted in enormous delay.   The compilation 
of data for forest clearance, where in -principle approval has been obtained after the 
FRA become applicable shows that stage -II could not be issued due to non -
compliance of FRA provisions or for want of NOC f rom Gram Sabha is presented 
below :- 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Line/Length 
Forest 
Stretch 
(Ha.) 
State Status 
Indicated on 26.7.2011 
No. of 
Gram-
Sabha 
involved 
Latest 
Status 
1 Rourkela-
Raigarh 
400KV, 210 
KM 
111.399 Orissa Stage-I approval obtained 
on 14.10.2009. 
Special permission to 
take up the work in the 
forest area received on 
26th July, 2010. 
Compliance report 
awaited from state 
Government  for final 
approval. 
 
56 Stage-II 
clearance 
still 
awaited. 

19 
 
 
As per the present provisions, FRA certificate has to be submitted with Stage -
I Application of Forest Proposal, which has  resulted in delay in formulation of Forest 
proposals at the initial stage itself.   
 
In order to facilitate timely implementation of power transmission projects 
matching the power generation / requirements as well as considering negligible 
impact on forest / environment and its habitants including the tribal people by 
transmission projects, the issue of exemption of transmission project  or granting 
relaxation by providing extra time for compliance of FRA provisions has been taken 
up with MoEF by POWERGRID as well as through Ministry of Power.  Minister of 
Power has taken up with the Minister of State (Independent Charge) of Environment 
and Forests vide DO letter dated 16.6.2011 requesting that transmission projects 
may be exempted from the purview of the circulars of Ministry of Environment and 
Forests dated 3.8.2009 and 30.7.2009 as a special case relating to compliance of 
Scheduled Trib es and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights Act 2006 for Transmission projects.   
 
 It was also requested that as this provision is affecting all transmission lines 
where forest clearance process has not yet completed even if, in -principle, approval 
has been issued but final approval has not been issued by MOEF.  Such exemption 
on the above mentioned ground shall go a long way in facilitating timely 
implementation of transmission projects.  It is relevant to mention that on reques t of 
MoP, Forest Advisory Committee (FAC) of MoEF had recommended the exemption 
for Transmission line from Forest Regulation Act (FRA) and the recommendation 
had been forwarded to Ministry of Tribal Affairs for their observation on the issue 
vide letter dt. 26.7.11. Committee on Restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes, 
2 Kameng-
Balipara 
400KV D/C 
line(Plain), 
100 KM 
98.25 Assam 
 
Stage-I approval obtained 
on 06.01.2010. 
Compliance report 
awaited from state 
Government for final 
approval. 
01 Stage-II 
clearance 
still 
awaited. 
3 Biharsharif-
Kodarma 
400 KV D/C, 
111 kM 
13.007 Bihar Stage-I approval obtained 
on 22.04.2010. 
Stage-2 clearance 
obtained on0 3.03.2011 
Days between stage -1 & 
2 is 314 apprx 10.5 
months 
07  
4 Raipur- 
Wardha 
400KV D/C, 
363.50 KM. 
15.37 
 
Chattis-
garh 
Stage-I approval obtained 
on 31.05.2010. 
Compliance report 
awaited from state 
Government  for final 
approval. 
12 Stage-II 
clearance 
obtained 
on 
09.03.201
1 after a 
gap of 10 
moths. 
5 LILO of 400 
KV Lonikhand 
/Pune – Kalwa 
line at Navi 
Mumbai, 10 
KM 
26.432 Maha-
rashtra 
Stage-I approval obtained   
on 02.06.2010. 
Compliance report 
awaited from state 
Government  for final 
approval. 
05 Stage-II 
clearance 
obtained 
on 
18.05.201
1 after a 
gap of 11 
months. 

20 
 
headed by Member, planning commission has also recommended exemption of 
transmission line projects from the conditions of FRA certificates. Group of Minister 
headed by Hon’ble Finance Minister has also recommended for relaxation of FRA for 
transmission projects. However, final decision is still awaited from MoEF.  
 
Land Acquisition 
 
 Transmission projects generally do not require large area of land and the land 
is only acquired for sub-stations. For substation land also PGCIL is  following the 
practice of land management to minimize the land requirement to the barest 
minimum. Generally 20 to 60 hectare of land is required for constructing a substation 
depending upon the type and volt age level.  Even for this 20 to 60 hectare land, 
POWERGRID try to locate substation on Government land as far as possible and in 
the absence of Government land private land is acquired. In order to ensure that 
indigenous (Tribal) people do not suffer adver se effects during the develop ment 
process and that they receive compat ible social and economic benefits utmost care 
is taken to avoid acquisition of land belonging to tribal community. 
  
POWERGRID, within the overall corporate ethics, has  internalized t he principles 
of sustainable development. Towards its commitment of a responsible corporate 
citizen, a corporate Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures has been 
developed and adopted to address the environment and socio -economic issues 
arising from  its activities.   The policy outlines POWERGRID's approach and 
commitment to deal with environmental and social issues, relating to its transmission 
projects, and lays out management procedures and protocols to mitigate the same. 
Similarly, the company to wards its social responsibility mission ensures, that it acts 
as socially responsible corporate entity with thrust on environment protection, 
community development, and energy conservation. The major features of such 
activities are as follows: 
 
 Detailed social assessment and socio -economic survey conducted by a third 
party like Indian Institute of Management or any Social Institute or NGOs in 
consultation with affected people. 
 POWERGRID provides Rehabilitation Assistance (Rs.20,000/ - to 90,000/- per 
family)in the form of Income Generating Scheme (IGS) to sustain/improve 
livelihood of affected persons/ their families. 
 One of the unique mandates is that these measures so drawn are discussed 
with the affected people, Grampanchayat and district officials and dis played in 
POWERGRID Website for wider circulation.  
 
In addition to above measures, POWERGRID based on outcome of social 
assessment also undertake need based community Developmental work, like in the 
affected village for overall up-liftment of surrounding, village and community: 
 
 Construction of road/ renovation of village road; 
 Renovation of Primary School in the village; 
 Construction of additional room in the existing primary School; 
 Community hall; 
 Providing furniture & other amenities in school; 
 Construction of room for health and veterinary hospital; 
 Bus Stand/shelter; 

21 
 
 Tube well; 
 Worship place; 
 Drainage system in the village; 
 Village street lighting; 
 Imparting Training (ITI) to the eligible members of affected families; 
 Augmentation of Dairy unit; 
 
   POWERGRID's policy on Resettlement and Rehabilita tion (R&R) is to 
provide "people displaced/affected by its projects, means to improve or at least 
restore their former living standards, earning capacity and production levels" through 
a process in which they participate through their own social and cultural institutions.   
 
 Apart from this, POWERGRID is requesting all State governments / District 
Magistrates to acquire land on negotiated settlement or consent award basis which 
entails compensation of land through mutual understanding with agreement that land 
owner will not move to court for enhancement of compensation. The State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu have already issued 
order that land acquisition shall be carried out base d on negotiated settlement in first 
go and in case of complication only compulsory acquisition under Land Acquisition  
Act shall be carried out.  Accordingly, lands for Ballia and Warangal substations have 
been acquired using the mode of consent award with out any problem and reference 
to court. Moreover, land for Solapur 765 kV and Aurangabad is being acquired using 
the same mode on POWERGRID request. 
   
The Government of India is seized of the matter. The proposed bill viz. “THE 
LAND ACQUISITION, REHABILIT ATION AND RESETTLEMENT BILL, 2011” which 
falls under the domain of the Ministry of Rural Development is yet to be enacted. 
[Ministry of Power O.M. No. H-9/6/2010-PG dated 12 December 2012] 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 7 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 The Committee note that seven Independent Directors are required to be 
appointed in the Board of POWER GRID in accordance with the guidelines on 
Corporate Governance issued by the Department of Public Enterprises. However, 
the company has presently only three Independen t Directors as the tenure of four 
Independent Directors has since expired on 9th July, 2010. Although the 
appointment of four Independent Directors in POWERGRID is stated to be under 
process, the Committee are constrained to observe that no timely action w as taken 
by the Government to appoint these Independent Directors. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the Board of the company will not be able to effectively 
discharge its functions in the absence of Independent directors whose contribution is 
stated to be helpful in giving direction to policy decisions as well as to overall 
functioning of the Company. The Committee, therefore, recommend emphatically 
that all out efforts should be made by the Government for filling up the vacancies of 
Independent Directors on the Boards of POWERGRID without any loss of time. The 
Committee further recommend that an appropriate system should be put in place to 
ensure timely filling -up of the anticipated vacancies in the Boards of Central Public 
Sector Enterprises. 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With the re-appointment of four Part Time Non-official (Independent) Directors 
on the Board of POWERGRID w.e.f. 10.07.2010 vide Government of India Order 
dated 19.10.2010, POWERGRID Board comprised seven Independent Directors till 
24.04.2011 when tenure of  two Independent Directors got completed. The tenure of 
four Independent Directors completed on 09.07.2011 and tenure of one Independent 
Director completed on 03.08.2011.  
 
 Two Independent Directors have been appointed by the President of India on 
the Board of POWERGRID w.e.f. 27.12.2011 vide Ministry of Power Office Order No. 
1/38/96-PG dated 27.12.2011.  POWERGRID’s Board presently comprises CMD, 
four functional Directors, two Government Directors and two Part Time Non -official 
(Independent) Directors. T he proposal for appointment of 5 non - official Directors 
has been sent for the approval of ACC. 
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December, 2012) 
 
Recommendation at Sl.No.9 
 
OUTSTANDING DUES 
 
The Committee note that the outstanding dues pertaining to erstwhile Delhi 
Electric Supply Undertaking period amounting to Rs. 57.79 crore are payable to 
POWERGRID. This amount has swelled to Rs. 96.40 crore as on 31st March, 2010 
on account of overdue interest. The Committee have been informed that this matter 
stands referred to the Group of Ministers comprising the Minister of Power, the 
Minister of Home Affairs, the Minister of Science and Technology and Earth 
Sciences in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi. The Committee feel that this 
long impending issue needs a prompt consideration by the Government to the best 
financial interest of the Company.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Power had taken up the settlement of dues of DESU period 
payable to Power Grid Corporation of India Limited with the Cabinet in 2005.    The 
Principal amount payable as on 23.2.1997 is Rs. 57.79 crore.Currently, the 
outstanding including interest has grown upto Rs. 102.93 crore as on 31.3.2012. 
 
While considering the note dated 23.12.2008 from the Ministry of Power 
regarding settlement of dues of DESU period, the Cabinet in its meeting held on 
2.1.2009 decided that the matter may, in the first instance, be considered by the 
Group of Ministers (GoM ).  The GoM comprising the Minister of Power, the Minister 
of Home Affairs and the Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences in 
consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi as Special Invitee was constituted on 
12.1.2009.  The Note for GoM circu lated by the Ministry of Power on 20.4.2009 but 
could not be considered because of general elections.  The GoM was reconstituted 
on 29.1.2010 to examine issues relating to the settlement of dues of DESU period 
comprising Minister of Home Affairs, Minister of Power and Minister of Human 
Resource Development and Chief Minister, Delhi as Special Invitee.  Note for GoM 
was circulated on 3.5.2010.  The meetings of GoM were held on 20.5.2010, 

23 
 
07.09.2010 and 29.03.2012.   Based on the minutes of the meeting of GoM,  a draft 
Cabinet Note has been prepared and sent to Ministry of Finance for obtaining the 
approval of Hon’ble Finance Minister on 21.5.2012.  based on the comments 
received from Ministry of Finance, a draft Cabinet Note has been circulated on 15th 
November, 2012 to various Ministries/ Departments for their comments.  
 
       Ministry of Power (O.M.NO.  2010-PG dated  December 12, 2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see para 13 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 10 
 
SAFETY OF TRANSMISSION LINE WORKERS 
 
The Committee feel that safety of transmission line workers is one of the key 
and pressing areas of concern. According to POWERGRID, the numbers of fatal and 
non fatal accidents during the years 2006 -07 to 2009 -10 are 61 and 5 respectively 
and the same resulted in 76 casualties besides injury to 43 persons. The majority of 
these accidents is stated to have occurred during construction of transmission lines 
and sub -station where contractors personnel were involved. The Committee have 
been informed t hat the causes of accidents in construction and transmission lines 
are significantly high due to the cumbersome nature of the works executed and that 
proper safety measures are taken care of at all locations. It has also been stated that 
besides ensuring p ayment of compensation under the Workmen Compensation Act 
1923, POWERGRID has also taken a number of steps to enhance safety of 
transmission line workers such as introduction of Contractors Safety Plan in the Bid 
document, Daily Safety Drill, organizing re gular safety transmission programmes for 
regular and casual workers, Safety Audit etc. The Committee would like to 
categorically assert that ensuring safety of workers of any PSU is a sine qua non for 
its very credibility. While taking due note of the init iatives taken by the Company to 
ensure safety of transmission line workers, the Committee recommend that in order 
to minimize occurrence of accidents in transmission network the following measures 
should also be undertaken by POWERGRID, namely:- 
 
(i) More emphasis be laid on training programmes for workers responsible for 
execution of Power Grid works.  
 
(ii) Modern technologies in construction and operation of transmission lines be 
introduced with a view to reducing the manual operations to the barest 
minimum and effective steps be taken to familiarize the workers with new 
technologies as and when introduced.  
 
(iii) Systems be put in place to ensure that the recommendations of the safety 
officers on various safety aspects are implemented within the prescribed ti me 
limit in letter and spirit; and  
 
(iv) Stringent punitive action be taken against those who are found responsible for 
accidents due to negligence on their part.  
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 POWERGRID has been taking appropriate measures regarding safety of its 
transmission assets and resources which are enumerated below:-  
 
1. Apex Safety Board: POWERGRID is having an apex Safety Board which is 
headed by CMD and all functional directors as its c ore members. The Apex 
body meets periodically to review the implementation of safety aspects in 
POWERGRID. 
 
2. POWERGRID Safety Policy: POWERGRID has its own Safety Policy in place 
which has also been revised recently in March 2012 incorporating 
modifications. 
 
3. Organization of Safety Meet: Safety Meet is being organized annually in the 
region or at Corp. Centre. All Regional Heads along -with the Regional Safety 
Co-ordinators are invited to deliberate on the safety issues and take appropriate 
measures for enhancing safe working environment in organization.  
4. Safety Manual: POWERGRID has developed its safety manuals which 
incorporates the various safety measures and safe practices required to be 
followed while working in transmission system. Recently in year 2012 the 
POWERGRID safety Manual has been revised. These manuals are also 
available on POWERGRID intranet site for its easy accessibility and usage by 
employees.  
 
5. Deployment of Safety officer: A safety officer / Safety co-ordinator is available at 
all regional  headquarters and corp. centre for effective supervision and 
implementation of safety policy and guidelines. Further, Safety steward are also 
in place at POWERGRID sites to ensure safety at work place. 
 
6. Safety Audit : Regular safety audits are being conduc ted at various levels on 
construction and operational work sites as per approved procedures and the 
same are being reviewed at regional / Corporate level.  
 
7. Organization of Contractor’s Safety Meet / Workshop:  POWERGRID has 
always given utmost importance in enhancing the safety culture and adoption of 
safe work practices by its turn key contractors and their workers. In this regard 
safety meet / workshop are being organized at site / regional / corporate level. 
 
8. Review of Safety at PRM / ORM Meetings: Safe ty is always being considered 
as a essential discussion point of agenda in the Progress Review Meeting 
(PRM) / Operational Review Meeting (ORM) meetings for ensuring 
implementation/review of safe work practices at site. 
 
9. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Tool and Plant (T&P) : POWERGRID 
is taking adequate care for procurement and use of standardized (ISI Mark) 
Personal Protective Equipment and tools and plants for its work sites. Further, 
regular checks are made to ensure the healthiness of PPE & T&P before its use 
at work sites.  
  

25 
 
10. Accident Enquiry Committee: Whenever any accident occurs a committee is 
constituted to enquire into the cause of the accident, fixing of responsibility and  
to give their recommendation to avoid its reoccurrence. The commit tee reports 
are being further circulated across all regions. 
 
11. Safety Training Programs:  POWERGRID gives special emphasis to inculcate 
safe working culture and practices among its own employees including 
contractor personnel’s. In this direction POWERGRID at corporate centre and 
at regional levels conducts regular safety training programs. POWERGRID has 
advised its contractors to provide ten days introductory training regarding the 
jobs undertaken by the worker before they are deployed on site works.During 
“Daily Safety Drill” before commencement of the work contractor’s gang 
leaders/supervisors/senior most member available at construction site shall 
brief the workers about safety requirements and warn them about imminent 
dangers and also the precautions to be taken against the imminent dangers.For 
Skill development of Power Transmission Line Construction workers, 
POWERGRID has started 3 months training of construction workers for each 
module of Tower Erection and stringing in collaboration with contractor’s viz. 
KEC, JSL, L&T etc. under Public Private Partnership mode. These courses also 
cover Safety procedures, use of Personal Protection Equipments and First Aid 
arrangements. This programme envisages providing training to about 1000 
personnel. The scheme is being considered under Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR). 
 
12. “Safety plan” of POWERGRID has been incorporated as a part of Bid 
document, which shall include first aid training to all workers, daily safety drill 
before commencement of work, mandatory ten days training to new workers 
before deployment on site works etc. Compliance of safety requirement’s 
before release of first progressive payment to the contractor. 
  
13. Punitive actions :Provisions are made in contract to deduct an amount of Rs 
Ten Lakhs from bills of contractor in case, any fatal accident takes place on 
construction site and the same is paid to kith of victim. This is in addition to 
Workmen Compensation being made.  
  
14. Penalizing the contractor with a penalty of Rs 10000/ - per day per incident as 
per safety plan for violation of safety norms and guidelines, by agency,  if found 
any during safety audits till it is complied. 
 
15. Subsequent to Bidder’s involveme nt in three cumulative fatal accidents during 
any financial year, bids submitted by such bidder during next three months 
period reckoned from the date of the last accident, shall be considered non -
responsive. However, if there is no bid from such bidder du ring the said three 
months period, any one bid submitted after three months will be considered 
non-responsive. 
 
16. Introduction of Modern Technology during construction and operation 
POWERGRID has always laid emphasis on utilization of new and modern 
technologies in its transmission system and its construction projects.  A few of 
the new technologies & mechanized techniques adopted by POWERGRID in its 
construction and operation of Transmission system are as follows: 

26 
 
 Use of Tension Stringing Equipment’s (TSE) f or stringing of Bundle conductors 
& earth wires. 
 Deployment of hydraulic rotary rigs for pile foundations for river crossings in 
place of conventional techniques. 
 Use of excavators for execution of foundation excavation activity. 
 Use of Jib-cranes during the tower erection in 765 kV D/C Lines. 
 Utilization of Modern survey techniques involving satellite imagery, total 
stations, Global Positioning system (GPS) for route alignment, detailed survey 
of transmission lines. 
 Emphasizing usage of mechanized means by  its contractors during tower 
erection. 
 Utilization of new Personal Protective Equipment’s(PPEs) like 
Retractable/Mobile fall arrestors, Double lanyard safety belts during tower 
erection/stringing activity . 
 Remote operation of switchyard equipment’s to re duce manual operation in 
operating  sub -stations. POWERGRID has taken further initiative to set up a 
National Transmission Asset Management Centre (NTAMC) at Gurgaon for 
facilitating centralized control and monitoring of operation of its Sub-stations. 
 Aerial Patrolling of Transmission Lines.  
 POWERGRID has bolstered its effort to train larger groups of employees for 
Emergency Restoration System and new technologies in Hot Line maintenance 
of transmission lines. Transmission line employees are being trai ned for the 
changed technologies in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of lines like 
Thermo graphic scanning, use of new Tools and Plans for construction etc. 
Whenever the new technologies are introduced, POWERGRID takes time 
bound steps to train the concerned employees for familiarization to changed 
technologies and procedures for effective utilization 
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 12 
 
TRANSMISSION ASSETS 
 
The Committee’s examination of Annual Report 2008 -09 of the company 
brings out that the Regional Load Dispatch Centres (RLDCs) of Central Electricity 
Authority were transferred to POWERGRID during the years 1994 to 1996 as per 
orders of the Ministry of Pow er and these assets of RLDCs are being used by the 
company pending transfer of ownership and determination of cost of assets so taken 
over. Meanwhile POWERGRID has also incurred an expenditure of Rs. 2000 crore 
on modernization of all the RLDCs. While expr essing their displeasure over unduly 
longer time being taken in settling such an important matter having direct bearing on 
the assets base of the company, the Committee would like to exhort POWERGRID 
to expeditiously take up this issue with the Ministry of  Power particularly when action 
for transfer of operation of these RLDCs to the newly created subsidiary of 
POWERGRID has already been initiated giving a new dimension to the structure of 
the company. 
 
  

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regional Load Despatch Centres (RLDCs) were transferred from Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) to POWERGRID in phased manner from 1.4.1994 to 
1.4.1996.  The RLDCs at Northern region, Western region, Eastern region and 
Southern region along with the Regional Power Committee (RP C) Secretariats are 
located in the same building.  The ownership of such immovable assets of RLDCs 
and all the facilities are bestowed with CEA/ Government of India.  A suitable 
arrangement regarding immovable assets was made between CEA, Ministry of 
Power and POWERGRID at the time of transfer of the RLDCs from CEA to 
POWERGRID.  This arrangement has been working satisfactorily. 
 
The assets to be transferred to the POSOCO were identified based on the 
recommendations of Pradhan Committee and Satnam Committee.  These assets are 
mainly the equipments located in the control centres of RLDCs and NLDC and are 
already in physical possession of POSOCO.  The legal transfer to POSOCO w.e.f 
1.10.2010 on net block amounting to Rs. 76 crores (gross block Rs. 271 crores) has 
been carried out.  The employees of RLDCs, NLDC and System Operation 
department have been posted in POSOCO on secondment basis on the same terms 
and conditions as applicable to POWERGRID.  The operation of RLDCs and NLDC 
was entrusted to POSOCO with ef fect from 1.10.2010 as per Gazette Notification 
dated 27.9.2010.  Since then, POSOCO is functioning satisfactorily.  
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-- NIL -- 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 6 
 
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION LOSSES  
 
The Committee’s examination has revealed that the transmission and 
distribution (T&D) loss in the country during the year 2006 were as high as 27.20% 
of the total power available for sale as against the world’s averag e of 8.58%.Since 
the T&D loss was not able to reflect all the losses, a concept of Aggregate Technical 
and Commercial (AT&C) loss was introduced in 2001-02 to assess total losses in the 
power network. According to the information made available to the Comm ittee, the 
percentage of AT&C loss stood at 28.44 at the national level. While the states like 
Manipur, Jammu & Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh reported astronomically high 
percentage of such losses to the extent of 81.01, 69.05 and 61.05 respectively, the 
percentage of such losses in the states of Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and 
Tamil Nadu stood as low as 12.85, 12.99 and 15.33 respectively . The Committee 
have been informed that while the prime responsibility for reigning in financial losses 
of distributi on utilities lies with State Governments, the Central Government have  
launched Restructured Accelerated Power Development Reform Programme (R -
APDRP) in July 2008 with an objective of reducing AT&C losses to 15%. While 
appreciating the initiative taken by t he Ministry in this regard, the Committee require 
the Ministry of Power to formulate appropriate strategies to make use of experiences 
of better performing states in those states where the AT&C losses are in the highest 
brackets. The Committee also recomme nd that the Ministry of Power should keep a 
strict vigil over the progress of Restructured Accelerated Pow er Development 
Reform Programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The responsibility of reduction in AT& C losses is with the State Utilities. To 
reduce the losses in their distribution sector, the State utilities have to initiate 
Technical and Administrative measures. Under the technical measure, the 
distribution network should be strengthened to avoid frequent failure and overloading 
of system, under the administrative measure, the Distribution utilities should take 
stringent measures under the Electricity Act, 2003 legislated by Union of India 
provides number of measures to check theft of Electricity. As pe r Section 135 of the 
Electricity Act, 2003 theft of electricity is a cognizable offence.  
 
The Government of India has launched the Re -structured Accelerated Power 
Development and Reform Programme(R -APDRP) for State Distribution Utilities to 
make their dis tribution system IT enabled and strengthening of sub –transmission 
systems, so that the energy auditing and accounting could be carried out and the 
reasons for losses are known and through the strengthening of distribution systems, 
the overloading and freq uent power failure could be minimized.   The R -APDRP 
scheme comprises of two parts -Part-A & Part -B. Part -A of the scheme being 
dedicated to establishment of IT enabled system for achieving reliable & verifiable 

30 
 
baseline data system. Part -B deals with regula r Sub Transmission & Distribution 
system strengthening & up-gradation projects. The target under R-APDRP is to bring 
AT&C loss below 15% in project areas.   The Utilities are also to achieve the 
following target of AT&C loss reduction at utility level: 
 
 Utilities having AT&C loss above 30%: Reduction by 3% per year 
 Utilities having AT&C loss below 30%: Reduction by 1.5% per year   
 
For Part -A schemes Initially 100% funds for the approved projects being 
provided in the form of a loan from the Government of India on such terms,  decided 
by the Ministry of Finance. The applicable rate of interest and other Terms and 
Conditions will be as notified by GoI from time to time. The loan along with interest 
thereon shall be converted into a grantonce the establishment of the required system 
is achieved and verified by an independent agency appointed by the Ministry of 
Power (MoP) through the Nodal Agency. No conversion to grant will be made in case 
projects are not completed within 3 years from the date of sanctioning  of the project. 
In such cases the concerned utility will have to bear the full loan and interest 
repayment. The project will be deemed to be completed on the establishment of the 
required system duly verified by an independent agency appointed by the Mini stry of 
Power (MoP) through the Nodal Agency. 
 
For Part- B, projects, initially upto 25% funds for the projects shall be provided 
as a loan from the Government of India on such terms decided by the Ministry of 
Finance. The applicable rate of interest and o ther Terms and Conditions will be as 
notified by GoI from time to time. The balance funds for Part B projects shall be 
raised from Financial Institutions (FIs), namely PFC/REC / multi -lateral institutions 
and/ or own resources. The loan from the FIs will b e governed by the respective 
terms of the FIs. For Special Category States (all North -Eastern States, Sikkim, 
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir), GOI loan for Part B 
projects will be upto 90%. All other conditions / methodology applicable t o non -
special category states shall also be applicable to the special category states. The 
project-wise requirement of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) will be decided by the 
Steering Committee. If the Distribution Utilities achieve the target of 15% AT&C los s 
on a sustained basis for a period of 5 years in the project area and the project is 
completed within the time schedule fixed by the Steering Committee, which shall in 
no case exceed five years from the date of project approval, upto 50% (90% for 
Special Category States) loan against Part -B projects will be convertible into a grant 
in equal tranches, every year for 5 years starting one year after the year in which the 
base-line data system (Part A) of  project area concerned is established and verified 
by the independent agency appointed by MoP through the Nodal Agency. If the utility 
fails to achieve or sustain the 15% AT&C loss target in a particular year, that year’s 
tranche of conversion of loan to grant will be reduced in proportion to the shortfall in 
achieving 15% Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) loss target from the 
starting base-line assessed figure. The loan from GOI shall be the first converted into 
grant. Loans from FIs shall be converted into grant only after the conversion of full 
GOI loan into grant. Whenever the loan from GoI / FIs will be converted into grant, 
interest and other charges paid on the converted amount will also be treated as grant 
and reimbursed to the Utility. For the loan and interest which could not be converted 
into grant on account of not meeting the conditions of conversion, the utility / state 
will have to bear the balance burden of loan and interest repayment. 
 

31 
 
The Power Finance Corporation Ltd. (PFC) nodal agency for R -APDRP on 
behalf of Ministry of Power, is regul arly reviewing the   programme/achievements 
with States in implementation of R -APDRP projects. In addition, the Steering 
Committee constituted by Ministry of Power under the chairmanship of Secretary 
(Power) review the progress of R -APDRP schemes for exped itious implementation 
of schemes on regular intervals with the Nodal agency (PFC) and with the states 
officials and projects are sanctioned and disbursements are made evenly during the 
Year.  
Present Status of R-APDRP: 
 
 Under Part -A of the Re -Structured AP DRP 1402 projects worth of Rs 
5,196.50Crore, to cover almost the entire country for establishment of IT 
enabled Baseline System have been approved by the GOI. 
 Under Part -A total, SCADA Projects worth Rs 1,442.29 Crore. covering 63 
towns have been  sanctioned   
 Under Part–B, and 1132 projects worth Rs 25,684.91 Crore for strengthening 
and upgrading of sub- transmission distribution system have been sanctioned 
so far. 
 The Ministry of Power has released an amount of Rs 6,502.10 Crore under 
the Restructured R -APDRP programme, out which Rs 6,304.97 Crore is the 
loan against Part -A and Part -B projects for disbursement to state utilities and 
Rs 197.13 Crore as grant aga inst enabling componen t for implementation of 
R-APDRP.  
 
 Ministry of Power (O.M.NO.  9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 7 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 8) 
 
DIRECTOR’S SHAREHOLDING 
 
The Committee note  that one of the independent directors in the Board of 
POWERGRID has disclosed holding of 1, 25,000 equity shares of the Company in 
individual capacity as on 31st March 2009. Since the POWERGRID Board has laid  
down  “Code  of  Conduct  for  prevention  of   Insider  Trading”  in  pursuance of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India ( Prohibition of Insider Trading) 
Regulations1992, the Committee would like to be apprised of the manner in which 
such a large shareholding of the Company was acquired by an I ndependent Director 
and the circumstances under which he was permitted for such an acquisition by 
Compliance Officer. The Committee also desire the management of POWERGRID to 
examine the ethical and legal implications of such share transactions by an individual 
while working on the Board of the company as an Independent Director. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter has been discussed with the concerned independent director. 
From the details given, it has been seen that he has not dealt in purchase/sale of 
shares, when the trading window was closed. During the period of trading window 

32 
 
closure all employees & directors are prohibited from purchase/sale of shares of the 
company, keeping in view of the price sensitive information during that period. 
 
Further, it has been informed that on overall basis no profits have been made 
by him on account of trading in shares of the company.  The quantum of share was 
0.00029% of the pre -FPO equity shares.  At the time of IPO all the independent 
Directors were eligible to a pply under Employee quota. Further, there was no overall 
cap on acquisition except seeking pre -clearance from compliance officer for 
purchase of shares in excess of 10,000 for which, request for pre -clearance was not 
made. However, as stated above, the dir ector has not purchased/sold shares during 
window closure period, nor made any profits out of the purchase/sale of shares of 
the company on overall basis. 
 
The tenure of the Director completed on 9th July 2011. 
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO.  9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 10 of Chapter I 
 
 
Recommendation  at Sl.No.11 
 
MEGA POWER PROJECT STATUS TO TRANSMISSION SYSTEM 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Government have  been 
extending Deemed Export Benefit under EXIM Policy to Mega and Ultra Mega Power 
Generation Projects on investment in hydro and thermal generation projects of 
capacity of more than 700MW and1000 MW respectively. However, these benefits 
are not being ex tended to the power transmission projects associated with such 
Mega and Ultra Mega Power Generation Projects. Since execution of transmission 
projects form an integral part of the accelerated development planned in power 
sector, the Committee are of firm v iew that Deemed Export Benefits should also be 
extended to associated power transmission projects so as to reduce the 
transmission project costs to the ultimate benefit of the consumer. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Power should take  up this matter with the 
appropriate authority at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal for according Mega Power Project to Transmission system was 
sent to Ministry of Finance as a part of pre -budget consultations.  However, t he 
same has not been acceded to.   
 
Ministry of Power (O.M.NO. 9/6/2010-PG dated December 12, 2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 16 of Chapter I 
 

33 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-- NIL -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19  March, 2013 from 1500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
6.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
8.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
   
 
 
…2p.. 
 

35 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memoranda Nos. 3 to 7 containing 
following draft Reports: 
 
(i). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(ii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iv). Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report on Power Grid Corporation of India Limited. 
 
(v). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
 
3. The Committee approved the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports 
without any modification and authorized the Chairman to present these Reports after 
getting them factually verified from the concerned Ministries / Departments. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX   Matter not related to this Report. 
  

36 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations  / 
observations contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Power Grid Corporation of India. 
 
I Total number of recommendations  12 
 
lI Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
[vide recommendations at Sl. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,7, 9,10 and 12] 
 
Percentage of total  
09 
 
 
75% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies                                   
 
Nil 
 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee [vide 
recommendations at Sl. No. 6, 8 and 11]  
 
Percentage of total 
 
03 
 
 
 
25% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 