1 
 
C.P.U. No. 947 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA 
[BASED ON C&AG AUDIT REPORT NO. PA 16 OF 2008 (PERFORMANCE AUDIT)] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the  First 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Public Private Partnership in Implementation of Road 
Projects by National Highways Authority of India in respect of Delhi - Gurgaon 
Project) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.04.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2012 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2012 / Chaitra 1934(S)  
14 

2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
CHAPTER   l Report  
 
1 
CHAPTER   lI  Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government.  
25 
CHAPTER   lII Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government‟s replies. 
  
34 
CHAPTER   IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
 
48 
CHAPTER   V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
57 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
 I  *Minutes of sitting of COPU  
 
 
 II 
  
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 1st Report of 
Committee on Public Undertakings (1 5th Lok Sabha) 
on National Highways Authority of India. 
 
 
 
* Not enclosed 
 
  

3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2011-2012) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4. Shri Ramesh Bais 
5. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
9. Shri Baijayant Panda „Jay‟ 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivajirao Patil 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Vacant * 
17. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
18. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
19. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
20. Vacant # 
21. Vacant # 
22. Shri N.K. Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   Additional Secretary 
2. Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
*   Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent on his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
27.1.2012. 
#   Ceased to be Member s of the Committee consequent on their retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
2.4.2012. 
 

4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the First 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on National 
Highways Authority of India - Public Private Partnership in implementation of Road 
Projects by National Highways Authority of India - Delhi-Gurgaon Sector  [Based on 
Audit Report No. PA 16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) (Commercial) of C&AG of India]. 
 
2. The First Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (20 09-2010) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2009.  Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 23 August, 2011.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their sitting 
held on 4th April, 2012.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix – I. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (2009-10) of the Committee is given in Appendix -II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 April 2012        Chairman, 
15 Chaitra 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

5 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2009-2010) on “Public Private Partnership in 
implementation of Road Projects by National Highways Authority of India - Delhi-
Gurgaon Sector. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1,5,6 and 7     (Total 04) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies (Chapter III) 
 Sl. Nos. 2,4 and 10                    (Total 03) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee  and which require reiteration  
(Chapter IV)  
 Sl. Nos. 8 and 9                              (Total 02) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V)           
Sl. Nos. 3 and 11          (Total 02) 
 
3. The Commit tee desire that final replies in respect of the observations/ 
recommendations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee and response to the Committee’s comments in Chapter I of this 
Report should be furnished to them expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Deficient Detailed Project Report 
 
5. Commenting on the deficient Detailed Project Report for Delhi -Gurgaon Project, 
the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as follows: 
 

6 
 
“The Committee note that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Delhi -Gurgaon 
project prepared by M/s RITES and finally approved in October 2001, suffered 
from many deficiencies as many critical items which should have been foreseen 
at the time of preparatio n of DPR were omitted. This resulted in execution of 
these items under change of scope of works orders for Rs.146.62 crore 
constituting 21 per cent of the total project cost. The change of scope of work 
included change in the height of underpasses from 3.5  meter to 5.5 meter, 
construction of an elevated stretch from Rao Tula Ram Marg to Palam and 
additional underpasses at two locations etc.  The Committee further note that 
the DPR did not make any provisions for sufficient number of pedestrian 
crossings by way of overhead foot bridges or underpasses at appropriate 
places. 
  
The NHAI has tried to justify the above -mentioned deficiencies in the 
DPR by stating that the areas around the project highway located in Delhi -
Haryana had witnessed rapid development and  change of scope orders were 
issued to accommodate the requests of Delhi and Haryana Governments.  
Further, underpass height of 3.5 meters was initially envisaged for crossing of 
light vehicles only. However, due to rapid development of the surroundings, t he 
Haryana Government insisted for provision of 5.5 meters underpass height to 
facilitate movement of heavy vehicles /fire tenders as lot of commercial and 
residential activities had taken place subsequently.  According to the Ministry 
the project highway was inspected by the then Hon‟ble Minister of Road 
Transport and Highways in November, 2003 and it was directed to further 
optimize the design with some more value additions. Accordingly change of 
scope orders of Rs.146.62 crore were issued.   
 
The Committee find the justification furnished by the Ministry as nothing 
but lame excuses.  The Committee observe that the pace of growth in the area 
did not pick up suddenly between April 2003 and May 2004 as claimed by the 
government/ NHAI but was known even befor e the award of the project. This is 
well evident in the traffic assessment report submitted by M/s RITES during the 
year 2000. The Ministry has in fact  submitted that the actual traffic volume at 
present is less than what was projected by RITES.  This nega tes the claim of 
the government of sudden rapid developments in the areas around the 
expressway.  Lamentably these deficiencies have cost the exchequer a 
whooping sum of Rs.146 crore that had to be paid by the Government, thus 
nullifying the factor of nega tive grant of Rs.61 crore received from the 
Concessionaire. The Committee while observing that the entire area around the 
project lies in an urban stretch and International Road Congress (IRC) 
specifications clearly stipulates height of underpasses as 5.5.  meter for such 
areas, find by the plea of the Government that the height of the underpass was 
raised to 5.5 meter instead of 3.5 meter only on the insistence of Haryana 
government for facilitating crossing of heavy vehicles/fire tenders to be simply 
untenable and incomprehensible.  This only reflects the lack of professional 

7 
 
competence on the part of NHAI in handling the project and points to a defective 
system of assessment prevailing in the organization.  
 
The Committee appreciate that the fact that the Governments of Haryana 
and Delhi have highlighted the major deficiencies in the DPR which NHAI had 
missed in the DPR ignoring the exponential growth of Gurgaon and the 
existence of an international airport in  the close proximity.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, the serious deficiencies in the DPR camaflouged in the name of 
change of scope of work at the insistence of the Delhi and Haryana 
Governments.  The Committee therefore recommend that responsibility mu st be 
fixed on the DPR consultant for their failure to take into account the Indian Road 
Congress (IRC) specifications on the minimum vertical height of 5.5 meter for 
underpasses.  The Committee further recommend that Authority should evolve 
procedures and  stipulate accountabilities to ensure that DPRs should be 
prepared after extensive consultation with the State Government concerned as 
well as taking into consideration the needs of the locals.” 
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  stated 
as follows: - 
 
“Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) was assigned to M/s. RITES Ltd. 
in June, 1997 to assess the technical feasibility and financial viability to augment 
the capacity of Delhi -Gurgaon section of NH -8.  DPR was completed in June, 
2000 for section of NH -8 from km. 15.40 to km. 36.630.  In order to make the 
project financially viable, six laning of road starting from km. 36.630 to km. 42.00 
(already 4-laned) was also added during September, 2001.  The reach  from km. 
13.70 (i.e. RTR) to km. 15.40 (Palam Junction) was also added.  Final DPR was 
approved in October, 2001. In view of the rapid development which had taken 
place in Delhi and Haryana areas falling on the project highway, Delhi and 
Haryana administrative authorities suggested some improvements, which were 
considered essential.  It may be stated in this connection that progress of Delhi -
Gurgaon project has been reviewed in Ministry and also by Haryana Govt. 
Authorities at Chandigarh from time to time and the Authorities have been kept 
apprised of the progress as also issues / problems affecting the project.  The 
issue of pedestrian over bridges in Haryana was raised only towards end of 
2006, when few accidents occurred on this road.  Prior to that, num ber of 
meetings was held with Haryana Govt. officials and they raised issues only of 
increasing length of viaducts, increasing vertical clearance of some 
underpasses, provision of flyover / underpass at Hero Honda Crossing and 
widening of service roads in Haryana portion. 
 
From the old records available it transpired that High level Committee 
comprising of representative from various Departments like DUAC, HUDA, 
NCRPB, DDA, AAI,DVB, MTNL, GAIL, DJB, PWDs, was interacting with NHAI / 
RITES during preparation  of DPR. However even after consultation certain 
changes in design was felt and were considered technically essential and 

8 
 
necessary for the project as per site requirements and requests of various 
departments. The height of underpass of 3.5m had been initi ally envisaged for 
crossing of light Vehicle only. However due to rapid development of the 
surrounding areas, the Haryana Govt/HUDA  has insisted upon to provide 
underpass of height  5.5 m instead of 3.5 m for facilitating crossing of heavy 
vehicle/ fire t enders and other heavy vehicles due to lot of commercial and 
residential activities that took place on both side of the project road. It may be 
stated that the entire section of Delhi -Gurgaon project is not an urban area, 
some portions still fall under rur al areas and underpass was initially planned for 
the rural areas as per IRC code.      However due to subsequent rapid 
industrial/commercial development of the area due to proximity with the nearest 
town of Gurgaon and to facilitate crossing of heavy comme rcial vehicles, the 
height of under pass was to be increased. Therefore there is no deficiency on 
part of DPR consultant M/s. RITES ( A Govt. of India undertaking, Ministry of 
Railways) on this account.  However in order to streamline the procedure NHAI 
has issued a circular on 3rd March, 2008 that prior to finalization of DPRs, 
participation of state Authorities should be ensured in order to incorporate their 
views/comments in the project preparation.” 
 
7. The vetting comments  of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid r eply of the 
Government were as follows: -  
 
As seen from the reply the task for preparation of DPR was assigned to 
M/s RITE in June 1997, which was approved in 2001. However, the work was 
executed during 2003 -04 i.e. after delay of three years. The Committee took 
serious note of the deficiencies in the initial DPR, non -cognizance of the 
developments subsequently. It was, therefore, recommended by the Committee 
that: 
 
(a) Responsibility must be fixed on the DPR consultant for their failure to 
take into  account the Indian Road Congress (IRC) specifications on the 
minimum vertical height of 5.5 meter for underpass and 
 
(b) Authority is required to evolve clear procedures and ide ntify the 
accountability to ensure that DPRs are prepared after extensive 
consultation with the State Government, as well as the requirement of the 
locals. 
 
In reply, the Government stated that in order to streamline the procedure, 
NHAI has issued a circular 9/2008 dated 3 rd March 2008 that prior to finalization 
of DPRs, participation of State Authority should be ensured in to incorporate 
their views/comments at the project preparation stage itself. As per the above 
circular, the concerned Chief Engineer of  National Highway Division of the State 
is required to be invited to participate in the discussions at the time of finalization 
of DPR, even prior to sending the said proposal to the Government. The 
concerned nodal officer of the State is to be invited for discussion. 

9 
 
 
It is however stated that NHAI did not meet out even the MoRTH 
specification in the Concession Agreement regarding the height of the 
underpass. 
 
As regards the circular issued on 3 rd March 2008, compliance thereto is 
also to be ensured to avoid lapses/deficiency in the projects.  
 
Further, Government/Management have not replied on the 
recommendation of the committee regarding fixing of responsibility on DPR 
consultant.”   
 
8. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows:- 
 
“Show Cause Notice to M/s RITES by NHAI will be issued on taking deterrent 
action for the deficiencies in DPR and appropriate action will be taken after 
examining the reply of M/s. RITES to Show Cause Notice.” 
 
9. The subsequent vetting  comments of Office of C&AG on the reply of the 
Government were as follows: - 
 
“The reply is interim, the desired action is still to be taken up by the Authority, 
further progress would be watched. In this regard a copy of show -cause notice 
issued if any to M/s RITES was called for from the management vide requisition 
dated 11 th July, 2011. The same is yet to be received. Further, no reply in 
support of compliance to the circular issued for participation of State Authority 
prior to finalization of DPRs has  been furnished. The sam e would be verified in 
Audit.” 
 
10. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows:- 
 
“NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C& AG 
observations/directions, and take appropriate action in this regard.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
11. Taking note of the deficiencies observed in preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) for Delhi -Gurgaon Project which missed many critical items 
resulting in subsequent change in scope of work, t he Committee had inter-alia 
recommended that responsibility must be fixed on the DPR consultant  for their 
failure to take into account the Indian Road Congress specifications on the 
minimum vertical height for under pass es.   To the sheer astonishment of the 

10 
 
Committee, the Ministry in their initial action taken replies maintained that there 
was no deficiency on the part of DPR consultants M/s RITES .  It is only after the 
vetting comments of the Audit, the Ministry altered its earlier stand and stated 
that show cause notice to the DPR consultants would be issued for the 
deficiencies observed in DPR and appropriate action would be taken after 
examining the reply to show cause notice.  The Committee  deprecate th is 
attitude of the Ministry and they consider this reply as interim in nature .  The 
Committee, therefore,  desire that the matter to fix responsibility against DPR 
Consultants should be pursued in the right earnest in a time bound manner and 
they be apprised of the  concrete action taken within three months from 
presentation of this Report.   
Recommendation No. 6 
Pre-Mature Issuance of Completion Certificate 
12. The Committee in their First Report have recommended with regard to „ Pre-
Mature Issuance of Completion Certificate‟ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that Independent Consultant, appointed by the NHAI for 
supervision of work executed by the Concessionaire, were responsible for issue 
of the completion and provisional completion certificates to the Concessionaire 
who can commence commercial operations only thereafter.  As per the 
prescribe procedure, after issue of the provisional completion certificate, a 
punch-list of items is prepared by the Independent Consultant which generally 
includes certain minor items of works to be completed and the final completion 
certificate can be issued only after execution of the Punch -List items.  In the 
case of Delhi Gurgao n Project, the Committee note that the provisional 
completion certificate was issued on 23 rd January, 2008, the date of start of 
commercial operations (Toll collection) was 25 th January, 2008 and the final 
completion certificate was issued on 22 nd August, 2009.  The audit has pointed 
out that a number of rectifiable Non Conformity Reports (NCRs) included as 
Punch-List items in the provisional completion certificate which were required to 
be completed by the Concessionaire within 120 days, remained in penden cy 
which is indicative of a deficient performance by the Concessionaire. 
 
The Committee note from the information furnished to them that the 
Independent Consultant for the Project M/s RITES – SHELADIA (JV) attached a 
list of Punch -List items with the provi sional certificate issued by them with the 
stipulation that the said Punch -List items shall be completed by the 
Concessionaire within 120 days of the date of issue of the provisional certificate 
of completion i.e. by 24th May, 2008.  According to the NHAI the Concessionaire 
had disputed certain items on the pretext of non coverage under the original 
scope of work and the issue was referred to a Committee of CGM which had 

11 
 
recommend delinking such items from Punch -List for further examination by 
Independent C onsultant and the same are presently being examined by him.  
Besides this, the issue of imposing penalty due to delay in completion of Punch 
List items is being examined by NHAI.  Regarding issuance of Completion of 
Certificate pending the Punch -List items , the NHAI has simply washed off its 
hands of all its responsibilities by submitting that it was the Independent 
Consultant who was to decide as to whether the Concessionaire has duly 
complied with all the provisions or not pertaining to issuance the of fi nal 
Completion Certificate.   
 
The Committee are not happy at all with the way the whole matter 
relating to issue of completion certificate has been handled.  In fact, the 
Committee gather an impression that undue haste has been shown in giving the 
completion certificate to the Concessionaire.  This is evident from the fact that 
after issuance of provisional certificate in January, 2008 with the stipulated time 
period of 120 days for completion of pending Punch -List items i.e. by May, 2008 
the same have not  yet been fully completed as on October, 2009.  Apparently, 
after start of Toll collection, the whole pressure lifted off the Concessionaire.  He 
has managed to get away with his obligation by giving an undertaking that he 
would be fully responsible for an y bad quality of work mentioned in the NCRs 
and to repair / reconstruct the same at its risks and cost during the entire 
concession period.  The Committee do not find such kind of undertaking by the 
Concessionaire as an appropriate substitute for the presc ribed norms of the 
work as per the concession agreement. The justification that Completion 
Certificate was issued not by the NHAI but by the Independent Consultant 
clearly indicates that the Authority has shirked off its responsibilities by leaving 
everything of this project of national importance into the hands of Independent 
Consultant.  Even the issue of levy of penalty @ Rs. 2 lac per week for delayed 
completion of work has also been left for the Independent Consultant to 
examine and decide. 
 
The Commit tee express their strong reservations over the manner in 
which the Completion Certificate was issued by the Independent Consultant 
without completing / exhausting the items of works contained in the Punch -List.  
On the other hand, the Independent Consultan t has issued the Completion 
Certificate after merely taking an undertaking from the Concessionaire for 
completion of the same.  Taking a strong exception, the Committee are of the 
firm view that the whole issue of Completion Certificate may be revisited by  
NHAI and those found guilty should be punished and penalty provisions be 
invoked on the Concessionaire for not completing the Punch -List items in time.  
The Committee further feel that NHAI needs to categorically explain this blatant 
lapse which came to passé.” 
 
 
 

12 
 
13. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  have 
stated as follows: -  
 
“There is no haste shown in giving the Provisional Completion Certificate. 
Provisional Completion certificate duly appended with Punch List (outstanding 
works) was issued by Independent Consultant (M/s RITES -Sheladia JV) on 
23.1.2008. Toll collection is per mitted after issue of Provisional Completion 
Certificate by the IC as per provisions of the concession Agreement. Since the 
Concessionaire did not complete the outstanding work within 120 days therefore 
penalty amounting to Rs. 60.42 lakhs as calculated by  the Independent 
Consultant has been recovered from the Concessionaire for delay in completion 
of punch list items. The new Independent Consultant (IC) (M/s STUP Consultant 
) having satisfied himself that all outstanding works covered under punch list 
(excluding de-linked items) have been completed by the Concessionaire, issued 
final Completion certificate (COD) on 22 nd August, 2009. As regards de -linked 
items the same is being examined by the Independent Consultant (IC) and 
appropriate decision will be tak en in accordance with provisions of the 
Concession Agreement.”  
   
14. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
were as follows: -  
 
“The Authority replied that, since the Concessionaire did not complete the 
outstanding work within 120 days, penalty amounting to Rs. 60.42 lakh as 
calculated by the independent consultant has been recovered from the 
Concessionaire for delay in completion of Punch -List items, However, 
calculation details for penalty of Rs. 60.42 lakh will be scrutinized by audit in due 
course, to comment on the adequacy of penalty imposed on Concessionaire.  
 
The issue of delinked items has not yet been settled till date, outcome of 
which may be expedited by the Authority. 
 
Regarding punch list, what action has been taken on this issue of fixing 
responsibility.” 
 
15. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“The action to settle the delinked items is being expedited. As regards f ixing 
responsibility on the issue of punch list, since the punch list has been issued by 
IC in accordance with the provision of the Concession Agreement, NHAI is not 
contemplating to fix responsibility in this matter.” 
 
  

13 
 
16. The vetting comments of Office  of C&AG on the Reply of the Government  were 
as follows: - 
 
“The issue of delinked items has not been settled till date, outcome of which 
may be expedited by the Authority. Regarding Punch -List no action has been 
taken on this issue of fixing responsibility as recommended by the committee.  
The detailed of penalty of Rs.60.42 lakh has been verified.” 
  
17. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI has been directed to take note of C&AG observations/directions for 
suitable follow-up.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee had expressed their strong 
reservations over the manner in which the completion certificate was issued by 
the Independent Consultant in the instant case.  They had, accordingly, desired 
that the whole issue be revisited by NHAI and those found guilty be punished 
besides invoking penalty provisions o n the Concessionaire for not completing 
the Punch List Items in time.  From the action taken reply of the Government, the 
Committee find that while a penalty of Rs. 60.42 lakh had since been recovered 
from the Concessionaire for delay in completion of Punch List Items, the issue of 
settlement of items de -linked from Punch List has not yet been settled as the 
same is stated to be under examination of the Independent Consultant.  While 
expressing their unhappiness over the delay in this matter, the Committee desire 
that concrete follow up action to settle the de -linked items should be expedited 
by the NHAI and they be apprised of the conclusive action taken in the matter.  
Recommendation No. 8 
Delay in Appointment of Independent Auditors 
19. The Committee in their First Report have recommended with regard to „ Delay in 
Appointment of Independent Auditors‟ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that as per the concession agreement, the Authority had 
the right but not the obligation to appoint at its cost another firm of chartered 
accountants as Independent Auditors  to audit and verify all those matters, 
expense, costs, realizat ions and other assurances which the auditors of the 

14 
 
Concessionaire were required to do.  The Committee are, however, constrained 
to note that this right was not timely exercised by the Authority.   
  
In this regard, the Committee note that the Independent Auditors 
appointed subsequently by NHAI on 5th August, 2008 to audit the transactions of 
the Concessionaire from the years 2002 to 2008 in their report submitted in 
March, 2009 had observed differences in the amounts to the tune of Rs. 2.16 
crore in the fi nancial records and the software generated reports both in cash 
collection as well as OBU collection.  According to Independent Auditors , this 
has raised a question mark on the accuracy of the traffic report and whether the 
revenue sharing had been done properly or not.   
 
The Committee take a serious note of the failure on the part of the NHAI 
for not having exercised its right of appoint ing Independent Auditors  in time 
though it was in its own interest.  Though it was not mandatory on the part of the 
NHAI, the Committee feel that the principles of good governance have not been 
followed in this case.  The Authority has not given any reason s for delayed 
appointment of Independent Auditors  but had taken the stand that it was not 
mandatory on their part.   
 
The Committee feel that the report of the Independent Auditors revealing 
inaccuracy in the financial records of the Concessionaire suggest that 
appointment of Independent Auditors should be made a mandatory provision in 
the internal working manual of the NHAI so as to avoid any scope of 
lopsidedness in the accuracy of the records maintained by the Concessionaire.  
The Committee further desir e that this matter may be properly inquired into and 
all necessary action may be taken against the Concessionaire in case some 
mischief is detected and penalty may be imposed accordingly.” 
 
20. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport an d Highways have 
stated as follows: -  
 
“There is no time frame given in the Concession Agreement for appointment of 
Additional Auditors. NHAI exercised its right after about 8 months from start of 
toll collection, which is a reasonable period to audit the Concessionaire account 
of toll revenue and other transaction details. There was no deliberate intention to 
delay the appointment of Additional Auditor. Moreover, Statutory Auditor is 
already in place to audit the accounts of the Concessionaire on continuou s 
basis. The current policy in this regard is given in the Model Concession 
Agreement issued by the Planning Commission in April, 2009.  The relevant 
Clause (Clause 33.2.3) is extracted below: -  
 
33.2.3 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, the 
Authority shall have the right, but not the obligation , to appoint at its cost from 
time to time and at anytime , another firm (the “ Additional Auditors ”) from the 
Panel of Chartered Accountants to audit and verify all those matters, expenses, 

15 
 
costs, realisations and things which the Statutory Auditors are required to do, 
undertake or certify pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The Concessionaire is being reminded from time to time by the 
Independent Consultant and Project Director the events of delay in receipt of 
information on Escrow Account statement.” 
 
21. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
were as follows: -  
 
“The Committee noted that the Authority has not followed the principles of good 
governance by not appointing the Independent Auditors.  
 
The Management replied that there was no deliberate intention to delay 
the appointment of Additional Auditors (Independent Auditors). It is also stated 
that the current polity in this regard is given in the Model Concession Agreement 
issued by the Planning Commission in April 2009. The relevant Clause (33.2.3) 
is extracted below:- 
 
33.2.3 Notwithstanding anything t o the contrary contained in this 
Agreement, the Authority shall have the right, but not the obligation, to appoint 
at its cost from time to time and at anytime, another firm (the “ Additional 
Auditors”) from the panel of Chartered Accountants to audit and v erify all those 
matters, expenses, costs, realizations and things which the Statutory Auditors 
are required to do, undertake or certify pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The reply is not satisfactory. The Authority should have exercised its right 
which would have helped to safeguard its own interests.” 
 
22. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI is appointing the Additional Auditors  whenever any issue arises in 
BOT(Toll) Projects. NHAI may be permitted to c ontinue with this policy viz to 
appoint the Additional Auditors as and when any issue arises.” 
 
 
23. The vetting comments of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government  were 
as follows: - 
 
“Action/reply of management is not in line with the recommendation of the 
committee. Further the reply is also silent about the action taken against the 
Concessionaire for inaccuracy of records, as desired by the Committee.” 
 
 

16 
 
24. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI has been directed to take note of C&AG observations/directions.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
25. In the light of the fact that the report of the Independent Auditors  
appointed subsequently by NHAI for Delhi -Gurgaon Project had revealed 
inaccuracies in the financial records of the Concessionaire, the Committee had 
made a specific suggestion that appointment of Independent Auditors should be 
made a mandatory provision i n the internal working manual of NHAI so as to 
avoid any scope of lopsidedness in the accuracy of records maintained by the 
Concessionaire.  To the utter dismay of the Committee, the Ministry, in its action 
taken replies, has once again tried to maintain i ts earlier position that the 
Authority has the right but not the obligation to appoint Independent Auditors.  
The Ministry has this time, however, taken shelter behind the current policy 
enshrined in the model concession agreement issued by the Planning 
Commission in April 2009, which is  almost over seven months before 
presentation of the relevant Report by the Committee.  The Committee are in no 
doubt that the Ministry could not comprehend the essence of their 
recommendation otherwise it would not have ple aded in its action taken replies 
at this stage that NHAI may be permitted to continue with its policy of appointing 
the Additional Auditors whenever any issue arises in BOT (Toll) Projects.  The 
Committee need hardly emphasise that the present policy of appointing 
Additional or Independent Auditors only when the need arises is not in the best 
financial interests of Government as had already been borne out by the findings 
of the Independent Auditor appointed in case of Delhi -Gurgaon project.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that appointment of 
Independent Auditors  should be made a mandatory provision in the internal 
working manual of NHAI so as to ensure accur acy of the financial records 
maintained by the Concessionaire.  

17 
 
 The Committee had also taken note of the observations made by the 
Independent Auditors  that the differences amounting to Rs. 2.16 crore in the 
financial records and the software generated rep ort had raised a question mark 
on the accuracy of traffic report and the aspect of revenue sharing.  They had, 
accordingly, desired that this matter be properly inquired into and necessary 
action taken against the Concessionaire in case some irregularity was detected 
and penalty imposed accordingly.  The Committee are, however, anguished to 
find that the Ministry’s reply is inexplicably silent on this aspect.  While 
expressing their di spleasure over this apparent in action on their specific 
recommendation, the Committee strongly reiterate  that an inquiry in the matter 
should be promptly conducted and they be apprised of the concrete action taken 
thereon including realization of penalty, if any , imposed on the Concessionaire 
for inaccuracy in financial records noticed by the Independent Auditors.  
Recommendation No. 9 
Failure to Conduct any Road Safety Audit 
26. The Committee in their First Report have recommended with regard to „ Failure 
to Conduct any Road Safety Audit‟ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note from a report submitted by the Central Road Research 
Institute (CRRI) in the Year 2008 that no road safety audit was carried out in 
respect of Delhi -Gurgaon project either at the planning stage or at the Detailed 
Project Reports stage.  This has resulted in complete neglect of the interests of 
non motorized traffic and pedestrians.  This is evident as only four sub ways 
(Eight Km to Twelve Km apart) and only two foot over -bridges have been 
provided on the entire corridor w hich are quite inadequate by any standard 
besides being user unfriendly.  This has caused a number of avoidable fatal 
accidents and deaths on the express-way since February, 2007. 
 
The Authority has failed to give any specific reason as to why the 
interests of the pedestrians were not taken into account during the planning 
stage.  Regarding the remedial measures which the Authority proposed to take, 
the Authority submitted that the CRRI Report on Road Safety has been sent to 
the Concessionaire for compliance with instructions to Independent Consultant 
for submitting compliance Report.  Further, the NHAI has now undertaken 
construction of five more Foot -Over Bridges at its own expense as the same 
were not provided under agreement with the Concessionaires.   F rom the 
compliance Report dated 22 nd September, 2009  submitted by the Independent 
Consultant in respect of  the CRRI Safety Audit Report,  the Committee note 
that on many aspects like provision for Road warning signs where High Tension 

18 
 
Power Lines are cro ssing the Express - Way, removal of trees on the medians,  
removal of rings over drainage covers, deployment of marshals to direct buses 
to stop at designated bus stops, absence of service roads due to non acquisition 
of land, removal of encroachments on se rvice roads, maintenance of  height of 
Metallic Beam Crash Barriers (MBCBs), training and deployment of marshals at 
the entry points for restricting the entry of two wheelers, provisions for road 
marking at the entry and exits points etc. the action is yet  to be taken by the 
Concessionaire.   
 
The Committee feel that all such important issues should have been 
taken into account when DPR was prepared for the Project.  Noting the land use 
pattern of heavy industrial areas and commercial establishments all alo ng the 
Express-Way and heavy pedestrian traffic generated, a fact well known in 
advance, the Committee feel that no justification is justified enough that can 
explain this blatant act of ignorance on the part of the Authority.  As a result, no 
provision co uld be made in the Concessionaire agreement for Foot -Over 
Bridges and Sub-Ways.  Its two fold impact is that on one hand so many people 
have lost their lives, on the other, the Authority has now to spend from its own 
pocket for construction of the same.     
 
The Committee express their profound anguish over the scant regard that 
has been given to human life and strongly deprecate the act of NHAI in 
completely ignoring the safety of pedestrians in designing the expressway 
ignoring the local needs of the peop le living on both the sides of the highway.  
As a result of this ignorance or rather indifference, subways, foot overbridges 
and pedestrian crossings were not conceptualized.  Considering the fact that the 
highway cuts a large city like Gurgaon in two part s, the Committee find it hard to 
fathom as to why RITES, the design consultant for the project could not forsee 
this basic need of the people.  The Committee hold NHAI as well as the Ministry 
accountable for this mess which could have been avoided.  The Co mmittee 
strongly urge that the adequate number of foot overbridges and subway be 
constructed taking into considerations the local needs of the people living on 
both the sides of the highway no matter at what cost and within strict time limits 
to be mentioned by NHAI.  The Committee wish to emphasise categorically that 
no venture, whatever be its utility or commercial viability, should ever 
compromise with human safety.  Why are roads, for that matter expressways, 
are conceptualized and eventually constructe d? Certainly for provision of better 
and safer commuting means/facilities to the denizens of a State. If such 
infrastructural facilities tend to become instruments of death, where would be 
the creditability of the State or the concerned authority?  It is s imply appalling to 
say the least, that more than 100 lives were lost on this expressway in a 
relatively short period, primarily due to inadequate safety norms; and lamentably 
utter callousness on the part of the concerned authorities.  The Committee 
strongly feel that there has been a criminal negligence in this regard.  Under 
these circumstances, the very efficacy of the concerned Concessionaire in 
particular and NHAI in general become questionable.  We cannot bring back to 

19 
 
life the helpless victims who pe rished in the accidents.  However, their deaths 
should not go in vain.  Painful it might be the Committee would like to take it as 
a wake up call. 
 
In view of the foregoing the Committee strongly recommends that 
accountability must be fixed on the concerne d officials responsible for lapses 
which apparently have placed human lives at grave danger and strict punitive 
action be taken against the guilty. 
 
The Committee also find it pertinent to recommend that it is perhaps 
hightime that Government gives serious  consideration for setting up Highway 
Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding all National Highways.”   
 
27 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  have 
stated as follows: -  
 
“1. A Detailed Project Report (DPR) study was assigned to M/s. RITES Ltd. 
in June, 1997 to assess the technical feasibility and financial viability to augment 
the capacity of Delhi -Gurgaon section of NH -8.  DPR was completed in June, 
2000 for section of NH -8 from km. 15.40 to km. 36.630.  In order  to make the 
project financially viable, six laning of road starting from km. 36.630 to km. 42.00 
(already 4-laned) was also added during September, 2001.  The reach from km. 
13.70 (i.e. RTR) to km. 15.40 (Palam Junction) was also added.  Final DPR was 
approved in October, 2001. 
 
2. The project was awarded to M/s. Jaypee -DSC Ventures Ltd. in April, 
2002 for Development to 8/6 lane access controlled highway from Km 14.300 to 
Km 42.00 on BOT (Toll) basis.  The Independent Consultant was M/s RITES -
Sheladia (JV) for this project since start of construction up to 31.12.2008.  As 
per original scope of works, there was provision for providing two nos. of 
pedestrian / cattle crossings at locations to be decided by NHAI.  After 
discussion with Haryana Govt. offici als in 2004, this facility was decided to be 
provided at Anaz Mandi and Kherki Daula (between Rajiv Chowk and km. 
42.00).  These have since been completed. 
 
3. In view of the rapid development which had taken place in Delhi and 
Haryana areas falling on the  project highway, Delhi and Haryana administrative 
authorities suggested some improvements, which were considered essential.  
The matter of change of scope was discussed at length in various meetings held 
with officers of the Airport Authority of India, Ha ryana Govt. and Delhi Govt.  
First change of scope notice was issued on 10 th April, 2003 and second on 22 nd 
September, 2003.  
 
4. The project highway was inspected by the then Hon‟ble Minister of Road 
Transport & Highways along with the Secretary (RT&H) on  29th November, 
2003, when it was directed to further optimize the design and provide some 

20 
 
more value additions.  Accordingly, Secretary (RT&H) directed Central Road 
Research Institute (CRRI) to undertake a study and suggest optimization in 
project design.   Based on the CRRI study, following two main decisions was 
taken:- 
 
(i) Clubbing of Palam and RTR intersections to provide an elevated section 
for about 1.1 km. length from km. 14.30 to km. 15.40. 
(ii) Flyover across NH -8 at Hero Honda Chowk (Which was subsequentl y 
deleted). 
 
The change of scope / value additions was approved by the then 
Secretary (RT&H) and Hon‟ble Minister of Road Transport & Highways on 8 th 
April, 2004. 
 
5. The change of scope necessitated transfer of land of Ministry of Defence 
and Airport Auth ority of India.  Thus till confirmation of land transfer was 
received, change of scope could not be finalized.  Finally on 1 st April, 2005, it 
was decided in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries (COS) that Ministry of 
Defence and AAI should give permissive possession of required land to NHAI. 
 
6. Proposal of change of scope costing Rs. 224.48 crore as assessed by 
the Independent Consultant was put up in the 55 th meeting of the Authority held 
on 15 th July, 2005.  This proposal also included additional two  nos. Pedestrian 
Foot Over Bridges and one no. Pedestrian Underpass at Kendriya School (all in 
Delhi).  These were provided on the request of Army Authorities and were 
agreed during discussion in connection with transfer of land from Ministry of 
Defence to  NHAI.  Out of this, the Pedestrian / Cycle Foot Over Bridge at 
Shankar Vihar as also the pedestrian underpass at Kendriya School near RTR 
Junction have already been opened for use by the public.  
 
7. As regards the second Pedestrian Foot Over Bridge near Subroto Park 
even though the proposal was approved in July, 2006, Air Force Authorities did 
not allow construction to be taken up and were insisting for providing a flyover at 
this location.  This continued upto as late as in November, 2007.  The matter 
was sorted out in December, 2007 and they allowed the construction of the Foot 
over Bridge in front of Subroto Park Gate.  This work has been completed. In 
addition to above there is another Pedestrian underpass near Toll plaza at Km 
24 constructed by the Concessionaire. Thus total four Pedestrian sub way and 
two FOB‟s have been constructed by the Concessionaire.  
 
8. In February / March, 2007, the Independent Consultant (M/s RITES - 
Sheladia (JV) submitted a proposal to NHAI for additional safety works on thi s 
project.  During the 63 rd meeting of the Authority held on 30 th March, 2007, it 
was informed that after opening to traffic 8 out of 9 flyovers, the stretch between 
Palam Junction and Rajiv Chowk has become hindrance free providing smooth 
flow conditions for the traffic.  This has also increased the average speed of 

21 
 
travel on the highway.  Due to pedestrians‟ crossings, the Expressway at 
random instead of crossing the road at designated places namely viaduct 
openings of the flyover, there have been some ac cidents in recent past.  Under 
the circumstances, certain additional works mainly for safety of traffic / 
pedestrians‟ were felt necessary.  It was, therefore, proposed to provide 5 more 
Foot Over Bridges at a cost of about Rs. 13 crores.  The proposal was  approved 
by the Authority.  It was also approved to get this work executed through open 
competitive bidding. 
 
9. Subsequently, based on request of Delhi Police for a pedestrian 
overbridge at Dhaula Kuan, an estimate and RFP for construction of six FOBs 
was approved by the Competent Authority on 31.05.2007.  Bids for six FOBs 
were invited on 06.06.2007 to be received on 02.07.2007.  At the request of 
some bidders, the date was extended to 09.07.2007.  However, only one bid 
was received, therefore, as per pr ocedure outlined in NHAI‟s Works Manual, it 
was decided to go for rebidding. 
 
10. In order to ensure better participation of contractors, the work was split 
into three packages of 2 FOBs each and bids invited on 12.09.2007 to be 
received on 05.10.2007.  The proposals received were evaluated by the 
Evaluation Committee which recommended some relaxation in RFP as regards 
condition of having done similar works in last 7 years (one contractor had done 
similar work in 2000 -01 i.e. older than 7 years) to have at least two responsive 
bidders for each package (otherwise only one contractor was f ound responsive 
in all three packages).  The matter was referred by the Competent Authority to 
Finance Division which did not favor relaxation and suggested quick re-bidding.   
 
11. Bids were invited for third time on 16.01.2008 and received on  
06.02.2008. This time the single bid has been received and found that the rates 
quoted by the bidders are abnormally high therefore it was decided to cancel the 
bidding process. During meeting taken by the Secretary, RTH on 26.2.2008 it 
was decided to entrust this w ork to Haryana Govt as a deposit work. The 
following 5 nos. FOBs in Haryana portion have been approved at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 13.20 Crore:- 
  
(i) km.26.000  between Udyog Vihar and IFFCO Junction 
(ii) km.26+915  between South City and IFFCO Junction 
(iii) km.34+320  near Rajiv Chowk 
(iv) km. 36+710 near Khandsa Village (new location instead of 
37+030) 
(v) km.38+780  near Narsinghpur Village 
 
Out of above two FOB at sl. No. (i) and (ii) has already been completed 
and third is in progress. For two FOB, Land Acquisition is being done. 
 

22 
 
12. As regards median fencing, it is to mention that erection of un -climbable 
median fencing all along Delhi -Gurgaon Access Controlled Highway was not 
envisaged in the scope of the work of the Project Highway. Neither the same 
were advised in the D PR of the Project Highway by the RITES. M/s. RITES -
Sheladia (JV) in year 2007 submitted proposal for additional safety measures. In 
this connection, a meeting was convened by Chairman, NHAI on 5.3.2007 and 
additional works were agreed for implementation wh ich includes, median 
fencing, service road on RHS and five FOB. NHAI vide letter dated 22.10.2007 
directed the Concessionaire to provide median fencing in about 22.0 Km length 
of road (un -climbable) between Km 14.300 to 42.000 in accordance with para 
4.13 (Traffic Safety Measures) of Concession Agreement. IC Vide letter dated 
26.10.2007 intimated that median fencing is not part of Concession Agreement, 
therefore it is not his obligation.  
 
The matter was examined in NHAI and matter put up to NHAI board. In a 
meeting of the authority held on 25.3.2008, the proposal for erecting median 
fencing at the cost of NHAI was approved. NHAI invited tenders and in first call 
only single bid was received  therefore as per NHAI policy, bids were invited 
second time in June, 2008. The work was awarded on 23.9.2008 and presently 
work is completed.  
 
13. Further, in addition to above NHAI has also engaged a consultant for 
providing 5 vehicular underpasses betw een Rajiv Chowk and end of project.  
Final Feasibility report has been submitted on 25.9.2009. Draft DPR submitted 
for only three feasible underpasses/ overpass. In addition to above there is also 
a provision of Construction of underpass and partial clover  leaf at Hero Honda 
Chowk for which Consultant has submitted the Draft PPR on 15.4.2009. 
However, recently Government of Haryana requested the NHAI to explore 
possibility of Elevated NH -8 between Rajiv Chowk and Kherki Daula instead of 
piecemeal improvement as above. The NHAI has submitted the Detailed Report 
showing three scenario based on techno -economic study to the Ministry on 16 th 
March, 2010 for decision. 
 
14. It may be stated in this connection that progress of Delhi -Gurgaon project 
has been reviewed  in Ministry and also by Haryana Govt. Authorities at 
Chandigarh from time to time and the Authorities have been kept apprised of the 
progress as also issues / problems affecting the project.  The issue of 
pedestrian over bridges in Haryana was raised only  towards end of 2006, when 
few accidents occurred on this road.  Prior to that, number of meetings was held 
with Haryana Govt. officials and they raised issues only of increasing length of 
viaducts, increasing vertical clearance of some underpasses, provision of flyover 
/ underpass at Hero Honda Crossing and widening of service roads in Haryana 
portion. 
 

23 
 
15. As regards setting up of Highway Police Force for monitoring and 
safeguarding all National Highways, there is no such proposal under 
consideration by the Government.  
 
28. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
were as follows: -  
 
“The Committee‟s concern is over not carrying out any safety Audit and 
inadequacies of sub-way/foot-over bridges at the planning as well as DPR stage 
causing neglect of the interests of pedestrians resulting in fatal accidents. The 
reply details developmen ts at later dates. Further, it also does not specify the 
required action to be taken by Concessionaire after the Compliance Report of 
September 2009. 
 
The Committee also desired to fix the accountability on concerned 
officials responsible for lapses, which have placed human  lives at danger and 
take strict punitive action  against them.  Action taken on this aspect have not 
been replied. The Government has  also not considered Committee‟s 
recommendation of setting up of a Highway Police Force for monitoring and 
safeguarding all NHs, without assigning any reasons.  Since Government has 
taken no action, Audit has no remark to offer.” 
 
29. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“Very few projects of this nature have been built in the country so far under such 
complex situations. The coordination of several authorities is involved in 
construction, operation and maintenance of Delhi -Gurgaon Highway. The 
improvements to the safety provisions is a continuous process towards 
achieving safer/forgiving roads by overcoming the constraints like  vehicle 
condition/population, road user behaviour, education level of truck drivers, etc. 
NHAI/Government is making sincere efforts to make roads safer. The Manual of 
Standards & Specifications for construction of highways have been published by 
IRC. As r egards the compliance report of Sept., 2009, the Concessionaire has 
attended to all the observations related to safety pointed out by the safety 
auditors. In connection with setting up of a Highway Police force, it is submitted 
that creation of National Ro ad Safety Management Board as per Sundar 
Committee recommendation is under consideration of the Government.” 
 
30. The vetting comments of Office of C&AG  on the reply of the Government  were 
as follows: - 
 
“Though the reply states in general that sincere eff orts are being made for road 
safety, but it is silent about the specific action taken as per recommendation of 
committee for fixing accountability on the concerned officials responsible for 
lapses which had placed human life in danger.  However the Safety Audit 

24 
 
Report along with the action taken thereon was not provided to Audit. As 
regarding setting up of Highway Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding all 
national highways, management submitted that creation of National road Safety 
Management as per Sundar Committee recommendations is under 
consideration by the Government, the same needs to expedite by the Authority.” 
 
31. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C&AG observations/  
directions.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
32. Expressing their deep concern that no road safety audit was carried out in 
respect of Delhi -Gurgaon Project both at planning and detailed project report 
stages which resulted in complete neglect of the interests of non -motorized 
traffic and safety of pedes trians, the Committee had, inter-alia, recommended 
that accountability must be fixed on the officials responsible for lapses which 
apparently placed human lives at danger.  While giving elaborate details of the 
various steps taken subsequently to address the safety issues, the Ministry’s 
reply is conspicuously silent about the action taken to fix accountability on 
officials responsible for lapses at the initial stages.  The Committee are not 
inclined to accept the averments made by the Ministry that  very few projects of 
this nature have been built in the country so far under such complex situations 
and they feel convinced that the Ministry is trying to make an effort to paper over 
the glaring failures of officials entrusted with the task of execution of Del hi-
Gurgaon Project.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation for 
fixing accountability and strict punitive action against the guilty and desire that 
conclusive action should be finalized in a time bound manner without any further 
delay.  The Committee expect the Ministry to draw suitable lessons from this 
project so that such lapses should not recur in future.  
 In their earlier Report, the Committee had also made a specific 
recommendation for setting up Highway Police Force for monitoring and 
safeguarding all National Highways.  In reply, the Ministry has intimated that 
creation of National Road Safety Management Board as per Sundar Committee 

25 
 
recommendation is under consideration of the Government.  The Committee 
desire the Government to sw iftly act on Sundar Committee recommendation and 
furnish a precise action taken reply to them on this aspect.  
 
Recommendation No.11 
Monitoring Role of the Ministry and NHAI 
33. The Committee in their First Report have recommended with regard to 
„Monitoring Role of the Ministry and NHAI‟ as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that the Delhi -Gurgaon project suffered from many 
deficiencies right from beginning.  First of all, the project was initially planned to 
be executed on SPV mode but at the last mome nt, its mode of execution was 
changed to BOT-Toll mode.  Thereafter, the Financial Consultant submitted that 
it was unviable on BOT mode but at the insistence of NHAI, made revised 
assessment for viability on BOT -Toll mode. Thereafter, though a 
recommendation was made by the Financial Consultant for conducting a fresh 
traffic study, the same was not undertaken by the Authority.  Thereafter, the 
change of scope of works was to be introduced in the project due to many 
deficiencies in the Detailed Project Repo rt (DPR).  All these factors led to an 
inordinate delay in the completion of the project.  Subsequently, completion 
certificate was issued to the Concessionaire without completion of all the Punch-
List items.  There was delay on the part of the Authority i n appointment of 
Independent Auditors to cross check the data furnished by the Concessionaire 
the eventual, chaos at toll plazas due to huge traffic congestion, absence of any 
road safety audit either at planning or DPR stage.  In such a scenario the 
Committee are appalled to note that in response to a query raised by the 
Committee about the future plans of NHAI to decongest the increase in traffic, 
the reply given by Authority is “NHAI at present do not have any plan to 
decongest the highway”.  Further, a section of service road is yet to be 
constructed due to non -acquisition of land from AAI.  Both the NHAI as well as 
the Ministry have failed to give any convincing reply to the Committee as to why 
this land could not be acquired so far or what efforts are being made to acquire 
the same.  No explanation has been given as to why no provisions were made 
in the DPR for adequate number of pedestrian crossings/foot over bridges on 
the expressway and who is to be held responsible for the number of deaths 
witnessed on the expressway because of inadequate safety infrastructure.  The 
Committee gather an impression that all aspects of monitoring and supervision 
of the works were left in the hands of the Independent Consultants.  The 
Committee feel that all these issues  tend to question the very effectiveness of 
monitoring role of the NHAI as well as its administrative Ministry. 
 
The NHAI has washed off its hands of its responsibilities by submitting 
that monitoring and supervision is the responsibility of the Independen t 
Consultants.  Thereafter, the Government has washed off its hands by 

26 
 
submitting that it is for the NHAI to enforce the provisions of the concession 
agreement and has to give directions only if something is brought to their notice.  
Keeping in view the fa ct that three Government Secretaries are on the Board of 
NHAI and the Ministry also conduct frequent meetings to ascertain the progress 
of NHDP, the Committee wonder as to how all the shortcomings observed in the 
Delhi-Gurgaon project escaped the notice of the Ministry.  
 
The admitted position of the Government is that NHAI is a creation of law 
and is accountable to Parliament through the Government and the Government 
has inherent right to issue directions to NHAI on matters of public importance.  
The Commi ttee however feel that the Government has failed to exercise this 
right as it has preferred to remain a mute spectator on all those issues 
mentioned above.  Though the Committee would not like the autonomy granted 
to NHAI under the Act may be infringed in any manner, the buck should stop 
somewhere!  Needless to state the Committee would except the Government to 
be alive to the issues involving public utility services including the road safety 
aspects.  It was the bounden duty of the Government to issue appr opriate 
directions to NHAI for taking the necessary corrective measures from time to 
time. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government as 
well as NHAI may undertake a thorough review of the Delhi -Gurgaon project 
and analyze the reasons for the shortcomings and deficiencies observed therein 
to strengthen the supervision mecha nism.  The results of the said analysis may 
be utilized in all the ongoing and future projects to avoid recurrence of such 
lapses in the future.  
 
At this juncture the Committee cannot contain themselves from 
commenting that it is imperative that above recommendations be heeded for the 
safety of all the prospective road users on the roads/expressways being handled 
or proposed to be handled by NHAI.   
 
In the light of all the irregularities/deficiencies pointed out by the C&AG 
and observed by the Committee in their foregoing conclusions, the Committee 
recommend that the whole issue needs to be investigated by an independent 
investigating agency and action taken thereon may be apprised.”  
 
34. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  have 
stated as follows: -  
 
“This project was monitored by High level Committee comprising of 
representative from various Departments like DU AC, HUDA, NCRPB, DDA, 
AAI,DVB, MTNL, GAIL, DJB, PWDs. Further this project being in the capital city 
of Delhi was also monitored by Hon‟ble Minister, RTH, Secretary, RTH , Hon‟ble 
LG, Delhi, Cabinet Secretary and other senior officials of GNCTD and Govt. o f 
Haryana. The monitoring mechanism for monitoring the progress of NHDP -I, II, 

27 
 
III etc is already in place in NHAI in addition to periodical review by the Ministry 
of Road Transport & Highways and COS under Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
The Government would reiter ate its position that subject to the autonomy 
granted to NHAI under NHAI Act, it would not consider it appropriate to involve 
itself with NHAI‟s day -to-day affairs relating to the project.  Through various 
review meetings NHAI has been advised of appropria te action within the 
framework of Concession Agreement.  The Government would not hesitate to 
take stringent action if violation of the terms of agreement is noticed.  It is 
already examining various issues brought to the fore by the Committee and 
CAG and will take action as appropriate.  It will keep the Committee informed of 
the action taken.” 
 
35. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
were as follows: -  
  
“The Committee concluded that the Government as well as NHAI should 
undertake a through review of the project and analyse the reasons for short-
comings/deficiencies observed therein to strengthen the supervision machinery. 
As per reply of the Government var ious issues brought out by the 
Committee/CAG are being examined and the Committee will be informed of the 
appropriate action taken. The issue may be watched through further ATNs.” 
 
36. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI will appoint a Retired Senior Officer to undertake a thorough review of 
Delhi-Gurgaon Project to analyze the reasons for shortcomings and deficiencies 
observed therein to strengthen the supervision mechanism.  The results of the 
said analysis will be utilized in the future projects.” 
 
37. The vetting comments of Office of C&AG  on the Reply of the Government  were 
as follows: - 
 
“The reply is interim as the required action to undertake a th orough review of 
Delhi-Gurgaon Project to analyze the reasons for shortcomings and deficiencies 
observed therein are yet to be taken up. The same may be expedited by NHAI 
and the results of the analysis/action taken thereon may be watched in further 
audits.” 
 
38. The reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG was as 
follows: - 
 
“NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C&AG observations/  
directions. The Ministry is also studying the status of compliance of the 

28 
 
Concession Agreement by the Concessionaire so that appropriate corrective 
action can be taken.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
39. After taking note of deficiencies observed during the execution of Delhi -
Gurgaon Project, the Committee had  recommended that the Government as well 
as NHAI may undertake a thorough review of the project and analyse the reasons 
for the shortcomings and deficiencies noticed in implementation, planning and 
execution so as to avoid recurrence of such lapses in the future.  The Committee 
also desired that the irregularities/defi ciencies observed in their Report needed 
to be investigated by an independent investigating agency.  The Government in 
its action taken reply has inter-alia stated that it is examining various issues 
brought out by the Committee and the C&AG and the Committee will be informed 
of the appropriate action taken.  It has subsequently been intimated by the 
Government that NHAI will appoint a retired senior officer to undertake a 
thorough review of Delhi -Gurgaon Project to analyze the reason s for 
shortcomings and deficiencies observed therein to strengthen the supervisory 
mechanism and the results of the said analysis will be utilized in the future 
projects.  While the Government has agreed to analyze the reasons for 
deficiencies/shortcomings obser ved in Delhi -Gurgaon Project, the Committee 
would like to treat this reply as interim in nature since conclusive action is yet to 
be taken on the recommendations of the Committee.  They, therefore, desire that 
the action proposed by the Government may be expedited and the results of the 
analysis/action taken thereon may be communicated to the Committee  within 
three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
At the very outset the Committee would wish to state that even though the 
matter under consideration is with regard to examination of the C &AG‟s Audit Report 
No. PA 16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) regarding Public Private Partnership in 
implementation of R oad Projects by NHAI in respect of Delhi Gurgaon Sector, certain 
other crucial factors which are inextricably intertwined with issues under examination 
came to fore.  Going by the spirit of the remit of the Committee per se, the Committee 
proceeded to examine issues that arose with a holistic perspective. 
 
 Before proceeding further the Committee are constrained to comment upon an 
aspect of conduct of Chairman, NHAI during his evidence before the Committee.  
During his deposition, while referring to certain  basic concepts of BOT mode, which he 
covered in his presentation, he remarked “perhaps, (they) are too novel or the Hon’ble 
members have not been able to grasp them.…” 
 
 The tone and tenor as also the very contents of these remarks tend to question 
the ca liber and comprehension capabilities of the members which in turn could be 
construed as casting reflections on the members of the Committee.  In this context, the 
Committee also find it worthwhile to mention that Chairman during his deposition also 
inter a lia remarked “in the audit report I sensed the C&AG himself is not perhaps 
familiar or completely familiar with the way the BOT projects works”.  These remarks 
too could be construed as casting reflections on officers of a constitutional body.  The 
Chairman, NHAI should certainly have been conscious of the basic norms of etiquette 
and discretion which a witness appearing before a Parliamentary Committee should 
bear in mind.  Evidently, the CMD unmindful of the said norms exceeded his brief.  The 
Committee takes objection to his indiscretion and condescending attitude. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Chairman, NHAI tenders unqualified apology for the statements made.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
In view of above an unqualified apology tendered by the Chairman/NHAI 
regarding statement made on CAG and his staff, no further action is needed.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
[ Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I)dated 19/8/2011] 

30 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Delay in Execution of Project 
 
The Committee note that the completion of the Delhi -Gurgaon project was 
delayed by 42 months beyond the scheduled completion date of June 2004 due to 
reasons like failure to provide land to the Concessionaire in time, change in mode of 
execution from Speci al Purpose Vehicle to BOT -Toll, subsequent delay in award of 
work to the Concessionaire and the delay of 26 months in finalization of change of 
scope orders valuing Rs.146.62 crore.   
 
Regarding delay caused due to change of scope of works, the Committee f eel 
that all those issues which came up subsequently on the insistence of Delhi & Haryana 
Government necessitating the issuance of change of scope of work orders should have 
been and could very well have been foreseen during the planning and preparation of  
Detailed Project Report.   
 
The Committee are conscious of the fact that throughout the country, the land 
acquisition is one of the major bottlenecks owing to factors like lack of land records, 
resistance from farmers and non -cooperation from State Govern ments, etc. which 
come in the way of timely completion of all types of projects and feel that this issue 
needs to be addressed properly and some effective mechanism has to be evolved 
involving the representatives of State Governments and other concerned functionaries.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The strategy adopted by NHAI for expeditious completion of the process of land 
acquisition. 
 
Several measures have been introduced to facilitate timely completion of pre -
construction activities (which include land acquisition and utility shifting), as follows: - 
 
(i) Utilization of State Govt. machinery for land acquisition  : Under the current 
system of land acquisition State Govt. Revenue Department officers are appointed as 
Competent Authority for Land Acquisition  (CALAs). Appointment of State Govt. 
Revenue Department officers  as CALAs is advantageous to NHAI due to their 
familiarity with local conditions/land -rates/land-use patterns, and also because 
they/their Depts. are custodians of local Revenue Records on ba sis of which 
Notifications under NH Act are issued for acquisition of land. 
 
(ii) Strengthening CALAs infrastructure for speeding up land acquisition  : 
Primarily, it is the responsibility of concerned State Government to provide adequate 
staff and infrastr ucture to CALA. However, as a measure for providing assistance to 
CALAs for speeding up land acquisition, NHAI always provide additional support to 
CALAs in the shape of additional staff/infrastructure (i.e. 
vehicles/computers/fax/photocopy machine etc). P rovision for sanction of additional 

31 
 
resources to CALAs are contained in Policy Circular dated 03 Oct. 06 . A copy of 
circular is at Annexure-III. NHAI HQ is more than liberal in sanctioning resources to 
CALAs; In fact, initial installment of resources sanc tioned by NHAI are mostly more 
than sufficient for timely acquisition of land. 
 
(iii) Strengthening PIUs infrastructure for land acquisition: In order to 
strengthen PIU level mechanisms for expediting timely land acquisition (which primarily 
comprises purs uit of land acquisition processes with CALA), aforementioned Circular 
also provides for engagement of 01 retired State Govt. Revenue officer and 01 
Surveyor/Amin by each PIU for each District. In cases where PIUs need additional 
manpower due to large volum e of work or time constraints, additional manpower over 
and above that provided for in Circular bid is frequently sanctioned. Recently, 
remuneration for personnel engaged by PIUs for land acquisition was increased by the 
Executive Committee (37 th Meeting on 23 Dec. 08) to a consolidated Rs.20,000 and 
Rs.15,000 for Revenue Officers and Surveyors/Amins respectively. Further, provision 
was also made for engagement of (ie non -Govt. retired) private Surveyors/Amins @ 
consolidated monthly remuneration of Rs.10,000.  
 
(iv) Interaction with the State Govts: As brought out above, NHAI is entirely 
dependent on State Govts for obtaining possession over encumbrance free land. 
Accordingly, instead of being assigned responsibilities over individual stretches of 
Highway (eg arms of GQ, halves of NS or EW Corridors,  or BOT projects), CGMs have 
been assigned responsibilities for implementation of projects in individual States. The 
level at which NHAI coordinates-interacts with State Govts for problem-solving is at the 
level of NHAI‟s State CGM -State Govt‟s Nodal Offic er for NHDP. Recently, in order to 
further streamline interaction with State Govts for smooth implementation NHDP, 
CGMs in charge of individual States have been posted to the respective State Capitals. 
 
(v) Constitution of High Powered Committee: 
Ministry had requested State Govt. to constitute State Level Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary to monitor the progress of land acquisition in the 
States. 
 
 (vi)  Decentralized System: NHAI has set up 10 regional offices headed by CGM 
level officer. The purpose is to have close monitoring and coordination with the State 
authorities on regular basis. 
 
(vii).  Ministry/NHAI had taken up the matter of speedy land acquisition with the State 
Governments. Letters have been written from Hon‟ble Minister, M oRTH, Secy, MoRTH 
and Chairman NHAI to the Chief Ministers/Chief Secretaries. 
 
(viii) Appointment of State Level Coordinator for land acquisition/pre -
construction: NHAI HQ has nominated a Project Director located in the State to 
function as State Level Coo rdinator for Land Acquisition/Pre -construction, whose 
functions are as follows:- 
 

32 
 
 Collection of information from all PIUs in the State, on pending land 
acquisition matters for various projects, and forwarding the same to HQ as 
per specified formats.  
 Coordination with State Government officers on regular basis for all matters 
pertaining to land acquisition.  
 Ensuring timely coordination meetings at the State level to resolve pending 
issues.  
 
(ix)  Constitution of Special Land Acquisition Units (SLAUs: In order to tide over 
the problem of land acquisition getting delayed due to frequent transfers of CALA, and 
because CALAs assign low priority to land acquisition for NHAI (which is their 
secondary task), Chairman has recently requested Chief Secretaries of a ll State Govts 
wherein NHDP projects are being implemented, to constitute dedicated Special Land 
Acquisition Units (SLAUs), for acquisition of land for NHAI . The activities of the Special 
Land Acquisition Units will include the following; 
 
(i) Preparation of notification under section 3A. 
(ii) Preparation of notification under section 3D(1) 
(iii) Preparation of award 
(iv) Disbursement of compensation to land owners 
(v) Dispute maters relating to Arbitration cases be referred to Arbitrator, 
mutation of land acquired under the Act. 
 
State Govts have also been requested to consider posting a senior Revenue 
Officer (ADM level) on deputation to NHAI to coordinate with Special Land Acquisition 
Units in the State.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee was aware of the fact that the land acquisition was a major 
bottleneck causing delays in project execution and felt that this needs to be addressed 
properly and some effective mechanism has to be evolved involving the 
representatives of State Government and other  concerned functionaries. 
 
 The Government in reply detailed out several measures introduced to facilitate 
timely completion of pre -construction activities. These include land acquisition also. 
The compliance of these as well as the effec tiveness will be verified during next audit 
of these units. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 

33 
 
Despite the measures stated to be in troduced, in following two cases delay in 
project implementation on account of land acquisitions were recently noticed:- 
 
1. Upgradation of Mehrauli -Gurgaon Road  (Andheria mode to Delhi/Haryanas 
Border) 
 
2. Rehabilitation and Upgradation to 4/6 laning from km 547.400 to 596.750 of NH-7 
 
 Further, similar cases of delay would be examined in future audits.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Pre-Mature Issuance of Completion Certificate 
 
 The Committee note that Independent Consultant, appointed by the NHAI for 
supervision of work executed by the Concessionaire, were responsible for issue of the 
completion and provisional completion certificates to the Concessionaire who can 
commence commercial operations only thereafter.  As per the prescribe procedure, 
after issue of the provisional completion certificate, a p unch-list of items is prepared by 
the Independent Consultant which generally includes certain minor items of works to 
be completed and the final completion certificate can be issued only after execution of 
the Punch-List items.  In the case of Delhi Gurgao n Project, the Committee note that 
the provisional completion certificate was issued on 23 rd January, 2008, the date of 
start of commercial operations (Toll collection) was 25 th January, 2008 and the final 
completion certificate was issued on 22 nd August, 2009.  The audit has pointed out that 
a number of rectifiable Non Conformity Reports (NCRs) included as Punch-List items in 
the provisional completion certificate which were required to be completed by the 
Concessionaire within 120 days, remained in penden cy which is indicative of a 
deficient performance by the Concessionaire. 
 
 The Committee note from the information furnished to them that the 
Independent Consultant for the Project M/s RITES – SHELADIA (JV) attached a list of 
Punch-List items with the provisional certificate issued by them with the stipulation that 
the said Punch-List items shall be completed by the Concessionaire within 120 days of 
the date of issue of the provisional certificate of completion i.e. by 24 th May, 2008.  
According to the NHAI the Concessionaire had disputed certain items on the pretext of 
non covera ge under the original scope of work and the issue was referred to a 
Committee of CGM which had recommend delinking such items from Punch -List for 
further examination by Independent Consultant and the same are presently being 

34 
 
examined by him.  Besides this,  the issue of imposing penalty due to delay in 
completion of Punch List items is being examined by NHAI.  Regarding issuance of 
Completion of Certificate pending the Punch -List items, the NHAI has simply washed 
off its hands of all its responsibilities by submitting that it was the Independent 
Consultant who was to decide as to whether the Concessionaire has duly complied 
with all the provisions or not pertaining to issuance the of final Completion Certificate.   
 
The Committee are not happy at all with the  way the whole matter relating to 
issue of completion certificate has been handled.  In fact, the Committee gather an 
impression that undue haste has been shown in giving the completion certificate to the 
Concessionaire.  This is evident from the fact that  after issuance of provisional 
certificate in January, 2008 with the stipulated time period of 120 days for completion of 
pending Punch -List items i.e. by May, 2008 the same have not yet been fully 
completed as on October, 2009.  Apparently, after start of  Toll collection, the whole 
pressure lifted off the Concessionaire.  He has managed to get away with his obligation 
by giving an undertaking that he would be fully responsible for any bad quality of work 
mentioned in the NCRs and to repair / reconstruct th e same at its risks and cost during 
the entire concession period.  The Committee do not find such kind of undertaking by 
the Concessionaire as an appropriate substitute for the prescribed norms of the work 
as per the concession agreement. The justification  that Completion Certificate was 
issued not by the NHAI but by the Independent Consultant clearly indicates that the 
Authority has shirked off its responsibilities by leaving everything of this project of 
national importance into the hands of Independent C onsultant.  Even the issue of levy 
of penalty @ Rs. 2 lac per week for delayed completion of work has also been left for 
the Independent Consultant to examine and decide. 
 
The Committee express their strong reservations over the manner in which the 
Completion Certificate was issued by the Independent Consultant without completing / 
exhausting the items of works contained in the Punch -List.  On the other hand, the 
Independent Consultant has issued the Completion Certificate after merely taking an 
undertaking from the Concessionaire for completion of the same.  Taking a strong 
exception, the Committee are of the firm view that the whole issue of Completion 
Certificate may be revisited by NHAI and those found guilty should be punished and 
penalty provisions be invoked on the Concessionaire for not completing the Punch -List 
items in time.  The Committee further feel that NHAI needs to categorically explain this 
blatant lapse which came to passé. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There is no haste shown in giving the Provisional Completion Certificate. 
Provisional Completion certificate duly appended with Punch List (outstanding works) 
was issued by Independent Consultant (M/s RITES -Sheladia JV) on 23.1.2008. Toll 
collection is permitted after issue of Provisional Completion Certificate by the IC as per 
provisions of the concession Agreement. Since the Concessionaire did not complete 
the outstanding work within 120 days therefore penalty amounting to Rs. 60.42 lakhs 
as calculated by  the Independent Consultant has been recovered from the 

35 
 
Concessionaire for delay in completion of punch list items. The new Independent 
Consultant (IC) (M/s STUP Consultant ) having satisfied himself that all outstanding 
works covered under punch list (exc luding de -linked items) have been completed by 
the Concessionaire, issued final Completion certificate (COD) on 22nd August, 2009. As 
regards de -linked items the same is being examined by the Independent Consultant 
(IC) and appropriate decision will be tak en in accordance with provisions of the 
Concession Agreement.  
   
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Authority replied that, since the Concessionaire did not complete the 
outstanding work within 120 days, penalty amounti ng to Rs. 60.42 lakh as calculated 
by the independent consultant has been recovered from the Concessionaire for delay 
in completion of Punch -List items, However, calculation details for penalty of Rs.60.42 
lakh will be scrutinized by audit in due course, t o comment on the adequacy of penalty 
imposed on Concessionaire.  
 
 The issue of delinked items has not yet been settled till date, outcome of which 
may be expedited by the Authority.   Regarding punch list, what action has been taken 
on this issue of fixing responsibility. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
The action to settle the delinked items is being expedited. As regards fixing 
responsibility on the issue of punch list, since the punch list has been issued by IC in 
accordance with the provision of the Concession Agreement, NHAI is not 
contemplating to fix responsibility in this matter. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of delinked items has not been  settled till date, outcome of which 
may be expedited by the Authority. Regarding Punch -List no action has been taken on 
this issue of fixing responsibility as recommended by the committee.  The detailed of 
penalty of Rs.60.42 lakh has been verified.  
  
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take note of C&AG observations/directions for 
suitable follow-up. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 18 of Chapter I 

36 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Non Compliance of Escrow Account Norms 
 
The Committee note that according to the audit report, the Authority should have 
an effective monitoring mechanism for ensuring that the funds released for a particular 
project have actually been utilized for that project. This is achieved through operatio n 
of Escrow Account (EA) by the Concessionaire who is to forward monthly EA report 
within five days of the end of each month to the Authority. The Committee are, 
however, constrained to note that in the case of Delhi -Gurgaon project, the copies of 
the EAs were neither forwarded by the Concessionaire nor the Authority demanded the 
same. The Authority while admitting the lapse on their part has submitted that it had 
directed the Concessionaire of Delhi -Gurgaon project to maintain EA in line with the 
concession agreement. 
 
Taking a serious note of the lapse on the part of NHAI in respect of the core 
issue of monitoring of the project funding and its utilization through the EA statements 
which is an important instrument of monitoring timely flow of funds from di fferent 
sources and their utilisation for the project activities, the Committee recommend that 
the Authority must ensure that agreement clauses relating to opening and periodical 
submission of escrow account are complied with in all future projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The agreement clauses relating to opening and periodical submission of escrow 
account has been included in Model Concession Agreement for ensuring compliances 
in all future projects . The Planning Commission in April, 2009 published Model 
Concession Agreement (MCA) in which under Article 31 the detailed instructions were 
provided for the Concessionaire to comply with. A copy of the Article 31 of MCA is at 
Annexure-IV. However, separately Independent Consultant appointed by NHAI is also 
responsible for implementing the Concession Agreement in true spirit. NHAI assures 
the Committee that agreement clauses shall be strictly followed in all future projects. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The management assured to follow agreement clauses of monitoring the project 
funding and utilization of Escrow Accounts strictly in future. This will be examined in 
next audit of PPP of NHAI as and when taken up.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 

37 
 
During the audit of Karur -Dindigul section (Tamil Nadu) PIU Karur, it was 
noticed that the Concessionaire diverted the funds from Escrow Account amount to 
Rs.45 crore to mutual fund in March and October 2008. The NHAI ignored this fact and 
continued to release the grant. The NHAI has released total grant of Rs. 77.93 crore up 
to March 2011. As s uch the NHAI has not followed the agreement clauses of 
monitoring the project funding and utilization of Escrow Accounts.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C&AG observatio ns/ 
directions for suitable further action. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Absence of Guidelines for Determining the Mode of Execution 
 
The Committee note that there were no internal guidelines or directions from 
Government for determining the mode of execution of project when NHDP Phase-I was 
started in the year 2000.  Such guidelines were issued only in March 2006.  In this 
regard, the C ommittee note that initially, the mode of execution of Delhi -Gurgaon 
project was through Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) mode but was subsequently 
changed to BOT-Toll mode despite the fact that the Financial Consultant did not initially 
find the BOT-Toll mode as viable.  
 
 The Government‟s position is that the change of mode was done to increase the 
private sector participation in the road projects so as to leverage the scarce budgetary 
resources.  In SPV mode the Government has to bear the cost of the projec t and by 
shifting to BOT mode the Government has saved its investments besides receiving an 
amount of Rs. 61 crore from the Concessionaire as negative grant.  In BOT -mode the 
procedural delays as well as the risks of cost over -run are also avoided as the e ntire 
obligation lies with the Concessionaire. Therefore in BOT -mode the financial 
implication on Government is bare-minimum as compared to EPC and SPV model.   
 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that fixing of one mode then 
switching over to the other mode, absence of any comparative study of BOT -Toll vis-à-
vis BOT-Annuity, not doing any fresh traffic assessment inspite of a recommendation to 
this effect by the financial consultant, absence of any internal guidelines for 
determining the mode of exe cution, apparent delays caused on account of deficient 
DPR etc. gives an indication that there has been a deliberate certain kind of 
indecisiveness which has clouded the entire process.   
 
 The Committee note that in the BOT -Toll mode, the Concessionaire builds the 
road, maintains it for a fixed period and also collects the toll during that period. In the 
BOT-Annuity mode, the only difference is that the Government collects the toll and the 
Concessionaire is paid fixed sums every six months to make him reco ver his 
investments.  The Committee while observing that no comparative study of BOT -Toll 
vis-à-vis BOT Annuity mode was carried out by the NHAI, find it inconceivable as to 
how a high traffic density stretch like Delhi -Gurgaon could not have been opted fo r 
execution on BOT -Annuity mode was not opted despite the fact that on this mode the 
toll collection is of the order of Rs.208 crore just in 20 months of the opening of the 
project for toll.   
 

39 
 
The Committee find the argument put forth by the Government/NHAI that  BOT -
Toll mode is preferable to BOT-Annuity mode as in the latter the risk of toll collection is 
passed on to NHAI as unconvincing.  In this regard, the Committee find it pertinent to 
drive home the point that as a welfare state, Government has a social responsibility to 
provide good roads to its citizens.  Even taking into consideration the fact that the 
Government opted for private sector participation to leverage its budgetary resource s, 
it can not be justified that the Government is not prepared to take a minimal risk of a 
lower toll collection if BOT Annuity mode was opted for Delhi -Gurgaon project. The 
whole scenario gives an impression that the Government was more interested in 
fulfilling the commercial interest of the Concessionaire instead of serving the public 
interest.  The Committee on a fair analysis of the arguments put forth by the 
Government for switching over in favour of BOT -Toll mode are of the view that had the 
Government carried out a comparative study of the toll and annuity mode, the 
unjustified enrichment of the Concessionaire by way of large toll collection and change 
of scope of work could have been well avoided.  Further, in BOT -Toll mode, the NHAI 
has managed to e vade its accountability on various lacunae brought out in the C&AG 
Report as it has left everything related to the execution of the project entirely in the 
hands of the Independent Consultant and the Concessionaire.  The plea of the 
Government that perform ance of projects implemented by NHAI on SPV mode has 
been very poor clearly tantamounts to admission of the inefficiencies of the 
Government machinery. 
 
The Committee, therefore, find that there are serious lacunae in the present 
policy of the Government which provides that all the projects should first be considered 
for BOT -Toll failing which on BOT -Annuity failing which SPV or EPC mode. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Government need to review their guidelines 
so that the mode of execution sho uld be based on case -to-case basis instead of a 
common guideline for all projects and the Authority be invariably made accountable in 
respect of project related deficiencies irrespective of the mode of execution.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet Comm ittee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
12.12.2000 considered the note dated 29.11.2000 circulated by the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and approved 40 sub-projects of 4/6/8 laning in a length of 4659 
km at an investment of Rs. 30,3 00 crore under different modes of funding like 
BOT/SPV/Annuity/EPC/ External funding. While assessing the projects, PIB had 
observed that NHAI should make attempts to improve leveraging of government 
support by identifying more sub projects with high traff ic density, which are amenable 
to BOT/SPV/Annuity mode of private funding. 
 
Thus, undertaking high traffic density corridors on private funding was inherent 
in the decision of the Government.  As regards various alternatives in the private 
funding option s uch as BOT (Toll), BOT (Annuity) and SPV, no guidelines were 
provided and the matter of investment decision in individual projects was left to the 

40 
 
decision of the NHAI Board.  The Board decided this project is to be taken up on BOT 
(Toll).   
 
The Government reiterated this policy in May, 2006 when it was decided inter -
alia that BOT (Annuity) mode should be followed only where the response to the toll 
based BOT was inadequate and that too after approval of CCEA. 
 
This policy shall continue after review by B.  K. Chaturvedi Committee, wherein 
BOT (Toll) has been recognized as the most preferred delivery mode followed by BOT 
(Annuity) and EPC, though with a simplified procedure for change in mode – instead of 
CCEA approval, the change in mode can now be approved  by an Inter -Ministerial 
Group (IMG) and by an Empowered Group of Ministers (E -GOM) where there is no 
consensus in IMG. 
 
Thus, the Committee may appreciate that choice of deliver mode – BOT (Toll) or 
BOT (Annuity) now in accordance with policies of the Gov ernment, which was driven 
mainly by the need to leverage private funding and pass on the traffic risk to the 
Concessionaire at the same time giving him flexibility in design, construction and 
operation subject to provisions of concession agreement.  The objective was never to 
dilute the accountability of NHAI or facilitate enrichment of the Concessionaire.  The 
contract management framework consistent with BOT policy does not permit NHAI to 
have day-to-day monitoring of the contract, which has to be done by an Independent 
Engineer. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee found serious l acunae in the present policy of the Government 
on the mode of execution of NH projects. The action taken on the recommendation of 
the Committee that (a) the Government need to review their guidelines on the mode of 
execution of projects on case -to-case bas is and accountability of the Authority in 
respect of project related deficiencies need to be fixed and action taken initiated. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
It is to submit that the Guidelines for determining the Mode of execution of 
Projects have been inter alia examined in detail by the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee on 
National Highways Development Project (NHDP) constituted by the Government. The 
recommendations of the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee on revised strategy for 
implementation of NHDP have been accepted by the Government and accordingly, the 
revised guidelines for implementation  of the National Project (NHDP) have already 
been circulated vide this Ministry O.M. No. RW/NH/37012/26/2009 -PPP dated 
05.11.2009. Salient features of the revised guidelines in respect of Modes of Execution 
of the projects are given at Annexure-A. 
 
 
 

41 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The implementation of the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee recommendation on 
NHAI Projects vis-à-vis. revised guidelines in respect of mode of execution of projects 
would be examined in Audit. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated19/8/2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Improper Fixation of Concession Period 
 
The Committee noted that according to Audit, the NHAI had not systematically 
developed financial models to indicate the benchmark Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
which would determine the optimum concession period within which the 
Concessionaire would recover the capital cost of the project and other project related 
expenditure besides earning a reasonable return. Based on traffic projections in the 
DPR of Delhi-Gurgaon project and discounted post tax cash inflows and outflows, Audit 
found that the IRR of this project worked out as 24 per cent.  Assuming reasonable IRR 
of 20 per cent, the concession period that should have been allowed to this project 
worked out to be 14 years whereas a concession period of 20 years has been allowed. 
A logical fall out of this  scenario would be that the Concessionaire of this project would 
gain Rs.187.77 crore (after discounting at a rate of 20 per cent) during the extended 
concession period. 
 
The NHAI has taken the stand that the Financial Consultants M/s SBI Capital 
Market Ltd recommended implementing the project on BOT basis considering 20 years 
concession period. It has further been stated that care was taken to include revenue 
sharing clause in the agreement which stipulates that the Concessionaire has to share 
equally with NHAI the revenue beyond level of 1,30,000 PCUs per day. 
 
The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Authority. Firstly, the 
NHAI did not conduct any fresh traffic study as advised by the financial consultant 
before inviting bids for the project .  Secondly, though this project was expected to be a 
very high traffic density corridor, but strangely the toll rates were fixed on the basis of 
worst-case scenario situation in the bidding document on the pretext of generating 
sufficient bidding interest in the project.  The Committee feel that by inviting bids based 
on worst case scenario situation, the NHAI had lost the opportunity of getting a higher 
negative grant from the bidders.  
 

42 
 
The Committee further note that the total project cost as per the co ncession 
agreement is Rs.555 crores and the Concessionaire has already collected a toll 
revenue of Rs. 208 crores in 20 months since commencement of the toll collection from 
January, 2008.  Taking note that NHAI did not undertake any study to assess the 
actual revenue likely to be generated during the entire concession period i.e. upto the 
year 2023 and the expected traffic growth in the coming years, the Committee are 
convinced that no home work was done by the Authority to assess the correctness of 
the 20  years concession period worked out by the Financial Consultant, which 
indicates nothing but deliberate oversight on the part of NHAI.  On the issue of revenue 
sharing agreement which requires the Concessionaire to share equally with NHAI the 
toll collection beyond a threshold limit, the Committee are constrained to note that such 
agreement gives no respite to the commuters but only promotes the commercial 
interest of the NHAI and Concessionaire.  Now, after the signing of the concession 
agreement, the Authority has no means to reduce the concession period.  In this way, 
the authority has lost the opportunity of either collecting toll revenue by itself for the 
remaining years or allowing the road  users to use the project road by paying lesser or 
no toll during that excess period.  The Committee, therefore, squarely put the blame on 
the NHAI for its failure to protect the interest of the hapless commuters.   
 
There is no gainsaying the fact that ve ry idea behind conceptualizing Delhi -
Gurgaon expressway was to ensure speedy and effective means of commuting 
between Delhi-Gurgaon-Delhi.  In this context, Committee find it pertinent to observe 
that the avoidable confusion and chaos at Toll Plazas and un due traffic holdups there, 
tend to negate the very purpose for which the expressway was constructed.  Under 
these circumstances one can‟t help but rueing that commuters did not get adequate 
facilities in terms of speedy and hassle free commuting commensura te with the 
humongous expenditure incurred on the expressway. 
 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should find some 
ways and means for provision of some relief to the hapless commuters either by 
sharing the toll or making it toll free once  the Concessionaire has recovered his 
investment.  The Committee also deprecate the methodology followed by the NHAI and 
strongly recommend that suitable guidelines/criteria be evolved for computing the 
concession period based on sound financial evaluations.  
 
The Committee further recommend that NHAI should have a mechanism to 
monitor the toll plazas with a view to obviate putting the users to unnecessary 
harassment by way of illegal and unscrupulous methods of toll collection.  The 
Committee understand th at the Monthly Tags issued by the Concessionaire are 
required to be renewed in a manner which is advantageous to the tag users.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that these tags should be converted into 
smart cards forthwith on the pattern of t he cards issued by the DMRC which can be 
renewed after exhausting of the charged amount. 
 
 
 

43 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Financial Consultant, M/s. SBI Caps had suggested to carry out fresh study 
of traffic volume.  The traffic volume given to the SBI Caps  pertains to the year 2000 
which was only one year old.  Taking note of the existing traffic volume and time 
elapsed it was not considered necessary to carry out fresh traffic counts. It may be 
mentioned that for project of this magnitude, one year old tra ffic data is considered 
quite recent and reasonable for traffic projections. The worst case scenario was 
considered considering diversion of traffic through existing old -Gurgaon road and 
through other improvement taking place in surrounding areas. 
 
While it is conceded that fresh traffic survey and more due diligence of toll rates 
would have been a better course, nevertheless, in the competitive bidding process in 
which every bidder does his own assessment of cost and revenue, the deficiencies in 
DPR resulting from over / under estimation of traffic and toll rate get neutralized. 
 
As regards curtailment of concession period it is to clarify that there is no 
provision in the Concession Agreement of Delhi-Gurgaon project to cut short the period 
after assessing that the Concessionaire has recovered his investment. It is further to 
mention that new MCA has a provision of curtailment of Concession period (Copy at 
Annexure-II).   
 
As regards the total project cost of Rs.555 crores and its comparison of toll 
revenue of Rs.208 crores, it is submitted that Concessionaire after completion of 
projects had to incur the expenditure on interest and expenditure on maintenance out 
of the toll revenue.  Thus interest, expenditure on maintenance, establishment 
expenses are also to be met out of the toll revenue.  As regards, the concession period 
of 20 years the project was awarded on BOT through competitive bidding with a pre -
fixed concession period of 20 years which was based on the recommendation of 
financial consultant M/s SBI capital Market Ltd. The 20 years concession period was 
fixed taking in to account traffic growth, return on investment, expenditure for operation 
& maintenance during the period, interest on borrowed capital, risk of traffic diversion 
etc. To benefit f rom the revenue generation out of traffic growth and to protect the 
interest of NHAI, the concept of revenue sharing beyond the threshold limit of 1, 30,000 
PCU per day was also provided in the contract. 
 
As regards, protecting the interest of the commuter s it is to clarify that as per 
Policy of the Government duly approved by the CCEA, the toll is to be collected on 
perpetuity basis therefore even after the end of concession period of the 
Concessionaire the commuters will have to pay user fee to the Govern ment until the 
Government changes its policy. 
 
As regards chaos at Toll plaza, it is to mention that this is operational issue and 
is being continuously monitored by Independent Consultant appointed to oversee 
Operation and Maintenance during the concessio n period and Project implementation 
Unit of NHAI also monitor the implementation and they instruct the Concessionaire to 

44 
 
take corrective action. The main reason for congestion and confusion is because of the 
rude behavior of the drivers ignoring direction signs and even manual instructions by 
the Marshall for no entry to cash users in Tag lanes.  
 
As regards suitable guidelines/criteria for computing the concession period it is 
to mention that at present this is decided after carrying out sound financial ev aluation 
by Financial Consultants, appraised by Planning Commission, Ministry of RTH and 
PPPAC constituted by the Government. However keeping in view the volatile market 
situation the bidder‟s perspective and analysis differs from that adopted by the 
Financial Consultant appointed by NHAI. Therefore in certain cases it has been found 
the projects approved by the PPPAC for less grant / more grant is quoted in actual 
bidding. 
 
On certain other projects the scenario is reverse. It is to mention that TPC as 
given by NHAI is a fixed value for the purpose of BOT Concession Agreement and 
„Grant‟ is based on this value. But actual TPC can never be the same for any two 
bidders. Depending on the sourcing/input costs/capitalized costs/EPC contractors 
margin/interest co st/managerial fee and risk premium the assessment of TPC by 
different bidders is bound to differ. Given this background there can be no single or 
correct value for TPC, and accordingly, quotation of grants would be different.  In the 
competitive bidding process the price discovery is determined by market forces.   
 
As regards illegal method of collection, it is may be mentioned that 
Concessionaire is collecting user fee in accordance with the provision of the 
Concession Agreement either by cash or by electr onic collection and by no other 
method. As regards renewal of monthly Tag , the Concessionaire has already been 
requested to review the discount policy in such a way so as to facilitate the commuters 
using Tag / Smart cards. The entire operation of project  highway including 
management of Toll Plaza is being monitored by the Independent Consultant and they 
issue the instructions to the Concessionaire from time to time. As regards adoption of 
smart card on the line of DMRC, it is to clarify that smart cards a re also in use along 
with Tag and the commuters have a choice. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The audit issue highlighted in the para was that NHAI had not systematically 
developed its financial models to indicate the benchmark Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
which would determine the optimum concession period within which the 
Concessionaire would recover the capital cost of the project and other project related 
expenditure besides earning a reasonable return. The Committee was in agreement 
thereof and further observed lack of traffic study or any other home work done by the 
Authority to assess the re venue generation and resultantly the undue benefits was 
extended/derived by Concessionaires due to longer concession period i.e. 20 years as 
he had already recovered his investment. The Authority replied that the new MCA has 
a provision of curtailment of C oncession period. Further, in the case of suitable 
guidelines/ criteria for computing the concession period, the Authority stated that at 

45 
 
present this is decided after carrying out sound financial evaluation by Financial 
Consultants, appraised by Planning Commission, Ministry of RTH and PPPAC 
constituted by the Government. With respect to the protecting the interests of 
commuters, as per the policy of Government, they have to pay the toll even after the 
concession period is over.  
 
The reply re -iterates dependency on outsourcing whereas the Authority should 
also at the same time conduct adequate studies/surveys at its own. More ways and 
means need to be explored to protect the interest of commuters. 
 
Action taken to reduce the dependency on others will be ve rified during Audit in 
due course. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
In reply to dependency of the Authority on outsourcing, it is submitted that NHAI 
model is outsource based with lean and thin organization. In order to i mplement a 
massive development programme like NHDP with skeleton staff, NHAI is bound to 
depend on DPR/Feasibility Study Consultants, Financial Consultants and Supervision 
Consultants/Independent Consultants from feasibility to execution of the projects. T he 
contracts with these Consultants provide for standard of performance, responsibility for 
performance, professional liability, etc. In connection with payment of Toll after expiry 
of concession period, Government has further amended the Fee Rules in Dec. , 2010 & 
Jan., 2011. As per the revised Fee Rules, after the Concession Agreement is over, the 
fee shall be collected by the Central Government executing authority at a reduced rate 
of 40% of the fee on the date of transfer.”  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee recommended that the Government should find some ways and 
means for provision of some relief to the commuters either by sharing the toll or making 
it toll free once the Concessionaire has recovered his investment. The reply stated that 
the Government has issued revised fee notification on 12 Jan. 2011. As per the revised 
notification the fee as notified as per Concession Agreement shall be leviable till the 
end of the concession period and after the Concession Agreement is over, the fee shall 
be collected by the Central Government executing authority at a reduced rate of 40% 
of the fee on the date of transfer of such section of National Highways, bridge, tunnel 
or bypass, as the case may be to revised annually in accordance with the rules.  
 
In respect of public funded project, the fee leviable would be reduced to 40% of 
the user fee for such section after the recovery of capital cost.  
 
The recommendations of committee are not yet taken in its true sprit a s the rate 
of fee is not reduced even after the capital cost is recovered by the Concessionaire in 
the ongoing/future BOT projects. 
 

46 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Concession Agreement are long term contracts and it is not open to NHAI to 
reopen these contracts during the concession period and adjust fee rates during the 
course of the contract.” 
 
[Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways] 
(O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Inadequate Road Facilities 
 
 The Committee note that though the Delhi -Gurgaon expressway had started 
functioning since January, 2008, it is still lacking many basic facilities like parking 
space, telephone booths, toilets, exit points, refreshment rooms, f uel stations, etc. 
which are expected to be there as apart of road side civic amenities.  Further, the 
discipline enforcing agencies deployed on the expressway are inadequate.  As a result, 
two wheelers, three wheelers which are not supposed to be on the e xpressway are 
entering it resulting in many fatal accidents and other kind of inconveniences.  Though 
claimed by the Concessionaire that marshals have been deployed, the same are barely 
visible.  The service roads are waterlogged and congested due to unauthorized parking 
of vehicles and encroachments.  There is no proper maintenance of service roads.  In 
fact, one portion of the service road from Palam to Rajokari, a stretch of about 6 kms is 
yet to be built for want of land acquisition.  This is causing a lot of inconvenience to the 
road users.  Though the NHAI has claimed that Concessionaire had provided patrolling 
vehicles and ambulances on the highway, the same are conspicuous by their absence.  
The fact that should not lost sight of is that patrolling v ehicles and ambulances are 
essential for safety of commuters and absence or inadequacy of same are indicative of 
callousness. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that all these issues must be taken up 
by NHAI with the Concessionaire for being attended t o urgently.  The Committee 
further recommend that the Ministry may take up the issue of land acquisition with the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as AAI so that the remaining service road on this 
section can be built without any further loss of time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards to way side amenities, it is to mention that the stretch is passing 
through very dense populated areas of Delhi and Gurgaon and acquisition of costly 
commercial land for way side amenities is not possible. However projec t was 
conceived within the available Right of Way without much land acquisition due 
to high commercial value and difficulty in getting the land within time. Further fuel 
stations are already located along the route in plenty. Exit points are also located o n 
stretch at selected locations for approaching nearby area through service road. The 

47 
 
matter of incomplete service road has already been taken up with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and the matter of handing over of land of AAI is under advanced stage and 
Estimate for construction of service road is under preparation. After taking over the 
land the work will be got executed in short period of time. The matter of entry of two 
/three wheelers have been taken up with respective state Government for enforcing 
this requirements but in vain. As part of ERP (Emergency Response Protocol) the 
Concessionaire has provided following and sequence of action taken is below. 
 
ACTION TAKEN IN CASE OF ACCIDENT OR ANY INCIDENT ON THE 
EXPRESSWAY 
 
• Accident information is received by  control room through Patrolling Team / 
Police / Public / Emergency Services / NHAI / Company Employee / Other 
Authority.  
 
• Control Room directs the nearest patrolling team on wireless to rush to the 
accident site.  In case information received about injur ed person in accident, 
Ambulances is directly sent to the site of accident.  
• Patrolling team reaches accident site, access the severity of accident and 
reports back to Control Room informing about the accident and necessary help 
such as Ambulance / Recovery / Fire Brigade / Police etc. 
 
• Accident site is immediately cordoned off by traffic cones & Traffic is regulated.  
 
• Control Room directs the Ambulance / Recovery if required to accident site and 
also informs the police about the accident. 
 
• Ambulance & Rec overy reaches the site. Injured person is taken to the nearest 
hospital and recovery removes the accidental vehicle from the site after police 
clearance.  
 
• In the event of fatal accident, the police authority takes over the dead body and 
the accident vehicle is removed after IOs (Investigating Officer) permission.  
 
• Site is cleared and reported to Control Room.  
 
AMBULANCE LOCATION 
Code Location Area of Responsibility 
Ambulance-1 24 Toll Plaza just after u turn 
on LHS / RHS RTR(Km 14.300) to Km 42 Plaza 
Ambulance-2 FOB 26+900 LHS Km 24 Plaza to Rajeev Chowk 
(km 33.200) 
Ambulance-3 32+500 RHS Rajeev Chowk (km 33.2000  to 
Nursing Pur (km 39)  

48 
 
Ambulance-4 Km 42 toll Plaza Km 42 to Nursing Pur (km 39) 
PCR / CAT Ambulance Delhi Area 
Rajokri ( km 22) to RTR (km 
14.300)  (If reaches before our 
ambulance) 
HOSPITAL 
HOSPITAL NAME DISTANCE FROM EXPRESSWAY 
SAFDARJUNG  HOSPITAL, RING 
ROAD, NEW DELHI 
Appx. 10 km from km 14+300 (RTR F/Over) 
R & R, SUBROTO PARK NEW DELHI Appx. 02 km. from km 14+300 (RTR F/Over) 
CIVIL  HOSPITAL, CIVIL 
LINES,GURGAON 
Appx.  03.5 km. from km 33+200 (Rajeev 
chowk) 
PARAS HOSPITAL, 4 GURGAON Appx.  04 km from km 29+640 (southcity 
F/Over) 
PUSPANJALI  HOSPITAL, CIVIL 
LINES,GURGAON 
Appx.  0.5 km. from km 33+200 (Rajeev 
chowk) 
SRS HOSPITAL, KHERKI DAULA, 
GURGAON 
Appx. 0.5 km from 42 Toll 
KALYANI  HOSPITAL, MEHROLI 
ROAD,GURGAON 
Appx. 02.5 km from km 28+160 (IFFCO 
chowk) 
AYUSHMAN HOSPITAL ,HERO HONDA 
CHOWK GURGAON 
Appx 100 mtr from km 36 +100(Hero honda 
chowk) 
SUNRISE HOSPITAL, ANAJ MANDI, 
GURGAON 
Appx 1 km from km 36 +100(Hero honda 
chowk) 
 
AMBULANCE FACILITY 
 
MANPOWER: 
Paramedic with Nursing Diploma and Ambulance Driver 
 
Equipments: Motorola Set (Wireless ) / Cell Phone, Stretcher folding , Linen/ Blanket, 
Oxygen Cylinder  with Mask , Ambu Bag , Section Apparatus, Tourniquet, First Aid Box 
, BP Apparatus , Stethoscope, Splints , Dressing Material Analgic, IV fluid & IV Set 
 
Prevention Safety Measures  
 
1. With a view to ensuring that accidents do not take place on the expressway, the 
Concessionaire has been taking the following preventive measures: 

49 
 
 
(i). Marshals (3 shifts) have been deployed on the Expressway to guide advise 
the commuters to follow the correct lanes and to prevent the pedestrians and 
the drivers of the slow moving vehicles from entering the Expressway.  
(ii). A commuter education/ awareness program was launched by the 
Concessionaire with special emphasis on safety and lane driving. 
(iii). Poll kiosks have been installed at key locations on the Expressway 
displaying what is permitted on the Expressway and what is not. It has also 
been displayed that violations would attract penalty: 
(iv). Patrolling vehicles and motor cycles have been deployed. They are always 
on the move along the Expressway all the time to supervise operations and 
come to the aid of any commuter in need and to advise erring commuters 
and passengers to adhere to the user norms; 
(v). Three recovery cranes of difference sizes have been deployed to remove the 
vehicles, which encounter a fault or accident, form the Expressway so that 
smooth flow of traffic is not hampered. Apart from this, ambulances also have 
been deployed at various locat ions on the Expressway to deal with any kind 
of emergency.  
(vi). SOS telephone booths have been provided on the Expressway for 
immediate contact in case of need. 
(vii). Speed limit instructions and advice regarding lane driving have been 
prominently displayed throughout the stretch of the Expressway. 
(viii). Trees and shrubs have been planted on the median to reduce glare of 
opposite traffic and improve environment; 
(ix). Expressway has been fully illuminated for better vision; 
(x). Crash barriers have been installed on the Expressway on both sides; 
(xi). 500 meters of steel rope barriers has been installed at one of the most 
prominent locations on the expressway catering to rural traffic; 
(xii). Solar Blinkers have been installed on key junctions;  
(xiii). VMS have been installed on gantries displayi ng safety messages day and 
night; 
(xiv). Three control rooms have been set up for traffic management with 
communications set up with wireless sets; 
(xv). Dedicated call centre and emergency numbers have been displayed all 
across the Expressway for any emergency; 
(xvi). 30 DG sets have been deployed on the Expressway to supply power back up 
in case of power failure; 
(xvii). Two cushion crash barriers have been installed; 
(xviii). Multiple solar studs have been installed on the flyovers and edges; 
(xix). Declinators installed on all the flyover railings; and 
(xx). Two speed enforcement cameras are being installed for checking violations 
and evasion of traffic rules on the Expressway. 
 
2. In spite of all these precautions and steps, at times accidents do take place. An 
analysis of the accidents that have taken  place reveals that the main factors 
responsible for the accidents have been as under: 

50 
 
(i). Over speeding 
(ii). Drunken driving 
(iii). Pedestrians attempting to cross the Expressway 
(iv). Slow moving vehicles forcibly and illegally using the Expressway. 
 
 
Emergency medical aid to  the accidents victims  
 
3. With a view to providing emergency medical aid and assistance to the accident 
victims, the Concessionaire have been taking the following specific measures; 
 
(i). Ambulances fitted with all the services have been deployed. 
(ii). Arrangements have been made with the private hospitals for providing 
emergency services to the accident victims; 
(iii). Private hospital ambulances are available round the clock which can be 
rushed to the accident spot any where on the Expressway within 10 to 20 
minutes of t he accidents on receiving the communication through 
communication system and the victims reach the nearest hospital within 20 
to 35 minutes. 
(iv). Adequate facilities of basic first aid have been made available for the 
Expressway. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
On the observation of the Committee about lack of basic facilities, the Authority 
replied that acquisition of costly commercial land for way side amenities is not possible. 
Though the exit points and fuel station alread y exist, matter of land acquisition for 
service road is under pursuance with AAI. As regard insufficiency of required action on 
the part of Concessionaire viz deployment of marshals, maintenance of service roads, 
absence of patrolling vehicles etc., the issue has not been replied properly.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
The matter of land related to Airport Authority of India (AAI) for construction of 
balance service road in Delhi Between Rajokri and Palam is being purs ued at the level 
of Secretary Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and the land is likely to be made 
available. As regards deployment of Marshalls, this is being regularly monitored by 
Independent Consultant as well as NHAI and any deficiency noted is being g ot 
rectified. The service road has got damaged near a Hero Honda Junction because of 
stagnation of sewerage, which is being discharged by local villagers into storm water 
drain. The natural drainage i.e. Khandsa Drain has been blocked by local villagers an d 
the civic bodies of Government of Haryana (GoH) has to make drain functional so that 
the stagnated water flows. Even the issues have been taken up at the highest level of 
Government of Haryana but the same has not been sorted out so far, Adequate 
numbers of patrolling vehicles are available on the stretch, however, this is being 

51 
 
regularly monitored by Independent consultant as well as NHAI and any deficiency 
noted is being got rectified.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
As regard insufficiency of required action on the part of Concessionaire viz. 
deployment of marshals, maintenance of service roads, absence of patrolling vehicles 
etc. the management has replied that these issues are being regularly monitored by 
Independent Consultant and NHAI; any deficiency noticed is being rectified.  
 
  As regarding the matter of land acquisition related to Airport Authority of 
India(AAI) for construction of balance service road in Delhi between Rajokri and Palam 
for service road, the management replied that the matter is being pursued at the level 
of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and the land is likely to be made 
available. These issues may be watched through further ATN/Audits. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Needs no further reply. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 

52 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Delay in Appointment of Independent Auditors 
 
 The Committee note that as per the concession agreement, the Authority had 
the right but not the obligation to appoint at its cost another firm of chartered 
accountants as Independent Auditors  to audit and verify all those matters, expense, 
costs, realizations and other assurances which the auditors of the Concessionaire were 
required to do.  The Committee are, however, constrained to note that this right was 
not timely exercised by the Authority.   
  
In this regard, the Committee note that the Independent Auditors appointed 
subsequently by NHAI on 5 th August, 2008 to audit the transactions of the 
Concessionaire from the years 2002 to 2008 in their report submitted in March, 2009 
had observed differences in the amounts to the tune of Rs. 2.16 crore in the fi nancial 
records and the software generated reports both in cash collection as well as OBU 
collection.  According to Independent Auditors, this has raised a question mark on the 
accuracy of the traffic report and whether the revenue sharing had been done pr operly 
or not.   
 
The Committee take a serious note of the failure on the part of the NHAI for not 
having exercised its right of appointing Independent Auditors in time though it was in its 
own interest.  Though it was not mandatory on the part of the NHAI, the Committee feel 
that the principles of good governance have not been followed in this case.  The 
Authority has not given any reasons for delayed appointment of Independent Auditors 
but had taken the stand that it was not mandatory on their part.   
 
 The Committee feel that the report of the Independent Auditors  revealing 
inaccuracy in the financial records of the Concessionaire suggest that appointment of 
Independent Auditors  should be made a mandatory provision in the internal working 
manual of the NH AI so as to avoid any scope of lopsidedness in the accuracy of the 
records maintained by the Concessionaire.  The Committee further desire that this 
matter may be properly inquired into and all necessary action may be taken against the 
Concessionaire in ca se some mischief is detected and penalty may be imposed 
accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There is no time frame given in the Concession Agreement for appointment of 
Additional Auditors . NHAI exercised its right after about 8 months from start of toll 

53 
 
collection, which is a reasonable period to audit the Concessionaire account of toll 
revenue and other transaction details. There was no deliberate intention to delay the 
appointment of Add itional Auditor. Moreover, Statutory Auditor is already in place to 
audit the accounts of the Concessionaire on continuous basis. The current policy in this 
regard is given in the Model Concession Agreement issued by the Planning 
Commission in April, 2009.  The relevant Clause (Clause 33.2.3) is extracted below: -  
 
33.2.3 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, the 
Authority shall have the right, but not the obligation , to appoint at its cost from 
time to time and at anytime, another firm (the “ Additional Auditors”) from the 
Panel of Chartered Accountants to audit and verify all those matters, expenses, 
costs, realisations and things which the Statutory Auditors are required to do, 
undertake or certify pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The Concessionaire is being reminded from time to time by the Independent 
Consultant and Project Director the events of delay in receipt of information on Escrow 
Account statement. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee noted that the Authority has not followed the principles of good 
governance by not appointing the Independent Auditors.  
 
The Management replied that there was no deliberate intention to delay the 
appointment of Additional Auditors  (Independent Auditors ). It is also stated that the 
current polity in this regard is given in the Model Concession Agreement issued by the 
Planning Commission in April 2009. The relevant Clause (33.2.3) is extracted below:- 
 
33.2.3 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, the 
Authority shall have the right, but not the obligation, to appoint at its cost from time to 
time and at anytime, another firm (the “ Additional Auditors ”) from the panel of 
Chartered Accountants to audit and verify all  those matters, expenses, costs, 
realizations and things which the Statutory Auditors are required to do, undertake or 
certify pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The reply is not satisfactory. The Authority should have exercised its right which 
would have helped to safeguard its own interests.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI is appointing the Additional Auditors  whenever any issue arises in 
BOT(Toll) Projects. NHAI may be permitted to continue with this policy viz to appo int 
the Additional Auditors as and when any issue arises. 
 
 
 

54 
 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
  Action/reply of management is not in line with the recommendation of the 
committee. Further the reply is also silent about the action taken against the 
Concessionaire for inaccuracy of records, as desired by the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take note of C&AG observations/directions. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 25 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Failure to Conduct any Road Safety Audit 
 
The Committee note from a report submitted by the Central Road Research 
Institute (CRRI) in the Year 2008 that no road safety audit was carried out in respect of 
Delhi-Gurgaon project either at the planning stage or at the Detailed Project Reports 
stage.  This has resulted in complete neglect of the interests of non motorized traffic 
and pedestrians.  This is evident as only four sub ways (Eight Km to Twelve Km apart) 
and only two foot over-bridges have been provided on the entire corridor which are 
quite inadequate by any standard besides being user unfriendly.  This has caused a 
number of avoidable fatal accidents and deaths on the express -way since February, 
2007. 
 
The Authority has failed to give any specific reason as to why the interests of the 
pedestrians were not taken into account during the planning stage.  Regarding the 
remedial measures which the Authority proposed to take, the Authority submitted that 
the CRRI Report on Road Safety has been sent to the Concessionaire for compliance 
with instructions to Independent Consultant for submitting compliance Report.  Further, 
the NHAI has now undertaken construction of five more Foot -Over Bridges at its own 
expense as the same were no t provided under agreement with the Concessionaires.   
From the compliance Report dated 22 nd September, 2009  submitted by the 
Independent Consultant in respect of  the CRRI Safety Audit Report,  the Committee 
note that on many aspects like provision for R oad warning signs where High Tension 
Power Lines are crossing the Express - Way, removal of trees on the medians,  
removal of rings over drainage covers, deployment of marshals to direct buses to stop 
at designated bus stops, absence of service roads due to  non acquisition of land, 
removal of encroachments on service roads, maintenance of  height of Metallic Beam 

55 
 
Crash Barriers (MBCBs), training and deployment of marshals at the entry points for 
restricting the entry of two wheelers, provisions for road mark ing at the entry and exits 
points etc. the action is yet to be taken by the Concessionaire.   
 
The Committee feel that all such important issues should have been taken into 
account when DPR was prepared for the Project.  Noting the land use pattern of heav y 
industrial areas and commercial establishments all along the Express -Way and heavy 
pedestrian traffic generated, a fact well known in advance, the Committee feel that no 
justification is justified enough that can explain this blatant act of ignorance on the part 
of the Authority.  As a result, no provision could be made in the Concessionaire 
agreement for Foot -Over Bridges and Sub -Ways.  Its two fold impact is that on one 
hand so many people have lost their lives, on the other, the Authority has now to spend 
from its own pocket for construction of the same.     
 
The Committee express their profound anguish over the scant regard that has 
been given to human life and strongly deprecate the act of NHAI in completely ignoring 
the safety of pedestrians in designing the expressway ignoring the local needs of the 
people living on both the sides of the highway.  As a result of this ignorance or rather 
indifference, subways, foot overbridges and pedestrian crossings were not 
conceptualized.  Considering the fact that the highway cuts a large city like Gurgaon in 
two parts, the Committee find it hard to fathom as to why RITES, the design consultant 
for the project could not forsee this basic need of the people.  The Committee hold 
NHAI as well as the Ministry accountable for this mess which could have been avoided.  
The Commi ttee strongly urge that the adequate number of foot overbridges and 
subway be constructed taking into considerations the local needs of the people living 
on both the sides of the highway no matter at what cost and within strict time limits to 
be mentioned by NHAI.  The Committee wish to emphasise categorically that no 
venture, whatever be its utility or commercial viability, should ever compromise with 
human safety.  Why are roads, for that matter expressways, are conceptualized and 
eventually constructed? Certainly for provision of better and safer commuting 
means/facilities to the denizens of a State. If such infrastructural facilities tend to 
become instruments of death, where would be the creditability of the State or the 
concerned authority?  It is simp ly appalling to say the least, that more than 100 lives 
were lost on this expressway in a relatively short period, primarily due to inadequate 
safety norms; and lamentably utter callousness on the part of the concerned 
authorities.  The Committee strongly feel that there has been a criminal negligence in 
this regard.  Under these circumstances, the very efficacy of the concerned 
Concessionaire in particular and NHAI in general become questionable.  We cannot 
bring back to life the helpless victims who peris hed in the accidents.  However, their 
deaths should not go in vain.  Painful it might be the Committee would like to take it as 
a wake up call. 
 
In view of the foregoing the Committee strongly recommends that accountability 
must be fixed on the concerned o fficials responsible for lapses which apparently have 
placed human lives at grave danger and strict punitive action be taken against the 
guilty. 

56 
 
 
The Committee also find it pertinent to recommend that it is perhaps hightime 
that Government gives serious co nsideration for setting up Highway Police Force for 
monitoring and safeguarding all National Highways.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. A Detailed Project Report (DPR) study was assigned to M/s. RITES Ltd. in June, 
1997 to assess the technical feasibility and financial viability to augment the capacity of 
Delhi-Gurgaon section of NH-8.  DPR was completed in June, 2000 for section of NH -8 
from km. 15.40 to km. 36.630.  In order to make the project financially viable, six laning 
of road starting from km. 36.630  to km. 42.00 (already 4 -laned) was also added during 
September, 2001.  The reach from km. 13.70 (i.e. RTR) to km. 15.40 (Palam Junction) 
was also added.  Final DPR was approved in October, 2001. 
 
2. The project was awarded to M/s. Jaypee -DSC Ventures Ltd.  in April, 2002 for 
Development to 8/6 lane access controlled highway from Km 14.300 to Km 42.00 on 
BOT (Toll) basis.  The Independent Consultant was M/s RITES -Sheladia (JV) for this 
project since start of construction up to 31.12.2008.  As per original sc ope of works, 
there was provision for providing two nos. of pedestrian / cattle crossings at locations 
to be decided by NHAI.  After discussion with Haryana Govt. officials in 2004, this 
facility was decided to be provided at Anaz Mandi and Kherki Daula (b etween Rajiv 
Chowk and km. 42.00).  These have since been completed. 
 
3. In view of the rapid development which had taken place in Delhi and Haryana 
areas falling on the project highway, Delhi and Haryana administrative authorities 
suggested some improveme nts, which were considered essential.  The matter of 
change of scope was discussed at length in various meetings held with officers of the 
Airport Authority of India, Haryana Govt. and Delhi Govt.  First change of scope notice 
was issued on 10th April, 2003 and second on 22nd September, 2003.  
 
4. The project highway was inspected by the then Hon‟ble Minister of Road 
Transport & Highways along with the Secretary (RT&H) on 29 th November, 2003, when 
it was directed to further optimize the design and provide s ome more value additions.  
Accordingly, Secretary (RT&H) directed Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) to 
undertake a study and suggest optimization in project design.  Based on the CRRI 
study, following two main decisions was taken:- 
 
(iii) Clubbing of Palam and RTR intersections to provide an elevated section for 
about 1.1 km. length from km. 14.30 to km. 15.40. 
(iv) Flyover across NH-8 at Hero Honda Chowk (Which was subsequently deleted). 
 
The change of scope / value additions was approved by the then Secretary 
(RT&H) and Hon‟ble Minister of Road Transport & Highways on 8th April, 2004. 
 

57 
 
5. The change of scope necessitated transfer of land of Ministry of Defence and 
Airport Authority of India.  Thus till confirmation of land transfer was received, change 
of scope could not be finalized.  Finally on 1st April, 2005, it was decided in the meeting 
of Committee of Secretaries (COS) that Ministry of Defence and AAI should give 
permissive possession of required land to NHAI. 
 
6. Proposal of change of scope costing Rs. 22 4.48 crore as assessed by the 
Independent Consultant was put up in the 55 th meeting of the Authority held on 15 th 
July, 2005.  This proposal also included additional two nos. Pedestrian Foot Over 
Bridges and one no. Pedestrian Underpass at Kendriya School (all in Delhi).  These 
were provided on the request of Army Authorities and were agreed during discussion in 
connection with transfer of land from Ministry of Defence to NHAI.  Out of this, the 
Pedestrian / Cycle Foot Over Bridge at Shankar Vihar as also t he pedestrian 
underpass at Kendriya School near RTR Junction have already been opened for use 
by the public.  
 
7. As regards the second Pedestrian Foot Over Bridge near Subroto Park even 
though the proposal was approved in July, 2006, Air Force Authorities  did not allow 
construction to be taken up and were insisting for providing a flyover at this location.  
This continued upto as late as in November, 2007.  The matter was sorted out in 
December, 2007 and they allowed the construction of the Foot over Bridg e in front of 
Subroto Park Gate.  This work has been completed. In addition to above there is 
another Pedestrian underpass near Toll plaza at Km 24 constructed by the 
Concessionaire. Thus total four Pedestrian sub way and two FOB‟s have been 
constructed by the Concessionaire.  
 
8. In February / March, 2007, the Independent Consultant (M/s RITES - Sheladia 
(JV) submitted a proposal to NHAI for additional safety works on this project.  During 
the 63 rd meeting of the Authority held on 30 th March, 2007, it was i nformed that after 
opening to traffic 8 out of 9 flyovers, the stretch between Palam Junction and Rajiv 
Chowk has become hindrance free providing smooth flow conditions for the traffic.  
This has also increased the average speed of travel on the highway.  Due to 
pedestrians‟ crossings, the Expressway at random instead of crossing the road at 
designated places namely viaduct openings of the flyover, there have been some 
accidents in recent past.  Under the circumstances, certain additional works mainly for 
safety of traffic / pedestrians‟ were felt necessary.  It was, therefore, proposed to 
provide 5 more Foot Over Bridges at a cost of about Rs. 13 crores.  The proposal was 
approved by the Authority.  It was also approved to get this work executed through 
open competitive bidding. 
 
9. Subsequently, based on request of Delhi Police for a pedestrian overbridge at 
Dhaula Kuan, an estimate and RFP for construction of six FOBs was approved by the 
Competent Authority on 31.05.2007.  Bids for six FOBs were invited on  06.06.2007 to 
be received on 02.07.2007.  At the request of some bidders, the date was extended to 
09.07.2007.  However, only one bid was received, therefore, as per procedure outlined 
in NHAI‟s Works Manual, it was decided to go for rebidding. 

58 
 
 
10. In or der to ensure better participation of contractors, the work was split into 
three packages of 2 FOBs each and bids invited on 12.09.2007 to be received on 
05.10.2007.  The proposals received were evaluated by the Evaluation Committee 
which recommended some relaxation in RFP as regards condition of having done 
similar works in last 7 years (one contractor had done similar work in 2000 -01 i.e. older 
than 7 years) to have at least two responsive bidders for each package (otherwise only 
one contractor was found responsive in all three packages).  The matter was referred 
by the Competent Authority to Finance Division which did not favor relaxation and 
suggested quick re-bidding.   
 
11. Bids were invited for third time on 16.01.2008 and received on  06.02.2008. Thi s 
time the single bid has been received and found that the rates quoted by the bidders 
are abnormally high therefore it was decided to cancel the bidding process. During 
meeting taken by the Secretary, RTH on 26.2.2008 it was decided to entrust this work 
to Haryana Govt as a deposit work. The following 5 nos. FOBs in Haryana portion have 
been approved at an estimated cost of Rs. 13.20 Crore:- 
  
(vi) km.26.000  between Udyog Vihar and IFFCO Junction 
(vii) km.26+915  between South City and and IFFCO Junction 
(viii) km.34+320  near Rajiv Chowk 
(ix) km. 36+710 near Khandsa Village (new location instead of 37+030) 
(x) km.38+780  near Narsinghpur Village 
 
Out of above two FOB at sl. No. (i) and (ii) has already been completed and 
third is in progress. For two FOB, Land Acquisition is being done. 
 
12. As regards median fencing, it is to mention that erection of un -climbable median 
fencing all along Delhi -Gurgaon Access Controlled Highway was not envisaged in the 
scope of the work of the Project Highway. Neither the same were advised in the DP R 
of the Project Highway by the RITES. M/s. RITES -Sheladia (JV) in year 2007 
submitted proposal for additional safety measures. In this connection, a meeting was 
convened by Chairman, NHAI on 5.3.2007 and additional works were agreed for 
implementation whi ch includes, median fencing, service road on RHS and five FOB. 
NHAI vide letter dated 22.10.2007 directed the Concessionaire to provide median 
fencing in about 22.0 Km length of road (un -climbable) between Km 14.300 to 42.000 
in accordance with para 4.13 ( Traffic Safety Measures) of Concession Agreement. IC 
Vide letter dated 26.10.2007 intimated that median fencing is not part of Concession 
Agreement, therefore it is not his obligation.  
 
The matter was examined in NHAI and matter put up to NHAI board. In a  
meeting of the authority held on 25.3.2008, the proposal for erecting median fencing at 
the cost of NHAI was approved. NHAI invited tenders and in first call only single bid 
was received therefore as per NHAI policy, bids were invited second time in June,  
2008. The work was awarded on 23.9.2008 and presently work is completed.  
 

59 
 
13. Further, in addition to above NHAI has also engaged a consultant for providing 5 
vehicular underpasses between Rajiv Chowk and end of project.  Final Feasibility 
report has bee n submitted on 25.9.2009. Draft DPR submitted for only three feasible 
underpasses/ overpass. In addition to above there is also a provision of Construction of 
underpass and partial clover leaf at Hero Honda Chowk for which Consultant has 
submitted the Draf t PPR on 15.4.2009. However, recently Government of Haryana 
requested the NHAI to explore possibility of Elevated NH -8 between Rajiv Chowk and 
Kherki Daula instead of piecemeal improvement as above. The NHAI has submitted 
the Detailed Report showing three scenario based on techno -economic study to the 
Ministry on 16th March, 2010 for decision. 
 
14. It may be stated in this connection that progress of Delhi -Gurgaon project has 
been reviewed in Ministry and also by Haryana Govt. Authorities at Chandigarh from  
time to time and the Authorities have been kept apprised of the progress as also issues 
/ problems affecting the project.  The issue of pedestrian over bridges in Haryana was 
raised only towards end of 2006, when few accidents occurred on this road.  Prio r to 
that, number of meetings was held with Haryana Govt. officials and they raised issues 
only of increasing length of viaducts, increasing vertical clearance of some 
underpasses, provision of flyover / underpass at Hero Honda Crossing and widening of 
service roads in Haryana portion. 
 
15. As regards setting up of Highway Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding 
all National Highways, there is no such proposal under consideration by the 
Government.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee‟s concern is over not carrying out any safety Audit and 
inadequacies of sub -way/foot-over bridges at the planning as well as DPR stage 
causing neglect of the interests of pedestrians resulting in fatal accidents. The reply 
details developments at later dates. Further, it also does not specify the required action 
to be taken by Concessionaire after the Compliance Report of September 2009. 
 
 The Committee also desired to fix the accountability on concerned officials 
responsible fo r lapses, which have placed human,. Lives at danger and take strict 
punitive action them.  Action taken in aspect have not been replied. The Government 
has also not considered Committee‟s recommendation of setting up of a Highway 
Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding all NHs, without assigning any reasons. 
Since Government has taken no action, Audit has no remark to offer. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Very few projects of this nature have been build in the count ry so far under such 
complex situations. The Coordination of several authorities is involved in construction, 
operation and maintenance of Delhi -Gurgaon Highway. The improvements to the 
safety provisions is a continuous process towards achieving safer/forg iving roads by 

60 
 
overcoming the constraints like vehicle condition/population, road user behaviour, 
education level of truck drivers, etc. NHAI/Government is making sincere efforts to 
make a roads safe. The Manual of Standards & Specifications for constructi on of 
highways have been published by IRC. As regards the compliance report of Sept., 
2009, the Concessionaire has attended to all the observations related to safety pointed 
out by the safety auditors. In connection with setting up of a Highway Police forc e, it is 
submitted that creation of National Road Safety Management Board as per Sundar 
Committee recommendation is under consideration of the Government. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
  Though the reply states in general that sincere efforts are being made for road 
safety, but it is silent about the specific action taken as per recommendation of 
committee for fixing accountability on the concerned officials responsible for lapses 
which had placed human life in dang er.  However the Safety Audit Report along with 
the action taken thereon was not provided to Audit. As regarding setting up of Highway 
Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding all national highways, management 
submitted that creation of National road S afety Management as per Sundar Committee 
recommendations is under consideration by the Government, the same needs to 
expedited by the Authority. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C&AG observations/  
directions. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 32 of Chapter I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

61 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Deficient Detailed Project Report 
 
The Committee note that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Delhi -Gurgaon 
project prepared by M/s RITES and finally approved in October 2001, suffered from 
many deficiencies as many critical items which should have been foreseen at the time 
of preparation of DPR were omitted. This resulted in execution of these items under 
change of scope of works orders for Rs.146.62 crore constituting 21 per cent of the 
total project cost. The change of scope of work included change in the height of 
underpasses from 3.5 meter to 5.5 meter, construction of an elevated stretch from Rao 
Tula Ram Marg to Palam and additional underpasses at two locations etc.  The 
Committee further note that the DPR did not make any provisions for sufficient number 
of pedestrian crossings by way of overhead foot bridges or underpasses at appropriate 
places. 
 
 The NHAI has tried to justify the above -mentioned deficiencies in the DPR by 
stating that the areas around the project highway located in Delhi -Haryana had 
witnessed rapid development and  change of scope orders were issued to 
accommodate the requests of Delhi and Haryana Governments.  Further, underpass 
height of 3.5 meters was initially envisaged for crossing of light vehicles only. However, 
due to rapid development of the surroundings, t he Haryana Government insisted for 
provision of 5.5 meters underpass height to facilitate movement of heavy vehicles /fire 
tenders as lot of commercial and residential activities had taken place subsequently.  
According to the Ministry the project highway was inspected by the then Hon‟ble 
Minister of Road Transport and Highways in November, 2003 and it was directed to 
further optimize the design with some more value additions. Accordingly change of 
scope orders of Rs.146.62 crore were issued.   
 
 The Commit tee find the justification furnished by the Ministry as nothing but 
lame excuses.  The Committee observe that the pace of growth in the area did not pick 
up suddenly between April 2003 and May 2004 as claimed by the government/ NHAI 
but was known even befo re the award of the project. This is well evident in the traffic 
assessment report submitted by M/s RITES during the year 2000. The Ministry has 
infact submitted that the actual traffic volume at present is less than what was 
projected by RITES.  This nega tes the claim of the government of sudden rapid 
developments in the areas around the expressway.  Lamentably these deficiencies 
have cost the exchequer a whooping sum of Rs.146 crore that had to be paid by the 
Government, thus nullifying the factor of nega tive grant of Rs.61 crore received from 
the Concessionaire. The Committee while observing that the entire area around the 
project lies in an urban stretch and International Road Congress (IRC) specifications 

62 
 
clearly stipulates height of underpasses as 5.5.  meter for such areas, find by the plea 
of the Government that the height of the underpass was raised to 5.5 meter instead of 
3.5 meter only on the insistence of Haryana government for facilitating crossing of 
heavy vehicles/fire tenders to be simply unten able and incomprehensible.  This only 
reflects the lack of professional competence on the part of NHAI in handling the project 
and points to a defective system of assessment prevailing in the organization.  
 
The Committee appreciate that the fact that the Governments of Haryana and 
Delhi have highlighted the major deficiencies in the DPR which NHAI had missed in the 
DPR ignoring the exponential growth of Gurgaon and the existence of an international 
airport in the close proximity.  In the opinion of the Com mittee, the serious deficiencies 
in the DPR camaflouged in the name of change of scope of work at the insistence of 
the Delhi and Haryana Governments.  The Committee therefore recommend that 
responsibility must be fixed on the DPR consultant for their fail ure to take into account 
the Indian Road Congress (IRC) specifications on the minimum vertical height of 5.5 
meter for underpasses.  The Committee further recommend that Authority should 
evolve procedures and stipulate accountabilities to ensure that DPRs should be 
prepared after extensive consultation with the State Government concerned as well as 
taking into consideration the needs of the locals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) was assigned to M/s. RITES Ltd. 
in June, 1997 to assess the technical feasibility and financial viability to augment the 
capacity of Delhi -Gurgaon section of NH -8.  DPR was completed in June, 2000 for 
section of NH-8 from km. 15.40 to km. 36.630.  In order to make the project financially 
viable, six laning of road starting from km. 36.630 to km. 42.00 (already 4 -laned) was 
also added during September, 2001.  The reach from km. 13.70 (i.e. RTR) to km. 15.40 
(Palam Junction) was also added.  Final DPR was approved in October, 2001. In view 
of the rapid development which had taken place in Delhi and Haryana areas falling on 
the project highway, Delhi and Haryana administrative authorities suggested some 
improvements, which were considered essential.  It may be stated in this connection 
that prog ress of Delhi -Gurgaon project has been reviewed in Ministry and also by 
Haryana Govt. Authorities at Chandigarh from time to time and the Authorities have 
been kept apprised of the progress as also issues / problems affecting the project.  The 
issue of ped estrian over bridges in Haryana was raised only towards end of 2006, 
when few accidents occurred on this road.  Prior to that, number of meetings was held 
with Haryana Govt. officials and they raised issues only of increasing length of 
viaducts, increasing  vertical clearance of some underpasses, provision of flyover / 
underpass at Hero Honda Crossing and widening of service roads in Haryana portion. 
 
From the old records available it transpired that High level Committee 
comprising of representative from var ious Departments like DUAC, HUDA, NCRPB, 
DDA, AAI,DVB, MTNL, GAIL, DJB, PWDs, was interacting with NHAI / RITES during 
preparation of DPR. However even after consultation certain changes in design was 
felt and were considered technically essential and nece ssary for the project as per site 

63 
 
requirements and requests of various departments. The height of underpass of 3.5m 
had been initially envisaged for crossing of light Vehicle only. However due to rapid 
development of the surrounding areas, the Haryana Govt/HUDA  has insisted upon to 
provide underpass of height  5.5 m instead of 3.5 m for facilitating crossing of heavy 
vehicle/ fire tenders and other heavy vehicles due to lot of commercial and residential 
activities that took place on both side of the pr oject road. It may be stated that the 
entire section of Delhi -Gurgaon project is not an urban area, some portions still fall 
under rural areas and underpass was initially planned for the rural areas as per IRC 
code.      However due to subsequent rapid ind ustrial/commercial development of the 
area due to proximity with the nearest town of Gurgaon and to facilitate crossing of 
heavy commercial vehicles, the height of under pass was to be increased. Therefore 
there is no deficiency on part of DPR consultant M /s. RITES ( A Govt. of India 
undertaking, Ministry of Railways) on this account.  However in order to streamline the 
procedure NHAI has issued a circular on 3rd March, 2008 that prior to finalization of 
DPRs, participation of state Authorities should be ens ured in order to incorporate their 
views/comments in the project preparation.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
As seen from the reply the task for preparation of DPR was assigned to M/s 
RITE in June 1997, which was appro ved in 2001. However, the work was executed 
during 2003-04 i.e. after delay of three years. The Committee took serious note of the 
deficiencies in the initial DPR, non -cognizance of the developments subsequently. It 
was, therefore, recommended by the Committee that: 
 
(a)  Responsibility must be fixed on the DPR consultant for their failure to take into  
account the Indian Road Congress (IRC) specifications on the minimum vertical 
height of 5.5 meter for underpass and 
 
(b) Authority is required to evolve clear procedures and identify the accountability to 
ensure that DPRs are prepared after extensive consultation with the State 
Government, as well as the requirement of the locals. 
 
In reply, the Government stated that in order to streamline the procedure, NHA I 
has issued a circular 9/2008 dated 3 rd March 2008 that prior to finalization of DPRs, 
participation of State Authority should be ensured in to incorporate their 
views/comments at the project preparation stage itself. As per the above circular, the 
concerned Chief Engineer of National Highway Division of the State is required to be 
invited to participate in the discussions at the time of finalization of DPR, even prior to 
sending the said proposal to the Government. The concerned nodal officer of the State  
is to be invited for discussion. 
 
 It is however stated that NHAI did not meet out even the MoRTH specification in 
the Concession Agreement regarding the height of the underpass. 
 

64 
 
 As regards the circular issued on 3 rd March 2008, compliance thereto is also to 
be ensured to avoid lapses/deficiency in the projects.  
 
 Further, Government/Management have not replied on the recommendation of 
the committee regarding fixing of responsibility on DPR consultant.   
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
Show Cause Notice to M/s RITES by NHAI will be issued on taking deterrent 
action for the deficiencies in DPR and appropriate action will be taken after examining 
the reply of M/s. RITES to Show Cause Notice.  
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The reply is interim, the desired action is still to be taken up by the Authority, 
further progress would be watched. In this regard a copy of show -cause noticed issued 
if any to M/s RITES was called for from the management vide requisition dated 11 th 
July, 2011. The same is yet to be received. Further, no reply in support of compliance 
to the circular issued for participation of State Authority prior to finalization of DPRs has 
been furnished. The same would be verified in Audit.  
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take into cognizance of C&AG observations/  
directions, and take appropriate action in this regard. 
  
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC (pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 11 of Chapter I 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
Monitoring Role of the Ministry and NHAI 
 
 The Committee note that the Delhi -Gurgaon project suffered from many 
deficiencies right from beginning.  First of all, the project was initially planned to be 
executed on SPV mode but at the last moment, its mode of execution was changed to 
BOT-Toll mode.  Thereafter, the Financial Consultant submitted that it was unviable on 
BOT mode but at the insistence of NHAI, made revised assessment for viability on 
BOT-Toll mode.  Thereafter, though a recommendation was made by the Financial 
Consultant for conducting  a fresh traffic study, the same was not undertaken by the 
Authority.  Thereafter, the change of scope of works was to be introduced in the project 
due to many deficiencies in the Detailed Project Report (DPR).  All these factors led to 

65 
 
an inordinate delay  in the completion of the project.  Subsequently, completion 
certificate was issued to the Concessionaire without completion of all the Punch -List 
items.  There was delay on the part of the Authority in appointment of Independent 
Auditors to cross check the data furnished by the Concessionaire the eventual, chaos 
at toll plazas due to huge traffic congestion, absence of any road safety audit either at 
planning or DPR stage.  In such a scenario the Committee are appalled to note that in 
response to a query raised by the Committee about the future plans of NHAI to 
decongest the increase in traffic, the reply given by Authority is “NHAI at present do not 
have any plan to decongest the highway”.  Further, a section of service road is yet to 
be constructed due to non -acquisition of land from AAI.  Both the NHAI as well as the 
Ministry have failed to give any convincing reply to the Committee as to why this land 
could not be acquired so far or what efforts are being made to acquire the same.  No 
explanation has been given as to why no provisions were made in the DPR for 
adequate number of pedestrian crossings/foot over bridges on the expressway and 
who is to be held responsible for the number of deaths witnessed on the expressway 
because of inadequate safety infrastructure.  The Committee gather an impression that 
all aspects of monitoring and supervision of the works were left in the hands of the 
Independent Consultants.  The Committee feel that all these issues tend to question 
the very effectiven ess of monitoring role of the NHAI as well as its administrative 
Ministry. 
 
 The NHAI has washed off its hands of its responsibilities by submitting that 
monitoring and supervision is the responsibility of the Independent Consultants.  
Thereafter, the Gove rnment has washed off its hands by submitting that it is for the 
NHAI to enforce the provisions of the concession agreement and has to give directions 
only if something is brought to their notice.  Keeping in view the fact that three 
Government Secretaries  are on the Board of NHAI and the Ministry also conduct 
frequent meetings to ascertain the progress of NHDP, the Committee wonder as to 
how all the shortcomings observed in the Delhi -Gurgaon project escaped the notice of 
the Ministry.  
 
 The admitted position of the Government is that NHAI is a creation of law and is 
accountable to Parliament through the Government and the Government has inherent 
right to issue directions to NHAI on matters of public importance.  The Committee 
however feel that the Government has failed to exercise this right as it has preferred to 
remain a mute spectator on all those issues mentioned above.  Though the Committee 
would not like the autonomy granted to NHAI under the Act may be infringed in any 
manner, the buck should stop so mewhere!  Needless to state the Committee would 
except the Government to be alive to the issues involving public utility services 
including the road safety aspects.  It was the bounden duty of the Government to issue 
appropriate directions to NHAI for taki ng the necessary corrective measures from time 
to time. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government as well as 
NHAI may undertake a thorough review of the Delhi -Gurgaon project and analyze the 
reasons for the shortcomings and deficie ncies observed therein to strengthen the 

66 
 
supervision mechanism.  The results of the said analysis may be utilized in all the 
ongoing and future projects to avoid recurrence of such lapses in the future.  
 
 At this juncture the Committee cannot contain themselves from commenting that 
it is imperative that above recommendations be heeded for the safety of all the 
prospective road users on the roads/expressways being handled or proposed to be 
handled by NHAI.   
 
In the light of all the irregularities/deficiencies pointed out by the C&AG and 
observed by the Committee in their foregoing conclusions, the Committee recommend 
that the whole issue needs to be investigated by an independent investigating agency 
and action taken thereon may be apprised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This project was monitored by High level Committee comprising of 
representative from various Departments like DUAC, HUDA, NCRPB, DDA, AAI,DVB, 
MTNL, GAIL, DJB, PWDs. Further this project being in the capital city of Delhi was also 
monitored by Hon‟ble Minister, RTH, Secretary, RTH , Hon‟ble LG, Delhi, Cabinet 
Secretary and other senior officials of GNCTD and Govt. of Haryana. The monitoring 
mechanism for monitoring the progress of NHDP -I, II, III etc is already in place in NHAI 
in addition to periodical review by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and COS 
under Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
The Government would reiterate its position that subject to the autonomy 
granted to NHAI under NHAI Act, it wou ld not consider it appropriate to involve itself 
with NHAI‟s day-to-day affairs relating to the project.  Through various review meetings 
NHAI has been advised of appropriate action within the framework of Concession 
Agreement.  The Government would not he sitate to take stringent action if violation of 
the terms of agreement is noticed.  It is already examining various issues brought to 
the fore by the Committee and CAG and will take action as appropriate.  It will keep the 
Committee informed of the action taken. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
  
The Committee concluded that the Government as well as NHAI should 
undertake a through review of the project and analyse the reasons for shrot -
comings/deficiencies observed therein to strengthen the supervision machinery. As per 
reply of the Government various issues brought out by the Committee/CAG are being 
examined and the Committee will be informed of the appropriate action taken. The 
issue may be watched through further ATNs. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI will appoint a Retired Senior Officer to undertake a through review of 
Delhi-Gurgaon Project to analyze the reasons for shortcomings and deficiencies 

67 
 
observed therein to strengthen the  supervision mechanism.  The results of the said 
analysis will be utilized in the future projects. 
 
Vetting comments of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The reply is interim as the required action to undertake a through review of 
Delhi-Gurgaon Project to analyze the reasons for shortcomings and deficiencies 
observed therein are yet to be taken up. The same may be expedited by NHAI and the 
results of the analysis/action taken thereon may be watched in further audits. 
 
Reply of the Government on the vetting comments of Office of C&AG 
 
NHAI has been directed to take into cognisance of C&AG observations/  
directions. The Ministry is also studying the status of compliance of the Concession 
Agreement by the Concessionaire so that appropriate corrective action can be taken. 
 
[Ministry of Road Transport and Highways] 
[O.M. No RW/NH-24035/6/2009-PIC(pt.I) dated 19/8/2011] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 39 of Chapter I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
4 April 2012        Chairman, 
15 Chaitra 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 

68 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04th April 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1 345 
hrs in Committee Room „E‟, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Shri Ramesh Bais 
Shri Ambica Banerjee 
Shri Shailendra Kumar 
Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
7 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
11 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1 Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Office of C&AG 
1 Shri Gautam Guha Director General (Commercial)-I 
2 Ms. Saroj Punhani Director General (Commercial)-II 
 
2. At the outset, the Committee took up for consideration the following two draft 
action taken reports on:- 
 
(i). 1st Report of 15 th Lok Sabha on Public Private Partnership in 
implementation of Road Projects by National Highways Authority of India in 
respect of Delhi-Gurgaon Project; and 
 
(ii). XXXX   XXXX   XXXX. 

69 
 
 
3. The Committee adopted both the aforesaid Action Taken Repor ts and 
authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in view of the suggestions made by the 
Members and present the same to the Parliament.  
    
4. The representatives of the office of C&AG then withdrew. 
  
5. XXXX.   XXXX   XXXX. 
 
6. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX. 
 
7. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX. 
  
 
The committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

70 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/  
observations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “ Public Private Partnership in 
implementation of Road Projects by National Highways Authority of India - Delhi-
Gurgaon Sector. 
 
I Total number of recommendations  11 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,5,6 and 7]   
 
Percentage of total  
 
04 
 
 
   36.4% 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government‟s replies [vide recommendation at Sl. 
Nos. 2,4 and10]             
 Percentage of total  
 
03 
 
  
 27.2 % 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and 
which require reiteration [ vide recommendations at Sl. No . 8 
and 9]  
Percentage of total  
 
02 
 
  
 
 18.2% 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  [vide recommendations at Sl. 
Nos. 3 and 11] 
Percentage of total  
 
02 
 
 
18.2% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 