 
 
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
26 

 
CPU NO. 959 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 12.10.2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  09.12.2013 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  09.12.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
OCTOBER 2013 / ASVINA 1935(S) 
26 

CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-2013)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014)  
INTRODUCTION  
ACRONYMS  
PART  I 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I GENERAL 
 
a) Historical Background  
b) Role and  Objectives   
c) Organization Structure 
 
 
 
1 
2 
4 
CHAPTER II PERFORMANCE 
 
a) Physical and Financial Performance 
b) Order Book Position 
c) Quality of Products 
d) Customer Satisfaction 
e) Performance Review 
 
 
 
5 
10 
16 
19 
22 
CHAPTER III RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT  
 
a) Research & Development 
b) Indigenization 
 
 
 
26 
30 
CHAPTER IV DIVERSIFICATION / EXPANSION PLAN 
 
a) Diversification / Expansion Plan 
b) Formation of Joint Venture Company(JVC) 
 
 
 
35 
38 
CHAPTER V OTHER MATTERS 
 
a) E-Procurement 
b) Manpower 
c) Board of Directors 
 
 
42 
45 
52 
 
PART  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
53 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 27 
December 2012 
64 

II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 12 
February 2013 
66 
III Extracts of the Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee 
held on 6 September 2013 
68 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Statement indicating the value and categorization of 
purchases made by BEL through various processes 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant* 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________  
* Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. on 25 April, 2013. 

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
( iii ) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (2013-14), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-
sixth Report on Bharat Electronics Limited. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Bharat Electronics 
Limited on 27 December 2012  and that of the Ministry of Defence (Department of 
Defence Production) on 12 February 2013. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the  Report at their Sitting held on             
6 September, 2013.      
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Bharat 
Electronics Limited  and Ministry of Defence (Department of  Defence Prod uction) for 
tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to them in 
connection with the examination of the subject.   
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations / Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                         SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
6 September, 2013                  Chairman, 
15 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)                             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
( v ) 

ACRONYMS 
   
Sl. No. Abbreviation Description 
1.  AVD Approved Vendor Directory 
2.  BEL Bharat Electronics Limited 
3.  BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
4.  BPC Bulk Production Clearance 
5.  BSS Battlefield Surveillance System 
6.  CAG Comptroller & Auditor General 
7.  CAIR Centre for Artificial Intelligence  
8.  CDMA Code Division Multiple Access 
9.  CIDSS Command Information Decision Support System 
10.  CII-EXIM Bank Confederation of Indian Industries - Export Import Bank 
11.  CKD Completely Knocked Down 
12.  CMS Combat Management System 
13.  CQAE (WE)  Controllerate of Quality Assurance Electronics (Weapon Equipment) 
14.  CQB Close Quarters Battle 
15.  CRL Central Research Laboratories 
16.  CSI Customer Satisfaction Index 
17.  CSR Corporate Social Responsibilities 
18.  CSS Coastal Surveillance System 
19.  CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
20.  C4I Command, Control, Communications, Computers & Intelligence 
21.  D&E Development & Engineering 
22.  DARE Defence Avionics Research Establishment 
23.  DEAL Defence Electronics application Laboratories 
24.  DFCC Digital Flight Control Computer 
25.  DGQA Directorate General of Quality Assurance 
26.  DLRL Defence Electronic Research Laboratories 
27.  DPE DPSUs Department of Public Enterprises 
28.  DPSUs Defence Public Sector Undertakings 
29.  DRDE Defence Research & Development Establishment 
30.  DRDL Defence Research and Development Laboratories  
31.  DRDO Defence Research & Development Organization 
32.  DRTS Digital Radio Trunking System 
33.  DSP Digital Signal Processing 
34.  ECI Election Commission of India 
35.  EMI/EMC Electro Magnetic Interference / Electro Magnetic Compatibility 
36.  EPS Earnings Per Share 
37.  ERP Enterprise Resource Planning 

38.  EVM MK-V Electronic Voting Machine Mark-V 
39.  EUM End User Monitoring 
40.  EW Electronic Warfare 
41.  FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
42.  FINAS Future Infantry Soldier as a system 
43.  FOM Figure of Merit 
44.  GBE-SDN Gigabit Ethernet based Ship Data Network 
45.  GSEPC General Staff Equipment Procurement Committee  
46.  GSM Global System for Mobile Communications 
47.  GSR Ground Support Radar 
48.  GSQR General Staff Qualitative Requirement 
49.  HR Human Resources 
50.  HLS Homeland Security System 
51.  HPA High Power Amplifier 
52.  II Tubes Image Intensifier Tubes 
53.  IIM Indian Institute of Management 
54.  JSG Joint Service Guides  
55.  JSS Joint Service Specifications  
56.  JVC Joint Venture Company 
57.  LASTEC Laser Science & Technology Centre 
58.  LCA Light Combat Aircraft 
59.  LD Liquidated Damages 
60.  LOB Lines of Business 
61.  LRDE Electronics & Radar Development Centre 
62.  LSCO Electronics Components Standardization Organization  
63.  MAG Maintainability Advisory Group 
64.  MIL SPECS Military Specifications 
65.  MTNL Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
66.  MTRDC Microwave Tube Research & Development Centre 
67.  NPR National Population Register 
68.  NSTL Naval Science & Technologies Laboratory 
69.  NVD Night Vision Device 
70.  OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
71.  ORDAQA Office of the Regional Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance 
72.  PAT Profit After Tax 
73.  PBT Profit Before Tax 
74.  PoC Proof of Concept 
75.  PDI Pre-Despatch Inspection 
76.  PLC Product Life Cycle 
77.  PO Purchase Order 

78.  PSTN Public Switched Telephone Network 
79.  QML  Qualified Manufacturers List  
80.  QPD  Qualified Products Data 
81.  QPL Qualified Products List  
82.  RoC Registrar of Companies 
83.  RFD Result Framework Document 
84.  R&D Research and Development  
85.  RFP Request for Proposal 
86.  SAG Scientific Advisory Group 
87.  SAP-SRM System Application Product-Supplier Relationship Management 
88.  SBU Strategic Business Unit 
89.  SDR Software Defined Radio 
90.  SCAPCC Services Capital Acquisition Plan Categorisation Committee 
91.  SECC Socio Economic Caste Census 
92.  SKD Semi Knocked Down 
93.  SNR Signal to Noise Ratio 
94.  SRM Supplier Relationship Management 
95.  SQAE  Senior Quality Assurance Establishment                                       
96.  TOT Transfer Of Technology 
97.  UAV Unmanned Ariel Vehicle 
98.  VVPAT Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail 
 

PART - I 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
GENERAL 
 
 
(a) Historical Background 
 
1.1 Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) was established in 1954 at B engaluru by the 
Government of India under the Ministry of Defence. Initially with the technical 
collaboration from M/s  CSF, France, BEL manufactured t ransreceivers, used by the 
Indian Army for radio communication. With a s mall beginning in the field of radio 
communication, BEL, today, is a multi-technology, multi-product Company. The Company 
has nine manufacturing Units spread across the country. Each of the Units is working in 
specific business areas as given below: 
 
Sl. Unit Year of 
setting 
up 
Major Products 
1 Bengaluru The mother unit has following 
Strategic Business Units (SBUs) viz 
Military Communication, 
Electronic Warfare & Avionics, Military 
Radar, Naval Systems, Telecom & 
Broadcast Systems, Export 
Manufacturing & Components 
1954 Military Communication, Electronic 
Warfare Systems, Radars, Weapon 
Systems, Naval Systems, Sonars, Network 
Centric Systems, Simulators, Satcom 
solutions, Electronic Voting Machines, 
Turnkey solutions, Components, 
Homeland Security System 
2 Ghaziabad 1974 Radars, Communication Equipment, 
Antennas, Microwave components, 
Satcom & Cellular Communication 
3 Pune 1979 Batteries, X -ray Tubes, Electro Optics, 
Laser Range Finders & Target Designators 
4 Machilipatnam 1983 Night Vision Devices, Thermal Imagers  
5 Panchkula 1985 Tactical Communication Equipment, 
Portable Radars 
6 Kotdwara 1986 Defence Communication Equipment, 
Switch boards, Encrypted message 
terminals for defence, Fire Detection 
System 
7 Navi Mumbai 1986 Hydraulics for Stabiliser, Shelters, Mast, 
Antenna System 
8 Chennai 1985 Tank Electronics, Stabiliser Drives, 
Advanced Land Navigation Systems, 
Integrated Fir e Control Systems, Gun 
Upgrades 
9 Hyderabad 1986 Electronic Warfare Systems 
 
 
1.2 The Company’s Mission, Vision, Values & o bjectives were formulated and 
approved by the Board on 27  October 2005 keeping in view the global scenario and the 
business environment in which the Company is operating. The Mission statement implies 

what the Company aims to accomplish and the same is further cascaded down to “Role of 
the Company”. The functions of the Company is derived from objects of Memorandum of 
Association. The role, objectives & functions of the Company is listed below:- 
 
(b)  Role and Objectives 
 
1.3 The role of BEL is to provide state -of-the-art products/sys tems in d efence 
electronics and other chosen areas of professional electronics for Indian defence forces 
and other customers.  
 
1.4 The objectives of the Company are: 
 
 To be a customer focused Company providing state -of-the-art products & 
solutions at competitive prices, meeting the demands of quality, delivery & 
service, 
 
 To generate internal resources for profitable growth, 
 
 To attain technological leadership in defence electronics through in -house 
R&D, partnership with defence/research laboratories & academic institutions, 
 
 To give thrust to exports, 
 
 To create a facilitating environment for employees to realize their full potential 
through continuous learning & team work, 
 
 To give value for money to customers & create wealth for shareholders, 
 
 To constantly benchmark Company’s performance with best-in-class 
internationally, 
 
 To raise marketing abilities to global standards, and; 
 
 To strive for self-reliance through indigenisation. 
 
1.5 The objectives of the Company are in the form of statements which are illustrated 
in Quantitative and Qualitative form as follows:- 
 
1. Quantitative 
 
(a) Turnover 
(b) Gross Margin 
(c) PBT 
(d) PAT 
(e) Networth 
(f) Exports 

(g) EPS 
(h) Dividend 
(i) R&D expenditure, etc. 
 
2. Qualitative 
 
(a) Quality compliance 
(b) Customer Satisfaction 
(c) Effective HR Management 
(d) Fulfilling Corporate Governance 
(e) Development of New Products 
(f) Sustainable Development measures 
(g) CSR, etc. 
 
1.6 The MoU  Guidelines on objectives stipulate  that these objectives should cover 
quantitative and qualitative; commercial and non -commercial; and static as well as 
dynamic aspects of the operations of the enterprise.  Efforts should be made to ensure 
that all the objectives get reflected in MoU Assessment Format. As per these guidelines, 
the micro objectives are covered in MoU which is approved by the Administrative Ministry 
in the form of Static/ Financial and Dynamic parameters like Gross Margin, Gross Sales, 
Financial Ratios, Six Sigma projects, Statistical Process Control, CII Exim Bank award, 
Customer Satisfaction, Training & e -learning, Development of new projects, Capital 
Expenditure, Sustainable Development, CSR, Employee Satisfaction Survey, etc.. Hence, 
all MoU parameters are considered as micro objectives. Yearly micro objectives are 
prepared in the form of an annual plan with targets for manufacture of products and 
systems, development of new products/systems, investments for upgrades & new 
facilities, financial and various other parameters. The extent of compliance to these micro 
objectives is measured by the ratings assigned to BEL based on Company’s performance 
every year. The Committee have been informed that BEL strives to fully comply with 
these set targets and has been rated in the “Excellent”/“Very Good” category. 
 
Functions of the Company 
 
1.7 The functions of BEL are to :- 
 
 Provide end -to-end solutions starting from design, development and 
manufacture of strategic defence electronic products / syste ms in the areas of 
Radars, Weapon systems, Electronic Warfare Systems, Communication 
products, C4I systems, Underwater systems, Electro -optics products for Indian 
Army, Navy & Air Force and select Civilian products. These products are 
developed through in -house efforts, by using DRDO lab designs or through 
Transfer of Technology (ToT) from foreign OEMs, 
 
 Ensure that the products are of i nternational quality & standards, provide long 
term product support and obsolescence management, 
 

 Upgrade the systems supplied whenever required, and to; 
 
 Provide world class technology to defence forces. 
 
(c) Organisation Structure 
 
1.8 In the last decade, the business environment has undergone rapid and far 
reaching changes as a result of technology up gradation, new g overnment polices, 
competition, etc.. In this dynamic enviro nment, it is essential for the Company to reorient 
itself to meet the changing needs of the Organizati on. Against this backdrop, the 
Company has taken several initiatives in the areas of Marketing, R&D,  HR, etc. to fit into 
the fast changing business environment. Some of the prominent changes in the 
organizational structure are listed below: 
 
 The Bengaluru unit (mother unit) of the Company was restructured into six 
Strategic Business Units (SB Us) viz. Mi litary Radar, Naval S ystems, Military 
Communication & Electronic Warfare, Telecom & Broadcast Systems, Export 
Manufacturing & Components in the year 2000, each headed by General 
Managers/Executive Directors. This revamp in organizational structure helped t he 
Company to effectively meet the emerging customer requirements, adaptation to 
latest technology, enhanced product support, etc.. 
 
 Re-organization of the second largest Unit i.e., BEL Ghaziabad into 2 Strategic 
Business Unit s Viz. Radars, Network Centric  Systems & Systems S trategic 
Business units. This major step is taken to ensure improved business focus and 
spread of operations.  
 
 Electronic W arfare & Avionics has been one of the fast growing & emerging 
business segment in the recent times. In orde r to have strong foothold, the 
Company further bifurcated during the year 2007 Milit ary Communication & 
Electronic Warfare SBU into exclusive Strategic business unit equipped with state 
of the art R&D facilities, Test labs, etc. . This change has helped the Company to 
meet the demands in field of Airborne & Shipborne Systems.  
 
 Similarly to give more thrust to Naval business, Naval Systems SBU has been split 
into two SB Us viz, Sonars & Communication Systems and Radar & Fire Control 
Systems. 
 
 Missile Systems has b een one of the emerging business segments in the 
prevailing business environment. In order to give more thrust, Radar SBU of 
Bengaluru Complex has been split into two SBUs Viz, Missile Systems & Military 
Radars. 
 
 In order to give more focus on platform bas ed solutions, “Systems” SBU of BEL 
Ghaziabad has been reorganised in to a full fledged “ Satcom and Cellular 
Communication Systems” SBU. 

CHAPTER   II 
 
PERFORMANCE 
 
(a) Physical and Financial Performance 
 
2.1 BEL’s targets and actual s in respect of value o f production and profit before tax 
since 2008-09 are stated to be as follows:- 
 
   (Rs. in Crore) 
Sl.No. Value of Production Profit before tax 
Year Target Actual % Target Actual % 
1 2008-09 4799 5273 109.9 1025 1097 107 
2 2009-10 5127 5248 102.4 1010 1045 103 
3 2010-11 5590 5520 98.8 1269 1161 91 
4 2011-12 5987 5794 96.8 1185 1075 91 
5 2012-13 6385 6290 98.05 1019 1125 110 
 
 
2.2 There has been no marked improvement in the performance of BEL during the last 
four years as is evident from the value of production and profit before tax figures given 
above.  When asked to explain the reasons for the stagnation in the Company’s 
performance and decline in profits, the CMD, BEL stated during the evidence on 27 
December 2012 as follows:- 
 
“Previously, we were in the component business and manufactured small 
equipment basically. That was the scenario at that particular time. Now that the 
requirement has changed, we have migrated from equipment manufacturing to the 
system integrator now.   That is one reason.  Secondly, this particular business has 
been opened to the private sector and we have to aggressively quote so that we 
can stop the entry of private sector in this particular area. That is the main reason 
for our profits coming down. In fact, we acted very st rongly and have taken the 
particular competition as a challenge so that we can survive in this particular area.” 
 
2.3  When enquired from the Secretary, Defence Production as to whether he was 
satisfied with the performance of BEL, he replied during evidence as under:- 
 
“...it is indeed a fact that there has been stagnation over these last four years or so.  
There is no denying that.” 
 
 The witness also added:-  
 
“Sir, it is quite right.  The only point that I am trying to submit is that in the current 
financial year, the expectation of BEL is that the target which has been given to 
them which you have also mentioned Rs. 6385 crore, they are hopeful of achieving 
that target.  They are moving on that.  There are one or two contracts where they 
are facing cert ain difficulties and where – since you had asked – the Ministry is 
also trying to help out.  You would appreciate that there are contacts.  If I may give 

a specific example, there is a contract which relates to Command Information and 
Decision Support Syst em (CIDSS) which is a large contract and which has been 
approved by the Cabinet also but at the last minute now the Army is saying that 
they still want certain changes which are having certain repercussions.  We would 
have to now discuss it with our DG (Ac q.) as well as the Army.  That is the role 
which the Ministry plays so that this particular contract can move forward.  It is 
because this is a contact, as I mentioned, already approved by the Cabinet and yet 
because of the dynamics in the Ministry, the re quirements of the Army as of now 
projects have become slightly different.  We are facing difficulties.  So, this is the 
sort of issue which we keep on trying to resolve on behalf of BEL.  Two contracts 
are stuck like that.  Another contract if I may submit  is relating to LYNX U2 Fire 
Control System for Indian Navy.  
The Ministry has banned a particular company because of its certain 
practices which were fraudulent. That is another major contract which they were 
implementing and it got stuck up. We are tryin g to help out in what other way the 
requirement of Navy for that particular radar can be satisfied. Our role invariably is 
also to help out BEL in achieving its target by interceding on their behalf with the 
Services which always have requirements which sometimes changes a little bit and 
sometimes the delays occur because they go through a very detailed trial 
procedure.” 
 
2.4 In a post evidence reply, BEL attributed the marginal improvement in performance 
to the following:- 
 
 BEL has more than 350 distinct p roducts in the core areas of Defence Electronics 
and other chosen professional electronics.   The Company’s products range from 
small Semiconductor Devices to huge Equipment / Systems. The product mix of 
the Company keeps varying depending on the customer r equirements. The order 
from customer for the same  product/system is not uniform and is restricted to few 
batches. 
 
 Previously, BEL was basically in the component business and manufactured small 
equipments only. Now with the change in technology trend and e merging 
requirements from the different customers, BEL has migrated from equipment 
manufacturing to the system integration. 
 
 BEL is a pioneer in manufacturing Defence Communication Systems. The 
Company has 3 dedicated Strategic Business Units (SBU) for the  manufacture of 
Communication Sets. These products yielded good turnover & profit till few years 
back. The change in technol ogy trend in recent years from s tandalone equipment 
to Turnkey/Platform based solutions has resulted in decline in the demand for th e 
communications sets and increase in customer requirements for system oriented 
projects. These projects have high material cost and have impacted the profit 
margins. 
 

 Now the Defence Market is opened up to private players and also the evolution of 
DPP since 2005 has brought in intense competition necessitating the Company to 
squeeze its profits and to aggressively quote in order to survive in the competitive 
environment. This is one of the main reasons for stagnant profits and low growth in 
Value of Produc tion.  However, BEL has acted very strongly and taken this 
competition as a challenge. In this regard, the Company has been giving additional 
thrust to new product development, process improvement, marketing, 
diversification, joint ventures, etc.. 
 
 Many of  the projects were first time inducted projects and execution of these 
complex system oriented projects involves activities like Software Development, 
Integration of Sub -systems / Modules, Installation & Commissioning etc. These 
projects undergo sizeable changes during the Proof of Concept (PoC) stage. 
 
 The delivery schedule as per the contract of large system oriented projects is 
spread over 3 -4 years. At times, the deliveries are delayed due to customer 
clearance/accord of Bulk Production Clearance (BPC),  Harbor Acceptance Test 
(HAT)/Sea Acceptance Test (SAT), site readiness, etc., impacting the turnover. 
 
 In addition to the above, other factors like increase in the staff cost, pay revision 
resulting in payment of huge arrears, etc., have also resulted in stagnation of Profit 
Before Tax” 
 
2.5 Considering the stagnant performance of BEL during the last four years, w hen 
asked if BEL would be able to achieve the projected value of production of Rs. 6385 
Crores during 2012 -13, the Department of Defence Producti on in their post evidence 
reply (February 2013) stated that t here are constraints like delays in BPC, debarring of 
vendor (M/s Rheinmetall for Lynx U2 project), issues related to CIDSS, BSS , etc.. While 
the Company is making all out efforts to overcome the se issues BEL is likely to achieve a 
turnover of Rs.  5800 to Rs. 5900 crore  during 2012 -13 on account of the constraints 
mentioned above. 
 
2.6 It has been observed from the information furnished by BEL that apart from the 
Product Support Centre at Kochi, n o major project has been undertaken by BEL during 
the last three years.  When asked whether the Department of Defence Production has 
reviewed the performance of BEL from this angle and whether any directions were given 
by the Department to BEL in this rega rd.  The Department of Defence Production in a 
written reply stated about the Company’s infrastructure requirements, R&D projects and 
modernisation plans.  The reply was, however, silent on the issue of any major projects 
undertaken by the Company in recen t past, as is evident from the reply furnished by the 
Department which is reproduced below: 
 
“The Ministry has been periodically reviewing and monitoring the progress of major 
R&D projects of BEL apart from the Company’s infrastructure requirements, 
modernization plans, etc. The Department have provided adequate thrust and 
necessary guidelines for continuous upgradation of its infrastructure/modernization 

of facilities to enable the Company to be in tune with the changing needs of the 
technology/products and to be globally competitive. This enables the Company to 
maintain its infrastructure at par with international standards. When new products 
are introduced, the corresponding technology and facilities are also induced.” 
    
 
 The various modernization programmes for BEL during the Eleventh Plan period 
(2007-12) are listed below:- 
 
 Test facility for Stabilizer & Automatic Loading Gear for T90 Tanks at Chennai. 
 Near Field Antenna Development Test Range Facility at Ghaziabad. 
 Combat Management System-C4I System for Naval Platforms at Ghaziabad. 
 EMI / EMC Chamber at Chennai.  
 Modern manufacturing facility of Digital Flight Control Computer (DFCC) for Light 
Combat Aircraft (Tejas) at Bengaluru Unit. 
 Newly constructed D&E building at Hyderabad.  
 Product Support Center at Kochi. 
 Walk-in Chamber at Bengaluru Unit.  
 Gigabit Ethernet based Ship Data Network (GBE-SDN) at Bengaluru Unit. 
 Altitude Chamber at Bengaluru Unit. 
 Anechoic Chamber at Hyderabad. 
 Test setup for AKASH at Bengaluru Unit. 
 Single Point Diamond Turning Machine at Machilipatnam Unit. 
 
The Company spends around Rs.  250-300 Crores on capital investments every 
year from its internal accruals. 
 
2.7 In a written note submitted to the Committee, BEL has stated that their export 
turnover during the year 2011 -12 was US$ 38.45 million as against the previous year 
export of US $ 41.53 million.  The range of products exported include Coastal 
Surveillance Radar System, Radar Finger Printing System, HF communication sets, 
Radar Warning Receiver, Fitted -up Shelters, El ectronic Voting Machines, X -Ray tubes, 
electro-mechanical parts (like Stators, Casing, etc.) and electronic assemblies. 
 
2.8 A very significant portion of Export is related to offset. The Company 
executed  large  offset contracts for companies such as M/s Fincantieri, Italy, Boeing, 
USA & Northrop Grumman, USA .  BEL has over the years taken a number of initiatives 
to increase exports. The Company plans to increase its exports through direct exports 
and offsets. It has identified African and South East Asian countries for special focus on 
product exports. 
 
2.9 When asked about the reasons for decline in exports during 2011 -12 as compared 
to previous year  and whether BEL has made any efforts to improve the situation , BEL in 
their written reply stated that BEL achieved export of US$ 41.53 M during 2010-11, mainly 
due to the business generated from Offset Sales. Offset sales was 64% of the total export 
sales value.  Subsequently, executable Offset Orders  have come down resulting in the 

decrease of export sales  to US$ 38.45 M for the year 2011 -12. The main reason for this 
shortfall is not considering deemed export status for the planned supply of communication 
equipment and energy system, for a value of US$  6 M, for the project Low Level 
Transportable Radar (LLTR) , contracted with M/s Thales. This was considered as 
domestic sales. However, BEL is expecting substantial growth in offset business during 
next 2 -3 years. In this regard, BEL has been interacting with all the major foreign 
companies like Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, Northrop Grumman, BAE Systems, 
SAAB, Thales for possible offset business arising out of various RFPs issued by the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD). 
 
2.10 When asked about the export potential of BEL and how much of that is being 
realized, it was stated that they are vigorously pursuing the possibilities to export various 
products and  systems to potential friendly countries of India with the concurrence of MoD. 
Also, BEL is anticipating sizable export orders on account   of the “ Offset” policy    
incorporated in Defence Procurement  Procedure (DPP). BEL has identified Contract   
Manufacturing (Build-to- Print and Build-to-Spec) as one of the new areas to address the 
emerging opportunities with foreign OEMs, with reference to offset business. Seven Units 
of the Company have also obtained AS9100 Certification to facilitate tapping the export 
market.  Business potential for BEL during the next 2-3 years is around   200-300   US$M.  
Export turnover is likely to grow substantially in the coming years. 
 
2.11 BEL has been signing MoU with Administrative Ministry since 1989 -90. The MoU 
ratings obtained by the Company since the beginning i,e. 1989-90 are as follows: 
 
Year Composite score Rating 
1989-90 1.50 Excellent 
1990-91 1.26 Excellent 
1991-92 1.81 Very Good 
1992-93 4.08 Fair 
1993-94 1.78 Very Good 
1994-95 2.14 Very Good 
1995-96 2.47 Very Good 
1996-97 1.46 Excellent 
1997-98 1.71 Very Good 
1998-99 1.46 Excellent 
1999-00 1.38 Excellent 
2000-01 1.46 Excellent 
2001-02 1.34 Excellent 
2002-03 1.03 Excellent 
2003-04 1.04 Excellent 
2004-05 1.13 Excellent 
2005-06 1.50 Excellent 
2006-07 1.44 Excellent 
2007-08 1.65 Very Good 
2008-09 1.31 Excellent 
2009-10 1.06 Excellent 
2010-11 2.054 Very Good 
2011-12 2.166 Very Good 

2.12 When asked for reasons for MoU Rating going down from ‘excellent’ to ‘very good’, 
during 2010-11, and remaining the same again in 2011-12, CMD, BEL during the course 
of oral evidence on 27 December 2012 stated :- 
 
 “Sir, the reason for this was the PBT. In fact, whatever PBT wa s achieved  was 
lower than  the MoU target.  This was the ma jor reason for downgrading the 
Company from ‘excellent category’ to ‘very good category’. In fact, it happened 
because we did the wage negotiations where the arrears were to be paid to the 
employees from 2007 onwards. As a result of the enhancement of the wages to 
the workers PBT achieved was less and the Company got downgraded. Arrears 
were due from 2007, and the money was disbursed in 2010 and 2011. Now, the 
impact has gone, and in the coming years  the emplo yees cost will also come 
down.  Since, increased wages is already there, we are taking care of it in our new 
products when we are quoting. We are taking care of the enhanced value addition 
there on. So, it will get levelled out in the coming years.” 
 
(b) Order Book Position 
 
2.13 The Order Book Position of the Company as on 1st April during the last four years 
is stated to be as under:- 
 
Order Book position (as on) Value (Rs. in Crore) 
01.04.2009 10387 
01.04.2010 11350 
01.04.2011 23600 
01.04.2012 25748 
 
2.14 BEL pointed out in a written reply that thin order book of some of the Units 
operating in Radio Business is a major concern. 
 
2.15 When asked if the Order Book Position on various products would improve in the 
coming years, CMD, BEL during  the course of oral evidence on 27 December 2012 
stated: 
 
“…….we are confident that with the order book we already have about Rs. 25,000 
crore on hand, and orders that we are going to acquire in the pipeline, which will be 
about Rs. 7,000 crore in the curr ent year; about Rs. 10,000 crore in the next year; 
and the following year it will be again another Rs. 10,000 crore. So, about Rs. 
27,000 crore will be added in a period of next three years. With that, we feel that, 
our order book would enable us to not on ly achieve good growth in turnover, but 
also improve the topline and consequently the bottomline.” 
 
2.16 Emphasising the need for curtaling the evaluation time for newly developed 
equipments, the CMD, BEL during the course of oral evidence submitted as under:- 
 
 “There are two -three different stages.  If a new case is there which means we 
develop an equipment and then the Army evaluates it and afterwards it takes about 

one to three years to place an order.  So, if such orders placement could be cut 
down to one and a half year, it would help all the public sector and other companies 
to respond because so much of money gets blocked into that.  The items for which 
evaluation has already taken place, there also the time taken by the Ministry of 
Defence at the mo ment is quite long. It varies from about one year to three years 
time for already i nducted equipment.  I think if this thing can be brought down, in 
fact, it will help the Units also to perform better and to do a better planning.  What 
we suffer is that if  the load is not there our manpower gets idle, in fact, we have to 
pay them salaries.  As you know, the cost of production is quite high.  We have to 
use the profit of one unit to support the other unit.  At the moment, we are doing this 
for Pune, Panchkul a and Kotdwara.  We are running into losses at these three 
places.  We are supporting them from Ghaziabad and Bangalore.  Similarly, 
suppose a new product is to be inducted, the evaluation is taking three to five years 
and may be even longer.  I will cite one example.  The L -70 gun on which we are 
working for upgradation for the last 10 years.  The order is yet to be placed which 
means bids are yet to be opened for that.  Definitely, after some time the 
companies will say that why to invest the money which is locked up for ten years.  I 
think with your intervention, in fact, if that help can be given to BEL or the other 
DPSUs definitely it can help us to perform better for the country” 
 
2.17. Secretary, Defence Production during evidence further added that:- 
 
 “As far as Defence Production policy is concerned, we say that to harness abilities 
of the country as a whole we would like to have participation of the private sector 
and the Ministry is moving along with that policy. In any case, therefore, the 
Services are also free to suggest but government takes the final decision. The 
Services are free to suggest that in a particular area they would like to have a 
competitive environment and sometimes we are able to convince them fully where 
BEL has full strength. For example, electronic warfare is an area where BEL is 
extremely strong and electronic warfare is considered to be sensitive for the 
country. Therefore, in that area we do not want, whether it is a foreign vendor or an 
Indian private vendor, them to enter  wherever there are extremely sensitive 
projects. If there is a project for inscription we necessarily direct it towards BEL. But 
there are certain projects where the country as a whole as the ability and in such 
cases they go for open competitive bidding and where we try to ensure that they get 
nominated on single vendor basis to get orders as a long -term strategy. I am trying 
to apprise the hon. Committee that in such areas which are nationally sensitive, it 
would be our endeavour to continue to ensure th at BEL gets the order. This 
requirement would continue and this is not going to remain static. That is an area of 
growth.  
2.18 BEL stated in a note that they are facing competition mainly from Indian 
companies like Tata Group, L& T, Mahindra Defence System s, ECIL, I TI, HCL, Alpha 
Technologies,  Astra Microwave, Data Patterns, HBL, etc. and also with global OEMs 
like Elta /  IAI,  Selex, Atlas Elektronic, etc. Many Indian companies are tying up with 
foreign O E M s for assistance on technology and bidding with them. 
 

2.19 When asked how many  products / systems of BEL face competition and how 
many are monopolistic in nature, the Company in their  post evidence reply  stated that 
BEL has several business verticals, mostly in Defence Electronics. Our major 
business  areas  are  - Radar and  Fire  Control  Systems , Missile  Systems, 
Communication Systems, Electronic Warfare & Avionics Systems,  Network Centric 
Systems (C4I), Electro Optics, Tank Electronics, Anti Submarine Warfare and Civilian 
products.  In  the  “Buy  Global”  category  of  purchases,  BEL  has  always  faced 
international competition and has won quite a few contracts in Electronic Warfare  
segment. The major market opportunities lost are in the segment of Radar, C4I, 
Communication etc.  With the changes in Defence Procurement Procedure encouraging 
private participation,  BEL is facing the competition from indigenous private sector 
companies in all its major  business segments such as Communication, Radar  &  Fire  
Control,  Network  Centric  System  (C4I),  Anti  Submarine Warfare  (ASW),  Electronic  
Warfare  &  Avionics,  Electro  Optics  &  Tank Electronics. 
 
2.20 It is observed from the material furnished to the Committee that the Ministry of 
Defence (Department of Defence Production) in a letter dated 30.3.2 011 had pointed out 
that there was insufficient awareness about commercial aspects, the terms of trade, etc. 
in public undertakings including BEL which had led to loosing out on orders in multi -
vendor cases.  In this context, the Ministry had suggested to BEL setting up of a 
commercial department to work out the costs and pricing policy, a marketing department 
to estalish and strengthen the brand identity of the Company and also a unit which would 
specialise in contracting. 
 
2.21 When asked about the number  of order and their value which were lost in multi -
vendor environment during the last five years, BEL in a written reply submitted that BEL 
has lost around 28 contracts amounting to  the tune of Rs.  1624 crore in primary 
business, the details are as given below:- 
 
Sl. No. PRODUCT Order Value 
(Rs. in Crore) 
1 Radio Frequency(RF) Seeker 12 
2 Wide Band Instrumentation Radar 13 
3 Radar Air Warning L-band Mk III 45 
4 Combat Management System (CMS) 239 
5 Avian Radar 250 
6 Digital Armored Vehicle Intercom System (DAVIS) 280 
7 Wide-band Code Division Multiple Access (WCDMA) 304 
8 VLF with AMC 434 
9 Small Projects (20 contracts) 47 
  
Total 
 
1624 
 
 
 
 

2.22 To a query about reasons leading to loss of such contract, the following reasons 
were extended by the Department:  
 
 In the case of a Global Tender, the pricing by an Overseas vendor when  
compared to the Company, is more competitive due to the fact that the Overseas 
vendor  incurs ‘nil’ customs duty, excise duty and sales tax. In case of services, 
the “reverse Charge” mechanism in India further puts the burden of service tax 
on import of services on the Company and not on the Overseas Vendor. 
 
 Due to the Company’s  emphasis to  increase the content of indigenisation  in the 
product as compared to Imports, the cost of the product will be generally higher 
mainly because the Company has to pay Excise Duty/Service Tax at the time 
of procurement of material/services from indigenous  source, on which CENV AT 
CREDIT for Excise Duty/ Service Tax is not available. Imports are exempted  
from payment of duties under Duty exemption Certificate but Excise Duty on input 
material is an additional  cost as “CENVA T” benefit is not available to the 
Company, due to the fact that the end product is not excisable. Whereas, this 
does not apply to  the Private Sector Vendors as they are able to avail 
CENVAT CREDIT  for the Excise Duty & Service Tax paid for procurement of 
goods & services used in the manufacture of goods for Defence. For  ascertaining 
the L1 status the taxes & duties on final product are not considered. 
 
 The sub systems required for the manufacture of finished products, the Company 
procures from the OEM or reputed companies where the cost of the product is 
generally high compared to the low cost / low quality product as provided  by the 
competitor. The Company has well established state of the art infrastructure 
which has been upgraded to the latest  technologies. Whereas the private  
competitor need not posses these kind of infrastructure and resorts to outsourcing 
at a very low cost. 
 
 The Company is governed by strict and mandatory vigilance guidelines  and 
administrative restrictions in the form of reservation, exit  policy, compensation,   
a dditional audits. These often become deterrents  in prompt decision making, 
thus resulting in increased operational costs.  Private Companies operate  without  
any  such restrictions making them efficient and cost effective. 
 
Thus, the end product value in many of the tenders lost by the Company is higher 
as compared to an Overseas Competitor as well as a Private Sector Competitor. 
 
2.23 With a view to gain further clarity in the matters of customs, excise duty and other 
such Government levies/charges which were working to the disadvantage of the 
Company, during the course of the oral evidence held on 12 February, 2013, a specific 
question was put to the Secretary, Department of Defence Production.  In response, he 
stated: 
 
“I would like to express thanks to the Committee – the issues concerning to 
customs and so on, these were brought to our notice for the first time because of 

questioning by the Committee.  BEL also brought out to our attention for the first 
time now.  I would assure the hon’ble Committee that these are the issues which 
prima-facie we have examined; we find that there is a lot of me rit in what BEL is 
telling.  There are somethings which I can set right in the Ministry, I will do that; 
there are certain things to be taken up with the Finance Ministry, I will do that also.  
I would like to express my thanks to the Committee that one as pect which was not 
known to us…….” 
 
2.24 On a specific query on CAG’s observation that the Company was operating on a 
thin vendor base which was not being shared among units while inviting quotations, 
thereby depriving the Company of reaping the benefits of competitive price, BEL informed 
the Committee that standardization and creation of approved vendors is done centrally by 
Corporate Standard Departments based on the reference documents – USMIL / QPL / 
QPA / QMC – for imported components, LCSO approval do cuments for indigenous 
components, BIS guide for raw materials and chemicals etc. The vendors are identified 
from (a) request from parties, (b) listed with reputed industries, (c) information available in 
internet, (d) advertisement in media. This is a con tinuous process and efforts are made to 
add more vendors to the list on a regular basis. The number of new vendors identified 
and approved in the last three years is as under: 
 
Year 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
No. of Vendors added 2756 2071 1900 2051 
 
 BEL has stated that for non -standard items approved vendor list is created by the 
respective D&E divisions of the units based on evaluation and approval by Design 
Agency i.e., DRDO, CDOT, NPOL, etc or BEL R& D in case of in -house developed items 
and in case of ToT products, based on the recommendation of the ToT partner. 
Sometimes customers nominate a particular vendor or issue specifications of the product 
which has to be sourced from the particular supplier. In cases where orders are received 
from customers for supply of equipments / systems as upgrades of the previous supplies, 
items already evaluated and cleared are only to be used. In such cases i.e., Design 
Agency approved, Proprietary items of ToT parties / their recommended OEMs and 
customers specified / nominated sources, BEL has no choice but to procure these items 
from single specified source. 
 
It has been stated further that BEL has already initiated following actions for 
increasing the vendor base: 
 
 Initiated In -house development programmes fo r sub systems / assemblies to 
enable BEL as alternate vendor. 
 Proposed to take up with DRDO for involving BEL in vendor selection process to 
explore alternate vendors. 
 Suitable instructions to Units/ SBUs by fixing annual targets for procurement 
through multi vendor route has been issued.  
 Implementation of e-procurement system in SAP. 

 With regards to non sharing of vendor base amongst various unit of the Company, 
suitable action has been taken. ERP system has been modified to enable all units 
to share the data base of vendors which is maintained ‘Plant Wise’. 
 
2.25 On the same issue, CMD, BEL during the course of oral evidence on 27 
December, 2012 further clarified as under:- 
 
“…… BEL -DRDO interface for vendor development.  We have now institutional 
meetings with DRDO and subsequent to that point BEL is not allowed to develop 
vendors because after all the design control is by DRDO.  Therefore, any change 
in vendor has an implication on the performance of the system.  So, DRDO rightly 
said that you cannot uni laterally decide on the choice of vendors because it would 
have implications on the performance.  BEL and DRDO together should work to 
develop alternate vendors.  So, that has been now put in place.  We are 
collaborating truly and vendor development is bei ng done.  We, in fact, take the 
responsibility of trying out the alternate vendor so that alternate vendors are in 
place and this contingency management is carried out.” 
 
2.26 When asked about the reasons for rise in competition and the measures taken by 
BEL to aggressively compete in market, CMD, BEL during the course of oral evidence on  
27 December 2012 stated:- 
 
 “………previously, we were in the component business and manufactured small 
equipment basically. That was the scenario at that particular time. No w that the 
requirement has changed, we have migrated from equipment manufacturing to 
system integrator. That is one reason.  Secondly, this particular business has been 
opened to the private sector and we have to aggressively quote so that we can 
stop the entry of private sector in this particular area. That is the main reason for 
our profits coming down. In fact, we acted very strongly and have taken the 
particular competition as a challenge so that we can survive in this particular area. 
Since we have alr eady established now as Akash missile system integrator or a 
major system integrator, in the next year , and the coming year s, the response to 
this particular issue will be much better as compared to the previous years” 
 
Sir, in the last five years we have accumulated orders worth about Rs. 
38,000 crore. Now, in this, almost 70 per cent is on the basis of a single vendor 
nomination to BEL, and the remaining 30 per cent is through competition within the 
country; through other private sector companies; and thr ough other international 
competition. Now, as a policy, we are conscious that these nominations to BEL 
would diminish in the future. Therefore, we would be requiring to take on 
competition both within the co untry as well as through the global route, which the 
defence forces are adopting. As a result of that we have now put in place 
mechanisms by which our productivity improves regularly. 
 
We have a Cost Reduction Committee, which focuses on reducing our 
costs, and we are also sensitising our marketing perso nnel to become much more 

aggressive in our approach to addressing the market . So, all these strategic 
initiatives coupled with our in -house R&D efforts are there. It is because much of 
the product cost comes from the material cost. Therefore, there is a need to drive 
down the material cost down, which means we have to focus on in -house 
development. Now, the R&D activities have been triggered as more than 100 
projects are in the pipeline where the development activities are taking place either 
through in-house R&D or in collaboration with the DRDO laboratories.”  
 
2.27 When asked about the development of future markets,  Secretary, Department of 
Defence Production during the course of oral evidence on 12 February 2013 stated:- 
  
“The future market in this is security sensitive and high -value denied items. For 
this, BEL are the best people for us. They understand the requirement and go 
ahead.  Now, the future is directed energy weapons which would be laser-based – 
laser-dazzlers and laser beams to attack the UA Vs. We have just started working.  
These are all big businesses. So, future comfort is there in this  one time 
advantage.  When we come to low -end, where something is available and where 
it is also available for the users from the outside, there is some pro blem. What 
comes from outside is coming from well established production line. It comes like 
Mark-II, Mark-III and Mark-IV. Initially, we take our Mark-I and compete with that. 
So, we always have that disadvantage. Sometimes, we are allowed to make it and 
sometimes the users feel that outside system is better, we leave it.  So, we leave 
it for acquisition and it is okay. On security sensitive things, high -value items and 
complex systems, we are working very well together and both are very happy.” 
 
2.28 Regarding the marketing initiatives taken by the Company, Department of Defence 
Production in a written reply have stated that they have initiated various actions and 
marketing strategies including recruitment of ex -service personnel, conducting marketing 
conferences, imparting short term and long term professional training in marketing to 
executive by top business schools like Indian Institute of Management (IIM).  Besides, the 
Company is in the process of creating a central marketing research group with the 
objective of securing required marketing intelligence, address the marketing challenges, 
identifying new business opportunities and gaining competitive intelligence.  With these 
initiatives the Company is confident of achieving desired performance in the co ming 
years.  
 
(c) Quality of Products 
 
2.29 In a note furnished to the Committee, it has been stated that BEL adopted the Total 
Quality Management (TQM) philosophy in the year 1990 under the acronym "TORQUE"  
which  stands  for  "Total  Organisational  Quality  Enhancement".   
 
2.30 Customer satisfaction survey was conducted during the year for six products from 
different Units / SBUs.  In the survey, overall customer satisfaction was found to be 81.33%. 
As part of the customer satisfaction initiatives duri ng the year, the Company organised a 
Technology Seminar for the Naval customers.   

 
2.31 When asked whether the Department of Defence Production conducts 
independent quality checks of the products supplied by BEL , the Department in their post 
evidence reply submitted that the Ministry have well established procedures, norms and 
guidelines with stringent acceptable quality standards, parameters and criterion for all the 
supplies to services. Quality checks are carried out with the objective of ensuring total  
security of the Nation. The validation of product/system/services supplied by BEL and 
other agencies with respect to Quality is carried out by the Ministry through their 
associated Defence Institutions/Establishments like Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance (DGQA) etc. Residential Inspectors have been deployed at the manufacturing 
units of BEL & other DPSUs as well as at the user sites. DGQA conducts validation and 
inspection on the quality of the products through agencies/establishments as follows:-  
 
Products for Army   : SQAE -Senior Quality Assurance Establishment 
CQAE-Controllerate of Quality Assurance 
Electronics MAG -Maintainability Advisory Group  
Products for Navy  :  CQAE (WE)  
Products for Air Force :  ORDAQA -Office of Regional Director AQA  
(Aircraft) 
  
2.32 Besides, other establishments like CAIR (Center for Artificial Intelligence), DARE 
(Defence Avionics Research Establishment), DEAL (Defence Electronics application 
Laboratories, DLRL (Defence Electronic Research Laboratories), DRDE (Defe nce 
Research & Development Establishment), DRDL (Defence Research and Development 
Laboratories), LRDE (Electronics & Radar Development Centre), LASTEC (Laser Science 
& Technology Centre), MTRDC (Microwave Tube Research & Development Centre), 
NSTL (Naval Sc ience & Technologies Laboratory), SAG (Scientific Advisory Group) etc., 
continuously interacts with the DPSUs for various checks and validation of the 
products/systems/services based on the nature of the projects. 
 
2.33 When asked about the media reports o n certain defence equipments including 
Night Vision Devices (NVD) being returned by the Armed Forces on account of poor 
quality and faulty equipments, the CMD, BEL during the course of the oral evidence held 
on 12 February, 2013 clarified: 
 
“The article which you referred to belongs to Shri Rajesh Shukla.  The total article 
is not correct.  We have called the Business Standard editor also and told him, why 
did you publish this article without asking us?  He has apologized and a rejoinder 
will be published there”. 
 
2.34 Clarifying further in the matter , the Secretary, Department of Defence Production 
stated: 
 
“I will only add that as the private sector enters, we apprehend that news items 
would be a little more common.” 
 

2.35 During the course of the Oral Evi dence held on 12 February, 2013 when this 
question was put to the representative of DRDO, he stated: 
 
“Sir, you mentioned about electro optics. Electro optics is a vast field. 2 ½ years 
back there were a lot of articles that the Army is night blind and the y are unable to 
fight. It is because of two reasons. One is, image intensifier based sights in short 
distance. For 200 m and 300 m, we require a hand -held image intensifier or 
weapon sights are required for aiming at short distance. The second thing is 
thermal imager at long distances. For 20 kms., again, huge optics is required. After 
this, there was a meeting with hon. Defence Minister in the chair where everybody 
was present. We worked out a plan in consultation with the Army and today I am 
happy to say that everywhere situation is under control regarding this night fighting 
capability. 
 
As Chairman, BEL mentioned, our tanks, T -72, T -90, BMP came from 
Russia. The commander is night blind. He is not able to see beyond 30 metres. 
Now we have given them the equipment through which he can see 3 ½ kms. The 
users on the ground are very happy. Actually, DRDO is not a commercial 
organisation. Our happiness comes when we see that what our young engineers 
develop reaches the hands of the soldier who is in the field.  So, when we take the 
equipment to the field and he expresses happiness and says, ‘Yes, this is what I 
want, I am now able to see 3 ½ kms. and I want this for all my tanks’. Now, as the 
Secretary mentioned, there is a large order coming up with Bharat Electronics.” 
 
2.36 When asked whether the Department has made any assessment or obtained any 
feedback from users, the Department in a written reply stated that a ssessing customer 
perception in BEL is an ongoing activity.  There are many interfaces with the cu stomer 
wherein the reactions/feedbacks of the customers are available.  Some of these avenues 
are: 
 
(i). Top Management interactions with the senior officers in the customers’ 
organization  
 
(ii). Institutional meetings at defined intervals with major customer.  Meet ings are 
held at the working group levels of both the sides followed by the meetings at 
senior officer level. 
 
(iii). Various interactive forums like product presentations, trials, evaluations, 
PNCs etc wherein senior officers (including General Managers) from va rious 
departments like R&D, Engineering, Production, Marketing & Sales attend. 
 
(iv). Day-to-day interactions of the Production & Quality personnel with the DGQA 
officers and staff attached to the plants as well as liaison offices / 
detachments (like MAG of the Army) of the Services in the Units of BEL. 
 
(v). Interaction by the liaison teams at the depots / docks. 

 
(vi). Interaction by the installation/product support personnel at the user sites. 
 
(vii). Feedbacks collected during the warranty & guarantee period of service. 
 
(viii). Customer complaints received during the life cycle of the product. 
 
(ix). As a part of Quality month celebrations during the month of November, 
customer meet is conducted by units / SBUs to capture the perceptions of the 
customers. 
 
 The above listed fora are being t reated as an indirect source for assessing the 
customer perceptions on the products & services provided by the Company.  
Traditionally, many corrective actions/follow up actions were initiated in the Company 
based on such feedbacks.   
 
(d) Customer Satisfaction  
 
2.37 In a written note furnished to the Committee, the Department of Defence 
Production have informed that their endeavour is to enhance the customer satisfaction 
level. It has been conducting customer satisfaction surveys every year. This survey i s 
being conducted through an independent professional body to bring in objectivity. 
Different sets of questionnaires are designed depending upon the products. The study is 
to evaluate Customer Satisfaction index based on the following attributes: 
  
 Product performance 
 Maintenance 
 Service  
 Overall perception 
 
2.38 The responses are rated in a 10 point scale.  The agency has its own special 
software to analyse the responses to give out meaningful and actionable guidelines to the 
management.  A report indicati ng the areas of weakness and possible actions needed to 
improve the ratings, is submitted for initiating necessary actions. 
 
2.39 Around 8 -10 products are chosen every year and index arrived at. The average 
Customer Satisfaction Index (CSI) for the past 5 years is around 80%. To summarize, the 
feedback from customer on BEL’s product has been positive and meets the desired 
performance levels. 
 
2.40 In a note furnished to the Committee, BEL stated that a Customer Coordination 
Cell has been set -up.  When asked  if the Cell has become operational and is it 
functioning effectively since its inception, BEL in a written reply stated that there is a 
Customer Coordination Cell that was set up on 8 December 2011 and has been fully 
operational since then.  The Cell has been functioning very effectively since its inception 
and carries out the following functions:- 

 
 Capture Customer Complaints. 
 Attend to Customer Calls on Toll Free Number. 
 Provide Feedback to Customers on status of Customer Complaints. 
 Generate Weekly, Mon thly & Quarterly Reports on Customer Complaints to 
Product Support groups and Management. 
 Generate trend curves on Customer Complaints for analysis. 
 Provide Suggestions for continuous improvement of the CRM module of SAP. 
 
The Customer Coordination Cell is headed by an Additional General Manager(AGM). 
 
 The following is the summary of activities carried out by Customer Coordination 
Cell up to December 2012: 
 
Number of Customer Complaints registered in CRM 3634 
Number of Customer Complaints Resolved 3296 
 
 The Complaints are monitored effectively by generating reports based on following 
criteria:- 
 
 SBU-wise complaint data. 
 Product-wise complaint data. 
 Service-wise (Army, Navy, Air Force) complaint data. 
 Speed of resolution of Complaints. 
 Complaints pending for more than specified duration, say 2 weeks. 
 
 By effective monitoring, Company is able to reduce the percentage of pending 
complaints from 47% in March 2012 to 9% as on December 2012, even though the 
cumulative total of complaints received have increase d from 1024 to 3634 during the 
period. 
 
2.41 It is observed from post evidence reply furnished by BEL  that out of 83 products  
delivered to the armed forces during the last five years, there was delay in delivery of 27 
products.  The delay period ranges fro m one month to more than two years for certain 
products. The products include NISHAN, HHTI, ADVANCED LAND NAVIGATION 
SYSTEM, COMBAT NET RADIO (CNR), LUP BOOSTER, ELLORA, etc.  The major 
delays are in delivery of products such as TRANSPORTABLE SATCOM TERMINAL, FCS 
LYNX U1 P16 AND CMS (SNF) where the delay period is of more than two years.   
 
2.42 BEL has stated that generally the products like STARS -V, VPS, RRF, VRC6100, 
EK896, Digital Mobile Radio Relay, Sonobuoy, Tarang, CAR Rohini, etc., are delivered 
ontime.  There are certain delays mainly in system integration and network centric 
systems due to the accord of Bulk Production Clearance, change in configuration by 
customer, site readiness etc.  Some of the actions initiated to improve ontime delivery are: 
 
 Proactive product development. 
 Introduction / upgradation of infrastructure 

 Improvement in Operational processes  
 Project Management Training to officers 
 Optimum utilization of SAP 
 
2.43 When asked if there was any arrangement for After Sale Service provi ded by BEL 
to its customers and if so, whether the customer are satisfied with the arrangement , BEL 
in its written reply stated that there is  a very good arrangement for providing After Sale 
Service to its customers. Every SBU has a Product Support group which addresses all 
requirements of After Sales Service during Warranty and beyond Warranty throughout  
the life of the equipment.   Besides this, BEL has set up the Customer  Coordination 
Cell with Toll Free number (1800-425-0433) to capture  all Customer requests for 
After Sales Service. Three AGMs have been  appointed (one for  each Service) at 
Corporate Office to monitor the Customer Complaints/requests pertaining to After Sales 
Service. BEL has also been proactively proposing Annual Maintenance Contracts (AM C), 
Rate Repair Contracts (RRC) and Refurbishment packages for its products supplied to 
customers.  Structured  progress  review  meetings  such  as Weapons  Electronics  &  
Sensors  Maintenance Management  Committee (WESMMC)  for Navy, Product 
Performance Reviews (PPR) for Air Force, Spares  Production  Progress  Review  
(SPPR) for  Army  and  Institutional Meetings are held periodically with senior officers of 
the Defence Services to address all Product Support issues. 
 
 BEL has also set up Water Front Support facilities at Mumbai, Visakhapatnam  and  
Kolkata  and  Product Support Centre  at  Kochi  to provide immediate product support to 
the fleet of Naval ships and units in these  stations.  For Air Force, Regional  Support 
Centres have been set up at  Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Pune, Sulur and Guwahati and 
in addition, resident engineers have been positioned at Jodhpur, Wadsar, Ambala, Aya 
Nagar and Barnala to provide After Sales Service. The Regional Service Centre (RSC) 
set up at Delhi provides After Sales Service to the three services  and Civilian 
Customers. BEL  has also set up a Liaison Cell at COD  Agra  and  positioned  
resident  engineers  at  Kolkata,  Tezpur  and Jammu to provide customer support 
services for Army. 
 
 In addition to the above, the Regional offices and Marketing Centres at Delhi,  
Mumbai,  Kolkata and Visakhapatnam liaise with customers and provide  after  sales  
support  through  the  concerned  SBUs  and  Service Centres of BEL. 
 
 The Customers are satisfied with the After Sales Service provided by BEL. 
However, there are certain suggestions received from customers as well as certain  
proactive steps  taken by BEL to improve After Sales Service, as indicated below: 
 
(a) Stocking  of  Critical  Spares  at  RPSCs  and  Strategic  Equipment Sites: 
Based on request from Air Force, critical spares have been placed at  Regional 
Product Support Centres (RPSCs) and strategic equipment sites which have 
reduced the down time of equipments considerably. 
 
(b) Obsolescence Management: An effective Obsolescence Management is being  
implemented using COTS software integrated with BEL’s SAP system.  This  

will  indicate  components  which  are  likely  to  become obsolete  / out of 
production in  the near future, so that appropriate action can be initiated f or 
Last Time Buy. 
 
(c) Recruitment of Ex-service men: In addition to the existing Ex-service men at  
various service centers, additional Ex-service men are being considered for 
recruitment to improve After Sales Service. 
 
(d) Frequent Operator & maintainer Training: Frequent operator and maintainer 
training are being provided to the Customers whenever the crew changes or 
on  request. This will result in proper usage of the equipment and its 
maintenance. 
 
(e) Root Cause Analysis and Six Sigma Projects: Root cause analysis are carried 
out to address the frequent failures and Six Sigma projects are initiated  to  
improve  the   design/manufacturing  process,  so  as  to improve the overall 
Quality and reliability of the equipment. 
 
(f) Life Cycle Support for Equipment: Customers are requesting for 12 year  
product support for all new contracts/orders.  Accordingly, BEL is providing  
proposals inclusive of 12 year support for new products.  The initial ordering of 
the systems  inclusive of 12 year product support, enables BEL to cater for 
adequate spares, infrastructure and manpower to provide satisfactory After 
Sales Service. 
 
(e) Performance Review  
  
2.44 It is the responsibility of the Department of Defence Production to identify the 
problems beyond the control of the BEL management and provide possible solution.  
When asked to indicate, how many problems of BEL were reported to the Department 
and how effectively action was taken, the Department of Defence Production stated in 
reply that Ministry of Defence exten ds necessary support to BEL by not only identifying 
the problems beyond its control, but has also been helping the Company to overcome 
and resolve those issues. Few of such instances are given below: 
 
 Whenever BEL comes across issues related to export clea rance, the Ministry 
extend help in resolving the same. One such example is for the Slew Ring 
Bearings used in Akash Weapon System, where the Ministry had helped BEL to 
obtain export clearance through discussions with Indian Embassy German Wing & 
German Aut horities. This resulted in the progress of the project as per the 
timelines. 
 
 During the execution of Akash Weapon System project, BEL was  facing problems 
due to delayed supply of missiles by one of the consortium partners, since this type 
of missile was manufactured by OEM for the first time.  The Ministry intervened and 
facilitated to resolve these issues and enabled supply of missiles.  
 

 Obtaining Site Clearance for some of the sites during the execution of Coastal 
Surveillance System Project across the  Indian Coastline was a concern and also 
impacted the delivery schedule. The Ministry intervened appropriately to enable 
BEL to overcome these issues. 
 
2.45 When asked how many quarterly performance review meetings of BEL were held 
by the Department during  ech of the last three years, the Department of Defene 
Production in a written reply submitted that the Ministry of Defence conducts regular 
review meetings covering business performance and other related aspects. Totally, 25 
performance appraisal meetings  related to Project Performance, Modernization, Fund 
Drawal, R&D, Order Acquisition etc., were held during the last 3 years (2008 -09, 2009-10 
& 2010-11) and 7 meetings were held during 2011-12.  Some of the major actions initiated 
by the Company arising out of reviews by the Ministry are given below: 
 
 Review meetings chaired by Secretary, Department of Defence Production with 
shipyards & other DPSUs on progress of major projects enabled BEL to overcome 
the issues related to Sonars and Ship Data Network. 
 
 New requirements & delivery commitments of Navy customer necessitated the 
formation of additional Strategic Business Unit (SBU) in the area of Naval Radar & 
Fire control systems. 
 
 In the backdrop of 26/11 terrorist attack at Mumbai, the Company initiated 
proactive action to establish chain of static sensors at coast line of the country to 
dynamically detect and track suspicious vessels entering Indian waters. 
 
 Setting up of BEL Product Support Centre at Kochi to provide waterfront support 
for the Southern Naval Command. 
 
 Preparation of Strategic Vision Document of the Company. The business , both 
Defence & Non-Defence has been analyzed and planned in its entirety. The study 
covered in detail various business aspects like Marketing, Technology, Product 
development, Infrastructure, Manufacturing processes, Human Resources, etc.   
 
 Implementation of e -procurement module to bring in more transparency  & Cycle 
Time reduction in procurement.   
 
 To further ensure Transparency & Probity in Procurement, Supplier Relation ship 
Management (SRM) is being implemented across the Company. 
 
 Customer Coordination Cell at Bengaluru to serve as single point window for 
complaint registration on wide range of BEL products and maintain status of 
complaint online. 
 
 Thrust by the Ministr y on indigenisation resulted in development of structured 
three year R&D Plan to benefit the Company in the long-run. 
 

2.46 When asked what specific directions / instructions were given by the Department to 
ensure that BEL’s targetted physical and financia l performance are achieved, it was 
stated that the Ministry has been extending necessary assistance in acquisition of orders 
to meet the targeted turnover. The review meetings conducted by the Ministry on 
progress of major projects involving customer repre sentatives has enabled to resolve 
critical issues related to projects and thereby ensuring smooth dispatch of the project. The 
Ministry regularly issue formal directions/instructions to BEL to initiate necessary actions 
towards achieving the targeted physi cal and financial performance. The performance of 
the Company is periodically reviewed and monitored to enable BEL to take appropriate 
corrective measures to achieve its annual targets. The Ministry lay great emphasis on 
delivery of equipment on time to meet requirements of the Armed forces. 
 
2.47 When asked about the problems, if any, faced by BEL, BEL stated that intervention 
of the Department of Defence Production in the following areas could help BEL to tide 
them:- 
 
(a) Funding of Strategically Critical Tec hnology Projects e.g. IR Detector (Cooled & 
Un-cooled), II Tubes, IF & RF Seekers, High Power Laser etc. 
 
(b) Placement of order of Security Sensitive Projects on DPSUs only – EW Systems. 
 
(c) Level Playing Field: Regulation of Private sector for Defence Business – Same 
policies as applicable to DPSUs (Vigilance, Security, CAG, etc.). 
 
(d) Custom Duty Exemption for proactive Development Projects. 
 
(e) Disposal of obsolete inventory to generate revenue -Amendment required in 
Custom Duty rules. 
 
(f) Exemption of Octroi (approx 3. 5%) for BEL and BEL Optronic Devices Limited in 
Pune (Maharashtra). 
 
(g) Shorter evaluation cycle time for indigenized products. 
 
(h) Early placement of order for which trials have been completed successfully. 
 
2.48 When asked if the aforesaid issues were brought to the notice of the Department of 
Defence Production by BEL and if so, has the Department taken up the above matters 
with the concerned ministries, the Department of Defence Production in their post 
evidence reply stated that  BEL has discussed with Department of Defence Production on 
the above issues, some of which fairly recently.  BEL has been directed to submit 
proposals in this regard and m atters will be taken up with concerned Ministries on receipt 
of proposals from BEL. 
 
2.49 It was observed from a w ritten reply furnished by BEL that during the last five 
years, the Company had lost around 2 8 contracts amounting to Rs. 1624 crore in primary 

business.  One of the main reasons for this loss of contracts was stated to be that in case 
of a global tender, t he pricing by an overseas vendor when compared to the Company 
was more competitive due to the fact that the overseas vendor incured ‘nil’ customs duty, 
excise duty and sales tax.  In case of services, the ‘reverse charge’ mechanism in India 
further put the burden of service tax on import of services on the Company and not on the 
overseas vendor.  When asked if the Ministry of Defence was aware of this problem faced 
by BEL and if so, what efforts were made by the Ministry to address this problem, the 
Secretary, Defence Production during evidence submitted as under: 
 
“I would like to express thanks to the Committee – the issues concerning to 
customs and so on, these were brought to our notice for the first time because of 
questioning by the Committee. BEL also  brought to our attention for the first time 
now. I would assure the hon. Committee that these are the issues which prima 
facie we have examined; we find that there is a lot of merit in what BEL is telling. 
There are some things which I can set right in th e Ministry, I will do that; there are 
certain things which are to be taken up with the Finance Ministry, I will do that also. 
I would like to express my thanks to the Committee that one aspect which was not 
known to us…” 

CHAPTER III 
 
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
 
(a) Research and Development 
 
3.1 In a written note furnished to the Committees, BEL stated that Research and 
Development activities formally started at Bharat Electronics Ltd. since early 1960s in its 
only plant at Bengaluru at that time. As the Bengaluru plant grew with time in terms of 
various divisions dealing with varieties of products, R&D facilities were set up for each 
division to focus on new product development and providing product support in the 
respective areas. With the passage of time as t he Company kept expanding in terms of 
multi-unit corporate with multi -product and multi -technology portfolios, R&D facilities of 
the Company also kept pace in terms of expanding the facilities for each unit. At present, 
all the 9 Units of BEL have their in -house R&D facilities concentrating product and 
technology developments to support the business objectives of these BEL Units. R&D 
Policy of the Company is to enhance BEL’s pre -eminence in Defence Electronics and 
other chosen fields and products.  
 
3.2 Other than these in -house R&D Centres for each Manufacturing facilities, Bharat 
Electronics has set up two Central Research Laboratories at Bengaluru and Ghaziabad to 
carry out R&D activities for the development of state -of-the-art technology modules 
required for the development of products taken up for development or to be taken up in 
future. BEL also has a Central – Development & Engineering division located within 
Bengaluru unit to cater for development of technology modules in the fields of RF, 
Microwaves, DSP, Encryption, Power Supply, Radar Signal Processing & Software as 
required by the product development R&D units across all units of BEL. 
 
3.3 The analysis of turnover of the Company for the year 2011 - 12 indicates that 54% of 
the turnover is from BEL developed products, 27% of the turnover is from products 
developed in association with DRDO and other National Labs and remaining 19% is from 
products for which technologies were acquired through foreign ToTs.  During 2011 - 12, BEL 
has spent a sum of Rs. 468 crore on R&D.  The total expenditure as percentage of turnover 
during the year was 8.21%. 
  
3.4 The R&D expenditure as percentage of turnover in comparison to the R&D 
expenditure as percentage of total expenditure is given below:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Achievement Details 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1. R&D Expenditure as % of 
turnover 
3.55% 5.10% 5.26% 6.05% 7.02% 8.21% 
2. R&D Expenditure as % of total 
expenditure 
4.53% 6.62% 5.67% 6.99% 8.24% 8.24% 
 
3.5 Regarding the development of new products by the R&D Division, BEL has informed 
that during 2011 - 12, different R&D Divisions of BEL have completed development of 

varieties of new products / systems / technology modules. Some of the new products / 
systems introduced during the year include Costal Surveillance System, Tablet PC, 
Integrated Anti Submarine Warfare Complex, Advanced Torpedo Defence System, Digital 
Radio Trunking System, Integrated Radio Line Modem.,Remotely Operated Vehicle, 
Thermal Imaging Camera for Flycatcher Radar etc.  
 
3.6 Scientists from Central Research Laboratories and other R & D divisions of BEL 
have contributed 55 Technical Papers in the national and international journals during the 
year.  
 
3.7 It is observed from the Annual Report (2009 -10) that BEL had submitted only two 
patent applications during the year.  When asked how the Company plan to increase its 
research activities so as to increase the number of patent applications in future, BEL in 
their written reply  clarifying further stated that p reviously, BEL had  not p atented the 
technologies developed in-house for defence equipment. However, in order to protect the 
intellectual property rights for the new technologies/processes developed or being 
developed within the Company, an aggressive campaign has been initiated o ver the past 
two year s. Many new technologies/processes that have been developed in the recent 
past have been identified for patenting. Also, awareness on patents is being created 
among all R&D engineers through lectures by reputed Patent Advisors. An in -house R&D 
Award for Patents was introduced. With the above thrust and initiatives on patenting, BEL 
has filed 12 Patent applications during 2011 -12 and filed 7 applications till Aug 2012 
during current year. 
 
3.8 When asked how the R&D initiatives are manag ed by the Company and whether 
BEL has any collaboration with Universities/Institutions, research bodies etc. in its R&D 
activities, BEL in a written reply stated that the Director (R&D) of BEL oversees all the 
R&D activities of BEL. The R&D groups in BEL are arranged in a three tiered structure for 
developing new technologies and equipment:-  
 
 Each Strategic Business Unit (SBU) has Development & Engineering (D&E) group, 
which focuses on the Equipment / System level developments in the core 
technology area assigned to them.  
 
 Central D&E, located at Bengaluru develops the core Technology Modules and 
facilitates the product development by the SBUs.  
 
 Central Research Laboratories (CRL), located at Bengaluru and Ghaziabad are 
engaged in applied research and bri ng out futuristic technologies in the areas of 
interest to the Company.  
 
 R&D initiatives in BEL are well managed by a structured mechanism which 
involves:- 
 
 Release of 3 year R&D Plan for all individual SBUs / Units and monthly monitoring 
of on-going projects. 
 

 Implementation of Knowledge Management Portal in SAP. 
 
 Monitoring of new R&D projects, which are to be initiated, as per R&D Plan. 
 
 Monitoring of R&D Expenditure in each SBU / Unit. 
 
 Review of critical projects, along with customers 
 
 Encouraging R&D Engineers to present papers in International / National Seminars 
/ Conferences. 
 
 Identifying and imparting specialized technical training for R&D Engineers 
 
 Recognizing the R&D efforts through in-house R&D Awards scheme and also 
applying for suitable external Awards. 
 
 More than 50% of the products of the Company’s turnover is in-house developed. 
For the balance of around 30%, DRDO forms a major development partner.  
 
3.9 The Committee observed from the Minutes of BEL Board Meetings of 27.12.2011 
that one of the Directors of the Company had felt that the customer interface as well as 
marketing and R&D interface is wear the BEL and there is need to modify the Company 
strategy to neglect customer focus.  When asked what specific action was taken by the 
Company to improve its R&D interface, BEL in a post evidence reply submitted that there 
are number of initiatives taken up to improve customer focus both by marketing and 
R&D. In R&D, to improve customer focus in core business segments, BEL has 
introduced  core R&D committees in area of Radar, Communication & Electro Optics 
and other areas are in progress. Technology owners for each of  the  core  business  
segments  have  been  identified  to  support  the developmental  activities. These 
committees will meet regularly to discuss the  User requirements in their respective 
area, eg., Radars, and come out with specific actions like type of projects to be under 
taken & which R&D group is to initiate this development and role of technology owners 
in this developmental effort. 
 
3.10 BEL added that R&D & technology planning representatives participate in the 
marketing conference held periodically to understand the User requirements. Likewise,  
marketing & strategic planning representatives participate in the R&D  conferen ce to 
have better cross-function interactions in order to improve customer focus. 
 
3.11 It was further stated by BEL that R&D representatives participate in user specific 
institutional review meetings to have closer interactions with users for better 
understanding of their needs.  R&D representatives have participated and presented 
papers in seminars conducted by  BEL for  users in core technology areas like 
Radars, C4I, Electronic Warfare, Electro Optics and also in User Meet programs in 
case of large programs like Akash Missile System. 
 
 

 
3.12 The Committee observed from the Minutes of the BEL Board Meeting held on 
27.12.2012 that the turnout time for R&D projects was 1 -3 years depending upon the size 
and complexity.  To a query whether any efficiency audit of R&D projects has been 
carried out and if so, the outcome thereof, BEL stated in a written reply as follows: 
 
“Methodology of measuring in -house R&D value addition in R&D projects across 
SBUs / Units of BEL has been introduced in the company during August 2012.  The 
outcome of this measurement was carried out for last five years and has shown 
significant in -house R&D value addition of around 56% (average) across BEL.  
There is a steady increase in products in our sales turnover arising out of in -house 
& j oint development with DRDO and other design agencies.  Turnover from 
Indigenous technology has increased from 75% in 2008-09 to 81% in 2011-12.” 
 
3.13 When asked how BEL ensured that there is no duplication of R&D efforts by BEL 
and other organizations in our country, BEL replied as follows: 
 
“Technology Roadmap is prepared centrally by Technology Planning Division at 
Corporate Office, which reflects the critical technologies that are required to be 
developed in each of the core business segments and also t he methodology of 
development.  The development methodology can be in -house R&D, or jointly with 
DRDO, or other Government R&D Institutions, or ToT from foreign OEMs, or jointly 
with any Indian Industry.  This assessment is based on the technology gap stud y 
and the status of maturity of requisite technology available, both in -house and with 
external agencies mentioned above, for bringing out new products to meet user 
requirements. 
 
 The technology roadmap is used as one of the critical inputs in bringing ou t 
a three -year roll -on R&D Plan every year, centrally by Technology Planning 
Division at Corporate Office, which gives the details on all R&D programs, both 
currently under progress and the future plans, across BEL in all its R&D centres.  
Since this activ ity is coordinated centrally it ensures that BEL does not duplicate 
R&D efforts taking place elsewhere in the country and also in-house R&D centres.” 
 
3.14 Regarding the future plan of action of R&D activities, BEL informed that a t hree 
year R&D Plan has b een made for each R & D division of BEL based on customers' 
perspectives and technology road map. Infrastructure, Capital items and requisite 
manpower as required for the R & D divisions have been identified and being allocated on 
priority. In - house development efforts will be given the top most priority. Co - operation 
with DRDO, other National Labs, design agencies and academic institutions will be 
strengthened for other indigenous developments. Interactions with foreign companies for 
taking up of joint development projects will be encouraged where necessary. 
 

(b) Indigenisation 
 
3.15 In a written note furnished to the Committee, BEL informed that the objective of 
indigenisation is to: 
 
 Minimize dependence on foreign partners 
 Acquire knowledge in different technology areas 
 Cost effectiveness through import substitution 
 Increase in value addition within the country 
 Protecting nation’s security 
 Self-reliance 
 
 Indigenous technology at BEL is developed in following ways: 
 
 In house R&D efforts. 
 Joint develop ment with National Labs (like DRDO, ISRO, CSIR,  C-DOT, 
Academic Institutions etc.). 
 Convergence of indigenous  technologies of interest of BEL developed by 
various indigenous design houses in India. 
 System & turnkey projects designed by BEL and realized thr ough integration  
of  bought out subsystems for faster availability of desired systems to 
customer. 
 Absorption of ToT in phased manner and bring ing out new products as 
variants. 
 
BEL has se t up in -house R&D facilities to facilitate development of  
technology in all the nine manufacturing units of the Company spread over the 
country.  In addition a Central Development and Engineering Division inside its 
Bengaluru Unit caters to the needs of designing and supplying of common core 
technology modules required t o develop various electronic equipment and 
systems. Company has also  set up  two  Central  Research  Laboratories  at 
Bengaluru and Ghaziabad to carry out research and development in the critical 
and enabling technologies required for the current and ‘futuristic products ’. 
Company spends around 7-8% of its turnover on R&D activities. 
 
3.16 It is observed that the Defence sector is increasingly being opened for private 
sector participation and changes are being brought into the defence purchase procedure.  
When asked whether any roadmap was drawn by the Company to remain a leader in the 
market in view of the increasing private sector participation in the defence sector, BEL in 
its written reply  stated that w ith an aim to enhance the indigenous content, the Indian 
Defence sector has been  opened  up  for  participation  by  private  companies.  Entry of 
private sector in defence  has resulted in increased competition, reduced margins, etc. 
This has posed a challenge to the Company in maintaining a sustained  growth and 
retaining the Defence market share in the prevailing competitive environment. BEL is 
fully geared up to handle competitive environment.   In this regard, BEL is taking pro-

active steps to protect and consolidate its leadership  position in the Indian Defence 
market while at the same time accelerate  the  efforts  to  get  into  new  business  
areas.  Some  of  the initiatives taken up by BEL to enhance its competitiveness are:- 
 
(a) Venturing into new technology Areas & indigenisation 
 
 Company has been working on new areas like Battlefield Management 
System, Future Infantry Soldier as A System (FINSAS), Ground Support Radar  
(GSR),  Tactical  Communication  System  (TCS),  Software  Defined Radio  
(SDR), Homeland Security System (HLS) etc. This will yield sales in the coming 
years. 
 
 Self-reliance is one of the objectives of the Company to meet the 
strategic needs  of  the nation. In view of the increasing competition in the 
open market era,  indigenisation has become one of the thrust areas of BEL. 
Indigenous technology at BEL is developed in following ways: 
 
 In house R&D efforts 
 Joint development with  national labs ( like DRDO, ISRO, CSIR, C-DOT, 
Academic institutions, etc) 
 Convergence of indigenous technologies of interest to BEL developed by 
various indigenous design houses in India 
 System  &  turnkey  projects  designed  by  BEL  and  realized  through 
integration of  bought out subsystems for faster availability of desired 
systems to customer. Indigenisation of subsystems for future needs. 
 
(b) Cost reduction 
 
Cost Reduction for Survival has been the motto of the Company. Specific 
thrust has been given to cost reduction in all areas of activity.  Task Forces 
have been formed in all the Units to address areas like i ndigenisation, design  
change, alternate sourcing, alternate components, Process / yield improvement, 
negotiations, energy savings etc. This has resulted in a significant cost reduction 
in all the Units of BEL.  Because of BEL’s continuous cost reduction efforts,  it 
could contain the cost escalations and could absorb the usual escalations due  to  
inflation, etc., and offer the products without escalating its prices over the  last 
supply prices or with minor increase in prices. 
 
(c) Enhanced product support 
 
 Product support activity has been one of the focus areas of BEL. There has 
been  constant effort in this direction to bring in quantum improvement from its 
existing  levels to provide effective product support. The various initiatives taken 
by BEL in this aspect are: 
 

 Commonly used spares made available to customers at short notice 
 
 Strengthening water front support teams at Mumbai, Vizag, Kolkata 
 
 In addition to the above, BEL has set up a product support Center at 
Kalamsassary in Kochi. The support center has enabled BEL to provide 
product  support to Indian Navy for the platforms coming under the 
Southern Naval Command 
 
 Dedicated segment wise project groups for better focus 
 
 Special Test facilities established for comprehensive evaluation in the 
Factory / Commands 
 
 Implementation of Company wide Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) to 
reduce MTTR (Mean Time To Repair) 
 
 For effective complaint management, a Customer Co-ordination cell has been 
set up at Bengaluru Complex to serve as a single window for complaint 
registration &  status monitoring on a wide range of BEL products. 
 
 Product  support  seminars  are  conducted  periodically.  The  seminar mainly 
aims at new initiatives to enhance product support, sharing of best practices 
across the Company on product support process, etc. 
 
(d) Diversification, New business initiatives & Thrust on Exports 
 
 BEL is stressing on major areas of diversification, formation of joint ventures 
and is also laying thrust on exports for which it is identifying some African and 
South East Asian countries.   
 
(e) Infrastructure upgradation 
 
 BEL has been continuously modernizing its infrastructure to be in tune 
with the changing needs of the technology /products. Specific groups in all the  
units scan the technology changes that are taking place and identify new test 
equipment / machinery in the world market for acquisition. This enab les the 
Company to maintain its infrastructure at par with international  standards. The 
Company has been spending around Rs 250 - 300 Crs on capital investments 
every year from internal accruals. 
 
(f) Public- Private Partnership 
 
 The combined presence will lead to collaborations with significant value 
additions, innovations , faster technology development and also  giant strides 

towards self -reliance. In order  to reap the maximum benefits, both DPSU  & 
Private sector should evolve as partners and complement each other in  bringing  
the   State-of-the-art   technologies  for  production  of defence systems. This will 
ensure in creating  strong defence industrial base. The benefits derived out of 
Public Private Partnership are: 
 
 Enhanced Self- reliance 
 National resources not replicated 
 Access to high end technology 
 Access to world class capabilities 
 Increased customer satisfaction 
 
 Some of  the  projects  executed  by  BEL  on  Public  Private  Partnership 
include Akash weapon system, Samyukta, etc.. 
 
(g) Future outlook 
 
 The business (both defence & civilian) has been examined and planned in 
its entirety. All the essential elements of business are addressed adequately and in 
right proportion. The study has covered in detail various business aspects like 
Marketing, Technology, Product development, Infrastructure, manufacturing 
processes, Human resources, etc. 
 
3.17 Asked about suggestions of DRDO to make BEL operations fully in synergy with 
the Defence requirements, a representative of DRDO stated during the oral evidence on 
12 February 2013 as follows:- 
 
“The situation is becoming more and more competitive.  Now, everybody wants the 
private sector also to play.  Number one is quality and timely delivery.  With regard 
to timely delivery and quality, as of now the BEL is doing well.  Then comes 
support.  The way the Defence PSUs are able to support the Services, the private 
sector will not be able to support.  So, this complaint regarding private sector will 
come in later. But as of now this competition exists.  
 
 Now, what is happening is, on security areas like where there is secrecy 
requirement in communication, these models have to be incorporated.  Only BEL 
does it, we do not go to private sector.  Now, if we are buying  electronic warfare 
equipment from abroad or if we are buying an aircraft from abroad and in that the 
electronic warfare has to be fitted in there, the foreigners will never allow us  to 
switch on our equipment there.  They say if you switch on, you will co me to know 
the emissions that are there in their country and we will get that recorded.  So, they 
never allow it.  So, there are a lot of security restrictions.  
 
 Now, with NSA in chair, some directives are given to us;  how to work out 
the security under  control for all the systems that are given to the Services and 
also allow certain amount of work to the private sector also.  Now, the future is 

consortium.  If you see the other countries like Europe or even in America, 
consortiums work like EADS.  Now -a-days user requires a huge system.  Huge 
system will have electro -optics; will have radar, control systems and 
communication together.  One small Company cannot have it.   So, BEL should 
become an overall integrated consortium head and it should take forwa rd with 
MOUs the private sector companies and small companies where technology 
growth takes place.  That way not only the BEL will benefit but the country will also 
benefit.” 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
DIVERSIFICATON / EXPANSION PLANS 
 
(a) Diversification / Expansion Plans 
 
4.1 Pointing out that BEL has not undertaken any major project in the recent past.  
When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence reviewed the performance 
of BEL from this angle, the Ministry merely stated that the Ministry has been reviewing the 
major R&D projects of BEL support from the Company’s infrastructure requirements, 
modernisation plans, etc. 
 
4.2 Pointing out that BEL has tremendous R&D potential and this could become biggest 
profit area if R&D could design products for use by  the civilian community, the Committee 
enquired whether BEL could license out the designs, the CMD, BEL responded by saying 
that although they were aware of the growth prospects in civilian markets they were not 
putting focused attention.  Also, on the iss ue of licencing of civilian products, the CMD, 
BEL admitted that they have not explored that particular area.  CMD, BEL during the 
course of oral evidence further submitted as under: 
 
“We were not putting focussed attention.  I agree with your statement in  
fact……….only last year we developed Digital Compass for the Army. Based on 
that particular technology, we developed the tablet PC; we have supplied six lakh 
tablet PCs. It was the outcome of that particular technology which we could reap. 
But definitely we have to do more in this area. We will address this particular point. 
……Sir, we never explored that particular area.” 
 
4.3 New projects are necessary for growth and expansion of any organization.  BEL 
informed in a note submitted to the Committee that no major project has been undertaken 
other than Product Support Centre at Kochi during the last three years.  Currently, BEL is 
implementing two minor projects viz. Wind Energy Power Plant (Rs. 65 -70 crore) and 
expansion of RF/MW Super Components Facility (Rs . 30 crore).  When asked why BEL 
has not undertaken any major projects which is a pre-requisite for growth and expansion of 
any origin; BEL in a written reply stated that BEL has nine manufacturing Units with 20 
Strategic Business Units (SBUs) spread acros s the country. Each SBU has specific 
product focus. There is no proposal at present to set up any more Units. However, the 
Company strongly believes that, thrust on R&D in developing new products/systems 
aligned with customer’s needs, setting up state -of-the-art infrastructure, continual 
improvements in processes, augmenting manpower, diversification strategies, formation 
of Joint Ventures, strengthening of marketing in the backdrop of increased competition 
etc., are the catalysts for future growth of the Company. To increase its performance, BEL 
has taken up many R&D programmes, infrastructure projects and also initiated many 
marketing strategies. 
 
The diversification will help BEL to increase its range of products, increase market 
penetration and growth in business without diluting its core business as these are allied to 

its main function of being a premier Company in the field of strategic electronics.  Also, 
with the opening up of the Defence sector to private industry it is necessary for BEL to 
diversify as a risk mitigation strategy.  However, the primary business segments of BEL 
will continue to be Radars, Communication and Electronic Warfare systems and defence 
business will continue to be its mainstay. For the last 8 -10 years, around 80% of BEL’s 
turnover accounts for defence products and the balance 20% is from civilian and other 
products. 
 
4.4 When asked to indicate the areas where BEL has diversified and the value of 
production and profit earned from the new business, BEL in a post evidence reply s tated 
that some of the major areas of diversification include Railways, Nuclear Instrumentation, 
Homeland Security, e-governance, smart cards, solar, etc.  These diversification efforts 
have yielded results in the areas of Smart cards and Homeland Security . In these 
areas, business is realized for so me of  the  projects  like  National  Population  
Registery,  Tablet  PC’s  (BEL designed) used for conducting  Socio  Economic Caste 
Census to identify “Below Poverty Line” families (BPL) etc.,   during 2010-11 & 2011-12. 
The revenue earned and profit from these new businesses is given below:- 
 
(Value in Rs. Crore) 
 
 
Year 
Total 
Revenue 
Net 
Profit(PAT) 
Revenue earned by 
Diversified products 
Profit earned by 
Diversified products 
2010-11 5530 861 81 2 
2011-12 5704 830 931 37 
 
4.5 When asked about the steps  taken by BEL to augment non-defence business and 
the results, thereof, during the last five years, BEL in its post evidence reply stated that 
with the  increased competition in defence business and to sustain in the competitive  
environment, venturing into civilian /non defence business is a  prime requirement. In 
this regard BEL has exclusive Strategic Business Units (SBU) for the manufacture of 
non-defence products/systems. Some of  the significant products developed in non -
defence area are Electronic Voting  Machines (EVMs), Tablet PCs (BEL designed), 
night vision devices, radars for civilian use, Doppler weather Radar (DWR), Wide A rea 
Networking projects, solar products, etc. Apart from these, BEL also has presence in 
the areas  of Access  Control  Systems , Homeland  Security  systems, etc.  B EL is 
continuously upgrading its technologies and introducing new products, every year, in its 
efforts to be the leader in professional electronics. 
 
- BEL has also developed some products like X-Ray Baggage Inspection 
System, Under Carriage Vehicle Inspection System, etc., which are required for  the 
Homeland Security applications. BEL is already executing a CCTV surveillance project 
for Indian Air Force  and shown interest to participate in many  HLS  projects  for  
Go ve rn m e n t / Defence   establishments.  Process  of establishing an IP based Video 
surveillance system for showcasing BELs capabilities in this area is under progress. 
 
- Apart from the above setup, BEL has also taken some initiatives to acquire orders: 
 

 Marketing of BEL’s capabilities to prospective bidders 
 Standardization of various manufacturing processes as per customer 
requirements 
 Strengthening the Marketing wing with additional work force 
 Training at reputed institutions like IIM for Marketing Executives to sharpen their 
Marketing skills 
 Annual Marketing conferences 
 
- The turnover from non defence areas for last 5 years is tabulated below, which 
shows Company’s efforts in increasing non-defence business:- 
 
(Rs. in Crores) 
 
Year 
 
Total Sales 
Non Defence 
Sales 
 
% age 
2007-08 4103 671 16 
2008-09 4624 658 14 
2009-10 5220 866 17 
2010-11 5530 1132 20 
2011-12 5704 1554 27 
 
 
4.6 On the issue of venturing into civilian products, the Secretary, Defence Production 
however had a diversified view.  During the course of evidence, he submitted as follows: 
 
“I would like to admit before the Committee that there are more such orders where 
they are running into certain difficulties in the civilian sector.  That is again 
impacting both their turn over and private market, unfortunately.” 
 
 
4.7 A special board meeting was stated to be held by BEL on 2 7.1.2011 where 
Secretary, Defence Production was also present to deliberate upon the Company’s future 
business plans and strategy for g rowth.  When asked whether it was not desirable for the 
Company to diversify and enter into manufacturing of computer hardware, mobile phones 
and other electronic items, the Department of Defence Production in a post evidence 
reply clarified that the marke t for computer hardware, mobile phones and other electronic 
items is currently being dominated by global players and operates on a different business 
model.  Moreover, the product life cycle (PLC) of such products is shorter and requires 
rolling out of lar ge variants frequently.  Venturing into such products / markets does not 
appear to be a viable proposition.  However, the Ministry is also hand holding BEL to be 
on the lookout to increase its business in the civilian segment as well as to explore the 
possibilities of diversification into potential and profitable business areas.  In view of this, 
BEL is giving additional thrust on development of products / systems aligned with the 
Company’s core strengths.  Some of the products identified in civilian segmen t include 
Homeland Security, e -Governance projects (like SECC, NPR), Telecom, Jammers, 
Nuclear instrumentation, etc.  

(b) Formation of Joint Venture Company (JVC) 
 
4.8 BEL initially set up a joint venture Company (JVC) BE-Delft Electronics Limited with 
Delft Electronische Products (DEP), Holland - a part  of  Delft  Instruments  International  
(DII)  group  in  1990.  M/s.DII decided to exit from related business subsequent to 
imposition of sanctions  by US Government. This resulted in setting up of subsidiary 
Company called BEL-Optronic Devices Ltd  (BELOP)  w.e.f  July  2002. BELOP recorded 
a turnover of Rs. 6273.92 lakh during the year 2011-12 with a PAT of  Rs.815.69 lakh.  
BELOP manufactures mainly Image Intensifier Tubes (I.I.Tubes) used in the Night Vi sion 
Devices manufactured  by BEL. This subsidiary is in the process of upgrading the 
technology for manufacturing of Super Gen II Tubes through ToT. 
 
 The joint venture Company with General Electric, USA, viz., GE BE Pvt. Ltd.,  
(Estd:1997) manufacturing CT Max and other latest version X-Ray Tubes continues to 
perform well. BEL supplies some parts required for the products  manufactured by this 
JVC. GE BE Pvt. Ltd achieved a turnover of Rs.42,931 lakh during 2011 -12 with a PAT 
of Rs.5034 lakh. 
 
 Other JVC, viz., BEL Multitone Pvt. Ltd., (Estd:1997) jointly promoted by BEL  
and  Multitone Plc., UK was set up to supply, install and service Private  Paging 
Systems  and Pagers. The JVC is presently in shell stage and  it had no business 
transaction during the year. It has been decided to close down this Company as there 
are no business prospects for paging systems in the country. 
 
4.9 It is stated in the preliminary material that the formation of a Joint Venture 
Company with M/s. Thales, France was considered by BEL on 27.12.2011.  When asked 
if any decision was taken by BEL regarding the formation of the Joint Venture, BEL in a 
written reply informed that the Joint Venture  with M/s Thales is basically for civilian 
radar and select Defence Radars. At the Board meeting held on 27 December 2011, 
the Board after detailed  deliberation agreed with the  commercial  viability  and business 
potential of the proposal. However,  since some board members felt  that there was 
scope for improving the flow of technology to the JVC, B oard  constituted  a sub-
committee consisting of Government Directors and  Director (Research & 
Development), BEL to look into these aspects and  report  to  the  Board  within  1-2  
months.  Accordingly, the sub - committee held a meeting with M/s.  Thales on                
24 February 2012 and persuaded M/s Thales to include flow of additional technologies to 
JVC. 
  
MoD’s guidelines  on  the  formation  of  Joint  Ventures  by  DPSU’s  were issued 
on 17 February 2012.  M/s. Thales and BEL teams had discussions on 21  and                
22 March 2012 and mutually agreed to carry out the necessary changes to the Joint 
Venture Agreement, to comply with MoD guidelines on  JVs and also included the 
additional technologies as discussed during the sub-committee meeting. 
 
 The Joint Venture proposal and the compliance statement with regard to the  
Joint  Venture Guidelines issued by MoD were discussed during the Board  Meeting 

held on 25 April 2012. The BoD desired some additional information  on the 
compliances  which was prepared and put up to the Board on 5 July 2012. 
 
 Board, after  deliberation,  approved  the  formation  of  a  Joint  Venture Company  
with M/s. Thales Air Systems S.A.S, France and M/s. Thales India  Private  Ltd.  with  an  
investment  by  BEL  in  t he  form  of  equity contribution of Euro 6.66 Million  (Rs.42.62 
crore. @ 1 Euro = Rs.64) for design, development, marketing, supply and support of 
Civilian and select Defence  Radars  for  Indian  and  Global  markets,  subject  to  
obtaining necessary  approval  from  the  Government  and  statutory  authorities.   Board 
directed that the proposal be forwarded to administrative Ministry seeking Government 
approval, simultaneously seeking the FIPB approval. 
 
 Subsequent to the approval by BEL Board, the p roposal was forwarded to 
Department of Defence Production on 24 August 2012 for approval. Parallely, an 
application was also submitted to FIPB for approval of the FDI on 14 September 2012. 
Presently, both the approvals are under progress. 
 
4.10 When asked if the Ministry of Defence had any objection to the proposal for 
formation of aforesaid joint venture which was forwarded to the Department of Defence 
Production on 24.8.2012 and is pending approval for over five months, the Department of 
Defence Productio n in a written reply stated that the Ministry has recommended the 
proposal to FIFB. 
 
4.11 Regarding signing of joint venture with M/s Photonis, CMD, BEL during the course 
of oral evidence clarified:- 
 
“It is not a Joint Venture. It is a ToT project which w e are doing with M/s Photonis. 
We are paying money for that. It is a licence fee that we pay every year. We have 
to produce 8000 numbers every year.  The ToT agreement is now in place.  In the 
year 2006 we submitted to 41  companies to give the ToT and M/s Photonis came 
forward. They participated in the tender. This same technology we were earlier 
producing with M/s Delf t of Holland. This plant will be on production in Pune by 
March and you all are welcome to visit that plant.”   
 
4.12 When asked whether it was mandatory to have the approval of the Administrative 
Ministry for formation of JVs by PSUs and whether there was any monitoring mechanism 
in the Ministry to supervise the formation of JVs by various PSUs under it, the Department 
of Defence Production i n their post evidence reply stated that the Department of Public 
Enterprise (DPE) have delegated the authority for formation of joint ventures(JVs) to the 
boards of Central Public Sector Enterprises(CPSEs) up to certain financial limits in case 
of Navratna and Miniratna CPSEs. As such, approval of the administrative ministry is not 
mandatory for all cases of JV formation by CPSEs under DPE guidelines. These DPE 
guidelines have been supplemented by the joint venture guidelines issued by the Ministry 
of Defence (MoD) in February 2012 for formation of JVs by DPSUs. In line with the letter 
and spirit of the Board -level authority delegated by DPE, the MoD guidelines also do not 
impose any additional requirements for the Ministry -level approvals, except where a 

specific approval of the Government may be necessary under relevant GoI guidelines, 
such as FIPB approvals, or where a specific Ministry intervention may be required, such 
as cases outside the delegated financial authority available to DPSU Boards under DPE 
guidelines. 
 
 In view of the delegated authority available to Navratna and Miniratna (CPSEs) 
under DPE guidelines, establishing a separate /dedicated monitoring mechanism has not 
been considered necessary in the Ministry at this stage. 
  
4.13 When asked if there are instances/complaints in the knowledge of the Department 
where the JV companies have procured components/equipments from other private 
companies and simply sourced it to BEL, the Department of Defence Production in their 
post evidence reply stated that no such complaints have been brought to their knowledge. 
 
4.14 Asked further if it was true that one of the easy routes for foreign companies to 
enter India’s Defence and domestic security market is under the cover of ‘transfer of 
technology’ deals,   the Department of Defence Production in their post evidence reply 
stated that the Defence Procurement Procedure provides for two types of Transfer of 
Technology (ToT) acquisitions. In the Buy & Make acquisition (i.e., Purchase from a 
foreign OEM followed  by licensed production / indigenous manufacture in the country), 
our past experience has shown that the technology transfer has been limited to transfer of 
engineering skills for production in many cases. The critical items are invariably supplied 
as proprietary item kits. This method of acquisition has also not encouraged formation of 
Joint Ventures (JVs) or alliances for co-production with Indian companies.  
 
 To overcome the above situation, a new category of acquisition has been 
introduced i.e., ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’, wherein Indian firms, both public and private, will 
play   a   lead    role    in   negotiating    and    obtaining technology   and co -production 
arrangements with the foreign OEMs. In this category of acquisition, the RFP will be 
issued to the Indian firms and not to the foreign OEMs.  
 
 Indian firms identified to have requisite technical and financial capabilities would be 
required to submit project proposals indicating detailed roadmap for development and 
production of the items over its life cycle. They will also be required to spell out the 
proposed production arrangement with the foreign OEM along with the content of the 
ToT.  The product so manufactured and supplied by the Indian Company must have 50% 
indigenous content.  However, the efficacy of the ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ category 
acquisition is yet to be established. 
  
4.15 When asked as to what was the take of the Department on the proposals of 
formation of Joint Ventures by BEL and was there some sort of resistance to such 
proposals, a representative of DRDO during the course of oral evidence on 12 February 
2013 submitted:- 
 
“No, there is no objection.  Generally, what we do is that we do not work in 
isolation.  The Defence PSUs, not only BEL but others also, work in close 

coordination; we consult because within the country there are people who are 
educated and the knowledge is available.  We try to pool up the knowledge.  We 
put a committee, bring in everybody from academicia, from production agency, 
from R&D and we put them tog ether and say that this is the kind of decision and 
that BEL wants to go in for JV.  If it is worthwhile going, we recommend it with our 
recommendation having some safeguards.” 
 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
OTHER MATTERS 
 
(a) E - Procurement  
 
5.1 It is observed from the information furnished by BEL that Supplier Relationship 
Management (SRM) is being implemented across the Company to ensure transparency 
and probity in procurement.  When asked about the salient features of SRM and whether 
there were any provisions for imposition of penalty in the event of deviations in supplies / 
procurement entailed in it, BEL in a written reply informed that  e - procurement at BEL has 
been implemented on SAP SRM 7.0 platform having Public Sector procurement features. It  
has  been  implemented  at  all  9  Units  of  BEL  for  both  Purchase and Sub - contract.  
The system is integrated with ERP system with the latest security such as Web Access 
Firewall, Reverse proxy and encryption of data from the client side upto the server in place. 
Second level authentication through Digital Signature for both publishing the bid and 
submission of response from the Vendor has been enabled. Six types of procurement have 
been configured in the system. As per CVC circular No. 010 / VGL / 035 dated 12.01.2012, 
action has been taken for certification of e - procurement system.  
 
 The following types of procurement has been configured in the system: 
 
o Open tender 
o Limited / Restricted tender 
o Single tender 
o Two part bid 
 
 Feature for on-line registration for the vendors is available 
 Through Supplier self service functionality, the vendor will be able to see  
the  Purchase order placed, submit order acknowledgement and enter 
Advanced Shipping Notification on-line 
 The supplier will be able to track the status of supplies and Invoice 
 System has a feature for on-line payment information 
 
 The  time  for  and  the  date  of  delivery  of  the  stores  stipulated  in  the 
Purchase  Order shall be deemed to be the essence of the contract, and delivery  
must be  completed not later than the dates specified therein. Should the supplier 
fail to deliver the stores or any consignment, thereof, within the period prescribed for 
such  delivery, BEL shall be entitled at its option: 
 
 To recover from the supplier agreed liquidated damages, and not by way  of  
penalty of sum of 0.5 % (2.5% in case of purchase orders placed  on  time  
preference  basis)  of  the  value  of  any  stores  not supplied in time for each  
week of delay or part of a week with a ceiling  of 10 % (25% in case of  
purchase orders placed on time preference basis), or 
 

 To purchase elsewhere, at the risk and cost of the supplier, the stores not 
delivered, or 
 
 To cancel the Purchase Order. 
 
 In the event of action being taken, the supplier shall be liable for any loss which 
BEL may sustain but the supplier shall not be entitled to any gain on 
repurchase made against default. 
 
 For supplies  from foreign vendors, LD Clause is applicable when mutually 
agreed and a clause is incorporated in the PO to that effect. 
 
Integrity Pact  
 
5.2 The Committee have been informed that one of the latest initiatives of the Central 
Vigilance Commission to eradicate corruption in procurement activity is introduction of the 
Integrity Pact in large value contracts in all Government Organisations. I n line with the 
directives from Ministry of Defence and the Central Vigilance Commission, BEL has 
adopted Integrity Pact with all vendors / suppliers / contractors / service providers for all 
Orders / Contracts of value Rs. 2,000 lakhs and above. The pact essentially envisages an 
agreement between the prospective vendors / bidders and the Principal (BEL), committing 
the Persons / officials of both sides, not to resort to any corrupt practices in any aspect / 
stage of the contract. Only those vendors / bidders, who commit themselves to such a Pact 
with the Principal, would be considered competent to participate in the bidding process. In 
other words, entering into this Pact is a preliminary qualification. Integrity Pact, in respect of 
a particular contract, w ould be operative from the stage of invitation of bids till the final 
completion of the contract. Any violation of the same would entail disqualification of the 
bidders and exclusion from future business dealings.  
 
 As per recommendation by the Central Vigilance Commissioner, BEL has appointed 
Shri N K Sinha, former Secretary, Planning Commission and former Chairman, PESB as 
the Independent External Monitor (IEM) for monitoring implementation of Integrity Pact in 
BEL. The IEM would review independently and  objectively, whether and to what extent 
parties have complied with their obligations under the Pact. IEM will take stock of the 
ongoing tendering processes on quarterly basis. The IEM conducts this review once in 
every quarter. In case of a complaint aris ing out of tendering process, the matter shall be 
examined by the IEM, who would look into the records, conduct an investigation, and 
submit recommendations to the management. During his visits to the Corporate Office 
every quarter, the IEM holds structured meetings with the Chairman & Managing Director. 
So far, 52 Orders / Contracts are covered under Integrity Pact.  
 
5.3 When asked about the details of procurement through single vendor by BEL during 
the last 5 years and efforts made to reduce single vendo r based procurement,  BE L in its 
post evidence reply  stated that a majority of the Single Vendor procurements falls under 
following categories:- 
 

 Design Agency Approved. 
 TOT/OEM’s Approved by TOT Provider 
 Customer Suggested. 
 
5.4 In case of in-house development, initially multiple  vendors are evaluated and 
zeroed down to Single Vendor based on the project requirement. Some initiatives  taken  
by  the  Company  for  reduction  of  Single  Vendor Procurement are :- 
 
 Periodical institutional meetings with DRDO & Other National Labs for  
involving BEL in vendor selection process to explore alternate vendor. 
 Implementation of e-Procurement.  
 In-house development programs for subsystems/assemblies to enable BEL as 
alternate vendor. 
 
5.5 In addition to the above eff orts, suitable instructions to Units/SBUs have been 
issued for fixing up annual targets for procurement through multi vendor route. 
 
5.6 A statement indicating the value and categorization of purchases made by BEL 
through various process is given at Annexure. 
 
5.7 When asked if the procurement through single vendor is in line with the Global 
Best Practices, the Department of Defence Production  in their post evidence reply  stated 
that BEL’s key processes including procurement through Single Vendor is extensi vely 
reviewed by external auditors during ISO9000 Surveillance Audits on yearly basis. The 
discussions with external auditors has revealed that the procurement process followed by 
BEL match with other organizations dealing with similar products. 
 
5.8 Procurement from single vendors in BEL has drastically gone down from 13% in 
2008-09 to only 3.88% during 2011-12 except for a slight increase in 2009 -10(16.19%). In 
value terms also single vendor procurements have  come down from Rs.457.47 Crore 
(2008-09) to Rs .193.03 Crore (2011-12). Remaining procurements have been made 
through Open tendering, Limited tendering, Customer/OEM nominated sources, 
Licensor/Licence Agreement, Joint Venture and Proprietary. BEL resorts to single tender 
procurement only under compelling circumstances when it is not feasible to do so by other 
modes. 
 
5.9 When asked whether single vendor procurements were in conformity with the CVC 
guidelines, the Department of Defence Production in their post evidence reply stated that 
CVC has provided  guidelines indicating that the proportion of Limited / Single Tenders 
should be gradually reduced through Vendor Development. The same is being monitored 
through reviews, quarterly progress reports, etc.  Besides, the Company has issued 
directions across all Units regarding broadening of vendor base and procurement through 
multi vendors.  Due to alternate sourcing, introduction of e -procurement etc., the single 
vendor procurement has come down from 16.19 % in 2009-10 to 3.88% in 2011-12.  
 

5.10 The Department in a written reply further clarified that BEL resorts to single tender 
procurement only under compelling circumstances when it is not feasible to do so by 
other modes. 
 
5.11 When asked about the efforts made by BEL to overcome delays in placement of 
purchase orders and return of rejected items, BEL in its written reply stated that the time 
for conversion of purchase requisition to issue of purchase orders is reduced to 21 days 
as against 30 days in the earlier Purchase Procedure. This period of 21 days c overs all 
the activities including calling of quotations, finalizing the purchase proposal, obtaining 
financial concurrence and approval of the Competent Authority, etc. The whole process of 
procurement is reviewed and monitored at various levels in the Un its / SBUs. However, 
there are some practical difficulties like, low quantity  PR kept on hold for clubbing in next 
MRP, pending clarifications from indentors/ D&E/Production control regarding drawing, 
technical specifications etc, change in requirements i ntimated by indentors, negotiation 
and confirmation of terms of price and delivery schedule from suppliers, pending sample 
approval before bulk procurement, re -tendering due to poor response, etc., due to which 
delay in some cases is unavoidable.  Various p arameters w.r.t. inspection of material / 
dealing with rejected items have been established and are regularly reviewed by the Units 
/ SBUs for corrective action. It is not practical to fix a time limit for the tests or inspections 
because the input materials vary depending on the product mix . Quite often the materials 
will have to be tested in the process to observe for process rejections due to defects in 
the materials and the process time would get added to the inspection time there by 
increasing the testing or inspection time. 
 
5.12 However, a system of reviewing the delay in placement of Purchase Orders and 
inspection of materials etc. by SBU/Unit Heads on periodical basis is already in place. 
 
(b) Manpower 
  
5.13 The Committee have been informed that t he sanctioned strength of manpower in 
BEL varies from year to year depending upon the expected volume of business and 
requirement of additional manpower vis -à-vis the existing manpower.  Accordingly, the 
actual staff strength of BEL as on 31 March, 2011 was as follows: 
 
Executives –   5503 
Non-Executives -  5677 
 
 The staff strength at the end of the next fiscal i.e.  31 March, 2012 was as follows:- 
Executives –   5157 
Non-Executives -  5634 
 
5.14 Of the total manpower in 2011 -12, 3,696 were engineers / sci entists. Women 
employees were 2,254 as on 31 March 2012. A total of 322 executives consisting of 
engineers, scientists and other professionals were inducted during the year.  During the year 
2011-12, 5.57% of the candidates recruited belonged to the minori ty community. The 
contract labour during 2009-10 was 3204 persons which has gone up to 4460 persons in 
2011-12. BEL has been implementing the Government Directives on Reservation. The 

particulars of SC / ST and other categories of employees as on 31 March 2012 are as 
under:- 
 
Category of employees Executives Non-Executives 
Group ‘A’ Group ‘B’ Group ‘C’ Group ‘D’ 
Scheduled Caste 820 56 1048 92 
Scheduled Tribe 250 5 141 25 
OBC 854 73 944 54 
Ex-Servicemen 103 77 328 80 
Physically Handicapped 79 11 146 17 
 
5.15 Regarding the ratio of number of officers with that of the workers, CMD, BEL during 
the course of oral evidence explained that: 
 
“….as I said, we were making small components, which was labour intensive. In 
fact, at one time, we were having a larg e number of employees. Now, when the 
Government has opened the component manufacturing facility for the outside 
world, we reduced the same; in fact, we stopped the component manufacturing in 
the company, and we shifted the business from component to equipm ent and from 
equipment to the systems now. That is why, in the system integration, the number 
of workers required is less and the number of officers required is more. That is the 
main reason why we shifted from the labour intensive to the system integratio n. 
That is the way basically all the companies work.”   
 
5.16 The Committee observed from the Annual Report of BEL that the total number of 
employees has come down gradually over the years from 13750 in 2002 -03 to 10791 in 
2011-12.  The reduction in number  of employees is nearly 3000.  When asked for the 
reasons for gradual reduction in manpower, BEL in their post evidence reply that 
previously, the Company was mainly in components business which was labour 
intensive. Now, with the Government policy for opening up of components business to 
private sector / outside world, BEL reduced component manufacturing  and shifted the 
business from component manufacturing to equipment and from equipment to system 
integration. This change in technology  trend from stand alone equipment to turnkey 
/platform based solutions require manpower generally in the areas of testing, Installation 
& Commissioning, etc.  BEL further stated that the Company recognized outsourcing as 
one of the strategic tools to achieve cost benefits and complement the strengths of private 
sector to build a strong industrial base. Hence the Company outsourced low end jobs and 
focused on core areas.  Upgradation of infrastructure and introduction of modern facilities, 
Process automation, Business Process R eengineering (BPR), etc. However, Company 
has been recruiting in the required skill sets depending on the business need. 
 
5.17 Queried further as to whether most of the work of BEL was being outsourced due 
to reduction in the number of permanent employees, he further clarified:- 
 
“We do not do outsourcing of the core business, for example, electronic 
assemblies, the microwave, joining of the components and all, we do in -house. We 
are not sub-contracting these areas. We want to keep the core business within the 

Company. Last year, we recruited some non -executives. This year also we have 
cleared that. Definitely, the number of 10,000 workers will not come down. In fact, 
in the coming years, as the  new technology is emerges, we have to go on adding 
so that we can have a good market share here. This is a very highly sophisticated 
technology. I would like to invite you to come to Bengaluru and see for yourself 
how much work we do in-house and how much work gets done from outside.  Only 
in those areas where it is n ot very accurate and the areas in which other private 
companies are active, we go outside. All the core technology which is required for 
our survival, we do in -house. We put lot  of money in the infrastructure  by training 
the people and by recruiting the people. This is going to continue.” 
 
5.18 The contract labour engaged by the Company during the 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 
Fiscals was 4097 and 4460 respectively. 
 
5.19 BEL have stated that contract labour has gone up from 3204 persons during 2009 
to 4460 persons d uring 2011 -12.  Queried about the sharp rise in the engagement of 
contract labour, CMD, BEL during the course of oral evidence clarified:- 
 
“In the non -core area, we are giving a contract basically for our production since 
the load is not continuous and at  the end of the financial year, that is generally 
from December onwards to March, we do employ the contract labour of about 
2000 to 2500 depending upon the load because for the balance of the year, there 
will not be any work. So, we get it done. It is not on a continuous basis.”  
 
5.20 When asked about any Recruitment Policy being followed in BEL, the Company in 
their post evidence reply stated that the Company has formulated a framework of policies, 
which will enable the organization to attract the right talent for the right job at the right time 
and in the right number with  the ultimate objective of ensuring optimum and effective 
utilization of human resources in acclimate of satisfaction, development and growth. In 
pursuance of the objective, the BEL Rec ruitment Rules and Procedures has  been  
formulated  to  govern,  regulate  and  facilitate  recruitment  of personnel in the Units and 
Offices of the Company. The recruitment is carried out for executives through Campus 
Recruitment, All India Recruitment,  Need Based Recruitments for Lateral Entries based 
on the manpower planning. For non -executives, the recruitment is done through local 
employment exchanges and advertisements. The process of manpower planning 
commences at the beginning of the financial  ye ar  when  business  and  production  
targets  are  fixed  in  all Units/SBUs.  The existing manpower i n the Unit is analyzed vis -
à-vis the projected volume of business for the next five to ten years and the number of 
personnel to be recruited for the current year is arrived at. 
 
 In addition, the attrition of manpower both due to superannuation and resignations 
is also studied.  Besides technology trends in various product domains are also analyzed 
to ascertain gaps in skill sets if any. These gaps can be m ade good  either by training 
existing manpower or by external recruitment. At the end of the financial year the entire 
recruitment process is again examined with a view to fine -tune the same for the next 
year’s recruitment. 

 
5.21 As mentioned briefly in this Report previously, the Committee note BEL operates in 
a highly competitive business environment and it is essential to enhance its capability to 
achieve significant growth. Only highly trained and motivated employees can prepare the 
Company to be a worl d - class organisation. New idea generation, flexibility and 
innovation through human capital is essential and hence sustained development of 
employees both at the individual and at the team level has been the philosophy of all 
BEL's human resource development initiatives.  
 
 Various training programs are designed to enhance competencies in areas like 
Technical, Functional and Managerial / Leadership. Structured Executive Development 
Programs are conducted regularly with premier institutes to meet the evolv ing training 
needs of executives as they progress through various grades. Apart from this, 360 - 
degree feedback and leadership development programs  were conducted to equip senior 
managers with leadership competencies. 99 senior executives underwent the program last 
year. Post training effectiveness initiatives are also in place to assess the impact of the 
training.  
 
 In order to address the learning and organisation development needs, various 
management development programmes as well as technology program mes were 
organised during 2011-12 through premier training institutions for all grades of executives. 
The Company - wide per capita training man - days for the year 2011 -12 was 3.52 as 
against 3.37 in 2010 - 11. The MoU score for HRD for the year was “Exce llent"   at 1.28.  
The composite score is arrived at based on per capita training mandays, percentage of 
people trained and feed back index.  The e - PMS module in SAP has been implemented 
from the year 2011 - 12 onwards. The PMS process will be done onlin e in respect of 
executives upto the grade of E - VIA.  
 
Driving significant change is one of the most challenging tasks that any large 
organisation faces. It requires that new paradigms replace the established ways of doing 
business. Our "Leading the Change" program for senior executives aims at aligning the 
thinking and attitudes of senior executives to that required for a global organisation. 111 senior 
executives have undergone the program last year.  
 
 The advantages of teamwork are reinforced in an Outbound Learning Program. 
This training takes the participant away from comfort zone, in an informal risk - free 
environment, thereby enabling the participant to experiment and explore the hidden 
potential. 5 cross - functional teams (117 participants) attended the program during the year 
2011 - 12.  
 
 Emotional Intelligence is a key requirement for a leader to be effective, facilitate 
employees to achieve superior business performance, develop the ability to manage self 
to adapt to change and to enhance positive attitude for building a culture of trust, support, 
openness and collaboration. A total of 419 executives attended the program in 2011 - 12. 
The program also had one - on - one counseling sessions.  
 

 Competency Awareness Workshops have been conducted to familiarise the 
executives on the BEL Behavioural Competency Model and its implications for business.   
About 68 executives attended the program in 2011 - 12.  
 
 Advanced Management Program is being organised for General Managers with 
an international c omponent for enhancing their awareness on global management 
practices. 2 General Managers attended this program. In order to strengthen the 
marketing cadre, a dedicated 3 - months Marketing program is being conducted through 
a premier institute with a one month on - the - job project, post the program. 21 
executives participated in the program.  
 
 Strategizing is an important component of the normal work of a senior executive. 
Strategy Building and Competitive Intelligence program was organised through the 
faculty of a premier institute and 57 senior executives attended the program.  
 
 In order to enhance the Quality awareness and impart key Quality concepts, 
structured Quality Programs have been introduced from 2011 - 12 and a total of 51 junior 
executives attended the program.  The course is being conducted through the faculty of 
BEL Quality Institute. 
  
 Performance Review Discussions are an important aspect of PMS. Last year, 
three one - day Development Oriented Performance Review and Feedback workshops 
were conducted and 57 senior executives attended the workshops.  
 
 Technology programs to enhance knowledge of engineers in various technology 
areas were conducted. Some of the programs were Mechanical Vibrations, Advanced 
DSP Design Techniques, Embedded Sys tems, Essentials of FPGA design, Advanced 
FPGA implementation, Designing with VHDL, Advances in VLSI Signal Processing, 
Cognitive Radio - the next frontier in wireless communication, Basic Altera FPGA 
Course, Vx Works training, etc.  
 
 Various training pro grams were organized for non -executives on quality, safety, 
technical and other related subjects in BEL Units.  
 
 BEL has been conferred with "Organisation with Innovative Practices, 2012" Award 
by Institute of Public Enterprises, Hyderabad. The IPE HR Leadership Awards are given to 
companies which have an outstanding performance record and foster innovation in HR 
Practices with exemplary learning and development initiatives in place.  
 
5.22 The Committee have been informed that there are various Fora of Wor kers’ 
Participation in Management in Bharat Electronics Limited. They comprise of Fora which 
are statutory, based on Government directives and Company’s Voluntary Schemes. The 
following Fora are functioning in Bharat Electronics Limited:- 
1. Statutory Fora: 
 
a) Works Committee - As prescribed under the Industrial Disputes Act,1947 

b) Canteen Committee - As prescribed under the Factories Act, 1948 
c)  Safety Committee - As prescribed under the Factories Act, 1948 
 
2. Fora constituted as per Government Directives: 
 
a)  Plant Level Council        
b)  Shop Level Council       
 
3. Voluntary Fora: 
 
a) Quality Control Circles  
b)  Suggestion Award Scheme  
c)  Sub-contract Committee 
d) Joint Standing Committee (Company as a whole) 
e) Joint Wage Negotiating Committee (Company as a whole) 
f) Apex Joint Council (Company as a whole) 
 
5.23 The Committee have been informed that the Employee  relations  in  all  Units  
continued  to  be  smooth  and  harmonious throughout the year. Regular interactions took 
place among the management, executives and the workmen through the apex forums, viz., 
the Joint Standing Committee consisting  of  Negotiating  Trade  Unions  and  Apex  Joint  
Council consisting of Officers Associations and TC Cadre Associations and also separately 
with respective Trade Unions  and Officers Associations.  
 
 Various welfare programmes were organised for the benefit of employees and their 
families, which included programmes addressing specific needs of sections of employees, 
such as, SC / ST employees, diff erently abled employees and women employees. 
Differently abled employees are provided free transport facility for commuting to the factory 
and back to residence, provided grace time for registering attendance, ramps at ATM 
counter etc. BEL Bengaluru comple x received the National Award for “Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities” under the “Best Employer” category.  Programmes conducted in 
the Units included health and safety awareness / improvement, vigilance awareness, etc.  
Various cultural programmes w ere organized by the Fine Arts Clubs in the Units for 
recreation of employees and their families.  Various summer camps / sports programmes 
were organized for the employees’ children. 
 
 BEL’s comprehensive medical scheme covers all employees, their spouses , 
dependent family members as well as retired employees and their spouses. BEL Hospital 
at Bengaluru extends outpatient medical treatment to the residents of neighbouring villages 
and employees of BEL associate institutions / societies in addition to its o wn employees, 
their dependents and retired employees / their spouses. Educational institutions run by the 
Company for education of children of employees and also of neighboring villages, 
performed well during the year.  
 
5.24 When asked whether any study h as been conducted to asses the manpower 
requirements of BEL and steps, if any, taken for optimum utilization of manpower; the 

Department  in the preliminary material stated that the manpower requirement in BEL is 
periodically reviewed (annual). The existing manpower is assessed viz-a-viz the projected 
volume of business, attrition, the skill sets and expertise required for future projects. 
There are no areas in BEL which are over -staffed. The Company has been recruiting 
engineers, executives in other functi onal areas and non -executives selectively based on 
requirement. Ensuring the optimum deployment of manpower in BEL is an on -going 
process both at the Unit as well as the Corporate Level. Optimum deployment of 
personnel is ensured through periodic transfers , job rotation and training. In the case of 
newly recruited engineers, their aptitude to work in different functional areas is assessed 
using standard psychometric tools during the induction training based on which their 
postings are decided. 
 
5.25 BEL has further stated that t he present global competitive scenario has imposed 
many challenges on the business processes of BEL. Accordingly, all the HR processes 
are continually revised  and updated to effectively address these challenges. The 
Company has been striving to align the various HR processes with short term and long 
term business strategies and objectives. Some of the initiatives taken by the Company 
are:- 
 
 HR to evolve as a business partner 
 Streamlining Talent Management policies to attract and retain best talent 
 Enhanced Leadership Development program for having a community of leaders 
at various levels 
 Empowering executives to become change agents 
 Robust and transparent Performance Management System (PMS) 
 Competence Building initiatives – perfect alignment with HR systems – 
 recruitment, training and development 
 Instituting a culture of innovation, entrepreneurship 
 Enhancing employee engagement 
 Progressive learning and development interventions for growth 
 Maintaining harmonious employee relations for higher productivity 
 Implementing  competency  based  succession  planning  and  individual 
development 
 Systematic Job enrichment and job rotation 
 Effective implementation of Mentoring Scheme for young executives 
 Planning to Develop a virtual university for BEL 
 To  Implement  an  online  development  centre  for  E2  -  E5  grade  for 
competency enhancement 
 Competency  based  360  degree  feedback  and  leadership  development 
workshop 
 Initiate executive coaching for Sr. Executives.” 
 
 (c) Board of Directors 
 

5.26 The Committee have been informed that There are 9 non -official (independent) 
Directors and 2 Government Directors on the Board of the Company. Seven Board 
meetings each were held during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  6 Board meetings were held 
during 2008 -09.  During these years the attendance of Government Directors in these 
meetings ranged from 1 to 5 only. 
 
When asked whether the Department was aware that the Government Directors in 
BEL Board rarely attend the Board meetings which defeats the very purpose of  their 
membership in the Board, the Department of Defence Production in their written reply 
submitted that the Companies Act, 1956 (the Act) and the Articles of Association of the 
Company (the Articles) have provisions for quorum for Board Meetings.  Secti on 287 of 
the Act and the Article 78 prescribe that the quorum for a meeting of the Board of 
Directors shall be one third of its total strength (any fraction contained in that one -third 
being rounded off as one) or two Directors, whichever is higher. Total strength at any time 
means the total number of Directors after deducting the number of vacancies at that time. 
 
 It was further submitted that Government/DPE have not laid down any guidelines 
regarding attendance of Government Directors at the Board Meetings. 
 
 To a specific query about one Official (Government) Director attending just one 
Board meeting out of seven held during 2009 -10,  the Secretary, Department of Defence 
Production during the course of oral evidence clarified:- 
 
“…...about the Directors  and their attendance, I am not trying to defend, but I will 
simply mention that this Director who did not attend happens to be the Signal 
Officer In-Charge.  He is an Army Officer.  He is the prime person with whom BEL 
has to do business.  I cannot remove  him from the Board.  In fact, BEL cannot do 
anything without his presence.  So, while he meets once in the Board, I can assure 
you that Chairman, BEL meets him ten times between the Board meetings.  So, it 
is not as if I do not have the benefit of his adv ice.  It is very much available.  But, 
we admit that he has failed to attend the Board meetings and I cannot remove him 
also.  That is my difficulty because Signal Officer In -Charge is the single most 
important person for him.  BEL cannot work without him.” 
 
 
  

PART -  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee are not impressed by BEL’s performance.  BEL has 
been making profits but its profit s have declined during the last two years 
and its value of production has stagnated of l ate.  BEL’s value of production 
which stood at Rs. 5273 crore in 2008-09 rose marginally during the three 
year period to reach Rs. 5794 crore in 20 11-12.  Its profit s declined 
considerably from Rs. 1161 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs. 1075 crore in 2011 -12.  
According to BEL’s CMD, the  poor performance is mainly caused due to 
BEL’s migration from equipment manufacturing to system integration and 
opening of defence market to private sector.  The Committee are not 
convinced of these reasons.  The Company  still gets 7 0% of its orders on 
single vendor nomination and BEL’s migration from equipment 
manufacturing is not an unplanned step.  It has been stated that the 
performance will improve in two to three years with about Rs. 2 5,000 crore 
orders in hand and by effecting cost reduction measures.  It is a matter of 
satisfaction to note that the profit of BEL increased to Rs. 1125 crore and the 
value of production registered a quantum jump to touch Rs. 6290 crore 
during 2012-13, after the Committee went into the functioning of BEL.  The 
Committee feel that in order to further improve its performance, there is need 
for diversification, cost cutting measures and re -focusing R&D, as brought 
out in some of the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
2. As is obvious from the information furnishe d to the Committee  that 
there will be increasing participation of private sector in defence , facilitated 
mostly by back to back collaboration with foreign partners.  In order to be 
competitive, DRDO has suggested that BEL should become an overall 
integrated consortium head involving private players with proven strength in 
identified areas and workout MoUs with them on a work sharing basis.  The 

Committee would like the Government to examine the suggestion from all 
angles and the Committee be apprised of the outcome.     
 
3. The Committee would also suggest that the measures recommended 
by them for optimalising  the performance of the Company need to be 
implemented expeditiously, particularly in the wake of the present global 
downturn in the economy, slow down in domestic market, the depreciation of 
rupee, the increasing competition, etc.  
 
4. The Committee note that during 2010-11 and 2011-12, the MoU rating of 
the Company was downgraded to ‘very good’ category .  The slide in 
performance is reportedly  due to e rosion in profit before tax caused by 
payment of wage arrears of employees in 2010-11.  This also had a cascading 
effect on the Company’s balance -sheet in 2011 -12 as well.  The Committee 
are of the opinion  that the revision of wages in a listed Company oug ht not 
be such a time consuming exercise as to affect its fortunes in a negative 
manner.  Had the process been  completed expeditiously, the cumulative 
effect of the revision of wages could have been avoided.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that since another wage revision will, in normal 
course, be due after three years or so, the Company should work out a 
mechanism, albeit of interim nature, including presumptive allocations, 
whereby, the arrears of wages are not carried forward for years together, bu t 
liquidated in substantial measure during the very year they become due.        
 
5. New projects are necessary for growth and expansion of any 
organization.  However, no major project has been undertaken by BEL in the 
recent past, other than the Product S uppport Centre a t Kochi.  Even the 
Ministry of Defence does not appear to have given any direction to BEL in 
this regard except monitoring the progress of BEL’s R&D project, reviewing 
its infrastructure requirements and modernization plans.  With the openi ng of 

the defence sector to private industry, the Committee feel that there is an 
urgent need for BEL to explore new areas of growth and would like BEL and 
the Ministry of Defence to work out a suitable plan and identify major 
projects for implementation in a time bound manner.  
 
6. Thin order book of some of the BEL’s units operating in Radio 
Business is stated to be a major concern, notwithstanding the fact that BEL 
is currently having an order book of about Rs. 25000 crore and is expecting 
orders of Rs. 27000 crore in another three years.  Reasons for BEL’s radio 
business not getting sufficient orders and steps to remedy the situation 
should be studied and the Committee be apprised of the outcome.  The 
Committee feel that BEL has not done much to tap the vast export potential 
for variety of its products.  Wha tever little exports made by BEL - US $ 38.45 
million in 2011 -12—are mainly on account  of offset sales.  The Committee 
hardly need to stress that BEL should draw up  an export strategy  to boost 
exports exclusive of offset sales, with specific targets and show results in a 
time bound manner.  
 
7. The Committee have been informed that evaluation / final clearance of 
newly developed equipment / product s by armed forces /  Ministry of Defence 
takes unduly lon g time with resultant delay in placement of orders causing 
huge investment being locked up and manpower remaining idle.  Another fall 
out of this delay is the new technology becoming obsolete in the rapidly 
changing technological environment.  The Committe e feel that the problems 
faced by BEL in this regard can be obviated if the Ministry of Defence  in 
consultation with the evaluation agencies  / armed forces and taking into 
account all relevant factors lays down a time frame for evaluation and 
clearances of  equipments / products and ensures its adherence. The 

Committee hope th at necessary action will be taken in this regard under 
intimation to the Committee.  
8. BEL is facing international competition in “Buy Global” category of 
Defence purchases and reporte dly lost major market opportunities in the 
segment of Radar, C41, communication, etc. and facing competition from 
indigenous private sector companies in all its major business segment s.  
The Company has lost around 28 contracts amounting to Rs. 1624 crore 
during the last five years in multi -vendor environment .  One of the main 
reasons attributed for the loss of contracts was that in the case of Global 
Tender, the pricing by an overseas vendor when compared to that of BEL is 
more competitive due to the fact that the overseas vendor incurs ‘nil’ 
customs duty, excise duty and sales tax.  To aggravate the matter further, in 
case of services, the ‘Reverse Charge’ mechanism in India further puts the 
burden of service tax on import of services  on the Company and no t on the 
overseas vendor. The Committee are concerned about the loss of such large 
contracts to foreign suppliers having an edge on account of exemption of 
Customs, Central Excise Duty and Sales Tax being afforded to global 
bidders at the cost of BEL. What  is most surprising that the Department of 
Defence Production has done precious little to ensure a level playing field 
for BEL and other Defence PSUs.  In fact, the Department was not even 
aware of this very unfair situation until the matter was brought to  their notice 
by the Committee.  This speaks volumes about the quality of performance 
review meetings h eld by the Department.  The Committee feel that the issue 
is serious and needs to be attended to without any further loss of time. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Defence Production take 
up the matter at the highest level in the Finance Ministry to  get the issue 
resolved and ensure that the Indian Companies do not lose precious 
contracts in global biddings due to the grossly unfair  preferential treatment 
being afforded to foreign companies at the cost of the domestic industry. 

 
9. The Committee find that though Research & Development activity of 
BEL started five decades ago and R&D expenditure as a percentage of turn -
over has been healthily improving from 3.55% in 2006-07 to 8.21% in 2011-12, 
no efficiency audit of R&D projects was carried out till recently.  It is only in 
August 2012 that a methodology of measuring in -house R&D value addition 
has been introduced.  The measurement ca rried out for the last five years 
has reportedly shown in -house R&D value addition of around 56% (average) 
across BEL. The Committee would like to know, how this percentage 
compares internat ionally and whether the methodology of measurement is 
globally recognised.  Incidentally, the Committee note the observation of one 
of the Directors of the Company that the R&D interface and customer 
interface is wea k in BEL and that there is need to modify the Company ’s 
strategy to reflect customer focus.  Notwithstandi ng some steps taken to 
address these issues, the Committe e feel that BEL should not be found 
wanting in this respect in future.  
 
10. The Committee are surprised to know that a company having long 
record of successful R&D activity and having 54% of its tur nover from in -
house developed products had not patented the technologies developed in -
house for defence equipment.  The Committee would like to have an 
assessment of the loss, if any, incurred on account of this lapse over the 
years.  It has been stated th at an aggressive campaign has been initiated 
over the past two years to protect the intel lectual property rights for the new 
technologies / process developed and 12 patent application filed during 
2011-12 and 7 applications till August 2012.  The Committee  urge that 
patenting activity should be one of the elements to be managed by the 
structural mechanism which has been put in place by BEL for R&D initiative.   
 

11. On a suggestion made by the Committee that BEL license out its 
designs which could become a major profit area, the CMD, BEL was candid 
in his admission that BEL never explored that particular area.  The 
Committee wish that necessary action is taken in this regard at the earliest 
under intimation to the Committee.   
 
12. The Committee note that BE L has taken up a number of marketing 
initiatives to counter competition being faced from private players which 
include recruitment of ex -service personnel, conducting marketing 
conferences, imparting short term and long term professional training in 
marketing to executives by top business schools like India Institute of 
Management, etc. BEL has also taken initiatives for cost reduction and has 
successfully achieved savings of Rs. 2.3 Crores  during 2011 -12 by 
coordinating in-house efforts of 57 Task Forces.  The Committee have also 
been informed that BEL is in the process of creating a Central Marketing 
Research Group for securing marketing intelligence to address marketing 
challenges.  The Committee believe that generating customer trust with 
highest standar ds o f quality coupled with effective  marketing are key to 
ensuring customer satisfaction. Increasing revenues and enhanced profits 
automatically flow, thereafter.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
renewed focus by the Company on a state-of-the-art, robust R&D mechanism 
with best available and complementing human resource on rolls, a highly 
professional market intelligence network, a reliable feedback and vigorous 
follow-up interface with the customers, a bouquet of products with a 
reasonable price band.  The Committee would like to be ap prised of a 
definite road-map encompassing all these facets at the earliest.   
 
13. The Committee feel that ensuring the quality of products is vital to 
improve the market presence, reliability and trustworthiness of the pr oducts 

supplied by BEL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that BEL should 
ensure a stringent quality control regimen for each and every product being 
rolled out from its plants so that the quality of products  is thoroughly 
checked before supply , especially the defence products which may 
otherwise directly risk  the safety and security of the Country.  Furthermore, 
as stated previously in this Report, m arketing strategies and customer 
interface should be improved  to infuse reliability and for enhancing the 
customer satisfaction level.  It would also be worthwhile  if apart from the 
stipulated pre-delivery tests post delivery tests are also conducted to ensure 
that the quality of products supplied is maintained at highest levels and the 
customers have no reasons to complain.   
 
14. The Committee observe that out of 83 products  delivered to the armed 
forces during the last five years, there was delay in delivery of 27 products 
(33% of products) ranging from one month to more than two years.  The 
major delay was in delivery of products such as  TRANSPORTABLE SATCOM 
TERMINAL, PCS LYNX U1 P16 AND CMS (SNF) , where the delay period was 
of more than two years. According to BEL, there are certain delays mainly in 
system integration, change in configuration by customer, site readiness, etc.  
The Committee would like to be assured that delay in none of the products is 
attributable to BEL. The Committee desire that in case, delay is due to lapse 
on the part of BEL, its product planning should be designed in such a way as 
to ensure timely delivery of products in future.  This is all the more 
necessary in a competitive situation increasingly faced by BEL.   
 
15. The Committee note that e -Procurement has been implemented by the 
Company in all its nine units for both purchase an d sub-contract.  Further, 
BEL has also adopted Integrity Pact will all vendors/suppliers/contracts/ 
service providers for all orders/ contracts of value of over Rs.200 crores as 

per the initiative of CVC to eradicate corruption in procurement activities.  
So far 52 orders/contracts are covered under Integrity Pact.  The Committee, 
however, are concerned to  find that a large quantum of procurement in BEL 
is still being done through single vendor  though the number of single 
vendor procurement s has come down from 13 per cent in 2008 -09 to 3.88 
per cent in 2011 -12.  The Committee  also note that about 27.34 per cent of 
the purchases have been mad e through Limited Tendering process during 
2011-12 and about 12.31 per cent  of the purchases through nominated 
tendering and 23.52 per cent through License Agreement.  This is in sharp 
contrast to the principles enunciated by the Company as only 32.95 per cent 
of the purchases hav e been made through Open Tendering process. From 
the information furnished to the Committee , the Committee do not find any 
plausible explanation for BEL resorting to single vendor/ limited tendering 
process. The Committee feel that it  is a serious matter as it is not in 
conformity with  the CVC guidelines  which emphasise that single vendor 
procurement should be gradually reduced through vendor development.   
The Committee, therefore, recommend that intensive efforts should be made 
by the Company to increase the vendor base  in constant consultation with 
DRDO. Furthermore, single vendor tendering/procur ement should be 
reduced to barest minimum and resorted to only in rarest case.  With a view 
to ensure strict adherence to the principle, the procurement system  should 
be continuously monitored  and reviewed through frequent meetings and 
progress reports.   
 
16.  The Committee also note that the value of most of the purchases made 
by open tendering or through nominated sources is below Rs.200 crores 
and therefore does not attract provisions of the Integrity Pact.  The 
Committee, therefore,  feel that the matte r for reducing the value  of the 
Integrity Pact from Rs. 200 c rores should be taken up with the concerned 

Department with a view to cover more and more orders/ contracts under it.  
This would not only ensure transparency in open tende ring but would  also 
go a long way in ushering fairness in procurement and minimizing scope for 
corruption to a large extent. 
  
17. The Committee note that there are nine non-official Directors and 2 
Government Directors on the Board of the Company.  There were six Board 
meetings during 2008 -09 and seven each in 2009-10 and 2010 -11.  The 
Committee note that one Government Director attended just one out of six 
Board meeting s during 2009 -10.  The Committee have been informed that 
although the Director was absent from the Board meeti ng, he ha d been by 
virtue of his positioning interacting quite often with the Company 
management even other wise and also on crucial matters.  The Committee 
are of the view that attendance of all Directors in the Board meetings is vital 
for the Company to benefit from their vast experience and expertise.  
Frequent absence of Directors from Board meetings  will defeat the very  
purpose of existence of the Board.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that regular attendance of other members of the Board should b e invariably 
insisted upon and ensured. The Department of Defence Production should 
also ensure the presence of their officers in the Board meetings so that the 
purpose of their inclusion in the Board is served and the C ompany benefits 
from their vast experience and expertise. 
 
 18. The Committee note a number of measures being taken by BEL to 
strengthen its manpower which includes periodical review of manpower 
requirements, regulating various forms of recruitment, provision of training, 
effective deploymen t of manpower, taking suitable welfare measures for 
staff, etc. The Committee however note that the number of regular employees 
of the Company has gone down  from 13750 persons in 2002 -03 to 11180 

persons in March 2012.  This, in  spite of the explanation of  the Company 
about it professing a need based HR policy appears too drastic a cut.  On the 
other hand, the number of contract labo urers ha s increased from 3204 
persons in 2009-10 to 4460 persons in 2011 -12 giving an impression that the 
Company is encouragi ng provisional employment which may be prone to 
exploitation.  It also implies a lacuna in manpower planning and projection as 
over one-third of BEL’s work force is temporary staff.  The Committee find 
such a trend disturbing and feel that in the long run it may prove counter -
productive and impede the consistency and stability of the organisation. The 
Committee believe that fresh talent combined with experience would , like in 
any other commercial organization,  strengthen BEL’s human resource and 
with infusion of new technology in the coming years, the in -house activities 
will grow to accommodate more and more permanent staff. The Committee 
recommend the Company should make a realistic assessment of its 
manpower requirement and its in -house work without unde rmining the 
importance of permanent staff to ensure that core areas of production and 
marketing do not suffer. 
 
19. It is the responsibility of the Department of Defence Production to 
identify the problems faced by BEL which are beyond its control and rend er 
all possible help to resolve them. During the course of examination of the 
Company, it transpired that intervention of the Department of Defence 
Production could have helped BEL to tide over some problems in matters 
such as (a) Funding of Strategically Critical Technology Projects e.g. IR 
Detector (Cooled & Un -cooled), II Tubes, IF & RF Seekers, High Power Laser 
etc., (b) Placement of order of Security Sensitive Projects on DPSUs only – 
EW Systems. , (c) Disposal of obsolete inventory to generate revenue -
Amendment required in Custom Duty rules. , (d) Exemption of Octroi (approx 
3.5%) for BEL and BEL Optronic Devices Limited in Pune (Maharashtra). , (e) 

Shorter evaluation cycl e time for indigenized products. , and  (f) Early 
placement of order for which trials have been completed successfully.   It is 
only after the matter was taken up by the Committee,  BEL ha s reportedly 
been asked by the Department of Defence Production to submit proposals 
for being taken up with the concerned Ministries.   The Committee urge the 
Ministry of Defence to examine the issues in right perspective and get them 
resolved expeditiously  by taking them up at the hig hest level  with all 
concerned ministries/departments / agencies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                         SHRI JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
6 September, 2013                  Chairman, 
15 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)                             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 27th December, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 16 45 
hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
5 Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
6 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
7 Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Anil Desai 
9 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
10 Shri Naresh Gujral 
11 Dr. V. Maitreyan 
12 Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
 
Representatives of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) 
 
 
1 Shri Anil Kumar CMD, BEL 
2 Shri Ramakrishna H.N. Director (Marketing) 
3 Smt. Elaine Mathias Executive Director (Finance) 
 

 
2.  The Committee held discussion with the representatives of the Bharat Electronics 
Limited (BEL) in connection with examination of BEL.  
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the BEL and drew 
their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker  regarding evidence before 
the Parliamentary Committees.   
 
4. The representatives of BEL then made a brief power point presentation on the 
subject before the Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairman and Members raised queries on 
various aspects pertaining to the functioning of BEL like their physical and financial 
performance, MoU rating, formation of joint venture, R&D activities, order book position, 
vacancies on the Board of Directors, manpower plannin g, etc.  Explanation / clarification 
on the same were given by the representatives of BEL.  In respect of points for which 
information was not readily available with the representatives of BEL, they were asked to 
furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th February, 2013 from 1400 hrs to 1520 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
         Lok Sabha 
 
   2  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
   3  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
   4  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
   5  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
 
         Rajya Sabha 
   6  Shri Anil Desai 
   7  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
   8  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
   9  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1.  Shri A. Louis Martin     Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri. P.C. Koul   Director 
3. Shri M.K.Madhusudhan   Additional Director 
 
                                   WITNESS 
 
Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) 
 
1. Shri R.K. Mathur   Secretary (DP) 
2. Shri A.K. Gupta   AS (DP) 
3. Shri P.K. Mishra   JS (ES) 
4. Dr. S.S. Sundram  Chief Controller (R&D) 
5. Shri Anil Kumar   CMD (BEL) 

 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence (Department of Defence Production ) and drew their attention to Direction 58 of 
the Directions by the Speaker , Lok Sabha  regarding evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committees.   
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry began their deposition by making a brief 
statement on the working of BEL and the role of the Ministry in the same. Thereafter, the 
Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the functioning of 
BEL like competition faced by BEL due to entry of private players, attendance of Directors 
in the Board meetings, quality of products, manpower, R&D activities,  reported supply of 
faulty night vision dev ices to Para military forces , manufacture of civilian use products , 
etc. In respect of points for which information was not readily available with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production), they were 
asked to furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

Appendix-III 
 
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2013-14) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 6th September, 2013 from 1030 hrs to 1100 hrs 
in Chairman's Chamber, Room No. 147, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
4.  Smt. Shruti Chowdhary 
5.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
6.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7.  Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Anil Desai 
9.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
10.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Bharat 
Electronics Limited and after some deliberations adopted the same without any changes. 
 

4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report on the basis of 
factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
 
5. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX matter not related to this Report 

Annexure 
(Vide Para 5.6) 
 
Value & Categorization of Purchase for the last four years-BEL 
Value in Rs Crores 
Year Total 
Purchase 
Open 
Tendering 
Limited 
Tendering 
Customer/ OEM 
nominated 
sources 
Licensor/ 
Licence 
Agreement 
Joint Venture Property Single Tender 
Value %age Value %age Value %age Value %age Value %age Value %age Value %age 
2008-09 3520.00 34.76 0.99 959.02 27.24 143.81 4.09 1540.23 43.76 0.00 0.00 372.49 10.58 457.47 13.00 
2009-10 2687.00 17.80 0.66 830.08 30.89 201.85 7.51 793.20 29.52 0.00 0.00 376.89 14.03 435.06 16.19 
2010-11 6042.00 25.97 0.43 909.05 15.05 472.35 7.82 3384.05 56.01 0.00 0.00 523.00 8.66 518.85 8.59 
2011-12 4971.00 198.42 3.99 1359.31 27.34 611.80 12.31 1169.41 23.52 0.00 0.00 1229.26 24.73 193.03 3.88 
Total 17220.00 276.95 1.61 4057.46 23.56 1429.81 8.30 6886.89 39.99 0.00 0.00 2501.64 14.53 1604.41 9.32 
 
Procurement to tune of Rs. 463 Crs during the last four years has been done through other modes of procurement. 
 