 
 
 
CPU No. 941                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2009-2010) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
Airports Authority of India 
 
 (Ministry of Civil Aviation) 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-First 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India – Review of Infrastructure and 
Operational Facilities ( Based on Audit Report No. 17 of 2007 (Performance Audit )  
(Commercial) of C&AG of India)  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30- 4- 2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30- 4- 2010 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2010 / Vaisakha 1932(S) 
 
8 

2 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
CHAPTER   l Report  5 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government.  
15 
CHAPTER   IlI Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration. 
28 
   
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
32 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty -First 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India 
– Review of Infrastructure and Operational Facilit ies 
(Based on Audit Report No. 17 of 2007 (Performance 
Audit ) (Commercial) of C&AG of India). 
34 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

3 
C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009 - 2010) 
 
SHRI V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO - CHAIRMAN 
Sl.  No. MEMBERS, LOK SABHA 
2. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8. Shri Baijayant Panda 
9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
MEMBERS, RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
18. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
21. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22. Shri Amar Singh 
 
 
 Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma Director  
3. Smt. Malvika Mehta           Senior Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(iii) 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present  this  Eighth  Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India – Review of 
Infrastructure and Operational Facilities (Based on Audit Report No. 17 of 2007 (Performance 
Audit) (Commercial) of C&AG of India).  
2. The Twenty -first R eport of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2007 -2008) was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th November, 2007.  Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 19 th March, 2009.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
28th April, 2010. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix – I.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Seventh Report of the Committee is given in Appendix – II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                                       V. KISHORE CHANDRA SINGH DEO, 
28th April, 2010             Chairman, 
8 Vaisakha, 1932(S)                  Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

5 
Chapter I 
Report 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings on Airports Authority of India – Review of 
Infrastructure and Operational Facilities which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th 
November, 2007. 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all  the 
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
(Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos.1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10             (Total 8)  
(ii) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter III)  
Sl.Nos.2, 5                (Total 2) 
(iii) Recommendations / observations to which the Government has  furnished interim 
replies. (Chapter IV)      
 Nil                    Nil 
(iv) Recommendations / observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s replies: (Chapter V)  
Nil                    Nil 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
4. In the context of financial outlay on Infrastructure / Projects  by AAI, the Committee 
had, in their Twenty-first Report recommended as follows:-  
 
 “The Committee regret to note that in the year from 2000 -01 to 2005 -06, there 
was a shortfall in actual expenditure vis -à-vis plan outlay on capital works 
executed by Airports Authority of India which resulted in non -creation / 
completion of projects after considerable time and cost overrun.  Thus, the goal 
of creating capacity ahead of demand was not fully met.  

6 
 
 The Committee take note that the shortfall in expenditure was registered at an 
all-time high at 58.35 per cent in 2000-01 which later on came down to 23.72% in 
2004-05.  The situation regarding utilization of funds has improved only since last 
two years. The Committee note that during the year 2006 -07, funds to the extent 
of 90.46% were utilized due to various measures taken for improving the capit al 
expenditure. The Committee also note that AAI has set up a project management 
cell at the headquarters headed by Executive Director to assess the progress of 
projects.  The Committee recommend that this cell should periodically assess the 
work of ongoing projects so as to ensure that there is no cost and time overrun in 
the implementation of projects and the intended objective of creating adequate 
infrastructure and capacity to meet future demand is fully achieved. 
 
 The Committee further note that durin g the 11 th Five Year Plan period, the 
Airports Authority of India proposes to spend about Rs.12,417.17 crore as 
compared to Rs.3,534.62 crore during the 10 th Five Year Plan period, an 
increase of almost 250 per cent.  The Committee would like to emphasise that 
Airports Authority of India fully utilize the allocated funds by way of creation and 
augmentation of infrastructure and operational facilities.  Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the Authority should create an appropriate 
mechanism/framework through  which full  utilization of funds is planned and 
ensured.” 
 
5. In their action taken reply to the recommendation of the Committee, the  Ministry of 
Civil Aviation have stated as follows:- 
“The observations / directions of the Committee have been noted. Sincere efforts 
will be made by AAI to execute the projects in a time -bound manner. Decision -
making processes will be streamlined. As observed by the Committee, the 
utilization of funds has shown considerable improvement in the recent past. It is 
expected that with better coordination and monitoring, in future, the allocated 
funds shall be utilized fully by AAI.”  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
6. In this connection, Audit has given the following remarks on the reply of the Ministry:-  
“The details collected from the AAI indicate the following:     
  (Rs. in Crore) 
Year 2006-07 2007-08 
Original Plan outlay 1149.82 1980.95 
Actual Expenditure 1040.17 1980.23 
Shortfall 109.65 0.72 
Percentage of shortfall 9.54 0.04 
 

7 
It could be seen from above that the shortfall in actual expenditure vis -à-vis plan 
outlay has come down considerably. 
 
Further in reply to audit query issued on this account, AAI stated (October 2008) 
that „After recommendations by COPU in November 2007 no major time and cost 
over run on the projects has been observed so far‟.  However it was observed in 
the test checked cases involving civil and electrical works pending for the quarter 
ending September 2008 that: 
 
1.  Time over run cases are still  evident for the projects awarded prior to 
COPU recommendation in November, 2007. 
 
2.  In test checked cases, it was found that Projects awarded even after 
COPU recommendation, had registered time over run. 
 
3. The impact due to this time cases on cost of the  Projects/works will be 
scrutinized on completion of these projects/works in the future audits.” 
 
7. The Ministry of Civil Aviation have furnished following information on the remarks of 
the C&AG:-  
“As already indicated, the observations of the Committee have been noted and 
efforts made to execute the projects in a time bound manner. Technical 
instructions have also been issued for timely completion of projects and to avoid 
time overrun.”   
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
8. Taking note of shortfall in actual expenditure vis -a-vis planned outlay on 
capital works during the years 2000 -01 to 2005 -06 by AAI resulting in non -
completion of projects even after considerable time and cost over -run, the 
Committee had in their earlier report made a recommendation that the project 
management cell in AAI should periodically assess the work of ongoing projects 
so as to ensure that there was no cost and time overrun in the implementation of 
projects. The Committee had also made a specific recommendation for creation 
of an appropriate mechanism for planning and ensuring full utilization of funds.  
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated that sincere efforts 
would be made to execute the projects in a time -bound manner and decision 
making processes would be streamlined. The Ministry have further stated that it 
is expected that the allocated funds shall be utilized fully by AAI in future.  

8 
The fact brought out in Audit observations that instances of time over -run 
are still being noticed even in the projects awarded by AAI subsequent to  
examination of the subject by the Committee, is a clear indicator that no specific 
efforts seem to have been made by the project m anagement cell in AAI to 
periodically assess the work of on -going projects as was recommended by the 
Committee in their earli er report. Strangely, the reply of the Ministry is also 
completely silent about the action taken by the Authority, in pursuance of the 
recommendation of the Committee, for creation of an appropriate mechanism for 
planning and ensuring full utilization of funds. 
While emphasizing the need for timely completion of projects and full 
utilization of funds allocated for achieving the intended objective of creating 
adequate infrastructure and capacity to meet future demands, the Committee 
desire that AAI should ta ke concrete action  to ensure periodical assessment of 
the progress of ongoing projects by  its project m anagement cell and establish 
appropriate mechanism to plan and ensure full utilization of funds  as had been 
specifically recommended in the earlier repor t on the subject matter.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
9. In connection with problems in land acquisition and encroachment , the Committee 
had, in their original report recommended the following:- 
 
“As per Audit, as on March 2006, land under encroachment was 702 acres in 20 
airports and during the five years ending 2005, the Authority was able to remove 
encroachment from only 30 acres of land while incurring an expenditure of Rs. 
24.35 crore.  The Com mittee also observe that the land has been under 
encroachment at different airports for periods ranging from 5 years to 40 years 
and there is not much progress as regards status of removal of encroachments.  
The Committee also take note of Audit observatio n that AAI‟s efforts to resolve 
land acquisition issues were held up due to procedural delays and litigation.  
 
In view of the fact that land is a key resource for Airports Authority of India to 
implement it programme of expansion, modernization and augmen tation of 
facilities, the Committee need hardly emphasize that the issues of land 
acquisition and encroachment need to be addressed on top priority.  
 
The Committee note that though AAI Act 1994 was amended in 2004 to include 
Chapter 5A empowering them to take necessary action for eviction of 
encroachments on their land, yet it has not helped in achieving the intended 
objectives.  It is true that AAI is fully empowered and competent to deal with 
issues of land acquisition and removal of encroachments on its  land but the 
Committee feel that these are very sensitive issues involving various agencies 

9 
and State Governments.  The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that the 
Ministry should not abdicate themselves of their responsibility and provide all 
necessary support to AAI to resolve all such contentious issues.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in order to resolve this vexatious problem, an 
institutional mechanism consisting of senior officials from AAI and the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation be forme d to periodically liaise with concerned agencies and State 
Governments so that the problems can be addressed in a far more pragmatic 
manner.  The Committee also desire that a nodal officer should also be 
appointed in the Authority to pursue these issues.” 
 
10. The Reply of the Ministry to the recommendation is given below:-  
“The observations / directives of the Committee have been noted.  It is submitted 
that State / Local authorities have a key role in the encroachment removal. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation would endeavour and support AAI in resolving these 
issues by following them up with the concerned State Governments.” 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
11. In this regard, Audit has given the following remarks on the reply of the Ministry:- 
“The area under encroachment as on 31 st March 2008 was 838.22 acres, when 
compared to 680 acres in 2006 -07.  As the area under encroachment increased 
during the year, concrete action as recommended by COPU needs to be taken. 
 
Further as per the recommendation of the Committee „in order to resolve this 
vexatious problem, an institutional mechanism consisting of senior officials from 
AAI and the Ministry of Civil Aviation be formed to periodically liaise with 
concerned agencies and State Governments so that the problem can be 
addressed in a far more pragmatic manner.  The Committee also desired that 
nodal officer should also be appointed in the Authority to pursue these issues‟.  
But no action in this regard has been taken so far (October 2008).” 
 
12. The Government has further replied on the remarks of Audit as under:-   
“Action for appointing Nodal Officers in Airports Authority of India to pursue these 
issues is under process.” 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
  

10 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. In their original report, the Committee  had observed that the sensitive 
issues of land acquisition and encroachment involving various agencies and 
State Governments needed to be addressed on top priority. They had accordingly 
recommended that an institutional mechanism consisting of senior officials from 
AAI and Ministry of Civil Aviation be formed to periodically liaise with all 
concerned so as to address and resolve the vexatious problems in  a far more 
pragmatic manner. The Committee had also desired that a nodal officer should be 
appointed in the Authority to pursue these issues. 
The Ministry have in their reply, stated that they would endeavou r and 
support AAI in resolving these issues by following them up with the concerned 
State Governments and that the action for appointing nodal officers in AAI to 
pursue these issues was under process. 
The Committee are dismayed to find that the action take n reply of the 
Ministry is conspicuously silent about the steps contemplated by them for 
establishing an institutional mechanism comprising of senior officials from AAI 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Undoubtedly, the Ministry have tried to absolve 
themselves of their responsibility by confining and limiting their role to merely 
extending support to AAI in resolving the relevant issues with the concerned 
State Governments. 
 As pointed out in the original report, the Ministry must realize that land 
being the key resource for AAI to implement its programme of expansion, 
modernization and upgradation of facilities, the issues related to land acquisition 
and removal of encroachments require utmost attention. Apparently, inaction on 
the part of the Ministry and AAI has resulted in increase of land under 
encroachment as brought out in Audit observations that the area under 
encroachment in airports had increased from 680 acres in 2006-07 to 838.22 acres 
as on 31 st March 2008. The Committee also find it disturbin g that their 
recommendation for appointment of nodal officer in the Authority to pursue these 
issues is stated to be still under process.  
While deprecating the lack of responsibility being displayed by the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation  and AAI  in th is matter , the Committee strongly reiterate their 
earlier recommendations and  desire that the Ministry should expeditiously 
initiate all necessary steps to set up an institutional mechanism consisting of 
senior officials from AAI and Ministry of Civil Aviation to address the twin evils of 
land acquisition and encroachments in an efficacious manner as well as for 
appointment of nodal officer in the Authority to pursue these issues. 

11 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
14. On the issue of passenger facilities infrastructure , the Committee had , in their 
original report, recommended the following:-  
“In view of the fact that there has been unprecedented growth of more than 20% 
in passenger traffic ranging from 21.5% in 2004 -05 and 23.7% in 2005 -06 to 
31.4% in 2006 -07, the Commit tee note that the Airports Authority of India has 
failed in achieving the objective of providing capacity ahead of demand at 
airports with regard to services such as check -in, immigration, security, customs 
and baggage delivery etc. 
The Audit have also obs erved that the overall customer satisfaction index has 
hovered around 74 -75% and in some cases, the ratings went below 70%.   As 
per the latest customer satisfaction survey report from February to April 2007 at 
top 40 airports, which handles 98% of total t raffic, shows that the Customer 
Satisfaction Level at Indian Airports varied from 70% to 87% with an average of 
75%.  The Committee, therefore, observe that infrastructure created at the 
airports is not commensurate with the growth in passenger traffic the reby 
resulting in lower customer satisfaction level. 
The Committee take note of umpteen number of measures taken by AAI to 
improve its facilities.  In view of the fact that Passenger traffic is expected to grow 
at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 12% from 96.4 million now to 280 
million in 2020 and cargo traffic would grow at a CAGR of 14% per annum to 9 
million tones, the Committee would like to emphasise that AAI need to gear up its 
functioning from achieving the twin objectives of providing capa city ahead of 
demand and improving customer satisfaction index. 
The Committee recommend that a dedicated in -house cell be created by the 
Airports Authority of India which would make a realistic assessment of the rate of 
growth of passengers and the need of passenger facilities on a holistic basis over 
the next 20-40 years based on which requisite infrastructure should be created in 
terms of technology, passenger facilities, airport management, areas of safety 
and security etc. The Committee further desire t hat this cell may study the 
international and domestic airports in other countries for more efficient 
management of Indian airports. 
The Committee note that to make airports user -friendly, Airport Advisory 
Committees have been constituted by AAI at 46 majo r airports. The Committee 
desire that these committees should meet at regular intervals as they can play a 
crucial role in improving facilities at airports for passengers.” 

12 
15. The Reply of the Ministry to the recommendation is as under:-  
“There is a dedicated Corporate Planning and Management Services Department 
in AAI which undertakes dedicated traffic forecasts as well as projections for 
future. This Department maintains all information / data and also regularly 
monitors the traffic trends on a continuous basis.  
 
Instructions have been sent to all the Regional Executive Directors / Airport 
Directors to ensure that meetings of the Airport Advisory Committees are 
convened regularly.”  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
16. In this connection, Audit has given the following remarks on the reply of the 
Ministry:- 
“Customer Satisfaction Survey was conducted during 2007 -08 and is also being 
conducted during 2008 -09 on half yearly basis.  The results, i n term of overall 
Customer Satisfaction Index (CSI) of passenger terminals are furnished below: 
Survey Period CSI 
percent 
Feb.07-March 07 74 
Aug.07 to Oct.07 76 
Feb.08 – March 
08 
76 
 
Fourth round of survey is being conducted during August 2008-October 2008 and 
the results are expected by third week of December 2008.  It could be seen from 
above that CSI from February 2007 to March 2008 was 76 % when compared to 
75% as per survey report from February 2007 to April 2007.  Hence there is no 
significant improvement in this regard.  Action is needed to be taken to increase 
the CSI. 
So far, no study has been conducted by the Authority at the International and 
domestic airports in other countries for more efficient management of Indian 
airports. 
As intimated by  AAI, Airport Advisory Committee Meetings are held in regular 
intervals.” 
17. The Government has further replied on the remarks of Audit as under:-   
“Consumer Satisfaction Index has improved from 76 to 78% during August to 
October 2008. While conducting t he study the bench marking with reference to 

13 
International Standards laid down for various Airports published by Airport 
Council International (ACI) are generally considered. Hence the need for 
conducting study by Airports Authority of India in other count ries may not be 
necessary.” 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
18.  In the light of Audit observations that the overall customer satisfaction 
level at Indian airports stood at 75% of total traffic, the Committee had observed 
that infrastructure created at the airports wa s not commensurate with the growth 
in passenger traf fic thereby resulting in lower customer satisfaction level.  The 
Committee had therefore recommended that a dedicated in -house cell be created 
by AAI which would make a realistic assessment of the rate of growth of 
passengers and the need of passenger facil ities on a holistic basis over the next 
20-40 years based on which requisite infrastructure should be created . The 
Committee had also desired that such a cell might study the international and 
domestic airports in other countries for more efficient managem ent of Indian 
airports.  The Committee had also observed that the Airport Advisory Committees 
could play a crucial role in improving facilities at airports for passengers and had 
therefore, desired that such committees should meet at regular intervals.   
The Ministry of Civil Aviation have, in their action taken reply, stated that 
there is a dedicated Corporate Planning and Management Services Department in 
AAI which undertakes traffic forecasts as well as projections for future and also 
regularly monitors the traffic trends on a continuous basis. The Ministry further 
stated that the need for conducting study by AAI in other countries may not be 
necessary as such studies undertaken by the Authority for  benchmarking are 
generally c onducted with reference to International Standards laid down for 
various Airports published by Airport Council International.  The Ministry have 
also stated that customer satisfaction index has improved from 76 to 78% during 
August to October 2008 .  As rega rds meetings of the Airport Advisory 
Committees, the Ministry have stated that instructions have been sent to all 
Regional Executive Directors/Airport Directors to en sure that such meetings are 
convened regularly. 
 While appreciating the steps being taken for realistic assessment of the 
rate of growth of passengers  as well as future projections of traffic, the 
Committee express their dissatisfaction over the fact that there has been no 
perceptible improvement in the customer satisfaction index which showed  a 
marginal increase from 75% in April 2007 to 78% in October 2008. The Committee 

14 
would, therefore, like to emphasize upon AAI the need for taking concrete and 
result-oriented steps for improving infrastructural facilities to enhance the 
customer satisfaction level in a time -bound manner.   At the same time, the 
Committee wish to point out that mere issuance of instructions for regularly 
convening the meetings of Airport Advisory Committees is not sufficient until and 
unless appropriate follow-up action is taken to draw a time schedule within which 
the Airport Advisory Committees should meet.  
 
 
 
  

15 
Chapter II 
Recommendations / Observations that have been accepted by Government. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Corporate Plan 
 
 The Airports Authority of India came  into existence on 1 st April, 1995 by merger 
of IAAI and NAAI. As per Audit report, the Authority did not have a Corporate Plan. An 
unsuccessful attempt was made in January 2004 for finalizing such a plan, which was 
revived again in May 2005 when the India n Institute of Technology was appointed to 
prepare a Corporate Plan for the Authority who submitted their report in February 2006.   
The Committee note that the Corporate Plan has now been finalized and approved by 
the AAI Board. 
 
 The Committee regret to note that AAI has taken more than a decade in 
preparing and finalizing a very important document like Corporate Plan which inter alia 
includes the vision of the organization for the short term as well as long term 
perspectives. The Committee feel that by n ot having proper Corporate Plan in place, 
AAI had to resort to segmented approach to the issues arising from time to time rather 
than having holistic approach to such issues.  The Committee are of the view that early 
preparation and implementation of Corpo rate Plan was imperative in view of 
unprecedented growth in aviation sector and to meet various challenges like 
modernization of airports in the wake of boom in civil aviation sector and also the 
emerging economic scenario in the country.    
 
 Now that the  Corporate Plan has been finalized and approved, the Committee 
desire that concerted efforts should be made for its implementation in a time bound 
manner. Therefore, the Committee would like to be apprised by the Authority about the 
follow-up action taken to implement the Corporate Plan, and its impact in handling the 
exponential increase in the aviation sector in a more systematic and organized manner.  
 
Reply of the Govt. 
AAI has drawn Corporate Plan for a period of 10 years i.e. from 2007 to 2016. In 
line with the broad objectives outlined in the corporate plan document, AAI has taken 
initiatives for achievement of these objectives.  The exponential growth in air traffic h as 
posed challenges for AAI in terms of infrastructure development and has also created 
new opportunities.  
The main focus of the Corporate Plan is the development of airport infrastructure 
in the country. In line with the objectives in the corporate plan,  Airports Authority has 
taken up the following initiatives for infrastructure development:  
 

16 
a. With a view to develop them into world class airports, Delhi & Mumbai airports 
have been restructured and leased out for up gradation and development to joint 
venture Companies in which AAI holds 26% equity stake and also gets revenue 
share @ 45.99% and 38.7% respectively.  
 
b. Master Plans have been prepared for modernization / development of Kolkata 
and Chennai airports by AAI at a cost of Rs.3749.5 crores. 
 
Kolkata - Rs.1941.5 crores 
Chennai - Rs.1808 crores 
    ---------------------- 
    Rs.3749.5 crores 
    ---------------------- 
c. AAI has taken a 13% stake in Greenfield airports being developed at Hyderabad 
and Bangalore with a cap of Rs. 50 crore for each of these airports. These new 
airports are likely to become operational in March 2008. 
 
d. For development of other airports, AAI has prepared modernization and 
upgradation plan for 35 airports. The work on these projects is likely to be 
completed by March 2010. It is expected that by that time, the demand will 
spread to other smaller airports and AAI will take up the task for developing the 
next level of airports.  
 
e. To facilitate the trade through air, existing cargo terminals at Kolkata and 
Chennai are being expanded and modernized for smooth handling of cargo. 
Cargo handling facilities are also being provided / upgraded at Amritsar, Jammu, 
Indore, Patna and Coimbatore airports.  
 
f. AAI will implement Satellite based CNS / ATM facilities by 2011.  
 
g. AAI has been assigned the responsibility of development of three Greenfield 
airports in the North -Eastern region namely Pakyong near Gangtok (Sikkim), 
Chiethu near Kohima (Nagaland) and Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh). In addition 
AAI has to undertake development / upgradation of several existing airports in 
this region. Substantial funding for these projects would come to AAI from the 
Central Government and North-Eastern Council (NEC). 
 
These initiatives shall help in achieving the objective of creating state -of-the-art 
infrastructure at airports in the next five years.  
 
The other strategic initiatives planned / taken by AAI are as follows:  
 
a. AAI has taken security as a continuous challenge and will keep on adjusting its 
strategies as per the changing threat perceptions. The control of security 
measures rests with Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and AAI will provide the 
necessary infrastructure.  

17 
 
b. For the benefit of passengers / customers and to improve the operational 
efficiency at airports, a three phase plan using IT enabled services is being 
implemented.  
 
c. Provision of safe air space and ground operations at airports is a top priority for 
AAI and AAI will take up the certification of aerodromes in accordance with the 
specifications contained in Annex. 14. 
 
d. AAI has taken initiatives for taking consultancy assignments in airport 
development / management, CNS/ATM in India and abroad for genera ting 
additional revenue. 
 
e. Major thrust has been given to generate non -aeronautical revenue. This aspect 
has been one of the objectives in the infrastructure design in the upcoming 
development plans.  
 
f. On Human Resource Development, AAI‟s strategy is as follows:  
 
a. Aiming at high performance and high accountability by creating 
performance oriented culture. 
 
b. Speed of action, innovation and creativity. 
 
c. Lever-aging on human resources. 
 
 Through these initiatives, following results are expected during the plan period:  
 
a. All the airports in the country shall have sufficient capacity to meet the air traffic 
demand with facilities comparable to the best airports in the world. Customer 
Satisfaction Index is expected to go upto 90% from the current level of 75%.  
 
b. Aeronautical Revenue will grow at a rate of about 15% on year to year basis up 
to 2008-09, 13% for the period covering 2009 -12 and 10% for the period 2012 -
15. 
 
c. The average profit will grow at a rate of 14% on year to year basis. 
 
d. Expenditure will come down to 50% of revenue in a phased manner. 
 
e. It is aimed to achieve a significantly higher growth in generation of such revenue 
@ 15% during 2008 -09, 16% till 2011 -12 and finally 18% during the remaining 
plan-period.  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 

18 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
No further remarks except that the compliance of initiative taken for achievement of 
objectives would be watched in future. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Noted for future compliance. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
  
Non Traffic Revenue 
 
The Committee note that the Audit in their Report have observed that the share 
of non-traffic revenue out of the total revenue of the Airports Authority of India was only 
11.90% in 2001 -02 (Rs. 267.20 crores) increasing marginally to 14.04 % in 2005 -06 
(Rs. 489.96 crores).   In view of the the fact that out of 90 operational airports being 
managed by AAI, only 12 airports were profit making and the remaining operational 
airports generate very meagenon -traffic revenue, the Committee emphasize the need 
for taking adequate measures for augmenting the shares of non -traffic revenue of the 
airports to strengthen and augment the existing infrastructure at the airports.   
 
The Committee are happy to note that AAI has identified the development of 35 
non-metro airports for commercial exploitation based on the reports which inter-alia 
provide for creation of flying schools at various airports, ground handling services to be 
provided to airlines and development of non -traffic revenue through city side 
development.  The Committee emphasize that the work of development for these non -
metro airports should b e completed within  a time bound programme.  The Committee 
also desire that mechanism for commercial exploitation of other non -metro airports 
should be explored and steps be taken with due promptitude for augmentation of non -
traffic revenue from these airports as well.  
Reply of the Govt. 
The observation/directives of the Committee have been noted.  All the Airport 
Directors / Regional Executive Directors have been advised to explore every possible 
avenue to enhance non -aeronautical revenue. A comprehensive plan is under 
implementation for commercial exploitation of lands on the city-side of 24 out of 35 non-
metro airports. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 

19 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
Regarding augmentation of non traffic revenue, AAI has proposed setting up of 
flying school at 28 airports, negotiations with oil companies for levy of through put 
charges, city side development of 24 non -metro airports, setting up of MRO 
(Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul) facility at Begumpet, Hyderabad and additional site 
for setting up of AFS station at Chennai.  The Terminal Building and Airside works for 
35 non-metro airports were planned to be completed by March 2010.  But there is no 
significant improvement for the development of  35 non metro airports so far (October 
2008).  During 2008 -09, development works for non metro airports estimating Rs.2193 
crore have been proposed to be taken up during 2008 -09.  Out of the 35 non metro 
airports, the city side development of 24 non -metro airports is being undertaken by AAI 
with private sector participation following PPP route.  Th e process has been initiated for 
Amritsar and Udaipur airports only.  Model Concession Agreement in this regard is 
being finalized in coordination with Ministry o f Civil Aviation/Planning Commission.  For 
the remaining airports it will be extended afterwards.  Further it has been informed by 
the Authority that the Nagpur airport is being handed over to Maharashtra Airport 
Development Company Ltd., St ate Govt. Under taking as per Govt.‟s decision and 
remaining 10 non metro airports are either defence owned where AAI operates civil 
enclaves or have no land available for commercial development. 
However, the progress of steps taken for the augmentation of non traffic rev enue 
and development of 35 non-metro airports in the time frame as mentioned in the reply to 
the recommendation no.1 (d) of the MOCA would further be examined in future audits. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Action is in hand to explore every possible avenue to enhance the non 
aeronautical revenue. A comprehensive plan is also under implementation for 
commercial exploitation of land on the city side. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
Operational Area Infrastructure-Timely Completion of Projects 
 
The Committee note that Audit from a test check of major works executed by AAI 
during 2004-05 at many airports have found cases of time overrun up to 75 months due 
to reasons like absence of clear possession of land before taking the work leading to 
delay and foreclosure of work, poor performance of the contractor etc. Audit has also 
noticed cost overrun of  Rs. 3.47 crore due to changes in scope of work.   
 
As already pointed out by the Committee in their earlier recommendation, they 
would again emphasise the imperative need of timely execution of projects to 

20 
strengthen the existing infrastructure which is woefully inadequate to meet the growing 
demand which has risen due to high growth in Civil Aviation Sector.  
 
The Committee note that AAI has taken sever al steps to avoid time and cost 
overrun in future projects. The Committee desire that a strong mechanism should be put 
in place to ensure that all these steps are scrupulously adhered to, to obviate any 
chance of cost and time overrun in implementation of future projects.  
 
Reply of the Govt. 
 
The observations / directions of the Committee have been noted. 
Instructions have been issued for awarding the work only after acquisition of land for the 
projects. Land matters are being vigorously pursued with the c oncerned State 
Governments. 
 
Action has been initiated to shortlist experienced contractors which would greatly 
help in timely execution of projects. 
 
It is expected that with above measures and regular monitoring by the Project 
Monitoring and Quality Assurance (PMQA) Department, the projects would be 
completed on time. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
Instructions were issued by AAI during Dec. 2006 to monitor the progress of 
projects.  Concerned Executive Director (Engineering), Executive Director 
(Communication, Navigational and Surveillance -Planning), Corporate Hqrs. shall be 
responsible for tenderin g action for packages more than Rs.5.00 crore.  Concerned 
Project Managers shall ensure timely completion of projects and he should tender 
progress report till be project is fully commissioned and handed over for operation.  
Project Monitoring and Quality Assurance directorate will coordinate and collect the 
information/data and prepare a concise report for informing the AAI Board.  The effect of 
implementation of these guidelines in the working of the AAI would further be seen 
during future audits. 
Further reply of the Govt. 
Noted for compliance during future audit.  
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009. 
 
  

21 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Air Traffic Management, Communication Navigation and Surveillance Facilities 
Infrastructure 
The Committee note that undue delays occurred in procurement/commissioning 
of various equipments viz Visual Simulator, Voice Communication System, Dedicated 
Satellite Communication Network, UHF links, Instrument Landing System(ILS) and 
Doppler Very High Frequency  Omni Range (DVOR) at various airports. 
 
The Committee further note that AAI incurred avoidable expenditure to the tune 
of Rs.7.65 crore by deciding  to enter into an agreement with BEL (Bharat Electronics 
Limited) without assessing their capability to upgrade  technology and produce Radars 
at a reasonable price.  Also, Flight Inspection System produced for Rs.19.50 crore in 
November,2004 had not been installed as the procurement of the aircraft in which it was 
to be fitted was delayed. 
 
The Committee highly deprecate lack of perspective  planning on the part of AAI 
in foreseeing procedural problems such a s delayed decision in procuring equipment, 
non-synchronisation of allied activities and poor contract management.  The Committee 
view these aspects very seriously and would like to hold Airports Authority of India 
responsible for non-synchronisation of the various above-quoted activities. 
 
The Committee recommend that the Authority should develop more expertise in 
planning and synchronizing its various activities so as to avoid losses on account of 
delay in procurement and installation of various systems. 
 
Reply of the Govt. 
The Committee‟s concern about delays in installation of CNS equipments has 
been noted. Following steps are being taken by AAI to avoid such delays – 
 
1. It has been decided to deal with the procurement process in a time bound 
manner. Dedicated teams would be deployed to evaluate the tenders so as to 
ensure that the purchase-contracts are finalised within the prescribed time-frame.  
 
2. With a view to ensure the synchronization of the site readiness with the 
availability of equipment, it has been decided, that, to the extent possible, the 
purchase order will be placed only for those systems where the sites ar e readily 
available or are likely to be available before the arrival of the equipment.  
 
3. In view of large infrastructure creation requirement for the CNS systems, AAI 
would augment its staff strength and create dedicated regional groups. These 
regional groups will coordinate the activities at the regional level for timely 
identification of suitable sites and completion of civil & electrical works ahead of 
arrival of the equipments.  
 

22 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
Instructions were issued during September 2008 for synchronizing the activities 
in order to avoid losses on account of delay in procurement and installation of various 
systems.   The effectiveness of these instructions in the working of the AAI would be 
seen during future audits. 
 
Further, MOCA stated in their reply that „In view of large infrastructure creation 
requirement for CNS systems, AAI would augment its staff strength and create 
dedicated regional groups.  These re gional groups will coordinate the activities at the 
regional level for timely identification of suitable sites and completion of civil & electrical 
works ahead of arrival of the equipment‟.  No such dedicated regional groups have been 
formed so far (October 2008). 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Action has been taken to coordinate the activities wherever necessary through 
the concerned Executive Director/General Manager in Airports authority of India, who 
would be the Nodal Officers for reviewing the procurement of systems.   
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Passenger Facilities Infrastructure 
In view of the fact that there has been unprecedented growth of more than 20% 
in passenger traffic ranging from 21.5% in 2004 -05 and 23.7% in 2005 -06 to 31.4% in 
2006-07, the Committee note that the Airports Authority of India has failed in achieving 
the objective of providing capacity ahead of demand at airports with regard to services 
such as check-in, immigration, security, customs and baggage delivery etc. 
The Audit have also observed that the overall customer satisfaction index has 
hovered around 74 -75% and in some cases, the ratings went below 70%.   As per the 
latest customer satisfaction survey report from February to April 2007 at top 40 airports, 
which handles 98% of total traffic, shows that the Customer Satisfaction Level at Indian 
Airports varied from 70% to 87% with an average of 75%.  The Committee, therefore, 
observe that infrastructure created at the airports is not commensurate with the growth 
in passenger traffic thereby resulting in lower customer satisfaction level. 

23 
The Committee take note of umpteen number of measures taken by AAI to 
improve its facilities.  In view of the fact that  Passenger traffic is expected to grow at a 
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 12% from 96.4 million now to 280 million in 
2020 and cargo traffic would grow at a CAGR of 14% per annum to 9 million tones, the 
Committee would like to emphasise that AAI ne ed to gear up its functioning from 
achieving the twin objectives of providing capacity ahead of demand and improving 
customer satisfaction index. 
The Committee recommend that a dedicated in -house cell be created by the 
Airports Authority of India which would make a realistic assessment of the rate of growth 
of passengers and the need of passenger facilities on a holistic basis over the next 20 -
40 years based on which requisite infrastructure should be created in terms of 
technology, passenger facilities, ai rport management, areas of safety and security etc. 
The Committee further desire that this cell may study the international and domestic 
airports in other countries for more efficient management of Indian airports. 
The Committee note that to make airports user-friendly, Airport Advisory 
Committees have been constituted by AAI at 46 major airports. The Committee desire 
that these committees should meet at regular intervals as they can play a crucial role in 
improving facilities at airports for passengers. 
Reply of the Govt. 
There is a dedicated Corporate Planning and Management Services Department 
in AAI which undertakes dedicated traffic forecasts as well as projections for future. This 
Department maintains all information / data and also regularly monitors the traffic trends 
on a continuous basis.  
 
Instructions have been sent to all the Regional Executive Directors / Airport Directors to 
ensure that meetings of the Airport Advisory Committees are convened regularly.  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
Customer Satisfaction Survey was conducted during 2007 -08 and is also being 
conducted during 2008-09 on half yearly basis.  The results, in term of overall Customer 
Satisfaction Index (CSI) of passenger terminals are furnished below: 
Survey Period CSI 
percent 
Feb.07-March 07 74 
Aug.07 to Oct.07 76 
Feb.08 – March 
08 
76 

24 
Fourth round of survey is being conducted during August 2008-October 2008 and 
the results are expected by third week of December 2008.  It could be seen from above 
that CSI from February 2007 to March 2008 was 76 % when compared to 75% as per 
survey report from February 2007 to April 2007.  Hence there is no significant 
improvement in this regard.  Action is needed to be taken to increase the CSI. 
So far, no study has been conducted by the Authority at the International and 
domestic airports in other countries for more efficient management of Indian airports. 
As intimated by AAI, Airport Advisory Committee Meetings are held in regular 
intervals. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Consumer Satisfaction Index has improved from 76 to 78% during August to 
October 2008. While conducting the study the bench marking with reference to 
International Standards laid down for various Airports p ublished by Airport Council 
International (ACI) are generally considered. Hence the need for conducting study by 
Airports Authority of India in other countries may not be necessary. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph no.18 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
Cargo Facilities Infrastructure 
The Committee note that Audit in their Report have pointed out that a new cargo 
complex was constructed at Amritsar despite a recommendation to the contrary by a 
Committee. The Committee regret to note that though the complex was completed in 
November, 2004 at a cost of Rs.2.93 crore, yet it had not been commercially utilized till 
June 2007. Furt her, the construction of integrated cargo complex at Kolkata also 
suffered a time overrun of more than a year. Now that New Cargo Complex have been 
constructed, it is imperative that they are commercially exploited so as to augment the 
revenues of the AAI. 
Beside above, a Bar Code System to be implemented at the airports for better 
monitoring and tracking of cargo was not operational even after two years of the issue 
of the work order leading to non -utilisation of investment to the tune of Rs.5.15 crore. 
The Committee strongly deplore the inaction on the part of AAI to activate an important 
system like Bar Code. 

25 
The Committee recommend that in future before taking a decision for 
construction of new facilities, an assessment regarding gainful utilization of e xisting 
facilities should be invariably done. The Committee further recommend that the Bar 
Code system be implemented at the earliest as it is crucial to have a sound system of 
monitoring and tracking cargo. 
Reply of the Govt. 
Assessment Study 
Instructions have been issued to the Regional Officials as well as to the major 
airports to ensure that an assessment regarding gainful utilization of existing facilities is 
invariably done before taking up construction of new facilities.   
Bar Code System 
Bar Code Sy stem is working operating satisfactorily at Export Complex and as 
per the availability of IGM message (from Customs) at import complex of Delhi and 
Mumbai airports.  
The integration with the newly upgraded ICMS database server work is in 
progress at Chennai airport and is expected to be completed in February 2008. 
The shifting of ICMS, bar Code and Customs EDFI System hardware to the 
equipment room at the newly built Cargo Terminal was completed on 31.12.2007 at 
NSCBI Airport, Kolkata.  Presently, the Bar Code Hardware and Software Engineers are 
working to integrate the Bar Code System with the ICMS data base.  This work is 
expected to be accomplished in February 2008. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
 The integration with new upgraded Integrated Cargo Management System 
(ICMS) data base server has been completed at Chennai Airport including migration of 
data on Oracle 10g data base server.  Further Bar Code System has also been 
implemented in Export Cargo Operations at Chennai Airport in respect of export cargo 
tendered with Bar Code label w.e.f. 1 st Aug. 2008.  As regards implementation of Bar 
Code System at Kolkata Airport is concerned, the job of weighing scale integration wit h 
local ICMS is in progress and on completion of this, Bar Code System shall be made 
functional. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
No further comments are required. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009 

26 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
No Uniformity between NAD and IAD Contracts 
The Committee note that though the Airports Authority of India was created by 
merging the erstwhile International Airports Authority of India with the National Airports 
Authority in 1995, a common works m anual for both the IAD and the NAD was finalized 
after more than a decade of the merger of the two divisions. The Audit have pointed out 
in their report that this delay has led to lack of uniformity resulting in different 
procedures for same items of work reflecting poorly in the functioning of the Authority. 
The Committee note with satisfaction that a uniform policy for the functioning of 
the two divisions has now been put into place and hope that the same would be 
followed scrupulously by both the divisio ns. Further, the Committee desire that the 
Authority should conduct a review so as to standardize all procedures and systems in 
the Airports Authority of India to minimize any difference with regard to procedure and 
practice on issues like tendering, biddi ng, award of contracts and commercial aspects 
related to the functioning of the Authority. 
Reply of the Govt. 
The observation of the Committee has been noted. AAI would ensure that all the 
systems and procedures are streamlined and uniformity is achieved t hroughout the 
organization. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008. 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
A new works manual covering NAD and IAD applicable throughout the 
organization was prepared and got approved by AAI Board in  its meeting No.108 held 
on 21 March 2007.  Though the new works manual covers a wide range of topics in 
work procedure, but the engagement of consultants and their fee etc. have not been 
covered in the manual. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
The engagement of  Consultants and their fee for technical and non technical 
matters are covered in the Delegation of Powers (DOP). 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Non-Finalisation of Land/Space Lease Policy 
The Committee note that since formation of Airports Authority of India after 
merger of IAA and NAA in April 1995, the AAI has been resorting to adhoc annual 
escalation of ten per cent per annum for land leased and space allotted. The Committee  
also note that many committees and consultants appointed in the past have submitted 
their Reports and still no land/space lease policy has been put in place so far. The 
Committee are of the view that the present practice of adhoc annual escalation is 
unscientific and does not reflect the prevalent market rates, cost of land/space and 
potential of the traffic handled at the airports. Hence, there is an imperative need to 
finalize and adopt a uniform and standardized policy of lease rental and license fee 
rates. The Committee, therefore, recommend that AAI should finalise a policy on 
land/space lease rates without further delay and apprise the Committee on the steps 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Govt 
The Committee‟s observations have been noted. AAI‟s ex isting land-lease policy 
will be rationalized so as to ensure that the licence fee and lease rentals reflect the 
market situation and trend. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
Policy on Ra tionalization of licence fees for land/space and annual escalation 
thereof at international/ domestic airports applicable for the period from 1 April 2008 to 
31 March 2011 was framed during May 2008 and circulated.  The 
adoptability/applicability of such instructions at different airports would be seen in future 
audits. 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Noted for compliance during future audit. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
 
  

28 
Chapter III 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Financial outlay on Infrastructure / Projects 
 
The Committee regret to note that in the  year from 2000 -01 to 2005 -06, there 
was a shortfall in actual expenditure vis -à-vis plan outlay on capital works executed by 
Airports Authority of India which resulted in non -creation / completion of projects after 
considerable time and cost overrun.  Thu s, the goal of creating capacity ahead of 
demand was not fully met.  
 
 The Committee take note that the shortfall in expenditure was registered at an 
all-time high at 58.35 per cent in 2000 -01 which later on came down to 23.72% in 2004 -
05.  The situation r egarding utilization of funds has improved only since last two years. 
The Committee note that during the year 2006 -07, funds to the extent of 90.46% were 
utilized due to various measures taken for improving the capital expenditure. The 
Committee also note that AAI has set up a project management cell at the headquarters 
headed by Executive Director to assess the progress of projects.  The Committee 
recommend that this cell should periodically assess the work of ongoing projects so as 
to ensure that there is  not cost and time overrun in the implementation of projects and 
the intended objective of creating adequate infrastructure and capacity to meet future 
demand is fully achieved. 
 
 The Committee further note that during the 11 th Five Year Plan period, the 
Airports Authority of India proposes to spend about Rs.12,417.17 crore as compared to 
Rs.3,534.62 crore during the 10 th Five Year Plan period, an increase of almost 250 per 
cent.  The Committee would like to emphasise that Airpo rts Authority of India fully utilize 
the allocated funds by way of creation and augmentation of infrastructure and 
operational facilities.  Hence, the Committee recommend that the Authority should 
create an appropriate mechanism/framework through which ful ly utilization of funds is 
planned and ensured. 
 
Reply of the Govt. 
The observations / directions of the Committee have been noted. Sincere efforts 
will be made by AAI to execute the projects in a time -bound manner. Decision -making 
processes will be stream lined. As observed by the Committee, the utilization of funds 
has shown considerable improvement in the recent past. It is expected that with better 
coordination and monitoring, in future, the allocated funds shall be utilized fully by AAI.  
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
 

29 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
The details collected from the AAI indicate the following:     
  (Rs. in Crore) 
Year 2006-07 2007-08 
Original Plan outlay 1149.82 1980.95 
Actual Expenditure 1040.17 1980.23 
Shortfall 109.65 0.72 
Percentage of shortfall 9.54 0.04 
 
It could be seen from above that the shortfall in actual expenditure vis -à-vis plan 
outlay has come down considerably. 
 
Further in reply to audit query issued on this account, AAI stated (October 2008) 
that „After recommendations by COPU in November 2007 no major time and cost over 
run on the projects has been observed so far‟.  However it was observed in the test 
checked cases involving civil and electrical works pending for the qu arter ending 
September 2008 that: 
 
1.  Time over run cases are still evident for the projects awarded prior to COPU 
recommendation in November, 2007. 
 
2.  In test checked cases, it was found that Projects awarded even after COPU 
recommendation, had registered time over run. 
 
3. The impact due to this time cases on cost of the Projects/works will be 
scrutinized on completion of these projects/works in the future audits. 
 
Further reply of the Govt.  
As already indicated, the observations of the Committ ee have been noted and 
efforts made to execute the projects in a time bound manner. Technical instructions 
have also been issued for timely completion of projects and to avoid time overrun.   
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 3rd March, 2009. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
Please see paragraph no. 8 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 

30 
Recommendation No. 5 
Problems in Land Acquisition and Encroachment 
 
As per Audit, as on March 2006, land under encroachment was 702 acres in 20 
airports and during the five years ending 2005, the Authority was able to remove 
encroachment from only 30 acres of land while incurring an expenditure of Rs. 24.35 
crore.  The Com mittee also observe that the land has been under encroachment at 
different airports for periods ranging from 5 years to 40 years and there is not much 
progress as regards status of removal of encroachments.  The Committee also take 
note of Audit observatio n that AAI‟s efforts to resolve land acquisition issues were held 
up due to procedural delays and litigation.  
 
In view of the fact that land is a key resource for Airports Authority of India to 
implement it programme of expansion, modernization and augmen tation of facilities, the 
Committee need hardly emphasize that the issues of land acquisition and 
encroachment need to be addressed on top priority.  
 
The Committee note that though AAI Act 1994 was amended in 2004 to include 
Chapter 5A empowering them to take necessary action for eviction of encroachments 
on their land, yet it has not helped in achieving the intended objectives.  It is true that 
AAI is fully empowered and competent to deal with issues of land acquisition and 
removal of encroachments on its  land but the Committee feel that these are very 
sensitive issues involving various agencies and State Governments.  The Committee 
are, therefore, of the opinion that the Ministry should not abdicate themselves of their 
responsibility and should provide al l necessary support to AAI to resolve all such 
contentious issues.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to resolve this 
vexatious problem, an institutional mechanism consisting of senior officials from AAI 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation b e formed to periodically liaise with concerned 
agencies and State Governments so that the problems can be addressed in a far more 
pragmatic manner.  The Committee also desire that a nodal officer should also be 
appointed in the Authority to pursue these issues.  
Reply of the Govt. 
The observations / directives of the Committee have been noted.  It is submitted 
that State / Local authorities have a key role in the encroachment removal. Ministry of 
Civil Aviation would endeavour and support AAI in resolving these issues by following 
them up with the concerned State Governments. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated 31st March, 2008 
 
 
 

31 
Vetting remarks of C&AG  
The area under encroachment as on 31 st March 2008 was 838.22 acres, when 
compared to 680 acres in 2006 -07.  As the area under encroachment increased during 
the year, concrete action as recommended by COPU needs to be taken. 
 
Further as per the recommendation of the Committee „in order to resol ve this 
vexatious problem, an institutional mechanism consisting of senior officials from AAI 
and the Ministry of Civil Aviation be formed to periodically liaise with concerned 
agencies and State Governments so that the problem can be addressed in a far mo re 
pragmatic manner.  The Committee also desired that nodal officer should also be 
appointed in the Authority to pursue these issues‟.  But no action in this regard has been 
taken so far (October 2008). 
Further reply of the Govt.  
Action for appointing Nod al Officers in Airports Authority of India to pursue these 
issues is under process. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation O.M. No.G.25012/26/2007-AAI dated  3rd March, 2009. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see paragraph no. 13 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:            V.KISHOR CHANDRA S. DEO, 
28th April, 2010             Chairman, 
8 Vaisakha, 1932(S)                  Committee on Public Undertakings. 
  

32 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE 17th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 28th APRIL 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri Baijayant Panda 
6 Shri L. Rajagopal 
7 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
8 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
9 Shri Ganesh Singh 
10 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
12 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
13 Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
14 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
3. Shri Paolienlal Haokip Under Secretary 
 
Officials of C&AG 
1. K.P. Sasidharan   Director General (Commercial) 
2. Birendra Kumar   Principal Director (Comm.) Audit Board 
 
 

33 
2. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted them without modification: - 
(i)  XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
(ii) Airports Authority of India - Review of Infrastructure and Operational Facilities 
(based on Audit Report No. 17 of 2007 (Performance Audit) (Commercial) of 
C&AG of India). 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation. 
 
4. The Committee then adjourned.  
  
 
  

34 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -First Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India – Review of 
Infrastructure and Operational Facilities ( Based on Audit Report No. 17 of 2007 
(Performance Audit ) (Commercial) of C&AG of India). 
 
I Total Number of Recommendations 10 
 
II Recommendations that have been accepted/ partially accepted  by the 
Government [Vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,3 ,4,6,7,8,9 & 10] 
Percentage of total 
8 
 
80% 
 
III Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee [Vide recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2 
& 5 ] 
Percentage of total 
2 
 
20% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government are still 
awaited [Vide recommendation at Sl. No.3 ] 
Percentage of total 
Nil 
 
 
 
V Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s replies [vide recommendation at Sl. Nos.] 
Nil 
 
 
 