 
 
 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED  
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
21 

CPU. No. 954 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
RASHTRIYA ISPAT NIGAM LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
on Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2013 / Phalguna 1934 (S)  
 
21 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
25 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
26 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are st ill 
awaited 
 
33 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the sitting 
 
34 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / R ecommendations contained 
in the Eleventh Report of COPU on ‘Rashtriya 
Ispat Nigam Limited’ 
 
36 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
 
   Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Ms. Patricia Jacobs   Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -first Report 
on action taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited”. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 6 Dece mber 2010.  Replies of the Government to the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10 December 2012.  
Subsequently, updated Action Taken Replies were re ceived from the Ministry on         
10 December 2012.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
at their sitting held on 19 March 2013.   
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations contained in the  Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (2010 -11) on “Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
(Ministry of Steel)” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 7th December, 2010. 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Governme nt in respect of all the  
eleven observations / Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10       (Total 8)  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III)     Nil 
 
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl.no. 3,4,11          (Total 3) 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations to which the Government have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V)             Nil 
 
3. The Committee desire that response to Committee’s comments in Ch apter I of 
the report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
Inputs Management 
 
5. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows:  
 
“The Committee observe that the primary challenge facing RINL today is the 
securitization of raw materials, such as, iron ore and coking coal, the primary 
inputs in the production of steel. A crucial point which the Committee note is 
that RINL is the only integrated steel plant among Public Sector Undertakings 
not having captive iron ore and coal mines. The Committee appreciate the fact 
that the non -allocation of captive mines of iron ore and coking coal to the 
company are attributable to RINL being a company which has been created by 
separation of units from SAIL and the Supply of its iron ore requirements being 

7 
 
 
planned to be met from Bailadila mines of National Mineral Development 
Corporation, another offsp ring of SAIL. However, with increase in competition 
and the falling margins of the company owing to its having to buy these primary 
raw materials at a comparatively higher cost than its competitors having 
captive mines of these raw materials, the Committee  feel that the growth and 
sustainability of the Company today hinges on the securitization of these 
primary raw materials at lower costs through captive mines.  
 
The Committee are apprised of the fact that iron ore mining leases are 
governed by MMDR Act, 1 957 under which the primary role of allocation of 
mines rests with State Governments. The Committee also took evidence of 
representatives of Ministry of Mines in this regard and were informed that no 
application of RINL for allocation of iron ore mines hav e reached the Ministry, 
this, despite numerous such applications having been filed by the Company in 
various States like Jharkhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. The 
Committee also note with serious concern that these applications are often 
processed at snail's pace owing to multiplicity of clearances required from as 
many authorities, causing much delay and escalations in costs. Besides, 
different States are known to be following different procedures in the matter.  
 
The Committee, in the light of the above facts, desire that a via -media 
be worked out to ensure expeditious processing of applications for mining 
blocks. The Committee further recommend that a standardized procedure for 
processing mining lease applications applicable in all States must be seriously 
considered by the Government to make the process more transparent and 
expedient.”  
 
6. The Government in their action taken reply stated as under: 
 
“RINL is the only steel plant in the public sector which does not have its own 
raw material suppliers – both coal and iron ore.  On account of this, RINL is at 
a disadvantageous position vis -à-vis other steel plants in terms of supply 
linkage and production cost.   The allocation of iron ore mining lease are 
decided by the concerned State Government  with prior approval of Ministry of 
Mines, Government of India.   Ministry of steel has been making all out efforts 
to help RINL have a firm linkage with the raw material sources, either as 
owners of the mines allotted to them or as a joint venture partner .   Ministry of 
Steel had been pursuing with the State governments of Orissa, Chattisgarh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for mining leases in 
favour of RINL, where they had filed the applications for these leases.  
 
RINL has filed 29 applications for grant of prospecting license / mining 
lease in the states of Andhra Pradesh (7), Odisha (5), Jharkhand (7), 
Rajasthan (6), Chattisgarh (2), Uttar Pradesh (1) and Karnataka (1).  However, 
no allocations have been made to RINL so far.  
 

8 
 
 
 Government of Rajasthan has recommended for allotment of mining lease 
of Iron Ore in an area of about 1,000 Hectares in Bhilwara district to RINL 
on 05.01.12, which is under consideration of Ministry of Mines. 
 
 Government of Andhra Pradesh is also actively considering for allotment of 
Iron ore mines Bayyaram, Khammam district. 
 
 As per communication received from Department of Steel & Mines Govt. of 
Odisha, vide letter no 7651 dated 25.10.2012, allotment / reservation of 
good iron ore blocks in the state of O disha in favour of RINL may not be 
considered as the State Government, vide resolution No. 6899 - dated 
18.9.2012, has decided to reserve all the remaining area bearing iron ore 
for undertaking prospecting or mining operation through the Odisha Mining 
Corporation Ltd. The resolution is yet to be approved by Central 
Government. To protect the interest of RINL and other central PSUs, the 
matter is being taken up with Central and State Governments. 
 
In connection with the above, RINL and Ministry of Steel have  taken up 
with the Hon’ble Chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of 
various States and at various instances requesting for allocation of the applied 
areas to RINL, VSP and also indicating willingness to enter into a Joint Venture 
with State Mining Development Corporation or any other State Government 
agency for exploitation of the Iron Ore and setting up of Value Addition Plants.” 
 
 
7. The Committee in their 11 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) had, inter alia 
emphasised the need for evolving a standardized procedure for processing of 
mining lease applications  for being applicable in  all States so as to make the 
process more transparent and expedient.  The Committee regret to note that 
Government’s reply is silent on this point. It is not clea r whether the matter was 
taken up with the  Ministry of Mines. Ministry of Steel apparently  has not 
taken/initiated any steps in this regard.  The Committee would urge upon the 
Ministry of Steel to take expeditious action in this regard  and apprise the 
Committee of the outcome.  
Further, the Committee note that although efforts are being made by the 
Ministry of Steel to pursue the concerned State governments for expeditious 
allocation of mining blocks to RINL, the efforts do not appear to  have yielded 
any tangible results so much so that even two years after the presentation of 
the Report, no allocation has been made to RINL by any of the State 

9 
 
 
Governments.  The Committee expect the Ministry of Steel to make all out 
efforts and ensure that RINL is allotted li censes for mining leases by the State 
Governments within a time frame. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
Allocation of captive iron-ore mines to RINL 
 
8. In their original Report, the Committee had recommended as follows: 
 
“Regarding the non-allocation of captive iron-ore mines to RINL, the Committee 
find that the problem lies in State Governments often denying the Company's 
applications, thereby ruling out the same being forwarded to the Union Ministry 
of Mines. The Committee, while appreciating the fact that t he State 
Governments may have their own set of considerations and criteria for 
selection of eligible applicants for mining leases, feel that the consistent denial 
or non-selection of a steel giant in the public sector like RINL smacks of not 
only irregularity but also inconsistencies in the system and warrants a serious 
re-think on the existing statutory and procedural provisions.  
 
Noting that the Company's applications have been denied on grounds 
such as RINL not contributing any value additions in the St ates having Mining 
blocks; the blocks being in forest reserves; the blocks having   been allocated 
to earlier applicants, etc., the Committee recommend that the Company should 
make serious efforts at fulfilling the criterion laid down by concerned States. 
Further, the Committee observe that States should be actively encouraged to 
give due weightage to macro value additions to be achieved through 
preferential allocation of resources to Public Sector Undertakings, which is for 
the nation as a whole as compared to value additions to be had locally.  
 
In conformity with the Supreme Court's observations in RIL vs RNRL 
case treating mineral reserves as national resources, the Committee would like 
to emphasise that the Government of India should take initiatives to  declare all 
mineral resources including iron-ore and coal as national wealth.” 
 
9. The Government in its reply stated as follows: 
  
“Ministry of Steel has been making all out efforts to help RINL have a firm 
linkage with the raw material sources, either a s owners of the mines allotted to 
them or as a joint venture partner.  Ministry of Steel has been pursuing with the 
State Governments of Orissa, Chattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh Jharkhand, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for mining leases in favour of RINL, where t hey 
had filed the applications for these leases.”  
 

10 
 
 
10. The Committee had observed that the applications of RINL for captive 
iron ore mining leases were often rejected by the States on grounds such as 
reported non -contribution of RINL to any value addition  in the States having 
mining blocks and had recommended that the Company should make sincere 
efforts to meet the criterion laid down by the concerned States. The Committee 
regret to note that the Action Taken Reply of the Government is conspicuously 
silent on this aspect. While reiterating their earlier Recommendation that RINL 
should fulfill the criterion laid down by States with respect to the requirement of 
value addition, the Committee desire that RINL should prepare a 
comprehensive revised proposal to the States concerned for allocation of 
mining leases and also address their other concerns. The Committee are also 
disappointed to note that the Action Taken Reply is silent on the issue of 
declaring all mineral resources including iron ore and coal as national wealth as 
recommended by them in their original Report. The Committee reiterate that 
Government should take all possible steps in consultation with State 
Governments to declare all mineral resources as national wealth . The 
Committee expect the Minist ry to furnish Action Taken in this regard within 
three months from presentation of this Report.  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
Illegal Mining 
 
11. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee would now like to dwell on the othe r disconcerting 
development viz. illegal mining. Illegal mining has now become an endemic 
feature. The Committee feel it is time to find out how much natural resources/ 
minerals have been legally used and how much has been illegally mined. The 
national resources, especially minerals including coal, should not be allowed to 
become the exclusive preserve of a handful of free looters. Another point which 
the Committee feel needs to be noted is that illegal mining has led to a 
situation where thousands of peopl e have become homeless. This is the ugly 
face of illegal mining which involves rampant exploitation of people. Tribals and 
forest dwellers have been irreversibly affected, having been thrown out of their 
original habitats. Lamentably, this distressing scen ario has forced them to 
resort to unconstitutional acts and to go into arms of extremists.  
 

11 
 
 
Illegal mining not only depletes the country of its natural resources but 
has also led to the disturbing situation of exploitation of hapless forest dwellers 
and tribals. The Committee find it pertinent to take note of concerted measures 
/ measures proposed by Government to tackle the menace of 'illegal mining', 
as the same is reflective of the seriousness with which the Government views 
this subject.  
 
The need of the hour is conservation of National resources. The 
Committee after in-depth consideration recommend action on following lines:  
 
a. The injudicious export of raw natural resources like iron ore, coal needs 
to be banned.  
 
b. The Committee note that the Governme nt has formulated a new 
National Mineral Policy, 2008 which envisages the regulation of mines 
and development of mineral resources. The Committee commend the 
various steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government to check the 
menace of illegal mining. The Committee desire that the measures 
taken need to be assiduously followed and monitored. The Committee 
further desire that the proposed action be taken up in right earnest and 
pursued expeditiously.  
 
c. In view of the emerging scenario of depletion of preciou s resources like 
minerals owing to injudicious export and illegal mining, the Committee 
emphasise upon the need to revisit the National Mineral Policy for 
effectively addressing these issues.  
 
d. In the context of judicious utilization of National resources,  the 
Committee strongly desire rightful allocations of minerals such as iron 
ore and coal to Public Sector Undertakings, which have been choked 
due to the constraint of these resources.  
 
The Committee have recommended the above course of action in their 
endeavour to address the interlinked issue of mineral conservation and the 
interests of the Public Sector Undertakings.” 
 
12.  The response of the Ministry of Mines as forwarded by the Ministry of Steel, 
Government of India in this regard is as under:-  
 
 The Central Government has taken the following steps to curb and check 
illegal mining in the country:- 
 
(i) State Governments were asked to frame rules to control illegal mining as 
per Section 23 C of MMDR Act (so far 18 States have framed Rules).  

12 
 
 
(ii) State Govern ments were requested to set up Task Forces at State and 
District level to control illegal mining since the year 2005 (so far 21 States 
have reported to have set up Task Forces).  
(iii) State Governments were advised to set up State Coordination -cum-
Empowered Com mittee (SCEC) to coordinate efforts to control illegal 
mining by including representatives of Railways, Customs and Port 
authorities (13 State Governments have set up such Committees). 
(iv) All State Governments advised to adopt an Action Plan with specific 
measures to detect and control illegal mining including, use of remote 
sensing, control on traffic, gather market intelligence, registration of end -
users and setting up of special cells etc.  
(v) Ministry of Mines has so far held five meetings with the State 
Governments to specifically review the action taken by the State 
Governments on illegal mining on 3.8.2009, 27.11.2009, 22.2.2010, 
16.4.2010 and 21.9.2010. This periodical review has been dovetailed in 
the meeting of Central Coordination -cum-Empowered Committe e 
meetings. 
(vi) A Central Coordination -cum-Empowered Committee set up under 
Secretary (Mines) on 4.3.2009 has held ten meetings on 24.7.2009, 
22.12.2009, 18.6.2010, 22.12.2010, 3.5.2011, 20.9.2011, 16.1.2012, 
27.3.2012, 28.6.2012 and 21.9.2012 to consider all mining related issues, 
including matters relating to coordination of activities to combat illegal 
mining.  
(vii) Railways have instituted a mechanism to allow transportation of iron ore 
only against permits issued rake -wise and verified by State Government, 
apart from taking measures to fence and set up check post at the railway 
sidings. 
(viii) Customs Department has issued instructions to all its field units to share 
information on ore export with State Governments. 
(ix) Ministry of Shipping has issued a direction to all ma jor Ports to streamline 
the verification procedures for movement of consignment by road and rail 
to Ports for exports. 
(x) Government has notified amendment in Rule 45 of Mineral Conservation 
and Development Rules, 1988, on 9.2.2011 making it mandatory for all  
miners, traders, stockist, exporters and end-users to register with IBM and 
report their transaction in minerals on monthly basis for a proper end -to-
end accounting of minerals. As on 11.6.2012, out of 9409 mining leases in 
the country, 8027 mining leases  have registered online with the IBM. The 
IBM has suspended 1587 mines for non -compliance and initiated 
prosecution in 4 cases and recommended 21 cases to State 
Governments for termination. IBM has also requested the State 
Governments not to issue transit passes for movement of minerals to 
unregistered operators. 
(xi) Indian Bureau Mines had constituted Special Task Forces for inspection 
of mines in endemic areas by taking the help of Satellite imageries. 
Special Task Force conducted inspections in a total of 45 4 mines in the 

13 
 
 
States of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand and Gujarat and 
suspended 155 mines under rule 13(2) of Mineral Conservation and 
Development Rules, 1988 due to serious violations. Further, the Indian 
Bureau of Mines have recommended for termination of eight leases. 
(xii) In so far as the online approval of mining plans and display of approved 
mining plans in the public domain is concerned, it is submitted that the 
Ministry is developing ‘Mining Tenement System (MTS)’ to automate the 
various processes associated with the mineral concession regime with 
features also to reflect the information as desired above. 
(xiii) The Central Government has also set up Shri Justice M. B. Shah 
Commission of Inquiry (COI) for illegal mining of iron ore and manganese 
vide gazette notification dated 22.11.2010. The COI submitted its First 
Interim Report on 14.7.2011, which has been tabled in the Parliament 
alongwith the Memorandum of Action Taken. The tenure of the COI has 
been extended till 16 th July, 2013 by the Gover nment. COI has so far 
visited Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Odisha. The 
COI has submitted its Report on illegal mining of iron ore and manganese 
ore in the State of Goa which has been tabled in the Parliament alongwith  
its Memorandum of the action taken on 7.9.2012. 
 
13. Taking note of large scale prevalence of the menace of illegal mining in 
the country, the Committee in their original report had, inter alia, recommended 
for rightful allocation of mineral ores like iron and coal to the PSUs  in the 
context of judicious utilisation of national resources. From the action taken 
reply, the Committee note that the Government have taken a number of steps to 
curb the menace of illegal mining. However, the Committee are dismayed to 
note that there is no mention in the action taken reply regarding to measures 
taken / proposed to be taken  to ensure allocation of mineral resources to PSUs  
on priority basis  as recommended by them in their original Report . The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their Recommendation that the Ministry of Steel 
should make all out efforts to impress upon the State Governments to allocate 
mineral resources such as iron ore and coal to PSUs on a priority basis.  
 

14 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Ageing Plant and Equipments 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the importance of expediting the process of revamp of RINL 
plant/machinery:  
 
“The Committee observe that the plants of RINL, the lifespan of which normally 
is of 15 years, are overdue for revamp, thereby adversely affecting the 
company's production and capacity realization.  The Committee note that steps 
that ought to have been initiated five years a go for a timely renovation or 
revamp of the aged machinery are being taken up only recently. The 
Committee, while appreciating the submission of the Company that they are 
still producing at efficiencies comparable with the best despite the aging plants, 
find it pertinent to observe that they could have done better had timely steps 
been taken for repair. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the company should 
expedite steps required to carry out the revamp of the aged Plant/machinery 
within a specified time frame, ensuring all the while, a minimal disruption in 
their production. The Committee desire that action taken in this regard together 
with status report vis -à-vis the progress achieved be submitted before the 
Committee.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken reply on the above has stated as follows:  
 
“RINL has already taken action to modernize its existing facilities to upkeep the 
health of the existing Blast Furnaces, LD Converters of Steel Melt Shop and 
Sinter Machines. In the process of modernization, in addition to up keeping the 
health of the units, capacity of production will also go up by 1 MTPA, totaling 
up to 7.3 MTPA. 
 
The unit-wise status / action taken for major units for revamp are:  
 
1.      Blast Furnaces – 1 and 2 : 
 
 

15 
 
 
1.1 BF-1 : 
 Orders for BF -1 Revamp have already been placed and execution is in 
progress. Major detailed Engineering has been completed and Pre -shut 
down activities also commenced. The up gradation envisages shut down 
which is being planned to commence by the end of current financial year.  
 
1.2 BF-2 : 
 Consultant has been engaged and tender for Revamp of BF -2 Main 
package is under advanced stage of finalization for taking up capital 
repairs during 2013 -14. BF -2 capital repairs are planned to be done 
simultaneously after upgrading BF -1, to have minimum impact on 
production of Hot Metal. 
 
2. Converters in Steel Melt Shop-1 : 
Order for Revamping & up gradation of LD converters of SMS-1 is already 
finalized and implementation is in progress. Revamping of all th e three 
converters is planned to be completed progressively one by one with a 
schedule for completion by 2015. 
 
3. Casters in Steel Melt Shop-1 : 
Modernization and automation of one Caster and modernization of Gas 
Cutting Machines of all the 6 Casters has alr eady been completed.  
Modernisation and automation of 3 Continuous Casting Machines is under 
process. 
 
4. Sinter Machines 1 and 2 :   
 Order for Consultancy services for  revamping & up -gradation of Sinter 
machine 1 & 2 had already been finalized. 
 Revamping & u p-gradation of Sinter Machine 1 &2 are planned in 2014 -
15 and 2015-16 respectively. 
 Tender finalization is under progress for the packages of Sinter Machine 1 
& 2. 
 
5. Coke Oven Battery :  
 One new Coke Oven Battery is already commissioned to take care of 
additional Coke requirement. 
 M/s MECON has been appointed as consultant for installation of new 
Battery.  
 Tenders for Battery and CDCP are issued. 
 Technical specifications for engaging consultant for preparation of DPR 
as well as execution of re building of C OB-1is under advanced stage of 
finalization. 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.2 
 
Expansion of Capacity 
 
 The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the need for the expansion of capacity of the RINL:-  
 
“The Committee are  apprised of the ongoing expansion plan of the company, 
whereby the current installed production capacity of 3 million tonnes is sought 
to be enhanced to 6.3 million tonnes per annum. The Committee note with 
concern the several delays in implementation of the expansion project that 
have led to escalation of the estimated costs by thousands of crores. The 
Committee are constrained to observe that unless effective monitoring and 
corrective steps are taken on a continuous basis the cost would further 
escalate. Besides the expansion project, the Committee also take note of 
delays in other infrastructure projects of the company resulting in cost overruns 
of more than 400 crore rupees.  
 
While conceding the fact that some of the cost escalations are due to 
new and  additional features being added to the original scheme, the 
Committee are nevertheless of the opinion, that such escalation would very 
well have been anticipated in the original scheme of things, and that a major 
bulk of the escalations are due, primarily, to the delay in implementation.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the company should, while 
taking steps to ensure minimum further delay, evolve a comprehensive and 
effective project planning and monitoring mechanism which shall minimize 
future delays and the associated escalation of costs involved. The Committee 
desire some concrete steps by the Company in this regard within six months of 
the presentation of this report, which may duly be communicated to the 
Committee.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows:-  
 
"RINL-VSP is on the verge of completion of its current expansion from the 
existing 3 mtpa to 6.3 mtpa of liquid steel at a cost of Rs.12291 Cr. The 
expansion is being implemented in two stages. The status of Stage -1 and 
Stage-2 is as follows:  
 
Stage-1: Execution of all the packages have been completed and units are at 
various stages of commissioning. Major units viz., Blast Furnace, Turbo 
Blower-4, Oxygen Plant etc have already been commissioned and are under 

17 
 
 
operation. Several auxiliary systems viz., Water system, Power system, Utility 
systems etc., have also been commissioned and are under operation as per 
requirement. Balance units of stage -1 i.e., ma inly Sinter Plant & Converter 
Shop are planned to be commissioned progressively by the end of the current 
financial year as detailed below: 
 
Steel Melt Shop -2: Order for installation of new Pressure Reducing System 
(PRS) has been placed and actions are bei ng taken to expedite the revival of 
PRS station which got damaged during the incident that took place on 
13.06.12. However, all efforts are being put in now to make both the 
Converters operative together and reduce the overall stabilization period of 
SMS-2, to minimize the impact of the incident.  
 
Stage-2: Consists of two mills viz., Special Bar Mill and Structural Mill. In both 
the Mills, almost all the supplies have been completed and erection activities 
are under progress. Several related auxiliary syst ems have already been 
completed and getting commissioned which include cranes, water system, 
power system etc. matching the requirement. 
 
 For expeditious completion of the 6.3 mtpa expansion project, 
monitoring at various levels is continuously being take n up by RINL -VSP and 
depending on the criticality; matters were also taken through Ministry of Steel 
with other Ministries and Embassies. Implementation of the Expansion Plan is 
on top of the agenda for the Management and it is monitoring and intervening 
continuously to resolve the issues arising during execution. Some of major 
reviews and actions taken for speedy execution include: 
 
 Periodical review of on-going Projects by High Power Steering Committee 
(HPSC) constituted by Govt. of India for early comple tion. Board is also 
being apprised about the progress of various Projects from time to time.  
 All critical issues are closely monitored at various levels of Plant including 
at CMD level through regular review meetings & constant follow up with 
CEOs of agencies concerned.  
 Periodical reviews are also held   at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Steel, 
Secretary (Steel) and other officials of Ministry of Steel during exclusive 
review meetings on Expansion, Quarterly Progress Review etc.  
 Meetings are held at th e level of Joint Secretary (Steel) periodically with 
the CEOs of various organizations viz., BHEL, MECON, B&R, HSCL, 
TPE, SMS-Siemag, Siemens etc to persuade them to step up the balance 
activities in their scope of work. 
 Depending upon criticality, issues are also taken up by Ministry of Steel  
with other Ministries as well as the respective Embassies requesting their 
kind intervention to impress upon agencies viz., M/s TPE, M/s Terruzzi etc 
for expediting the pace of work.  
 Necessary actions such as offloa ding of jobs from failing contractors, 
introduction of online bill processing system to ensure timely payment to 

18 
 
 
the contractors, expediting tendering process, drawing approvals, 
inspection etc are taken, which have helped in expediting the execution of 
Projects . RINL further issued steel for all Non Turnkey projects which 
helped in completing the structural works at time and provided own / hired 
cranes including other resources as a proactive measure for completing 
the project faster.  
 
Cost escalations: The total cost of 6.3 Mtpa Expansion as approved by RINL 
Board is Rs.12291 Crores (Base: Feb’11 - with foreign exchange component of 
Rs.2134 Crores). 
There is no major cost overrun likely with respect to the approved cost 
Rs.12291 crores except statutory va riations during project cycle like exchange 
rate, taxes, WPI index changes etc. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
Prioritizing allocation of raw materials to PSUs 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the importance o f giving priority to public sector undertakings in the 
allocation of national resources: 
 
“The Committee note with concern the travails of the Company in its efforts to 
secure a captive mine for sourcing its coking coal requirements. The 
Committee also not e that RINL had surrendered two blocks, Maha l and 
Tenughat Jhirkri for economic unviability and have sought alternative blocks in 
lieu thereof. The Committee have obtained the views of the Ministry of Coal on 
the matter and have been apprised that no provi sions exist for allocation of 
alternate blocks in lieu of surrendered allocations.  
 
Considering that the company is required to start from scratch in 
applying afresh for other coal blocks and taking note of the urgency of the 
coking coal requirements of t he company in view of its expansion plans, the 
Committee desire that the plan to acquire adequate and secure supply of 
coking coal for its expanded capacity must be firmed up to ensure that 
additional capacity to be added do not go under -utilised for want of Coking 
coal.  
 
Further, the Committee desire that in consideration of the fact that PSUs 
have been mandated with the important task of giving a fillip to industrial and 
economic growth and infrastructure base of the country, every effort must be 
made by  the Government to give them some priority in securing essential 
inputs over the private sector, which primarily are modeled on profit 
generation.”  
 

19 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“Ministry of Coal has intimated to Ministry of Steel the coal blocks identified for 
allocation for various sectors. 4 blocks have been identified for allocation to 
Integrated Steel companies (Govt.) and indicated that “Applications for the 
blocks reserved for Government Integrated Steel Companies shall be 
separately circulated after f inalization of terms & conditions.” After finalization 
of these terms & conditions, Ministry of Coal will be accordingly requested to 
allocate suitable coal block to RINL.”  
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
Facilitating ICVL’s operations 
 
The Committee appreciate that the Government has approved the formation of 
an International Coal Ventures Ltd. (ICVL) between RINL, CIL, NTPC and NMDC 
towards enabling acquisition of coking and thermal coal assets overseas, and note 
that this venture holds much promise for pos sible supplementing of the supply of 
coking coal for RINL's requirements, among others.  
 
The Committee express their hope that the formation of ICVL may result in 
enhancing the supply of coking and thermal coal to the PSUs as a whole, and RINL in 
particular. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should facilitate and 
actively promote this entity to enable it to achieve its objectives expeditiously.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows:- 
 
“Government of India has approved the formation of a Special Purpose 
Vehicle.  International Coal Ventures Private Limited (ICVL) a joint venture 
company with SAIL, CIL, RINL, NMDC and NTPC, to acquire coal assets 
overseas. Though ICVL has been submitting bids for acquisition of mines 
abroad, till now no asset could be acquired.  
 
Since NTPC had requested to opt out from ICVL which has already 
been approved by Ministry of Power, the Board of ICVL has also approved to 
recommend the request of NTPC to Ministry of Steel.   Ministry of Steel is 
accordingly processing a proposal for the consideration / approval of the 
Cabinet for restructuring ICVL wherein the equity of NTPC could be transferred 
to three promoters (except CIL) in the shareholding ratio.”  
 

20 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
Pelletization Plants 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to pelletization of plants: 
 
“The Committee, during the course of examination, have been apprise d of the 
importance of pelletization of fines (iron -ore fines) in supplementing the supply 
of lump iron-ore as raw input for steel production. They also note that there still 
are huge cost and technology constraints in this field in the country. The 
Committee nevertheless observe that the process of pelletization has not been 
given adequate priority in the country, neither by the domestic steel industry in 
general, nor by RINL as an individual steel producer, leading to huge export of 
valuable natural resources in the form of fines at throw-away prices.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that RINL should draw up a plan 
to go into pelletization in enhanced capacities to supplement its supply of iron -
ore, and that the government should explore mechanisms to  incentivize 
pelletization plants, with the twin objectives of preventing the dumping of 
precious natural resources in the export market at throwaway prices and 
enhancing the supply chain of raw materials for steel producers in the country.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows: 
 
“RINL has signed a MoU with NMDC to setup slurry pipe line from Bailadila to 
Visakhapatnam for transportation of iron ore fines in the form o f slurry and 
consume it as feed by setting up pellet plant at Visakhapatnam. 
 
M/s MECON is appointed to carry out route survey for slurry pipe line 
and they are also being engaged for preparation of Techno Economic Feasible 
Report (TEFF) for the above project. 
 
OMDC, a subsidiary of EIL (for which RINL is the holding company) has 
plans to set up 2 Mtpa pellet plant along with 2 Mtpa iron ore beneficiation plant 
for which TEFR is already prepared by M/s DASTUR Co.”   
 
Recommendation No.8 
 
Research & Development 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the importance of research and development to the steel manufacturing 
industry:  

21 
 
 
 
“The Committee regret to note that the Research and Development (R&D) 
spending in RINL is at a dismal 0.148 per cent of its total expenditure in 2009 -
10. The Committee are informed that the core process and technology related 
improvements are generally provided by the equipment supplier, and domestic 
R&D are on peripheral process improvements,  product development, waste 
management, cost reduction and environment protection, etc.  
 
However, the Committee further note that RINL has rightly admitted that 
they have a long way to go in terms of R&D. While appreciating the ongoing 
efforts of the comp any in signing MOUs with educational institutes and 
research laboratories, etc., the Committee recommend that the Company, as a 
bulwark of the steel industry in the country, should enhance its R&D and 
develop such a strong unit that can serve the country's  needs over and above 
meeting the needs of the Company.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows: 
 
“RINL has taken up several R&D projects in collaboration with differen t 
research institutes like Indian Institute of Technology-Kanpur, Indian Institute of 
Technology – Madras, Indian Institute of Science - Bangalore, Institute of 
Minerals & Materials Technology - Bhubaneswar, Welding Research Institute -
Tiruchirapalli, NGRI -Hyderabad, Central Electro Chemical Research Institute -
Karaikudi, Jadavpur University -Kolkata, Andhra University – Visakhapatnam, 
NMDC-Hyderabad, Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute – Kolkata etc. 
 
 RINL had spent an amount of Rs. 20.29 Crores towards R&D during the 
year 2011-12 which is 41% higher as compared the expenditure during 2010 -
11. 
 
A blue print has been drawn for focused efforts and the salient features of 
the R&D strategy include: 
 
a. Funds – To increase R&D expenditure from a present Rs.20.29  crores 
in 2011-12 to around Rs. 100 crores in 2016-17. 
 
b. Human resources – To expand manpower from 8 Engineers/ Scientists 
and 2 Technical Staff in 2011 -12 to 100 Engineers/ Scientists and 80 
Technical Staff in 2016-17. 
 
c. Facilities – To setup a state of th e art R&D Centre with requisite 
diagnostic and research facilities, pilot plants and simulation facilities. 
 

22 
 
 
d. Collaboration with expert Academic and Research Institutions in India 
and abroad.  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
Transparency 
 
The Committee in thei r 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the importance of transparency: 
 
“The Committee note the formulation of the draft Whistle Blower Policy of RINL 
with its stated objective of bringing in more transparency and good governance 
in the organization and to encourage and provide a platform to employees for 
voicing their concerns regarding any unethical and improper practice, etc. in 
the Company.  
 
The Committee appreciate this initiative. The Committee are also of the 
considered view tha t a Whistle Blower Policy more or less on uniform 
parameters be formulated for all PSUs as part of good corporate governance 
so as to usher in an environment of transparency among all PSUs and 
establishment of a self correcting mechanism to check unethical  and improper 
practices within the organizations.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows: 
 
“The Whistle Blower Policy of RINL has been circulated to the Members of the 
Audit Committee at its 24 th Meeting held on 9 th Dec, 2010 for its 
Recommendations. 
 
It is understood that Standing Conference of Public Enterprises 
(SCOPE) has constituted a Committee, for evolving a uniform “Whistle Blower 
Mechanism” to be adopted by CPSEs which is in advanced stage of finalization 
and RINL would finalise the same after publication/communication of the 
guidelines by SCOPE.” 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
Conservation of National Resources  
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommende d the following with 
regard to the need to conserve national resources: 
 
“Minerals in any form, be it iron ore, coal or bauxite etc., are national wealth. 
These minerals are not inexhaustible. Slowly but steadily these minerals 

23 
 
 
deplete. It takes hundreds o f years for these minerals to form. Nature has 
bestowed upon our country a bounty of minerals, notable among them being 
iron ore, coal, bauxite etc. But how well we utilize our natural resources solely 
depends on our own prudence concerning them. In this context, the Committee 
note, with concern the twin menaces of reckless export of minerals and illegal 
mining.  
 
The Committee find it quite disturbing to note the present trend of 
exporting minerals particularly of iron -ore. Globally, though many countries 
have rich reserves of minerals, they procure them from others to preserve their 
own mineral resources for use at a later date. At this juncture it would be much 
wiser for us to preserve our minerals which may not be available to us when 
we actually require them for our industrial purposes and other needs (including 
our defence requirements) in the future. Our mineral wealth certainly cannot be 
frittered away for meager sums which are to be paid as royalty to fatten the 
purses of a few private individuals of  our companies. Hence it would be rather 
unwise and callous on our part to fritter away such valuable resources which 
we may in the future require for own industrial purposes including defence 
requirements. In this context, it would be pertinent to note th e following 
observations made by the Supreme Court of India in their recent judgment 
pronounced on 7 May, 2010 "Among various considerations, the prime aspect 
relates to national interest relating to the interest of consumers and protection 
of natural reso urces…… gas is an essential natural resource….. The 
Government holds this natural resources as a trust for the people of the 
country. Supply of gas is a matter of national interest …….. 
 
The natural resources are vested with Government as a matter of trust  
in the name of the people of India. Thus it is the solemn duty of the State to 
protect the national interest. The Constitutional requirements on the 
Government would equally apply not only to the Government but also to private 
players in the process. Natu ral resources must always be used in the interests 
of the country, and not to promote personal or private interests. These 
observations which were made by Supreme Court in their judgment in the 
above mentioned cases, made in the context of natural resource s are 
applicable to all natural resources including our mineral wealth and underscore 
the vital importance of the preservation of natural resources. Under the 
provisions of Article 39(b) of the Constitution "The State shall in particular, 
direct its policy  towards securing -that ownership and control of the material 
resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common 
good.  
The Committee, therefore, observe that our country having just taken 
wings and still in a nascent stage of deve lopment, frittering away all our 
resources at this stage may by allowing unlimited exports for crass commercial 
interest certainly would not be a prudent policy which the government, as a 
trustee to the national wealth, needs to comprehensively review.” 
 

24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows:  
 
“The Ministry of Steel fully agrees with the view that there should be no 
reckless export of minerals.  It has therefore advocate d on ban on export of 
iron ores.    This has not been accepted by the Government which has taken 
the view that fiscal measures like imposition of export duty may be taken to 
check exports.   As a result of the concerted efforts of the Ministry of Steel the  
Government has imposed an export   duty of 20% on iron ore exports.  
 
The Ministry of Mines have furnished the comments on this 
Recommendation and the comments are as under: 
 
Based on the Recommendations of the Committee on Open and 
Competitive Mechanism for Allocation, Pricing and Utilisation of Natural 
Resources headed by Shri Ashok Chawla the Ministry of Mines has prepared a 
draft Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011 which has 
been approved by the Cabinet on 30.9.2011 and presented  to the Lok Sabha 
on 12.12.2011. The Bill has since been referred to the Standing Committee on 
Coal & Steel on 5.1.2012.  
 
The Justice M. B. Shah Commission of Inquiry (COI) set up by the 
Government for inquiry into illegal mining of iron and manganese ore s has 
submitted its First Interim Report on 14.7.2011, which has been tabled in the 
Parliament alongwith the Memorandum of Action Taken. The COI has also 
submitted its Report on the State of Goa which has been tabled in the 
Parliament alongwith its Memoran dum of the action taken on 7.9.2012. The 
tenure of the COI has been extended till 16th July, 2013 by the Government.” 
 
 

25 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Recommendations /observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
 
 
-- Nil -- 

26 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Inputs Management 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the importance of securing raw materials for RINL to improve its operational 
capability:  
 
“The Committee observe that the primary challenge facing RINL today is the 
securitization of raw materials, such as, iron ore and coking coal, the primary 
inputs in t he production of steel. A crucial point which the Committee note is 
that RINL is the only integrated steel plant among Public Sector Undertakings 
not having captive iron ore and coal mines. The Committee appreciate the fact 
that the non -allocation of capti ve mines of iron ore and coking coal to the 
company are attributable to RINL being a company which has been created by 
separation of units from SAIL and the Supply of its iron ore requirements being 
planned to be met from Bailadila mines of National Minera l Development 
Corporation, another offspring of SAIL. However, with increase in competition 
and the falling margins of the company owing to its having to buy these primary 
raw materials at a comparatively higher cost than its competitors having 
captive mines of these raw materials, the Committee feel that the growth and 
sustainability of the Company today hinges on the securitization of these 
primary raw materials at lower costs through captive mines.  
 
The Committee are apprised of the fact that iron ore m ining leases are 
governed by MMDR Act, 1957 under which the primary role of allocation of 
mines rests with State Governments. The Committee also took evidence of 
representatives of Ministry of Mines in this regard and were informed that no 
application of R INL for allocation of iron ore mines have reached the Ministry, 
this, despite numerous such applications having been filed by the Company in 
various States like Jharkhand, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. The 
Committee also note with serious concern t hat these applications are often 
processed at snail's pace owing to multiplicity of clearances required from as 
many authorities, causing much delay and escalations in costs. Besides, 
different States are known to be following different procedures in the matter.  
 
The Committee, in the light of the above facts, desire that a via -media 
be worked out to ensure expeditious processing of applications for mining 
blocks. The Committee further recommend that a standardized procedure for 
processing mining lease app lications applicable in all States must be seriously 

27 
 
 
considered by the Government to make the process more transparent and 
expedient.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows: 
 
“RINL is the only steel plant in the public sector which does not have its own 
raw material suppliers – both coal and iron ore.  On account of this, RINL is at 
a disadvantageous position vis -à-vis other steel plants in terms of supply 
linkage and p roduction cost.   The allocation of iron ore mining lease are 
decided by the concerned State Government with prior approval of Ministry of 
Mines, government of India.   Ministry of steel has been making all out efforts 
to help RINL have a firm linkage with  the raw material sources, either as 
owners of the mines allotted to them or as a joint venture partner.   Ministry of 
Steel had been pursuing with the State governments of Orissa, Chattisgarh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for min ing leases in 
favour of RINL, where they had filed the applications for these leases.  
 
RINL has filed 29 applications for grant of prospecting license / mining 
lease in the states of Andhra Pradesh (7), Odisha (5), Jharkhand (7), 
Rajasthan (6), Chattisgarh (2), Uttar Pradesh (1) and Karnataka (1).  However, 
no allocations have been made to RINL so far.  
 
 Government of Rajasthan has recommended for allotment of mining lease 
of Iron Ore in an area of about 1,000 Hectares in Bhilwara district to RINL 
on 05.01.12, which is under consideration of Ministry of Mines. 
 
 Government of Andhra Pradesh is also actively considering for allotment of 
Iron ore mines Bayyaram, Khammam district. 
 
 As per communication received from Department of Steel & Mines Govt. of 
Odisha, vide letter no 7651 dated 25.10.2012, allotment / reservation of 
good iron ore blocks in the state of Odisha in favour of RINL may not be 
considered as the State Government, vide resolution No. 6899 - dated 
18.9.2012, has decided to reserve all the remaini ng area bearing iron ore 
for undertaking prospecting or mining operation through the Odisha Mining 
Corporation Ltd. The resolution is yet to be approved by Central 
Government. To protect the interest of RINL and other central PSUs, the 
matter is being taken up with Central and State Governments. 
 
In connection with the above, RINL and Ministry of Steel have taken up 
with the Hon’ble Chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of 
various States and at various instances requesting for allocat ion of the applied 
areas to RINL, VSP and also indicating willingness to enter into a Joint Venture 

28 
 
 
with State Mining Development Corporation or any other State Government 
agency for exploitation of the Iron Ore and setting up of Value Addition Plants.” 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
Allocation of captive iron-ore mines to RINL 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the issue of allocation of captive iron-ore mines to RINL: 
 
“Regarding the non-allocation of captive iron-ore mines to RINL, the Committee 
find that the problem lies in State Governments often denying the Company's 
applications, thereby ruling out the same being forwarded to the Union Ministry 
of Mines. The Committee, while appreciating the fact that the State 
Governments may have their own set of considerations and criteria for 
selection of eligible applicants for mining leases, feel that the consistent denial 
or non-selection of a steel giant in the public sector like RINL smacks of not 
only irregularity but als o inconsistencies in the system and warrants a serious 
re-think on the existing statutory and procedural provisions.  
 
Noting that the Company's applications have been denied on grounds 
such as RINL not contributing any value additions in the States having  Mining 
blocks; the blocks being in forest reserves; the blocks having   been allocated 
to earlier applicants, etc., the Committee recommend that the Company should 
make serious efforts at fulfilling the criterion laid down by concerned States. 
Further, the Committee observe that States should be actively encouraged to 
give due weightage to macro value additions to be achieved through 
preferential allocation of resources to Public Sector Undertakings, which is for 
the nation as a whole as compared to value additions to be had locally.  
 
In conformity with the Supreme Court's observations in RIL vs RNRL 
case treating mineral reserves as national resources, the Committee would like 
to emphasise that the Government of India should take initiatives to declare al l 
mineral resources including iron-ore and coal as national wealth.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply on the above 
Recommendation has stated as follows:- 
 
“Ministry of Steel has been making all out efforts to help  RINL have a firm 
linkage with the raw material sources, either as owners of the mines allotted to 
them or as a joint venture partner.  Ministry of Steel has been pursuing with the 
State Governments of Orissa, Chattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh Jharkhand, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for mining leases in favour of RINL, where they 
had filed the applications for these leases.”  

29 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
Illegal Mining 
 
The Committee in their 11 th Report have recommended the following with 
regard to the issue of illegal mining: 
 
“The Committee would now like to dwell on the other disconcerting 
development viz. illegal mining. Illegal mining has now become an endemic 
feature. The Committee feel it is time to find out how much natural resources/ 
minerals have been legally used and how much has been illegally mined. The 
national resources, especially minerals including coal, should not be allowed to 
become the exclusive preserve of a handful of free looters. Another point which 
the Committee feel needs to be noted is that il legal mining has led to a 
situation where thousands of people have become homeless. This is the ugly 
face of illegal mining which involves rampant exploitation of people. Tribals and 
forest dwellers have been irreversibly affected, having been thrown out o f their 
original habitats. Lamentably, this distressing scenario has forced them to 
resort to unconstitutional acts and to go into arms of extremists.  
 
Illegal mining not only depletes the country of its natural resources but 
has also led to the disturbin g situation of exploitation of hapless forest dwellers 
and tribals. The Committee find it pertinent to take note of concerted measures 
/ measures proposed by Government to tackle the menace of 'illegal mining', 
as the same is reflective of the seriousness with which the Government views 
this subject.  
 
The need of the hour is conservation of National resources. The 
Committee after in-depth consideration recommend action on following lines:  
 
a) The injudicious export of raw natural resources like iron ore, coa l needs to 
be banned.  
 
b) The Committee note that the Government has formulated a new National 
Mineral Policy, 2008 which envisages the regulation of mines and 
development of mineral resources. The Committee commend the various 
steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government to check the menace of 
illegal mining. The Committee desire that the measures taken need to be 
assiduously followed and monitored. The Committee further desire that 
the proposed action be taken up in right earnest and pursued 
expeditiously.  
 
c) In view of the emerging scenario of depletion of precious resources like 
minerals owing to injudicious export and illegal mining, the Committee 
emphasise upon the need to revisit the National Mineral Policy for 
effectively addressing these issues.  

30 
 
 
 
d) In the context of judicious utilization of National resources, the Committee 
strongly desire rightful allocations of minerals such as iron ore and coal to 
Public Sector Undertakings, which have been choked due to the 
constraint of these resources.  
 
The Committee have recommended the above course of action in their 
endeavour to address the interlinked issue of mineral conservation and the 
interests of the Public Sector Undertakings.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel has replied to the above Recommendation as follows: 
 
“Ministry of Mines have furnished the comments on this Recommendation and 
the comments are as under:- 
 
The Central Government has taken the following steps to curb and check illegal 
mining in the country: 
 
(i). State Governments were as ked to frame rules to control illegal mining as 
per Section 23 C of MMDR Act (so far 18 States have framed Rules).  
(ii). State Governments were requested to set up Task Forces at State and 
District level to control illegal mining since the year 2005 (so far 21 States 
have reported to have set up Task Forces).  
(iii). State Governments were advised to set up State Coordination -cum-
Empowered Committee (SCEC) to coordinate efforts to control illegal 
mining by including representatives of Railways, Customs and Port 
authorities (13 State Governments have set up such Committees). 
(iv). All State Governments advised to adopt an Action Plan with specific 
measures to detect and control illegal mining including, use of remote 
sensing, control on traffic, gather market intelligence, reg istration of end -
users and setting up of special cells etc.  
(v). Ministry of Mines has so far held five meetings with the State 
Governments to specifically review the action taken by the State 
Governments on illegal mining on 3.8.2009, 27.11.2009, 22.2.2010, 
16.4.2010 and 21.9.2010. This periodical review has been dovetailed in 
the meeting of Central Coordination -cum-Empowered Committee 
meetings. 
(vi). A Central Coordination -cum-Empowered Committee set up under 
Secretary (Mines) on 4.3.2009 has held ten meetings on 2 4.7.2009, 
22.12.2009, 18.6.2010, 22.12.2010, 3.5.2011, 20.9.2011, 16.1.2012, 
27.3.2012, 28.6.2012 and 21.9.2012 to consider all mining related issues, 
including matters relating to coordination of activities to combat illegal 
mining.  

31 
 
 
(vii). Railways have institu ted a mechanism to allow transportation of iron ore 
only against permits issued rake -wise and verified by State Government, 
apart from taking measures to fence and set up check post at the railway 
sidings. 
(viii). Customs Department has issued instructions to all its field units to share 
information on ore export with State Governments. 
(ix). Ministry of Shipping has issued a direction to all major Ports to streamline 
the verification procedures for movement of consignment by road and rail 
to Ports for exports. 
(x). Government has notified amendment in Rule 45 of Mineral Conservation 
and Development Rules, 1988, on 9.2.2011 making it mandatory for all 
miners, traders, stockist, exporters and end-users to register with IBM and 
report their transaction in minerals on monthly bas is for a proper end -to-
end accounting of minerals. As on 11.6.2012, out of 9409 mining leases in 
the country, 8027 mining leases have registered online with the IBM. The 
IBM has suspended 1587 mines for non -compliance and initiated 
prosecution in 4 cases a nd recommended 21 cases to State 
Governments for termination. IBM has also requested the State 
Governments not to issue transit passes for movement of minerals to 
unregistered operators. 
(xi). Indian Bureau Mines had constituted Special Task Forces for inspectio n 
of mines in endemic areas by taking the help of Satellite imageries. 
Special Task Force conducted inspections in a total of 454 mines in the 
States of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Jharkhand and Gujarat and 
suspended 155 mines under rule 13(2) of Mi neral Conservation and 
Development Rules, 1988 due to serious violations. Further, the Indian 
Bureau of Mines have recommended for termination of eight leases. 
(xii). In so far as the online approval of mining plans and display of approved 
mining plans in the pub lic domain is concerned, it is submitted that the 
Ministry is developing ‘Mining Tenement System (MTS)’ to automate the 
various processes associated with the mineral concession regime with 
features also to reflect the information as desired above. 
(xiii). The Cent ral Government has also set up Shri Justice M. B. Shah 
Commission of Inquiry (COI) for illegal mining of iron ore and manganese 
vide gazette notification dated 22.11.2010. The COI submitted its First 
Interim Report on 14.7.2011, which has been tabled in th e Parliament 
alongwith the Memorandum of Action Taken. The tenure of the COI has 
been extended till 16 th July, 2013 by the Government. COI has so far 
visited Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Odisha. The 
COI has submitted its Report on illegal mining of iron ore and manganese 
ore in the State of Goa which has been tabled in the Parliament alongwith 
its Memorandum of the action taken on 7.9.2012. 
 
 

32 
 
 
Details of State wise Illegal Mining Cases 
 
Details of State - wise Illegal Mining cases 
Action Taken Up to March 2012 
S. No. State 2009 2010 2011 
2012 
(upto 
March) Vehicle 
Seized 
FIR 
Lodged 
Court 
cases 
filed 
Fine realized 
(Rs. In 
Lakhs) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 11591 17882 13949 5964 844 18 519 12361.08 
2 Andaman & 
Nicobar 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0.05 
3 Chhattisgarh 1078 2017 1841 1105 3363 0 8502 1336.539 
4 Goa 9 13 1 0 459 0 0 18.628 
5 Gujarat 5416 2184 2389 1096 2780 247 20 11707.89 
6 Haryana 1372 3446 2022 0 103 467 21 907.767 
7 Himachal Pradesh 1114 1213 1289 0 0 700 1306 1684.55 
8 Jharkhand 15 411 594 216 136 285 30 48.843 
9 Karnataka 1687 4949 4870 1821 77553 949 630 8397.407 
10 Kerala 1321 2028 1948 1227 0 0 0 1142.201 
11 Madhya Pradesh 3868 4245 5299 1848 0 2741 25610 6558.837 
12 Maharashtra 8270 26563 28829 11813 91331 13 1 10465.37 
13 Mizoram 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 
14 Orissa 758 420 309 0 1823 39 36 5720.71 
15 Punjab 73 754 194 120 61 67 0 386.266 
16 Rajasthan 4711 1833 821 380 224 1250 48 1455.736 
17 Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 Tamil Nadu 215 277 99 24 36814 1421 617 11603.37 
19 Uttarakhand 0 0 0 0 683 0 0 38.5 
20 Uttar Pradesh 0 4641 4708 0 0 0 0 1674.82 
21 West Bengal 80 239 174 95 3911 1479 430 0 
Total 41578 73115 69337 25713 220085 9676 37770 75508.56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19  March, 2013 from 1500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
6.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
8.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
   
 
 
…2p.. 
 

35 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memoranda Nos. 3 to 7 containing following 
draft Reports: 
 
(i). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(ii). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iii). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iv). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(v). Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report on Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited. 
 
 
3. The Committee approved the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports 
without any modification and authorized the Chairman to present these Reports after 
getting them factually verified from the concerned Ministries / Departments. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX    Matter not related to this Report 

36 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations/ observations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings on “Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited”. 
 
 
I Total number of Recommendations  11 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.  1,2,5,6,7,8,9 
and 10]  
 
Percentage of total  
08 
 
 
 
 72.73% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies [vide Recommendation at Sl. 
No. 8]             
 
Percentage of total  
Nil 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee [vide 
Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3,4 and 11] 
 
Percentage of total 
03 
 
 
 
 27.27 % 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 