 
 
 
 
SECURITY PRINTING AND MINTING  
CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  
19 

  
 
C.P.U. No. 952 
  
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
SECURITY PRINTING AND MINTING CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on 
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013 /  Phalguna 1934 (S)  
 
19 

  
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations / Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
18 
CHAPTER III Observations / Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
31 
CHAPTER IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee 
 
32 
CHAPTER V  Observations / Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
38 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the sitting 43 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Sixth Report of COPU on ‘ Security Printing 
and Minting Corporation of India Limited’ 
 
45 
 
   
 
 
 
(i) 
 
  

4 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul   Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  Additional Director 
4. Shri Yogendra Singh  Executive Officer 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on 
action taken by Government on the  Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on ‘Security Printing and Minting 
Corporation of India Limited’. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 30 April 2010.  Replies of the Government to the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 29 December 2010.  Subsequently, updated 
replies were received from the Government on 3 January 2013.  The draft Report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 19 March 2013.   
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  

6 
 
 
  CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings  (2009-10) on Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India 
Ltd., which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 
April 2010. 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
18 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos.1,2,8,12,13,14,16, and 18                         (Total Eight) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: (Chapter-III) 
                      NIL 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: (Chapter-IV) 
SI. Nos. 4,5,6,9,11 and 17          (Total Six)  
                         
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which fi nal replies of the 
Government are still awaited: (Chapter-V)  
Sl.Nos. 3,7,10 and 15                                                              (Total Four)                                           
  
                   
3. The Committee desire that response to Committee’s comments in Chapter I 
of the Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Organizational Set Up 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee (2009-10) in their Sixth Report had noted that except functioning 
under the control and directions of corporate office, the present organizational setup in 
all the nine production units of SPMCIL continues to be same as was in place when 

7 
 
these units were functioning as depart mental organizations under the direct control of 
Department of Economic Affairs (DE A) in the Ministry of Finance and the Corporation 
was still working out a proposal on study on the organizational set up and the vision and 
the mission for the Corporation f or the next ten years by inputs from the professional 
consultants. Emphasizing that this issue required  priority attention on the part of the 
management for putting in place the requisite corporate st ructure in the production 
units, the Committee had recommended that the proposed studies on the organizational 
set up in SPMCIL should be undertaken and completed at the earliest with a view to 
achieving the envisaged objectives of operational flexibility, fostering efficiency and 
higher productivity in the production units. 
 
6. In their  initial action taken reply  furnished to the Committee on 29 December , 
2010 the Government stated  that through internal studies and assessments, higher 
productivity has been achieved by the Units. Studies were also cond ucted by M/s 
National Productivity Council and IFCI in the field of process/system improvements and 
energy conservation. Further, one Consultant has been engaged to do the capacity 
assessment and suggest product wise capacity of the Units. One more Consult ant is 
being engaged to study and suggest organization structure, manpower requirement, 
manning pattern, performance management, training and development 
methods/strategy. For this purpose, tender was floated. Offers received have been 
opened on 22 October, 2010 and the technical evaluation has since been completed. 
 
7.       The Government in their updated action taken reply of 3 January, 2013 inter-alia 
stated that the capacity assessment and product -wise capacity of the Units for which a 
consultant was appointed has already submitted the report and the installed capacity of 
Nine Units of SPMCIL are yet to be formally notified by the Company.  But, the 
constantly increasing indent fo r SPMCIL as decided by the Government  and the 
Reserve Bank of India have been addressed irrespective of the installed capacity of the 
machine because Company is at the threshold of Capacity building through 
replacement and modernization of machines. 
 
The Performance Management System has since been implemented 
commencing from t he year 2011 -12 vide Corporate Office Order dated 12.01.2012 in 
respect of Executives from E -1 level to E -6 level and the Supervisors in S -1 and S -2 
level working in all the Nine Units and the Corporate Office.   
 
M/s KPMG was appointed to study the Organizational set up and the Vision and 
Mission for the Corporation for the next 10 years.  The scope and coverage of the study 
in all the related areas of operation and business are broadly divide d into the following 
categories:  
 
(a) Corporate Business Plan 
(b) Human Resource Management 
(c) Technical Operation  
 

8 
 
The part A of the KPMG report which exclusively deals with the Corporate 
Business Plan based on the working of the verticals and the and Vision and Mission of 
the Company thereof is yet to be formally approved by the Company.  Presently the 
focus is more on the capacity building of Plant and Machinery and Rationalization of 
Manpower so that a befitting Organizational structure and set up could be evolved to 
match with the global standard as per Organizational Mission and Vision spelled out by 
M/s KPMG in their report. 
 
8. Taking note of the fact that SPMCIL was working out a proposal on study of 
the organizational set up and the vision and mission statement for the 
Corporation, the Committee in their Sixth Report had desired that the proposed 
study should be undertaken and completed at the earliest. In their Action Taken 
Reply, the Government have stated that the Report of the study commissioned by 
SPMCIL to study their organizational set up and prepare vision and mission 
statement is yet to be formally approved by the Corporation.  The Committee find 
this casualness towards an important task inexplicable  and expect  SPMCIL to 
take action on  the study report at the earliest and also take all possible steps to 
put in place expeditiously a vibrant organizational structure so that the envisaged 
objectives for which the Corporation had been set up are fully met. 
  
Capital Structure 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
9 Noting that the Capital structure of SPMCIL did not reflect the true picture of its 
asset base as the value and nature of asset transferred to the corporation were yet to 
be finalized due to the inordinate delay by the Ministry of Finance is Consideration of 
the proposal submitted by the Corporation, the Committee had asked the Ministry for an 
early decision so that the financial status of the Company was viewed in the right 
perspective. 
10 In its Acti on Taken Note the Government have  stated that “a proposal for 
restructuring of capital of Security Printing Minting Corporation of India Limited 
(SPMCIL) as on 10/02/2006 has been received from the SPMCIL.  The book value of 
the net assets as on 10/02/2006 was `2826.81 crore. After adjusting for assets 
amounting to `228.33 crore which was found as unserviceable and unproductive and an 
amount of `60.78 crore as a liability consequent upon implementation of a Court 

9 
 
Judgment, a net amount of `2537.70 crore is proposed to be treated as equity capital/  
loan   from GOI to SPMCIL. However an amount of Rs 600 crores payable towards 
stamp duty  by Corporation on transfer of title of land & buildings at different locations  
from GOI to Corporation and an amount of Rs 695 crores appearing as contingent 
liabilities in the books of accounts of the Corporation in various cases pending in 
courts/Tribunals  are requested by SPMCIL to be  considered  by GOI while arriving at 
the final amount. The proposal received from SPMCIL is under consideration of the 
Government.” 
11. The Six Report of the Committee was presented to the Parliament almost 
three years ago on 30 April, 2010. The initial Action Taken Replies of the 
Government were received on 29 December, 2010. The updated Action Taken 
Replies were received from the Govern ment on 03 January, 2013 i.e. almost 
quarter to three years after the presentation of the Report to Parliament . The 
Committee, therefore, fin d it really inexplicable the way Government is sitting 
over the proposal of SPMCIL regarding its Capital Structure.  They also wonder 
how the Corporation in the absence of its real capital structure is managing its 
accounts, asset base and all other such indices which hold crucial relevance for a 
corporate entity. The Committee, therefore,  reiterate their recommendation for an 
early decision in the matter by the Ministry of Finance. Furthermore, since a lot of 
precious time has already been lost, the Committee desire the Ministry of Finance 
to decide upon the matter within one month of presentation of this Report to 
Parliament. 
 
Sundry Debtors 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
12. Concerned to note that SPMCIL was encountering various problems in realizing 
its outstanding dues which were mounting year after and stood at Rs. 836.31 crore as 
on 31 March, 2009, the Committee had recommended the intervention of the Ministry of 
Finance in the matter to help the Corporation in realization of its outstanding dues by 
exerting influence on the defaulting departments of the Central and State Governments. 
In their updat ed Action Taken Note, the Government have inter-alia stated that Sundry 
debtors  outstanding as on 31 March, 2011 we re amounting to Rs.961.15 crore  which 
has increased to Rs.1266.01 crore  as on 31  March, 2012. There increase in Sundry 
Debtors primarily due  to increase in the volume  of turnover of the C ompany & 
provisional release of payment of coins. The turnover increased from Rs.3164 crore in 
the year 2010-11 to Rs.3418 crore in the year 2011-12. Old debtors are reducing due to 
concerted efforts of SPMCIL  supported by follow -up by the Ministry. The Ministry of 

10 
 
Finance is regularly reviewing the status of sundry debtors and is continuously 
intervening in the matter to bring down the same. Ministry of E xternal Affairs has been 
requested to clear their outsta nding of last three years early. Ministry of F inance 
(Budget Division) is also helping in realizing this outstanding amount from M inistry of 
External Affairs.  
 
 
13.  From the for going facts and figures , it is evident that  the efforts 
enumerated in the Action Taken Note are  not bearing fruits. The sundry debts 
have gone up sharply from Rs. 961.15 crore as on 31 March, 2011 to Rs. 1266.01 
crore as on 31 March, 2012.  The Committee also do not subscribe to the alibi that 
sundry debts have primarily in creased due to increase in the v olume of turnover 
of the Company and provisional release of payment of coins. The turn over of the 
Company has merely increased by 8.03% from Rs. 3164 crore in 2010 -11 to Rs 
3418 crore in 2011 -12 while the sundry debts have shot up by 30.68% during the 
same period. The Committee, therefore, desire a more effective and proactive 
intervention of the Ministry of Finance so as to bring down the sundry debts of 
SPMCIL to the minimal. 
 
Payment for Postal Stationery  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
14. Taking note of the fact that notwithstanding high production cost of cer tain items 
of postal stationery , the Government had put a price cap on the payments for 
manufacturing such stationery so as to restrict the price of these products in public 
interest, the Committee in their Sixth Report had recommended that ways and means 
should be evolved to ensure payment of at least actual cost of production of such items 
so that the commercial interests of the Corporation are not compromised. 
  
15. In their updated replies the Government have stated that a Committee was 
constituted in July,2009 under the Chairmanship of the JS&FA, MOF to fix pricing 
norms for various products supplied by units of SPMCIL to the Department of Posts. 
The report of the s aid Committee was circulated vide letter dated 03 June, 2011 of 
MOF. After having the various meetings it was recommended that: 
 All pending claims for pre - corporatization period would be cleared by DOP. 
Pending claims relating to the post corporatization period would be provisionally 
settled on the basis of Cost Audit Branch (CAB) rates for 2005-06. 
 DOP would make advance payment of 40% of the value of indents being placed 
on SPMCIL in future. 

11 
 
 SPMCIL and DOP would mutually work out a more efficient and cen tralized 
billing/ payment system so as to facilitate prompt settlement of dues. 
 -CAB would undertake a study to establish the base price for 2006 -07 and 
suggest an indexation formula which would be applicable for the next three 
years. i.e. 2007-08,2008-09 and 2009-10. 
However DOP has not acted as per the directives of the Committee and 
both old outstanding payment before corporatization and 40% advance payment 
issues are pending for implementation at their end.   Similarly CAB has also not 
suggested indexation formula for price determination for the year 2007 -08, 2008-
09 and 2009-10. 
 
16. The Committee note with satisfaction that in pursuance of their 
Recommendation, a committee had been constituted by the Ministry of Finance 
which inter-alia had recommended among others measures for settlement of all 
pending claims/dues of SPMCIL by the Department of Posts in respect of the 
supply of postal stationery both for the pre and post corporatization period.   It 
had also recommended that the Departm ent of Post make advance payment of 40 
percent of the values of indent being placed on SPMCIL in future. Furthermore, 
the Ministerial Committee had also recommended that C ost Audit Branch would 
undertake a study to establish a base price and also suggest a n indexation 
formula for the next three fiscals with effect from 2007 -08 to 2009 -10. The 
Committee regret to note that Department of Posts is yet to act upon these 
recommendations and further CAB did not do its bidding. The Action Taken Note 
does not indicate whether any action has been taken by the Ministry of Finance to 
pursue the recommendations of its own committee which would have gone a long 
way in ensuring a just return to SPMCIL.    
 The Committee , therefore  urge the Government to pursue the matter 
vigorously with the Department of Posts so that the pending claims/dues of 
SPMCIL are settled at the earliest as this would help protect the commercial 
interest of SPMCIL.  Moreover, since the three fiscals for which the mandate was 
assigned to CAB for est ablishing base price and indexation formula have long 
gone by, the Committee desire the Ministry of Finance to take a fresh call in the 
matter and also ensure that the same is adhered to without fail.  

12 
 
 
 
Taxation Matters 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
17. While accepting SPMCIL’s plea that since Government are  the ultimate 
consignee for most of its products, the y should be exempted from the payment of 
excise/custom duties and other taxes, the Committee in their Sixth Report had 
accordingly recommended that the Mi nistry of Finance should take requisite steps to 
this effect. 
 
18. In their updated Action Taken Notes the Government have stated that anomalies 
in taxation on some products manufactured by SPMCIL and raw -material/machines 
imported by SPMCIL were noticed a nd the same have been part ly removed by 
notification issued by Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. The Committee have 
also been informed that a comprehensive proposal for grant of exemption of excise 
duty, custom duty, service tax, VAT, Octroi, ent ry tax & cess duty to units of SPMCIL, 
BRBNMPL and BNPMIPL has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance and is under 
examination. 
 
19. The Committee note with satisfaction the steps taken by Government for 
removal of anomalies in taxation on products manufactured and raw material, etc, 
imported by SPMCIL.  The Committee also expect the Ministry of Finance to 
favorably consider the proposal of SPMCIL and their units for grant of exemption 
of excise/custom duty and other taxes at the earliest and apprise  them of the 
outcome.  
Capacity Utilization 
(Recommendation  No. 9) 
 
20. While noting that the installed capacity in various units does not seem to have 
been calculated on a scientific basis giving due consideration to operating machine 
speed and actual ut ilization of man h our, the Committee  in their earlier Report had  
recommended that SPMCIL should undertake a thorough review for rationality 
assessing its installed capacity in each unit and take effective steps to ensure optimum 
utilization of capacity so assessed. 
 
21. The Government in their updated Action Taken Replies  have stated that M/S 
Institute of Industrial Engineering (IIIE), which was assigned to conduct capacity 
assessment study of all SPMCIL units, has submitted its report on 29 June, 2011. 
 
22. The Committee are constrained to observe that the reply does not mention 
the findings of the IIIE regarding the cap acity assessment of the Company nor 

13 
 
has it mentioned whether installed capacity has been reviewed by SPMCIL in the 
light of the IIIE report, though the report had been submitted to  the Company way 
back on 29 June, 2011. The Committee would await details in this regard. 
 
Disposal of impaired Machinery 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
 
23. Expressing concern that the  present policy of preserving the impaired machinery 
in the premises is not only fraught with danger of theft but may also led to over 
accumulation besides huge expenses on its security, the Committee had recommended 
that SPMCIL should immediatel y undertake safe and irreversible disposal of impaired 
machineries lying with the Corporation.  
 
24. The Government, in their updated Action Taken Note s have informed th e 
Committee that the detailed procedures for disposal of impaired machinery has been 
prepared & included in the new Procurement Manual at Chapter 14 titled Disposal. The 
Procurement Manual was approved by SPMCIL Board and examined by Central 
Vigilance Commission. This was released by the then Finance Minister on 23 May, 
2011 and has been made effective w.e.f. 01June,2011. 
 
25. The Committee  note that finally SPMCIL has come up with detailed 
procedures to facilitate the disposal of impaired machinery  and has got it 
included in its procurement manual.  The Committee, however, regret to note that 
the reply is silent on  the disposal of impaired machinery lying with the Company  
as recommended by them .  The Committee would , therefore, urge expeditious 
disposal of impaired machinery, if not already done. 
 
Security Expenses 
(Recommendation  No. 11) 
 
26. In their earlier Report, the Committee based on a suggestion from the 
Corporation recommended reimbursement of the huge security expenses being 
incurred by SPMCIL production Units on the security deployments made around these 
Units due to threat perception as the Corporation did not have any say in the matters of 
Security deployment which was the Government’s prerogative. 
 
27. In their  updated Action Taken Reply, the Government have stated that the 
request of SPMCIL for reimbursement of security expenditure incurred by the units has 
not been accepted by the Ministry vide their letter No.3/8/2009 -SPMC/484 dt. 

14 
 
01.06.2011 on the logic that there is no precedent for the same in any PSU under any 
Government Department. 
 
28. The Committee do not agree with the reasoning given by the Government 
for not reimbursing the sec urity expenditure to the SPMCIL on the plea that there 
has been no precedent in this regard in any of the PSUs.    The Committee feel 
that g iven the unique and strategic nature of the functioning of the Company  
which is mandated to discharge  a major sovereign function of the Government , 
SPMCIL cannot be equated with any other public undertaking. The Government in 
fitness of things should bear the cost of deployment of security  in SPMCIL units  
as any lapse in security will have far reaching implications . The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate their Recommendation that Government should favorably 
consider reimbursement of security expenditure incurred by the units of SPMCIL.  
 
Counterfeit Currency 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
29. The Committee had in their earlier report while taking note of the alarming 
proportion that the menace of circulation of counterfeit currency in the country ha d 
acquired in the recent years  had felt that a lthough RBI is stated to have initiated a 
number of steps to cope up with the challenges of c ounterfeit currency including those 
taken to educate the people, these awareness campaigns were yet to reach the 
common masses particularly in the rural areas where poor and innocent people , more 
vulnerable to counterfeit currency , continues to be the vict ims of this problem and are 
easily targeted by the anti -national elements. They had , therefore, while impressing 
upon the Government to take appropriate steps to amend the penal provisions for 
providing protection to such hapless victims, also emphasized upon the RBI to introduce 
easily recognizable and yet scoring high on anti -counterfeiting security features in the 
design of the currency notes on the lines of advanced international practices. Needless 
to say that inclusion of such security features will g o a long way in mitigating the 
hardships being faced by the common man. 
 
30. In their initial Action Taken Reply, the Government have stated that selecting of 
new security features for the new series of bank notes has already been initiated by the 
Ministry of Finance. To improve design of the Indian bank notes RBI has constituted a 
high level steering committee of experts. A co -ordination mechanism i n Ministry of 
Home Affairs called F -CORD has been set up to co -ordinate among various security 
agencies to tackle the menace of counterfeit currency.  
 
31. Addressing the menace of forged notes is an ongoing process. With a view to 
further strengthen the systems of handling banknotes by the banks, RBI has issued a 

15 
 
direction to all its scheduled banks that banknotes in denomination of Rs.100 and above 
should b e re -issued by banks over their counters or through ATMs only if those 
banknotes are duly checked for authenticity/genuineness and fitness by machines. 
Such machines should adhere to the note sorting standards prescribed by RBI. The 
bank have also been dir ected that they should (i) use such machines in all their 
branches having average daily cash receipts of Rs.1 crore and above by March, 2010 
and (ii) use such machines in all their branches having average daily cash receipts 
between Rs.50 lakh and Rs.1 cro re by March 31, 2010. The banks have already 
initiated the process of implementation of the instructions. The banks so far installed 
2018 note sorting machines in their branches which have case receipts of Rs.1 crore 
and above. The guidelines on note sorting parameters have also been issued.      
 
32.   In th eir updated A ction Taken Reply, the Government have further stated that 
under the awareness campaign which was launched  through Doordarshan on August 
15, an ad film titled “Paisa Bolta Hai”, in Hindi an d 11 other regional languages, was 
shown on the National and Regional Channels of Doordarshan for a year.  A dedicated 
microsite www.paisaboltahai.rbi.org.in with easy to understand information on genuine 
Indian banknotes has been hosted in the official site of RBI. The objective of the 
campaign is to make the common people (Aam Admi) aware of the features of gen uine 
Indian banknotes.  
 
33. To address the multi-dimensional aspects of the FICN menace, several agencies 
such as the RBI, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs, Security and Intelligence 
Agencies of the Centre and States, Central Bureau of Invest igation (CBI) etc., are 
working in tandem, to thwart the illegal activities related to FICNs.   The work of these 
agencies is periodically reviewed by a nodal group (FCORD) set up for this purpose.  
FCORD (FICN Coordination Cell) coordinates/share all avai lable information/  
intelligence and analysis on circulation/smuggling of FICN in the world.  At the functional 
level, the CBI has been declared as the nodal agency for coordination with the States 
and the Directorate General of Revenue Intelligence has bee n nominated as the Lead 
Intelligence Agency for the purpose.  National Investigation Agency has been 
empowered by National Investigation Agency Act to investigate and prosecute such 
offences to deal with t his menace.   The Government have  also constituted a Terror 
Funding and Fake Currency Cell (TFFC) in NIA in 2010 to focus on investigation of 
Terror Funding and Fake Currency Cases. 
 
34. While taking note of the various measures taken by the Government in 
pursuance of the Recommendations of the Committee t o effectively control the 
menace of counterfeit currency , the Committee  are disappointed to note that no 
steps to amend the penal provisions for providing protection to the hapless 
victims of counterfeit operations have been initiated by the Government . This is 
all the more imperative since more and more law enforcing agencies are being 
involved by the Government to cur b and control  this problem of gargantuan 

16 
 
proportion.   The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that Government initiate appropriate steps in this regard immediately.   
35. The Committee also note that under the awareness campaign on the Indian 
currency an ad film namely ‘paisa bolta hai’ was telecast on various channels of 
Doordarshan  for a year to spread awareness among the common man regarding 
the true features of Indian banknotes. While appreciating this campaign, the 
Committee are of the opinion that with a view to make such campaign more 
effective and its impact forceful, it is imp erative to make such efforts a 
continuous process. Likewise, it is also important to widen the coverage of such 
campaign as telecasting of ad film only on Doordarshan seems insufficient as a 
large number of people who do not watch Doordarshan remain uncove red. The 
Committee, therefore, urge that steps should be taken to telecast such ad films 
on all popular channels so as to enhance the coverage and efficacy of awareness 
campaign.   
36. The Committee also note that for selecting new security features for th e 
new series of bank notes , steps  have already been initiated by the Ministry of 
Finance and RBI and a high level steering committee of experts to improve 
design of Indian bank notes  has been constituted .  The Committee trust that 
efforts initiated by the Government for introduction of easily recognizable anti 
counterfeiting security features would fructify at the soonest  and will help in 
controlling the menace of counterfeit currency notes.  
 
Indigenization of Security Sensitive Items 
(Recommendation  No.17) 
 
37. Considering the fact that excessive dependence upon the import of raw -material 
like paper and ink to the extent of around 80-85 per cent make the country vulnerable to 
the menace of counterfeiting, the Committee in their Sixth Report had observed that the 
Government need to undertake R&D activities concerning the indigenization of the 
production process of such security sensitive items. The Committee had, accordingly, 
recommended that efforts at indigenization brook  no delay whatsoever and need  be 
taken up on utmost priority. The Committee had further recommended that the Ministry 
of Finance and SPMCIL should expeditiously formulate a concrete plan for dedicated 
R&D set-up with enhanced financial allocation and draw a roadmap with a clear time -
frame for achieving indigenization in security sensitive items. 
  

17 
 
38. The Government in their updated Action t aken Reply  have stated that at present 
majority of the Bank Note Paper is imported.  The present currency  manufacturing 
project plans include Ban knote Paper Mill India, Mysore (BNPM) as 50:50 JV between 
Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India (SPMCIL) and Bharatiya Reserve Bank 
Note Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL) which shall have two Cylinder Mould Vat 
Made Watermarked Banknote (CWBN) pa per lines with a total capacity of around 
12000MT/per annum.  A New CWBN paper line is also coming up at Security Paper Mill 
(SPM), Hoshangabad of 6000 MT capacity.  The present capacity of SPM, 
Hoshangabad for manufacture of CWBN & security paper is about  3000 MT per annum.  
Therefore, once the new projects are commissioned, there will be a n additional capacity 
of 18000 MT of CWBN paper. The offset and numbering inks are produced locally by 
BNP, Dewas for meeting SPMCIL requirements but are procured by BRBNMPL for their 
own requirement.  Part of Quick Set Intaglio Ink (QSI), requirement is me t through 
captive production at Bank Note Press, Dewas (A unit of SPMCIL) & BRBNMPL is 
meeting its requirement through outsourcing.  Modernisation of Ink factory is being done 
progressively & it is expected that the currency printing presses would become s elf 
reliant for QSI in the years to come.  Further, SPMCIL presses, namely CNP, Nasik & 
BNP, Dewas, are the nodal units for FICN testing along with two other presses of 
BRBNMPL at Salboni & Mysore. Moreover, consequent to formation of a co -ordination 
mechanism in Ministry of Home Affairs called FCORD, the subject is under discussion 
between various stake holders. It is apprised that for applied R&D, SPMCIL Board has 
accorded approval for setting up of corporate R&D Centre at BNP, Dewas, Security 
Paper R&D C enter at SPM, Hoshangabad & Mint R&D Center at IGM, Hyderabad in 
phase-I.  For coordinating activities, R&D manpower consisting of 5 Officers & 8 
Supervisors posts have been sanctioned recently. The recruitment action is being 
processed by SPMCIL.  The app lication oriented R&D proposed to be done by SPMCIL 
shall pick up speed only after the manpower and infrastructure is available.  In the 
interim phase, a modest R&D policy and action plan have been made by SPMCIL which 
have been approved by SPMCIL Board and the same is being pursued. 
 
39. The Committee appreciate  the aforementioned initiatives to augment the 
indigenous production of some security sensitive items, but are constrained to 
observe that the augmentation plans of  Company placed before the Committee 
are devoid of specificity regarding physical and financial dimensions as well as 
timelines for indigenization . The Committee, therefore, feel that in the absence of 
road map for indigenization, envisaged augmentation may remain only on papers. 
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry and Corporation to put their heads 
together and draw doable plans for augmentation of indigenous production 
capacity with well laid down allocation, physical targets and timelines. 
 
 

18 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT 
 
  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 1 
 
Manpower Planning 
 
The Committee have been informed that all the Government employees 
functioning under the nine departmental units were treated as on Rs.deemed 
deputation’ to SPMCIL after the corporatisation of these units was effected in February, 
2006.  The Committee’s examination however, reveals that in the absence of any 
perspective manpower planning, the Company had to admittedly, go through a critical 
phase during 2008 -09 because of uncertainties prevailing over the issue of en -masse 
transfer of Government employees to the rolls of the Company as some unions and 
associations of the employees were initially opposed to the process of corporatization. 
The fact  that a tripartite agreement on absorption of Government employees in the 
Corporation could be reached with the Government, SPMCIL and the Unions only in 
September, 2008 is a clear indicator that the issue of deployment of manpower in the 
Corporation was n ot fully analysed in its entire ramifications before conceptualising 
corporatisation of the departmental units.  The net result is that optimization of 
manpower is yet to be achieved as is evident from the fact that about 2000 employees 
as on 31 March, 200 9 are still awaiting deployment by the surplus cell even after the 
report of National Productivity Council has brought out that the expenditure on 
manpower in SPMCIL is on higher side. Closely connected are the issues relating to 
recruitment of skilled man power, formulation of appropriate Recruitment and Service 
Rules, establishment of appropriate Industrial Relations Machinery (IRM) suitable for a 
multi-unit Corporate entity and inculcating corporate work culture and training of 
employees to meet the chall enges of advanced technology besides new financial 
systems introduced after corporatization.  While taking due notice of the initiatives taken 
by the Government through tripartite agreement to address the apprehensions of the 
employees in new set up, the C ommittee wish to strongly impress upon the 
management to pay focused attention towards all aspects of streamlining the 
management systems consistent with the requirement of multi unit Corporate entity, job- 
specific skill development and training needs of the employees working in a Corporation 
engaged in security sensitive area. The Committee further recommend that Recruitment 
and Service Rules may be finalized without further delay and no shortcut method of 
engaging retired officials on contract basis be r esorted to.   They would like to be 
apprised of the precise steps taken in this regard.  
  
 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.1 Rationalization of Manpower 
 
 At the outset, it is relevant to mention that 18,398 Govt. employees working in the 
Mints, Presses and  Paper Mill were kept on deemed deputation in SPMCIL vide 
Govt. order dated 10.02.2006. Tripartite Agreement was signed on 15.09.2008 for 
en-masse transfer of Mints, Presses and Paper Mill Employees to Company.  Out of 
approximately 16,300 Govt. Employees on deemed deputation in SPMCIL as on 
01.11.2008, more than 90% opted for permanent absorption in the Company and 
1,385 number decided to opt for the Govt. service.  
 The following chart vouch that the Manpower strength in SPMCIL after 
Corporatisation has significantly declined.  
 
Declining Manpower Strength 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Sales turnover of the Company in the first year of incorporation was 1,513 
crores and during 2011-12, the turnover has become double as evident from the bar-
chart given below. 
 
Sales Turnover more than Double 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 0 
500 
1000 
1500 
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500 
4000 
Financial Year 
1513 
2004 
2339 
3038 3135 
3423 
Amount (in crores) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
18,398  17,501  16,675  15,848  
14,951  
13,483  12,818  
0  
2,000  
4,000  
6,000  
8,000  
10,000  
12,000  
14,000  
16,000  
18,000  
20,000  
Financial Year 
On 10.02.06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 

20 
 
 
 Correlating with the Manpower Strength and the Sales Turnover of the Company, it 
is pertinent to draw inference that Per Employee Profit is continuously going up in 
SPMCIL after Corporatisation as evident from the bar-chart given below:  
 
Per Employee Profit constantly going up 
 
 
 Summing up, three bar -charts showing (i) declined Manpower strength          (ii) 
Increased Sales Turnover (iii) Per Employee Profit going up, is a sheer reflection of 
increased efficiency of SPMCIL Manpower after Corporatisation.  
 
 With reference to observations of COPU, it is pertinent to update that at the time of 
en-masse transfer, altogether 1,385 employees opted to continue in the Govt. 
service and already taken on the roll of DoPT Surplus Cell, though they continue at 
the workplace of SPMCIL Units.  During the intervening period many have retired, 
opted for special VRS and already redeployed.  The big challenge for the Company 
is a writ petition filed by the Govt. employees of SPP Hyderabad contesting their 
redeployment in other Govt. Departments by DoPT.  Nevertheless, the total number 
of Govt. optees today in SPMCIL Units has come down to 454 only. 
 
 It has been the strategic effort by the SPMCIL Management in SPMCIL as a 
Corporatized entity to rationalize the manpower and en sure optimum utilization of 
available Manpower. 
 
 It is pertinent to mention that immediately after Corporatisation, NPC was appointed 
and their recommendation was rejected by the Unions in the Core committee.   
Then, it was agreed to appoint an independent Consultant as already reported to the 
Committee on Public Undertakings in SPMCIL Action taken Report submitted 
through the Administrative Ministry vide OM No. 3/8/09 -SPMC (Vol.II) dated 
29.12.2010. 
 
 M/s KPMG was appointed by the Company for an independent  assessment of NPC 
report so far manpower requirement is concerned.  The HR area of KPMG study 
broadly divided into five parts as mentioned below:  
1.52 1.19 
2.73 
3.63 
4.28 4.54 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Financial Year 
Amount (in Lacs) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 

21 
 
 
(i) Organisational Structure and Roles 
(ii) Manpower Plan and Projection  
(iii) Competency Mapping and Performance Management System 
(iv) Appropriate Cadre Structure  
(v) Alignment of Various HR Processes  
 
 Report of KPMG with specific reference to Manpower Planning and other HR related 
areas as mentioned above was presented to the Steering Committee of SPMCIL on 
30th March, 2012 and the same was duly signed off.  
 
 Thereafter, it was considered expedient to make a reference to the GMs of all the 
nine Units to exhaust the process of consultation with the recognized Unions for their 
consent so that Manpower Plan and Projections as  recommended by KPMG could 
be formalized by the Company.   
 
 This process of consultation was inevitable because as per clause No. 25 of MoS, 
the Company is under obligation to do so with the representatives of recognized 
Union because NPC report was not ac cepted and an independent study for 
revalidation was agreed.   
 
 There is a subtle resistance by the Unions but Units have been advised to complete 
the process of consultation so that Corporate Office is in a position to formally notify 
the standard manpower in respect of all the Units keeping the long term perspective 
of the Company in mind.   
 
 The fact remains that the Manpower in the Company has drastically reduced in 
comparison to the sanctioned strength as was notified during Govt. time for Mints, 
Presses and Paper Mill.   
 
5.2 Recruitment Policy and Service Rules  
 
 Prior to Corporatisation, the Units were functioning as independent establishment / 
department of Govt. and therefore each Unit had its own Recruitment Rules in 
respect of each category of post(s) in Mints / Presses and Paper Mill.  
 
 The erstwhile Recruitment Rules also included the option to have Officers and other 
category of employees on deputation basis which is not permissible in a Public 
Sector Undertaking without specific dispensation f rom the Department of Public 
Enterprises.  
 
 A comprehensive “SPMCIL Recruitment Policy -2012” has since been framed and 
was placed before the SPMCIL Board on regular intervals.  As advised by the Board, 

22 
 
legal opinion was obtained, Policy was also referred t o a Sub -Committee of the 
Board.   
 
 In the meantime the SPMCIL Recruitment Policy delinking from the Promotion Policy 
as was placed before the Board has become the basis of all recruitments from open 
market and also recruitment through internal process inviting applications from 
amongst pote ntial Company Employees by posting the job vacancy across nine 
Units and Corporate Office.   
 
 Likewise, SPMCIL Promotion Policy for Non -Executives has been framed and was 
made available to the Unions on 27th March, 2012 in the  4th Bipartite Forum Meeting 
for the purpose of consultation.  The Unions are yet to finally give their counter 
proposal and the “Promotion Policy of the Non -Executives” is being separately taken 
up with the Unions. 
 
 The  draft Promotion Policy for the SPMCIL Executives has since been made and 
informal consultation including the process of inviting suggestions is complete.  As a 
Govt. Department, the promotion was post based and vacancy bound and differing 
from Mints and Presses whereas proposed SPMCIL Promotion Policy for Executives 
shall be uniformly applicable. The draft promotion policy is being taken up to 
SPMCIL Board for its consideration.  
 
 In the meantime, the IDA pattern pay scales as applicable to PSU for Exe cutives 
and Non -Unionized Supervisors have been implemented across the Company 
effective from 27.6.2012 in line with the Order issued by the Administrative Ministry.   
 
5.3 Skill Development and Training  
 
 Training and Development of Employees in SPMCIL as  a Corporatised entity has 
emerged to play a pivotal role for Capacity Building and enhancing the Operational 
Efficiency.  The primary objective of SPMCIL Training and Retraining are 
predominantly Skill and Technology driven to cope with the machines and 
modernization plan.  The development of soft skill of Executives and Supervisors 
also constitute an integral part of Employees training.  
 
 A strategic beginning was made after Corporatisation by issuing comprehensive 
guidelines to the Units by the Corporate  Office highlighting on the basic parameters 
for identification of training needs and also the objective was to formalize Annual 
Training Plan commencing from 2008-09.   
 
 National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM) located at Faridabad was 
identified as the training -Hub for development of SPMCIL Executives.              97 
Executives were trained during the year 2010 -11, 84 Executives of Nine Units and 
Corporate Office were trained during the year 2011 -12 for a duration of six days in 
the premises of NIFM, Faridabad.  The objective of Executive Development 
Programme (EDP) was to expose the Executives to various functional areas which 

23 
 
includes Operation & Technical, Materials Management, Sales & Marketing, IT, 
Finance and Human Resource.  Their learning  in the class room was leveraged at 
the workplace to enhance the operational efficiency. 
 
 Besides, the Company has deputed its Executives to various professional and 
Management institutes of repute and they are, Indian Institutes of Management, 
National In stitute of Technical & Industrial Engineering, Institute of Public 
Enterprises, National Productivity Council, Indian Railways Institute of Logistic and 
Material Management, etc.  
 
 For the purpose of Training of the Supervisors from across the nine Units,  
Hyderabad Mint located at Cherapally has been identified as the Training -Hub for 
development of Supervisors of the Company in their domain area and also with the 
objective to equip them with Supervisory skill to interface with the Workers at the 
workplace.  
 
 The Units of SPMCIL identify the training needs and skill gap of the Industrial 
Workers working in the shop floor and plant level based on which Units decide the 
Plan and module for in -house training and also deputing the workers to the outside 
Organisations.   
 
 Summing up, SPMCIL has 284 Executives, 1101 Supervisors and 10,979 Workers 
on the roll as on 31.03.2012 which excludes 454 Govt. optees.  It was the 
commitment of the Company in MoU target to train 6% Executives, 4% Supervisors 
and 3% Workers an d the Company has overwhelmingly achieved the Excellent 
target by training to 16.10% and 16.47% Employees during the year 2010 -11 and 
2011-12 respectively.  This includes Executives, Supervisors and Workers of 
SPMCIL and their enhanced efficiency is apart from the Balance Sheet of the 
Company.   
 
 M/s KPMG evaluated the SPMCIL Training Programmes conducted during the year 
2011-12 and it is evident from the report of KPMG that Training and Development of 
the Employees in SPMCIL across Nine Units and Corporate Office has generated 
huge satisfaction amongst the Employees which is a motivating factor.  
 
              [ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
                                                    ( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 2 
 
Constitution of Joint Consultative Machinery   
 
The Committee appreciate that a provision in the tripartite agreement has since 
been incorporated for formation of a structure in SPMCIL on lines of joint Consultative 
Machinery. In order to meet the genuine aspirat ions of the employees working in 
different units, the Committee recommends that all the necessary steps should be taken 

24 
 
to expeditiously put in place an effective Industrial Relation Machinery (IRM) to take 
care of the teething problems which are generally  experienced on corporatization of 
Government industrial units. In this regard, the Committee desire that the workers and 
all the unions functioning in the units of SPMCIL should be taken into confidence and 
actively involved on modalities of constituting such Joint Consultative Machinery. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Company has notified the formation of a full-fledged joint consultative machinery 
on 16.03.2010 known as “SPMCIL Apex Bipartite Forum -2010”.  This Forum has 
representatives of Workers and Staff side elected/nominated in consultation with the 
recognized Unions by the concerned Units.   
 The objective of the Forum is to provide a common platform to the representatives of 
Workers, Staff Members and Union Office Bearers for interaction with Top 
Management of the Company.  The forum facilitates the discussions and 
deliberations on the employe e related issues of the Corporation having ramification 
over multiple-Units and Company as a whole.  The Unit-specific issues are left to the 
concerned Units to resolve.   
 Till date after Corporatisation four meetings of Apex Bipartite Forum have since 
been successfully conducted in line with the policy notified and the objective 
prescribed.  Slowly and steadily the Forum is emerging to play a pivotal role in 
carrying forward the Company to next higher level through the process of joint 
consultation.  
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 
 
Delay in Lifting NJSP 
 
The Committee have been informed that the directions by Government stipulate 
that six months stock of printed stamp paper has to be held for the requirement of State 
Governments and that supply of such papers cannot be stopped because it has the 
potential for introduction of false stamp papers as happened in Telgi case. The 
Committee's attention has however, b een drawn towards the delay in lifting the non -
judicial stamp papers by various State Government leading to piling up of huge stocks 
in the Corporation and consequential high working capital costs. The Committee is of 
firm view that sound business principl es should always be the guiding factors of any 
commercial entity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that appropriate measures 
should be taken by the Ministry of Finance to take up this issue with the State 
Governments concerned in the best financial interests of the Corporation. 
Reply of the Government   
 
Request have been made by SPMCIL for timely lifting of NJSP.  There has been 
significant improvement in lifting up NJSP by the State Governments due to consistent  

25 
 
follow up by SPMCIL and Ministry of Finance. The matter is now regularly raised 
in the meeting of State Secretaries and IG Registration & Stamps, wherein it has been 
given cognizance by State Governments and lifting has improved. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 12 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility  
 
The Committee feel that the corporatized industrial units must show their 
commitment to the cause of social responsibilities towards people around t he area of 
their operation. The Committee have been informed that SPMCIL has formulated its 
corporate social responsibility polity in tune with the philosophy of Central Public Sector 
Enterprise and earmarked an amount of Rs.2 crore for the purpose as per MoU signed 
with the administrative ministry for the year 2009 -2010. The Committee’s examination 
has however, revealed that the Corporation has incurred a meager expenditure of 
Rs.0.28 crore to provide assistance mainly for an ambulance and construction of school 
buildings at Nasik. During evidence, the CMD, SPMCIL admitted that the Corporation 
had not been proactively doing for adjoining communities and poor villages. The 
Committee feel that the public sector undertakings being the extension of the State 
have a moral responsibility to discharge their social obligations. The Committee, 
therefore, desire SPMCIL to do some introspection to take initiatives for welfare of the 
society at large. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action taken i n 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is a commitment of SPMCIL to carry forward the Corporate Social Responsibility 
initiatives in tune with the philosophy of the Public Enterprises business in India like 
many other PSUs. As the Department of Public  Enterprises (DPE) came up with 
guidelines on CSR vide OM dated 9.4.2010 which were approved by the Board of 
Directors in its 30th Board Meeting, the same became the basis for the CSR Policy in 
SPMCIL. SPMCIL has been signing MoU with the Ministry of Finan ce every year 
giving therein the specific parameters for expenditure to be incurred on various 
activities under CSR.  Major CSR initiatives of the Company are in the fields of (i) 
Education (ii) Health & Family Welfare (iii) Environment and Social Developm ent (iv) 
Public Awareness, and (v) Civic Amenities. 
 
 For the year 2010 -11, the Company had made a commitment of an expenditure of 
Rs. 3 crores on various CSR projects as per the MoU signed with Ministry of 
Finance.  The actual expenditure however crossed this target and an amount of Rs. 
383.94 lakhs was spent by the Company. It is pertinent to mention that in order to 
promote education in the backward areas, as part of its CSR initiatives, SPMCIL 
signed an MoU with Bharti Foundation on 19 th October, 2010.  As per this MoU, 

26 
 
school buildings and furniture as well as equipments would be provided by SPMCIL 
at a cost of about Rs. 4 crores.  Further, SPMCIL has provided another sum of Rs. 
15 lakhs during the year to “Palse Gram Vikas Mandal, Palse” for constructi on of a 
school building at village Palse, District Nashik, in addition to Rs. 10 lakhs already 
provided for this purpose during the year 2009-10. 
 
 For the year 2011 -12, an MoU was signed by SPMCIL with Ministry of Finance 
which inter -alia envisaged an expenditure of Rs.3.50 crores on CSR initiatives.  
Some of the projects undertaken by the Company include construction of schools at 
Murshidabad, expan sion and improvement of the road side amenities of road 
connecting from US Gymkhana, ISP to Nashik -Pune Highway and Jail Road Side, 
providing rainwater harvesting System and sanitation project at Panvel, Chinchvali 
and Govandi in Maharashtra through Indian  Red Cross Society, Mumbai, providing 
artificial limbs, calipers, crutches and hearing aids to the disabled persons through 
Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti and Providing Solar Lamps. The 
Company also trained 101 MSME personnel during the year 2011 -12 through ni -
MSME Hyderabad.  An amount of Rs. 4.36 crores was thus spent by the Company 
during the year 2011 -12 against the target amount of Rs.3.50 crores and thereby 
achieving excellent rating. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 13 
 
Erratic indents for Coins and Currency 
 
The Committee note that SPMCIL is primarily dependent upon RBI and various 
other departments of Central/State Governments for its operationa l performance. The 
Corporation is however, stated to be experiencing difficulties in optimizing its capacities 
particularly because of uneven demand projections for currency notes and coins by RBI. 
The Committee have been informed during their examination that RBI did not place any 
indents for coins during the years 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 and the same were suddenly 
increased to 3485 million pieces in 2007 -08 and to 5900 million pieces in 2008 -09. 
Substantial variations in projected annual requirements of curre ncy note has also been 
noted. Whatever may be reasons for uneven demand projections for currency and 
coins, the fact remains that such uncertainties in indents and lack of firm commitment 
for producing currency and coins put unwarranted pressure on the pro duction planning 
and deployment of resources committed for printing of currency notes and minting of 
coins. In the light of the candid admission by RBI that it is possible for them to project 
‘approximate’ demand for production of currency notes and coins in advance for the 
next five years, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Finance should 
clinch the issue with RBI by impressing upon them to project their indents for currency 
notes and coins five years in advance so that the capacity of e ach unit of SPMCIL is 
neither kept idle nor overburdened due to uneven annual demands nor difficulties 
experienced in meeting the increased demands as had happened in 1996 -98 when the 

27 
 
Government of India had to resort to outsourcing of printing of currency  notes to foreign 
agencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding perceived shortage of coins in the country, a high level committee, 
headed by Deputy Governor, RBI, was constituted by Government of India to address 
the issue and it was brought out by the co mmittee that the demand projections of RBI 
are not consistent and the shortages / surpluses of coins arise as a cyclic phenomena 
which can be minimized with good logistic / distribution related management.  Also, in 
the recent production planning, held on 05.10.2012.  RBI has been requested to 
strengthen their statistical department for better forecasting.    
 
Indent/ projections for Banknotes and coins for the period 2012 -13 to 2016 -17 
have been finalized in the Production Planning Meeting (PPM) held on Oc tober 05, 
2012. Based on the discussions in the PPM, the revised indent/projections for Rs. 10 
coins for the above period have been communicated to GoI by RBI on 16.10.2012.   
These projections have been arrived at by using time -series and econometric analy sis 
based on the available time -series data in the system under certain assumptions such 
as Real GDP growth prospects, WPI -inflation and the disposal rate of denomination -
wise soiled banknotes etc.  
 
It may be pertinent to mention in this context that the High Level Committee 
constituted to look into the demand for coins (Chairman: Dr. KC Chakrabarty), in its 
Report submitted to Government of India on August 14, 2012 has, inter alia, noted that 
such de mands are subject to diverse socio -economic, behavioural and often 
unpredictable factors, rendering the task of forecasting the demand not easy, especially 
in India.  
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 
 
Outsourcing of Printing of Currency Notes  
 
The Committee is aghast to note that the RBI had outsourced the printing of 
notes to three foreign countries in the year 1997 -98. The Committee was informed that 
2000 million pieces of 100 rupee denomination and 1600 million pieces of 500 Rupee 
denomination of notes were outsourced for printing at (i) American Banknote Company 
(USA) – 635 million pieces; (ii) Thomas De La Rue, UK – 1365 million pieces (100 
rupee denomina tion), and Giesecke & Devrient Consortium (Germany) – 1600 million 
pieces (500 rupee denomination), amounting to a sum of Rs. One lakh crores. On 
further inquiry the Committee was also given to understand that such outsourcing of the 
printing of notes was not done either prior to 1996 or after that. The reasons such as (a) 
the bad conditions of the notes and (b) the ‘soilage’ factor etc. mentioned by the 

28 
 
representatives of the RBI are far from convincing. The RBI system of a assessment 
with respect to the d emands of the bank notes in the country has been off the mark 
resulting in a gap between the demand and supply of bank notes, but this is a factor that 
was constant prior to and after 1996. The Committee rejects the reasons that have been 
forwarded for this extraordinary decision which is unprecedented. 
 
The Committee also find it pertinent to point out that during printing of currency 
notes worth 1 lakh crores in three different countries, there was always a grave risk of 
unauthorized printing of excess cu rrency notes, which would have been  unaccounted 
money. The Committee simply wonder how come a decision was taken to have the 
currency notes printed by above mentioned companies in three different countries. 
Logically speaking since all the said three coun tries are well developed, each country 
certainly had the capability of undertaking the entire printing assignment. In any case 
the very thought of India’s currency being printed in three different countries is alarming 
to say the least. During that particu lar fateful period our entire economic sovereignty 
was at stake. 
 
The Committee is concerned of the grave implications of such a move as it has 
wider ramifications in a multi faceted angle. The danger of destabilizing the economy by 
the agencies of authori ties who could have misused our security parameters vis -à-vis 
printing of currency notes, the use of such notes which could have been printed in 
excess could easily have fallen in the hands of unscrupulous elements such as 
terrorists, extremists and other economic offenders, looms large in our minds.   The 
Committee expresses its strong resentment over such an unprecedented, 
unconventional and uncalled for measure. The Committee while recommending that 
SPMCIL be strengthened to undertake the printing and min ting of the required currency 
notes/coins fervently emphasise that outsourcing of printing of currency notes/minting 
coins should never be resorted to in the future.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Since corporatisation, SPMCIL and BRBNMPL have been meeting th e 
requirement of coins and currency and no import has been resorted to.  The concerns 
and recommendations of the Committee have been carefully noted for future guidance. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 16 
 
Role of SPMCIL  
 
In the context of the operational role of SPMCIL in checking counterfeit currency, 
the CMD, SPMCIL washed off his hands during evidence stating “……counterfeit matter 
remains with the Government. I am basically their vendor”. The Committee is surprised 
at t his explanation coming from the Chief Executive of a responsible corporate 

29 
 
organization entrusted, inter alia, with the responsibility of providing design part of 
currency notes to the Government. In the opinion of the Committee, SPMCIL is not just 
a vendo r but a Government agent equally accountable for production of an ideal 
currency which cannot be easily counterfeited.  In fact, delay in responding 
technologically to the challenges of counterfeit was one of the main constraints 
experienced in the system of keeping the departmental units engaged in production of 
currency and coins as Government entities and it was with this purpose that the nine 
departmental units were corporatized and placed under SPMCIL.  Although SPMCIL is 
stated to have taken certain i nitiatives to keep pace with advancement of technology, 
the Corporation as bank note designer and printer of currency notes does not appear to 
have taken requisite technological initiatives to deter counterfeiting.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that SPMCIL should direct its efforts towards continuous 
design innovations conforming to international standards so as to meet the challenges 
of counterfeiting effectively. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
SPMCIL had planned for an investment of about Rs. 2500 crore to be spent  from 
2009-10 onwards on modernization, indigenization and upgradation of its machinery 
and setting up of 2 nd tier R&D set -up, so as to be able to manufacture state of the art 
coins, currency and other security products.  A joint vent ure company, called “Bank 
Note Paper Mill India Private Ltd”, has been established for setting up two lines of 
12000 MT capacity bank note in Mysore.  One line of bank note paper mill is being set 
up in Hoshangabad in addition to modernization of existing two lines.  Modernization of 
ink factory at Dewas has been taken up to increase the production of intaglio ink 
indigenously, steps have been taken up to establish R&D set up in designing, printing, 
ink, paper and coinage material.  Similarly, steps are bei ng taken to increase and 
modernize capacity in designing of state of art Indian Bank Notes.  
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 18 
 
Mini Ratna Status 
 
Incidentally, in terms of the tripartite settlement, the Government stands 
committed to provide support to the corporation to the tune of Rs. 1200 -1500 core for 
modernization. It has, however, been brought to the notice of the Committee that a letter 
has recently be en received by SPMCIL from DPE stating that the Mini Ratna status of 
the Corporation would be withdrawn unless the Government support is in national 
interest. Considering the fact that the financial support proposed to be given by the 
Ministry is a part of  its commitment to the Unions and is in no manner proposed to 
bridge the losses of the Corporation, the Committee are of firm view that it would not be 
appropriate to link the issue of Mini Ratna status with the financial support proposed to 

30 
 
be given for m odernization to a Corporation required to meet the challenges of 
upgrading the technology in the area of printing of security products and counterfeiting 
of currency notes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance 
should resolve thi s issue with DPE to ensure that the Mini Ratna status of SPMCIL is 
not affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance has vide O.M. No. 
4/2/2008-Cy.I dated 10.05.2010 asked the Department of Public Enterprises to 
examine whether the financial support to SPMCIL to the tune of Rs. 1200-1500 
crores for modernization and capacity up -gradation of the existing plant and 
machinery, for making units of SPMCIL competitive, would affect SPMCIL’s Mini 
Ratna status. 
  
 The Department of Public Enterprises has vide O.M. No. 26(2)/2005 -GM (Part ) 
dated 21.05.2010 informed that in terms of DPE OM No. 18(16)/2005 -GM-GL-84 
dated 28.05.2007, the budgetary support to implement Government sponsored 
projects of national interest and Government sponsored R&D projects will not 
disqualify CPSEs from retain ing their Mini Ratna status, provided investment 
decision for such projects are taken by the Government and not by the CPSEs 
concerned. 
 
 The Department of Public Enterprises has further clarified that the provision for 
financial assistance to Security Prin ting & Minting Corporation of India Limited 
(SPMCIL) was incorporated in the Memorandum of Settlement signed with the 
employees at the time of formation of SPMCIL and the projects proposed to be 
financed by the Government are being taken up as per the dire ctions of Core 
Group on Security and Committee of Secretaries. As the proposed projects are 
aimed at complete indigenization of currency inputs, namely, paper and ink, they 
can be considered as falling under the category of vital national interest as 
intimated by DEA and the investment decisions for these projects have also being 
taken by the Government. Therefore, it appears that the proposed financial support 
to SPMCIL falls within the ambit of provisions contained in DPE OM dated 
28.05.2007 and, therefore, would not affect the Mini Ratna Status of SPMCIL. 
   
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 

31 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 4 
 
Capital Structure 
 
Outdated financial systems were one of the important factors for corporatization 
of the departmental units. The Committee however, note that the capital structure of 
SPMCIL does not reflect the true picture of its asset base as the value and nature of 
assets transferred to the Corporation has not yet been finalized. Thi s delay has been 
attributed primarily to the reasons that transfer of assets from the departmental units at 
the time of corporatization was made on book value without any detailed verification of 
assets and stock. Although the Ministry of Finance is report ed to be processing the 
proposal to finalize the capital structure on the basis of a detailed exercise undertaken 
by SPMCIL to record the correct value of assets in each unit, the fact remains that 
unduly linger time has been taken to settle such an import ant issue having direct 
bearing on capital base of the Corporation. The Committee, therefore, desire that an 
early decision on the correct valuation of assets transferred to the Corporation should 
be taken so as to present the financial status of the Corporation in right perspective. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal for restructuring of capital of Security Printing Minting Corporation of 
India Limited (SPMCIL) as on 10/02/2006 has been received from the SPMCIL.  The 
book value of the net assets as on 10/02/2006 was Rs.2826.81 crore. After adjusting for 
assets amounting to Rs.228.33 crore which was equity capital/  loan   from GOI to 
SPMCIL. However an amount of Rs 600 crores payable towards found as unserviceable 
and unproductive and an amount of Rs.60 .78 crore as a liability consequent upon 
implementation of a Court Judgment, a net amount of Rs.2537.70 crore is proposed to 
be treated as stamp duty  by Corporation on transfer of title of land & buildings at 
different locations  from GOI to Corporation a nd an amount of Rs 695 crores appearing 
as contingent liabilities in the books of accounts of the Corporation in various cases 
pending in courts/Tribunals  are requested by SPMCIL to be  considered  by GOI while 
arriving at the final amount. The proposal r eceived from SPMCIL is under consideration 
of the Government. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 11 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
 

33 
 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 5 
 
Sundry Debtors 
 
The Committee is concerned to note that SPMCIL is encountering various 
problems in realizing its outstanding dues which are stated to be increasing year after 
year. Such dues stood at Rs.836.31 crore as on 31 March, 200 9. The information 
furnished in this regard reveals that the entire dues pertain to Central/State Government 
and RBI and majority of these outstanding are to realizes from various State 
Governments (Rs. 230.64 crore), Ministry of External Affairs (Rs. 196. 86 crore) and 
Department of Posts (Rs. 156.86 crore). The Committee's examination has brought out 
that while the matter of realization of outstanding dues from various State Governments 
has been taken up in the meeting of State Secretaries and the same is being followed 
up the Ministry of External Affairs is inexplicably not able to clear its outstanding dues 
because of inadequate provision in its budget.  What is more surprising is the fact that a 
Committee is reported to have been constituted to finalize the cost of products 
manufactured by SPMCIL for the purpose of settlement of old dues pertaining to 
Department of Post. The Committee wishes to emphasize that the burden of growing 
sundry debtors has an adverse bearing on working capital costs of SPMCIL. T he 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Finance should intervene in the 
matter to help SPMCIL in realization of its outstanding dues by exerting influence on the 
defaulting departments of the Central and State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sundry Debtors outstanding as on 31 st March, 2011 were amounting to 
Rs.961.15 crores which has increased to Rs.1266.01 crores as on 31 st March, 2012. 
There is increase in Sundry Debtors primarily due to increase in the  volume of turnover 
of the company & provisional release of payment of coins. The turnover increased from 
Rs.3164 crores in the year 2010 -11 to Rs.3418 crores in the year 20 11-12. Old debtors 
are reducing due to concerted efforts of SPMCIL supported by follow -up by the Ministry. 
The Ministry of Finance is regularly reviewing the status of sundry debtors and is 
continuously intervening in the matter to bring down the same.  Mi nistry of external 
affairs has been requested to clear their outstanding of last three years early. Ministry of 
finance budget division is also helping in realizing this outstanding amount from MEA.  
 
RBI’s reply : 
The bills raised by Presses in the first half of a month i.e between 1 st to 15th, of a 
month, for supply of notes are now paid by RBI on or before 25 th of that month and bills 
raised between 16 th & 30 th of a month on or before 10 th of the succeeding month. As 
such all bills are settled promptly. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013  
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 13 of Chapter I of the Report 

34 
 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
 
Payment for Postal Stationery  
 
Yet another area which has engaged the attention of the Committee relates to 
incurrence of losses by SPMCIL on account of non-payment of actual cost of production 
of postal stationery. The Committee has been informed that the production cost of 
certain items of postal  stationery is high and the payments for manufacturing such 
stationery are restricted to cap prices due to Government policy to restrict the price of 
these products in public interest. While giving due credence to Government policy in 
matter, the Committee  recommend that ways and means should be evolved to ensure 
payment of at least actual cost of production of such items so that the commercial 
interests of the Corporation are not compromised. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
A Committee was constituted in July,2009 under the Chairmanship of the JS&FA, 
MOF to fix pricing norms for various products supplied by units of SPMCIL to the 
Department of Posts.  The report of the said Committee was circulated vide letter dated 
03.06.2011 of MOF. After having the various meetings it was recommended that: 
 
 All pending claims for pre - corporatization period would be cleared by DOP. 
Pending claims relating to the post corporatization period would be provisionally 
settled on the basis of CAB rates for 2005-06. 
 
 DOP would make advance payment of 40% of the value of indents being placed on 
SPMCIL in future. 
 
 SPMCIL and DOP would mutually work out a more efficient and centralized billing/ 
payment system so as to facilitate prompt settlement of dues. 
 
 CAB would undertake a stud y to establish the base price for 2006 -07 and suggest 
an indexation formula which would be applicable for the next three years. i.e. 2007-
08,2008-09 and 2009-10. 
 
However DOP has not acted as per the directives of the Committee and both old 
outstanding pay ment before corporatization and 40% advance payment issues are 
pending for implementation at their end. 
 
Similarly CAB has also not suggested indexation formula for price determination 
for the year 2007-08,2008-09 and 2009-10. 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 16 of Chapter I of the Report 

35 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 
 
Capacity Utilization  
 
Interestingly, tall claims have been made by SPMCIL  that its capacity utilization 
as against the installed capacity for major products including currency notes and coins 
ranged from 149 per cent to 174 per cent during 2008 -09. The Committee do not find 
any merit in the assertions made by the Corporation th at more utilization capacity had 
been achieved by means of deployment of manpower on overtime basis and through 
payment of productivity linked incentive besides reducing the rejection percentage, 
machine down time and better control after corporatization. On the other hand, the 
installed capacity in various units does not seem to have been calculated on a scientific 
basis giving due consideration to operating machine speed and actual utilization of man 
hour. The Committee, therefore, recommend that SPMCIL s hould undertake a thorough 
review for rationality assessing its installed capacity in each unit and take effective steps 
to ensure optimum utilization of capacity so assessed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
M/s. Institute of Industrial Engineering (IIIE) had been engaged as a consultant to 
conduct capacity assessment study of all SPMCIL units. IIIE has concluded its 
assessment & submitted its report on 29th June, 2011 for all the nine units.  
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 22 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 
 
Security Expenses 
 
A Suggestion has been received by the Committee from the CMD, SPMCIL that 
the Ministry of Finance may reimburse the huge security expenses being incurred by 
the production units of the Corporation which is engaged in production of currency and 
coins which is a sovereign function. The Committee are in agreement with the plea 
made by SPMCIL that it does not have any independent say in the matters of 
deployment of security in its units and has to be guided by the directions of the 
intelligence agencies and the State Governments due to probable threat perception as 
potential targets by anti -national elements. In the opinion of the Committee, 
reimbursement for security deployment in the various units of SPMCIL is largely in the 
hands of the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance should favorably consider reimburse ment of security expenditure incurred by 
the units of SPMCIL so as to facilitate functioning of these strategic business units.” 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Request of SPMCIL for reimbursement of security expenditure incurred by the 
units has not been ac cepted by the Ministry vide their letter No.3/8/2009 -SPMC/484 dt. 
01.06.2011 on the logic that there is no precedent for the same in any PSU under any 
Government Department. 
 
                          [ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
                                 ( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 28 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 17 
 
Indigenization of Security Sensitive Items  
 
The Committee note that the SPMCIL presently depends on foreign suppliers for 
raw material like paper and ink to the extent of around 80 -85 per cent. The Committee 
has been informed by Finance Secretary during his deposition that SPMCIL “has started 
activities in the crucial area of research and development with the overall objective of 
indigenizing major security products within a medium time -frame.” The information 
furnished to the Committee however, reveals that only Rs.2.5 crore are expected to be 
incurred during 2009 -10 on R&D for which no dedicated set up exists in SPMCIL.  At 
the same time, a joint venture company of SPMCIL and BRBNMPL for production of 
currency paper is yet to be constituted and the process for replacement and installation 
of security paper manufacturin g machines at SPM Hosnangabad is still underway.  As 
regards the indigenization of production of ink, it has been stated that the ink factory at 
Dewas has developed intaglio ink for printing of bank notes and is trying to develop 
indigenous varnish for var nishing of Rs. five and ten notes.  Although two different 
committees have been constituted in the past by the Government to steer R&D efforts 
and to review the procedures for procurement of security sensitive items, their reports 
are also yet to reach log ical ends.  From these facts, the Committee gather a strong 
impression that the issues of R&D and indigenization are not being given due attention 
thus making the country vulnerable to counterfeiting due to excessive dependence on 
imported currency paper and ink for printing of bank notes.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts at indigenization brooks no 
delay whatsoever and need be taken up with utmost priority and expeditiously.  The 
Committee while further noting that some quantity of paper and security ink are being 
indigenously produced, feel that if we have the capability to indigenously produce a part 
of our requirement, there is no reason why we can’t meet our entire needs indigenously. 
 
Indigenization of core raw material such as paper and ink for printing currency 
notes are very critical from the security point of view.  Once we are self reliant in respect 

37 
 
of producing these core raw materials, we could to a great measure ward off 
counterfeiting and other pilferage with our valued currency. 
 
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Finance and SPMCIL 
should expeditiously formulate a concrete plan for dedicated R&D set -up with enhanced 
financial allocation and draw a roadmap wi th a clear time -frame for achieving 
indigenization in security sensitive items. 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present majority of the Bank Note Paper is imported.  The present currency 
paper manufacturing project plans include Banknote Paper Mill India, Mysore (BNPM) 
as 50:50 JV between Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India (SPMCIL) and 
Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL) which shall have two 
Cylinder Mould Vat Made Watermarked Banknote (CWBN) paper lines with a total 
capacity of around 12000MT/per annum.  A New CWBN paper line is also coming up at 
Security Paper Mill (SPM), Hoshangabad of 6000 MT capacity.  The present capacity of 
SPM, Hoshangabad for manufacture of CWBN & security paper is about 3000 MT per 
annum.  Therefore, once the new projects are commissioned, there will be a additional 
capacity of 18000 MT of CWBN paper.  
 
The offset and numbering inks are produced locally by BNP, Dewas for meeting 
SPMCIL requirements but are procured by BRBNMPL for their own requirement.  Part 
of Quick Set Intaglio Ink (QSI), requirement is met through captive production at Bank 
Note Press, Dewas (A unit of SPMCIL) & BRBNMPL is meeting its requirement through 
outsourcing.  Modernisation of Ink factory is being done progressively & it is expected 
that the currency printing presses would become self reliant for QSI in the years to 
come.  
  
Further, SPMCIL presses, namely CNP, Nasik & BNP, Dewas, are the nodal 
units for FICN testing along with two other presses of BRBNMPL at Salboni & Mysore. 
Moreover, consequent to formation of a co -ordination mechanism in Ministry of Home 
Affairs called FCORD, the subject is under discussion between various stake holders.  
 
It is apprised that for applied R&D, SPMCIL Board has accorded approval for 
setting up of corporate R&D Centre at BNP, Dewas, Security Paper R&D Center at 
SPM, Hoshangabad & Mint R&D Cen ter at IGM, Hyderabad in phase -I.  For 
coordinating activities, R&D manpower consisting of 5 Officers & 8 Supervisors posts 
have been sanctioned recently. The recruitment action is being processed by SPMCIL.  
The application oriented R&D proposed to be done by SPMCIL shall pick up speed only 
after the manpower and infrastructure is available.  In the interim phase, a modest R&D 
policy and action plan have been made by SPMCIL which have been approved by 
SPMCIL Board and the same is being pursued. 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 39 of Chapter I of the Report 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 3 
 
Organizational Set Up 
 
The Committee note that except functioning under the control and directions of 
corporate office, the present organizational setup in all the nine production units of 
SPMCIL continues to be same as was in place when these units were functioning as 
departmental organizations under the direct control of Department of Economic Affairs 
(DEA) in the Ministry of Finance.  Although SPMCIL is reported to be still working out a 
proposal on study on th e organizational set up and the vision and the mission for the 
Corporation for the next ten years by inputs from the professional consultants, the 
Committee are in no doubt that this issue requires priority attention on the part of the 
management for putti ng in place the requisite corporate structure in the production 
units. The Committee, therefore, desire that the proposed studies on the organizational 
set up in SPMCIL should be undertaken and completed at the earliest with a view to 
achieving the envisag ed objectives of operational flexibility, fostering efficiency and 
higher productivity in the production units.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As already reported by the Administrative Ministry vide OM No. 3/8/09 -SPMC 
(Vol.II) dated 29.12.2010 in response to the recommendations of the Committee on 
this particular issue, it is pertinent to update that the capacity assessment and 
product-wise capacity of the Units for which a consultant was appointed has already 
submitted the report and the installed capacity of Nine Units of SPMCIL are yet to be 
formally notified by the Company.  But, the constantly increasing indent for SPMCIL 
as decided by the Govt. and the RBI have been addressed irrespective of the 
installed capacity of the machine because Company is at the threshold of Capacity 
building through replacement and modernization of machines.  
 
 The Performance Management System has since been implemented commencing 
from the year 2011 -12 vide Corporate Office Order dated 12.01.2012 in respect of 
Executives from E -1 level to E -6 level and the Supervisors in S -1 and S -2 level 
working in all the Nine Units and the Corporate Office.   
 
 The focus of the Performance Management System in SPMCIL is broadly divided 
into (i) Key Performance Area for which maximum score of 70 per cent has been 
prescribed for achievement of individual target during the year of assessment, (ii) 
Competency framework has been evolved, (iii) Values of individuals assessed, (iv) 

39 
 
Potential Appraisal in a standard format is likely to make the system transparent and 
robust during the years to come.  
 
 A formal notification on 27.06.2012 has been issued by Department of Ec onomic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance conveying the sanction of Competent Authority for 
changeover to IDA pattern of pay scale as prevalent in the Public Sector Enterprises 
and the benefits of Perquisites extended and Performance Related Pay as per the 
DPE n orms to the Executives and non -Unionised Supervisors in SPMCIL shall be 
payable from 2012 -13 onwards depending on the MoU target achieved and 
incremental profit earned.  
 
 M/s KPMG was appointed to study the Organisational set up and the Vision and 
Mission for the Corporation for the next 10 years.  The scope and coverage of the 
study in all the related areas of operation and business are broadly divided into the 
following categories :  
 
(d) Corporate Business Plan 
(e) Human Resource Management 
(f) Technical Operation  
 
 The part A of the KPMG report which exclusively deals with the Corporate Business 
Plan based on the working of the verticals and the and Vision and Mission of the 
Company thereof is yet to be formally approved by the Company.  Presently the 
focus is more on the capacity building of Plant and Machinery and Rationalization of 
Manpower so that a befitting Organisational structure and set up could be evolved to 
match with the global standard as per Organisational Mission and Vision spelled out 
by M/s KPMG in their report.  
 
 
 [ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 8 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 7 
 
Taxation Matters  
 
SPMCIL has informed the Committee that its production units were earlier 
exempted from payment of excise and custom duties as local taxes on various items, 
when these were functioning as departmental organizations. However, the same units 
are now being asked to p ay various taxes by the authorities who are issuing demand 
notices after corporatization of these units. Ac cording to SPMCIL, Government are  the 
ultimate consignee for most of its products and it has been agreed to in a meeting at the 
level of Finance Secr etary and Revenue Secretary to exempt taxes on products 

40 
 
wherever Government Departments are the consignees. It is also noticed from 
Memorandum of Understanding (2008 -09) between SPMCIL and Ministry of Finance 
that the Government also stand committed to pro vide assistance in persuading State 
Governments for exemption payment of VAT, entry tax etc., available to production 
units prior to its corporatization. While appreciating the positive view taken in this 
matter, the Committee desire the Ministry of Financ e to take requisite steps with due 
promptitude keeping in view the specific role assigned to SPMCIL in producing security 
products for public use. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Anomalies in taxation on some products manufactured by SPMCIL and raw -
material/machines imported by SPMCIL were noticed and the same have been  partly 
removed by notification issued by Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.   
  
A comprehensive proposal for grant of exemption of excise duty, custom duty, 
service tax , VAT, Octroi , e ntry tax & cess duty to units of SPMCIL, BRBNMPL  and 
BNPMIPL has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance and is under examination. 
 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 19 of Chapter I of the Report 
 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 10 
 
Disposal of Impaired Machinery  
 
The Committee note that the procedure order stipulates that the parts of the 
impaired machinery should be auctioned only after the  machine parts are destroyed by 
pressing or by gas -cutting and the dies etc. are defaced. However, the process is 
reported to have been frozen and no dysfunctional machinery is presently being 
discarded or dismantled in pursuance of a decision taken after the Telgi scam. The 
Committee feel that the present policy of preserving the impaired machinery in the 
premises is not only fraught with danger of theft but may also lead to over accumulation 
besides huge expenses on its security. The committee are of the firm opinion that 
SPMCIL should immediately undertake the safe and irreversible disposal of impaired 
machineries lying with the Corporation. This is a matter which cannot be procrastinated 
due to the hazards that have been mentioned. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The detailed procedures for disposal of impaired machinery has been prepared & 
included in the new Procurement Manual at Chapter 14 titled Disposal. The 
Procurement Manual was  approved by SPMCIL Board and examined by central 

41 
 
vigilance Commission.  Thi s was released by the then Finance Minister on 23 rd May, 
2011 and has been made effective w.e.f. 01.06.2011. 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 ) 
 
Please also see comments of the Committee at para 25 of Chapter I of the Repor 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 15 
 
Counterfeit Currency 
 
The menace of circulation of counterfeit currency in the country has been 
assuming alarming proportion in the recent years. While no assessment of counterfeit 
currency presently in circulation in the county has been made by Reserve Bank of India, 
the guesstimate reported in media put such currency at an astronomical figure of Rs. 
169,000 crore floating in Indian financial system including official banking channels. The 
Committee have also been informed by Secretary, Ministry of Finance that the value of 
fake currency seized and recovered has increased from Rs. 8.39 Crore in 2006 to Rs. 
25.79 crore in 2008 and an estimate by CMD, SPMCIL put the figure of counterfeit 
notes at 8 pieces per million after the incident of detection of counterfeit bank notes in 
the branch of bank at Dumariagunj, U.P. It has been averred before the Committee that 
counterfeiting is a law and order issue and the RBI’s role in addressing the problem of 
counterfeiting lies in improving the security features of the currency notes, putting in 
place a system where all such notes making entry into banking channels are promptly 
detected and raising the awareness level of all users particularly, members of p ublic. 
Although RBI is stated to have initiated a number of steps to cope up with the 
challenges of counterfeit currency including those taken to educate the people, the 
Committee feel that the awareness campaigns launched by RBI are yet to reach the 
common masses particularly in the rural areas where poor and innocent people more 
vulnerable to counterfeit currency continues to be the victims of this problem and are 
easily targeted by the anti-national elements. While impressing upon the Government to 
take appropriate steps to amend the penal provisions for providing protection to such 
hapless victims, the Committee would like to emphasise that RBI should introduce 
easily recognizable and yet scoring high on anti -counterfeiting security features in the 
design of the currency notes on the lines of advanced international practices. Needless 
to say that inclusion of such security features will go a long way in mitigating the 
hardships being faced by the common man.” 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 An awareness campaign was launched  through Doordarshan on August 15, 
2010.  This campaign, with an ad film titled “Paisa Bolta Hai”, in Hindi and 11 other 
regional languages, was shown on the National and Regional Channels of Doordarshan 
for a year.  A dedicated microsite www.paisaboltahai.rbi.org.in with easy to understand 
information on genuine Indian banknotes has been hosted in the official site of RBI. The 

42 
 
objective of the campaign is to make the common people (Aam Admi) aware of the 
features of genuine Indian banknotes.  
 
 To address the multi-dimensional aspects of the FICN menace, several agencies 
such as the RBI, Ministry of Finance,  Ministry of Home Affairs, Security and Intelligence 
Agencies of the Centre and States, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) etc.,  are 
working in tandem, to thwart the illegal activities related to FICNs.   The work of these 
agencies is periodically reviewed by a nodal group (FCORD) set up for this purpose.  
FCORD (FICN Coordination Cell) coordinates/share all available 
information/intelligence and analysis on circulation/smuggling of FICN in the world.  At 
the functional level, the CBI has been declared as the nodal agency for coordination 
with the States and the Directorate General of Revenue Intelligence has been 
nominated as the L ead Intelligence Agency for the purpose.  National Investigation 
Agency has been empowered by National Investigation Agency Act to investigate and 
prosecute such offences to deal with t his menace.   The Government have  also 
constituted a Terror Funding and Fake Currency Cell (TFFC) in NIA in 2010 to focus on 
investigation of Terror Funding and Fake Currency Cases. 
[ Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs ] 
( O.M. No.3/8/09-SPMC dated 3rd January, 2013 
Please also see comments  of the Committee at para Nos 34,35 and 36 of Chapter 
I of the Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 1 9 March, 2013 from 1 500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘ E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
6.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
8.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
   
 
 
…2p.. 
 

44 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memoranda Nos. 3 to 7 containing following 
draft Reports: 
 
(i). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(ii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iii). Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report on Security Printing and Minting Corporation of 
India Limited. 
 
(iv). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(v). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
 
3. The Committee approved the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without 
any modification and authorized the Chairman to present the se Reports after getting 
them factually verified from the concerned Ministries / Departments. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF COPU ON 
“SECURITY PRINTING AN OBSERVATIONSD MINTING CORPORATION OF INDIA 
LIMITED.” 
 
 
I. 
 
Total number of recommendations 18 
II. Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,8,12,13,14,16 & 18) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
 08 
 
 
 
44.4 
III. Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
 
NIL 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4,5,6,9,11 & 17) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
06 
 
 
 
 
33.3 
 
V. Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3,7,10 & 15) 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
04 
 
 
 
22.3 
 