 
1 
C.P.U. No. 936 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2009 - 2010) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
(Department of Defence Production) 
 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contai ned in 
the Twenty -Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Performance of Engine 
Division of Bharat Earth Movers Limited based on C&AG Report No. 9 
(Commercial) of 2007). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.3.2010 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.3.2010 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
2010 / Phalguna 1930(S) 
3 

 
2 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (v) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  
 
5 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
 
18 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s 
replies.  
 
28 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
 
37 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
38 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings 
  
39 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations/ observations contained in 
the Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2009-2010) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri L. Rajagopal 
10 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12 Shri Ganesh Singh 
13 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
17 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
18 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani  
21 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
22 Shri Amar Singh  
 
Secretariat  
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
3 Smt. K. Rangamani Narasimhan Executive Officer 
 
 
 

 
4 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Commi ttee on Public Undertakings having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Third Action Taken Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Performance of Engine Division 
of Bharat Earth Movers Limited based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 
2007. 
 
2. The Twenty-Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2007 -
2008) was presented to Lok Sabha on 5 th March, 2008.  Action Taken Replies of 
the Government to the recommendations contained in the Report were received 
on 16th February, 2009.  The Committee on Public Undertakings considered and 
adopted this Report at their sittings held on 12.02.2010.  The Minutes of the 
sitting are given in Appendix – I.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 25th Report (2008 -09) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix – II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:     V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO   
12 February, 2010        Chairman, 
Phalguna, 1931(S)         Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
5 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations containe d in the Twenty Fifth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2007 -08) on 
“Performance of Engine Division of Bharat Earth Movers Limited based on C&AG 
Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2007 which was presented to Lok Sabha on 5 th 
March, 2008. 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from Government in respect of all 
the recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos.2,3 & 5       (Total 3 )  
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies (Chapter III) 
Sl. Nos.1 & 4        (Total 2) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect  of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
          Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations to which the Government have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V)      Nil 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
“Non-achievement of objectives  
 
The Committee note that the BEML set up its own Engine Division in 1991 
in order to meet the requirement of En gines for captive consumption for its Earth 
moving equipment. The said objective included manufacturing of engine suitable 
for mining and construction equipment, achievement of higher technological 
base besides avoiding use of the engines of the other make  which were having 
problems like poor quality, poor performance, non -reliability, high -down time, 
non-availability of spares and poor after sales services etc.  The other factors like 
vertical integration for maintaining the overall quality of the equipmen t, control 
from the Company side over the supplies of spares / engines and having a better 
after-sales service were also considered by the Company for establishment of its 
own Engine Division.  
 
In the above context, the Committee note with concern that ev en after 
sixteen years of establishment of its own Engine Division, the Company has 

 
6 
failed to fully achieve the objectives mentioned above. The Company has 
continued to offer the equipment manufactured by them fitted with the engines of 
other make even dur ing the period up to 2006 -07 as pointed out by the audit in 
their latest findings.  The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
advanced by the Company that business -wise it was not viable to manufacture 
the entire range of engines and secondly the customers of BEML equipment 
have preference for the engines of other make.  
 
The Committee find the above stand taken by the Company contrary to 
the basic objectives which inspired it to establish its own Engine Division. The 
Committee fail to understand that even after lapse of 16 years the Company has 
not been able to produce, if not the entire range of engines at least the major 
varieties required for its own earth moving equipment. In the opinion of the 
Committee the very purpose for which the Compa ny started its own Engine 
Division has been defeated to a great extent.  
 
After going through the explanation / arguments given by the Company, 
the Committee find that it is a glaring example of lack of vision, poor planning and 
improper execution of their  policy of establishment of its own Engine Division. 
While deprecating the failure on the part of the Engine Division in meeting its 
objectives, the Committee recommend that the Company must undertake a 
thorough examination about the lapses in the matter a nd come out with a proper 
review of the causes of failure to achieve the objectives and accordingly take 
corrective steps. The Committee further recommend that the persons responsible 
for such serious lapses be identified and accountability be fixed and th e action 
taken thereon may be communicated to the committee.”  
 
 The Ministry in their action taken reply has submitted as under:- 
 
“Though the very objective of establishment of Engine Division in BEML 
as a production center for captive consumption has be en achieved, 
however, on account of the following facts, the full complement of the 
installed capacity which is estimated at 1500 Engines per annum 
(although the cylinder block machine capacity is restricted to 1100 per 
annum)  could not be achieved: 
 
(a) The entire Infrastructure to be created for producing 2400 Engines 
per annum as projected in the Project Report, could not be installed for 
want of Capital Investment, on account of foreign exchange restrictions 
imposed by Government of India. 
 
(b) The capacity of  Single FMS Machine used for producing Cylinder 
Blocks for all the 4 -Series of Engines is restricted to 1100 Nos. and only 
with outsourcing of Engine block machining 1500 nos. can be achieved.    
 
(c) The Manpower of 288 is quite inadequate and the Assembly wa s 
running only in Single Shift. 
 
(d) The constraint of diversification of the Engine range beyond the  
4-series Engine and restricted manufacture of Spares and Recon Engines. 
  

 
7 
2. Notwithstanding the above, BEML has taken the following initiatives in the 
last 5 years to improve the Engine Division performance:  
 
(a) Increased the no. of Engines from 215 in 2000 -01 to 1040 with 
483% increase over last seven years. 
 
(b) Increased the Manpower from 288 in 2001 -02 to 338 in 2007 -08 
and started Engine Assembly production in  2 Shifts, using two bays out of 
the three Assembly bays established originally. 
 
(c) Changed the age old practice of treating all workmen as Indirect 
and made all direct workmen as directly responsible for the required level 
of Production / Standard Man Hours  (SMH) and also introduced Direct 
incentive scheme during 2007 -08 and thus the SMH has been increased 
to 199 SMH per workmen per month in 2007 -08 as compared to 101 SMH 
in the past (2004-05). 
 
(d) Initiated Engine Diversification and fuel efficient  
4-Cylinder Engine applicable to two Equipments (BE71 and BL9H) with 
potentially large quantity has been developed through in -house R&D.  The 
same has already been produced and introduced. 
 
(e) Outsourced the Design & Development of High Power Density 
Diesel Engine (Gas convertible Engine) to ARAI, Pune and the same is 
under development and expected to be rolled out in November 2008.  
BEML has  paid an amount of Rs. 60 Lakhs  as Technical fees to ARAI, 
Pune. 
  
(f) In an effort to make the BEML Engine go Electronic and to conv ert 
BEML Engine to Electronic Engines, BEML has  already engaged a Global 
Consulting firm M/s. Heinzman, Germany to develop Electronic FIP (Fuel 
Injection Pump) for 140 Series Engines  at a cost of Rs. 1.4 Crores 
investment, to achieve Fuel Efficiency and to increase the Engine 
Demand.  The Project is likely to be commissioned in the month of  March, 
2009 and later proposed to be extended to other series.  
 
(g) The original 4 -Series Engines have been extended from 7 Models 
numbering 270 in 2001-02 to 25 Models numbering 922 in 2007-08. 
 
(h)  BEML has signed an MoU for ToT with Licence Fee and Royalty 
for Tatra Engine with Euro -II and Euro -III compliance and already a 
Project Manager has been nominated to set -up the facility. The Engine is 
expected to be produced dur ing 2008-09 for Indian market and probably 
exported later to parent company, as global outsource. 
 
3. `In addition to the above, BEML is also exploring the possibility of 
outsourcing the Cylinder Block Machining to increase the no. of Engines to be 
produced.  With the above initiative and the current changes brought about in the 
Engine Division, BEML is quite confident of achieving 1500 Engines, including 
equivalent spares and recon engines during 2009-10.   
 

 
8 
4. With regard to fitting the other makes of Engine, it is respectfully submitted 
that BEML Engine with 105, 125, 140 and 170 mm bore size can meet the range 
of 100 HP to 750 HP and thus BEML‟s entire range of current Engine upto 750 
HP covers only to the extent of 25 models of equipments out of the tot al range of 
34 models, currently being produced and supplied.  For the rest of the 9 models 
falling below and above our capacity Engines, BEML has to necessarily procure 
and source from outside, which is beyond their Technological capability to 
produce. They are thus, sourcing from outside after proper trial and evaluation, 
including the customer approval, on par with Global practice which includes 
Ashok Leyland, Kirloskar Oil Engines Limited, Cummins & MTU, which is 
essential and business necessity. 
 
5. Concerning the Customer preference of the Engine, Some customers 
have shown preference to certain make of Engines and in fact, BEML has 
produced documentary evidence to the Committee to establish that in respect of 
Coal India Subsidiary, MCL (Mahanadi Coalfi elds Limited) a tender has clearly 
preferred the Cummins / Caterpillar Make Engine to be fitted on the equipment 
for the Dozers.  
 
6. As regards the lack of Vision, Poor Planning and improper execution of 
the Engine Division, it is submitted that for the l ast five years BEML  has been 
taking adequate and  appropriate initiatives with long term perception to increase 
the volume of Engine production and also to increase the factory level profit, 
including the sale of spares with higher profits. As already sta ted above, BEML 
has taken adequate steps required to improve the Engine Production to 1500 
level with corresponding manpower and outsourcing.  Further for increasing the 
further volume of 2400 Engines, BEML is taking steps to diversify into 
manufacture of Tatra Engines and to increase the Engines Capacity through 
purchase of another FMS unit and related infrastructure with planned additional 
investment of about Rs.150 Crs, including increasing of Manpower and such 
steps when fructified would result in produ ction of 2400 Engines, within another 
4-5 years.  However, it is respectfully submitted that the number of Engines to be 
produced, in-spite of having capacity, is directly linked to the market demand and 
thus Production cannot be linked to the capacity in a given year, but to the 
demand in the market, either for OEM application or for Spares to avoid piling up 
of stocks.  
 
7. With regard to identifying the persons responsible for not achieving the 
desired level of production and fixing accountability, it is  respectfully submitted 
that the Engine Division which was started in the year 1991 -92 by the erstwhile 
BEML management in position, who, during 1988 to 1991 decided to go -ahead 
with the Project restricting it to 1500 Engines. Only 215 Nos. of Engines were  
produced in 2000-01 and the persons responsible for low level of Production and 
low volume of Business as compared to installed Capacity have already served 
the Company with the best of their abilities and demitted office.  The reasons for 
not achieving t he desired level and the then market demand, including 
acceptability of BEML equipments by the Indian Customers and probably to 
some extent abroad, cannot be ascertained and responsibility may not be able to 
be fixed at this point of time on them. Present BEML Management has taken 
initiative for improvement in performance of Engine Division resulting in 1040 
Engines in 2007-08 including increasing spares business and Recon (with 473% 

 
9 
increase as compared to 214 nos. in 2000 -01) and making Engine Division 
profitable at factory level on transfer cost basis.  
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008)  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
In response to the COPU recommendation, the Board in its 274 th & 275th 
Board Meeting (25 th Jan. 2008 & 18 Feb. 2008 respectively) deliberated on the 
recommendation of the Performance Audit report. The Board members also 
visited the plant on 25 January 2008 and concluded that with additional 
investment on infrastructure the rated capacity could be achieved. The 
management had decided to invest about Rs. 150 crore and gradually achieve 
rated and projected capacity. The capital expenditure proposal is yet to be 
placed before the Board for approval. Repo rt of the examination of the lapses 
and review of the causes of failure has not been provided to audit. 
 
2. With regard to the reply that the various initiatives taken by the company 
in the last 5 years increased the Production of the engines from 215 in 2 000-01 
to 1040 in 2007 -08 with 483 percent increase over the last seven years, on 
verification of records it was found that the actual position was as under:  
 
Year       No. of engines produced 
2000-01  -  215 
2001-02  -  270 
2002-03  -  217  Does not include 
2003-04  - 331 reconditioned engines 
2004-05  -  481  (RECON) 
2005-06  -  625 
2006-07  -  708 
2007-08  -  1040* 
 
*The production figure of 1040 engines stated in the reply includes 
incomplete engines and old reconditioned engines as detailed below: 
 
Sl. No. No. of 
Engines 
Remarks 
1 83 Engines not in complete shape as of 31 March 
2008. 
2 40 Old engines reconditioned. 
3 17 Engines not manufactured but other jobs like gear 
box machining and drilling work of sister units 
offloaded to Engine Division, My sore etc. 
considered as equivalent and to production of 17 
engines. 
 
3. Considering the comparable figures of regular production at 900 engines 
during 2007-08 the growth works out to 318% and not 483%. As per the internal 
production programme the division  is planning to produce 1100 engines during 
2008-09. 
 

 
10 
4. As regards the Committee‟s recommendation relating to fixing of personal 
responsibility / accountability, the company has not taken action and stated that 
“the persons responsible for low level of Pr oduction and low volume of Business 
as compared to installed capacity have demitted office after serving the company 
with the best of their abilities”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter has been thoroughly examined and it was found that even 
though the land & building provided is sufficient for production of 2400 engines, 
the Engine Cylinder Block machining capacity was only for 1100 engines per 
annum.  Even though the manpower requirement was projected at 1500, only 
288 persons were deployed in line with the demand and actual production levels. 
In addition, the production of engines depends on the market demand and even if 
there is a demand, BEML has to restrict its production to the extent of its range 
covering 4 series of Engines namely 105,125,140 & 170 series. 
 
2. Based on the above analysis following corrective steps have been taken 
by BEML : 
 
(i)  Man power increased from 288 in 2001 to 338 in 2007-08. 
 
(ii)  Engine production started in two shifts instead of single shift and 
third shift was also in troduced where critical machines are operated. Also 
operating Assembly in 2 shifts basis from one shift with effect from 
04.06.2007 
 
(iii)  Direct incentive scheme was introduced for the direct work men on 
trial basis from 01 -03-2005 wherein minimum SMH wa s 80 and 
subsequently the scheme was revised from 01 -09-2007 to motivate the 
employees and to increase production level wherein minimum SMH was 
raised to 100.  With this total SMH has increased from 10343  to 21413 
per month, almost over 100%. 
 
(iv)  Noting that the Engine Production could be increased by extending 
the applications to  certain equipment models instead of sourcing from 
outside Engine manufacturers, the current Management from 2002 
onwards has made all out efforts to continuously increase Eng ine 
Production.  BEML engine application has been increased from 7 Models 
during 2001-02 to 25 Models in 2007 -08.  This has resulted in increased 
engine production from 215 Engines in 2000 -01 to 1040 Engine during 
2007-08.  Thus, the utilization of existin g infrastructure has been 
increased by 5 folds compared to 2000-01 and is almost closer to 100% of 
the installed capacity. 
 
3. Out of 1040 Engines manufactured by the Division during 2007 -08, 83 
engines were reversed as advised by the auditors due to certa in problems which 
had crept into the system during the implementation of ERP for the first time in 
the Company as certain parts of marginal and insignificant value were 
regularized later for drawals, contrary to earlier practice obtaining in many PSUs.  
 

 
11 
4. In fact, with regard to reversal of 83 Engines it is submitted that it is not a 
case that no Engines were produced and simply declared to boost up production 
without really building the Engine. But on the contrary this is a case where the 
Engines have be en built before 31 -03-2008. Due to certain problems which had 
crept into the system during the implementation of ERP for the first time in the 
Company, certain parts of marginal value were regularized later for drawls. Due 
to this, the Statutory Auditor de clined to count them as production and therefore 
BEML agreed with the Auditor for reversal. 
 
5. The building up of the old engine which comes for rehabilitation and over -
haul requires complete dismantling, cleaning of parts, changing of parts and at 
times some machining and replacement with new Cylinder block. Then, these 
engines have to be rebuilt, assembled and tested with the same standards as 
applicable to new engines. This takes more SMH than required to produce a new 
engine. 101 old engines were rebui lt during 2007 -08.Therefore, it has been 
reckoned to equate to new Engine which is a practice in the Engine Industry. 
 
6. Further to 101 old Engines overhauled (worth of Rs 10 Crores), Engine 
Division also manufactures Dumper aggregates like Output Shafts and PTOs. 
Gear box housings for Tatra and BMP transmissions involving significant 
machining on FMS and other critical machines, are also manufactured by the 
division due to lack of facility at H&P division. 
  
7. In order to capture lucrative spares busines s the division manufactures/ 
supplies spare parts worth Rs.60 Crores and Rs. 15 crores of in -house spares 
produced equivalent to 25 engines which involves 5423 SMH.  
 
8. For all these extra activities, 9269 SMH of available capacity of the Engine 
Division is consumed which when equated with the new engines works out to 42 
Engines [excluding rebuilt of old engines]. All the above are efforts unsolicited 
initiative of Top Management to increase production of Engine Division. 
 
9. The exclusion of 140 engines f rom 1040 engines stated produced in the 
vetting remarks of Audit does not significantly alter the growth rate even 
considering that such engines are not to be reckoned as produced.  Further, the 
reconditioned engines involve substantially much more value a ddition and are 
essential to reduce warranty cost and capture repair market and avoid 
repowering of BEML engine with other engines.  This also ensures customer 
satisfaction.  
 
 
10. In addition to the above and in order to reach the optimum production level 
of 2400 engines, Capital expenditure proposal of Rs.150 Crores has been 
approved by the Board in its 279th Meeting held on 18.09.08.  
 
11. As stated before, individual responsibility cannot be fixed for low level 
production and low volume of business as c ompared to installed capacity on 
account of various reasons beyond the control of the persons in authority who 
have demitted the office prior to 2002 after serving the company with the best of 
their abilities.  
 

 
12 
12. In view of the limited range of the appl ications of engines in the equipment 
basket of the company and the customers preference for the competitor engines 
have prevented the company and its officials from achieving significant volume of 
business as compared to installed capacity of 1100 nos. in the earlier years.   
 
13. Further, the current management of the company took various initiatives 
and have achieved year to year growth from 2002-03 as confirmed by the audit in 
their vetting remarks. Hence, the question of fixing responsibility on the cur rent 
Management also was not considered appropriate in the circumstances. Current 
Management having taken various initiatives to increase production progressively 
year after year as verified and confirmed in audit cannot also be made 
accountable for initiating action against the earlier Managements for accumulated 
lapses in achieving the installed capacity over the years.” 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated13.02.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
The Co mmittee in their original report while observing that the 
Engine division of BEML had not been able to achieve the objectives it was 
required to achieve, had recommended that the Company must undertake a 
thorough examination about the lapses in the matter and the persons 
responsible for the lapses be identified and accountability be fixed and the 
action taken thereon be communicated to the Committee.   
 
The Ministry in their action taken reply has submitted that due to 
certain factors like insufficient capi tal investment on account of foreign 
exchange restrictions imposed by Government of India, inadequate 
manpower etc. which existed during the earlier years of establishment of 
engine division were mainly responsible for its’ below par performance 
prior to the year 2002.  In this regard the Committee has now been informed 
that the BEML has taken a number of initiatives to overcome the lacunae of 
the past for increasing the production of engines by means of increased 
manpower and introduction of direct incenti ve scheme to boost up the 
workmen, introduction of three shift system instead of existing single shift, 
extending the applications of its engines to additional equipment instead of 
sourcing from outside etc. All these steps have resulted in increased 
engine production from 215 engines in 2000 -01 to 1040 engines during 
2007-08  which is almost closer to 100% of the installed capacity.    
 
As regards identifying the persons responsible for not achieving the 
desired level of production and fixing responsibilit y, the Company has 
submitted that the persons responsible for low level of production prior to 
2002 have already demitted the office and the reasons for not achieving the 
desired level could not  be ascertained and as such at this point of time 
they are not  able to fix responsibility.  However, the present Management 
has taken the above mentioned initiatives for improvement in performance 
of Engine Division.  
 
Taking a holistic view of the position explained above, the 
Committee feel that in accordance with the spirit of their recommendation, 

 
13 
the Company have already taken number of steps for improving the 
performance of the Engine Division and the same has also been 
acknowledged by the C&AG in their comments on the action taken reply of 
the Ministry. The Com mittee appreciate the efforts of the present 
management for being able to improve upon the system to achieve 
maximum utilisation of the installed capacity and impress upon them the 
need for continuing with its efforts in accordance with sound business 
principles and prudent commercial practices.  The Committee, however 
caution the management of the Company that while formulating the policy 
objectives, they should also simultaneously ensure that the action plan is 
executed without having any scope of mismatch between the two. 
 
 
Recommendation No.5  
 
Failure in the diversification activities  
 
The Committee note that in order to optimize the capacity utilization and 
also to normalize the cost of production, the Engine Division intended to extend 
the application of the Company's engines to other products and also to sell them 
independently as separate aggregate. Accordingly the Division took up the 
manufacture of engines for diesel generator (DG) set applications and K -300 
engines for compressor applications to private customers. As per the audit 
findings, the diversification efforts made to manufacture and sell the Company's 
engine for use in Diesel Generator sets were not successful resulting in loss of 
Rs.2.49 crores. Besides, the Company was left holding an i nventory of finished 
stock of Rs.3.14 crores.  
 
In this regard, the Committee note that according to the Company, 
considering the huge demand for captive power generation through lower 
capacity DG sets, a decision was taken to enter the field of manufactur ing DG 
sets. However, due to a large number of players both in organized and 
unorganized sectors in the market the Company could not make much head way 
in marketing the DG sets. So the Company made efforts to find out suitable 
distributors who can market t he engines for DG sets. The Company entered into 
an agreement with a private party, namely M/s.Jeevan Diesels for marketing the 
engines and based on the indications given by them, the manufacture of DG 
engines was taken up. However, the envisaged objective  could not materialize 
as the said party was reluctant to adhere to the agreement based on changed 
market requirements.     
 
The Committee are not convinced with the performance of the Engine 
Division in the course of its diversification activities. The co mmittee are 
constrained to note that the Company continued manufacturing DG sets for 
same party without any acceptable commercial terms and the production 
continued even though the concerned party had not lifted the first lot of 10 DG 
sets. The Company failed to safeguard its interest by not legally involving for the 
said private customer in case of backing out nor the Company formulated any 
guidelines for entering into marketing agreement with private customers to 
safeguard its interests, particularly when new \ products were being launched.  
 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that effective steps should 

 
14 
now be taken by the Company to diversify and capture markets for diesel 
engines, with the overall objective of improving capacity utilization of t he plant 
and a better market share. The Committee further recommend that the Company 
should carefully draw the terms and conditions of agreements with the customers 
to fully safeguard its own interests. The Committee also recommend that 
responsibility be fixed on the persons concerned for drafting inappropriate terms 
and conditions in the agreement entered into with private party regarding 
marketing of DG sets thereby resulting in substantial loss to the Company and 
action taken thereon may be intimated. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
As regards foraying into Diesel Genset (DG Set) marketing, BEML has 
attempted to enter this market as part of diversification efforts by manufacturing 
24 Nos. of Engines after the initial market study of Southern States, considerin g 
the fact that Engine Plant is located in the State of Karnataka and also the 
Logistic cost.  The Engine was produced by BEML and the Alternator procured 
from outside firm to fit it on the Engine to make Diesel Genset.   Accordingly, 
BEML had identified o ne of the existing Diesel Genset marketing & Distributing 
firm by name M/s. Jeevan Diesels, in order to do a pilot marketing and popularize 
the BEML Gensets. The arrangement made with M/s. Jeevan Diesels was that 
BEML to supply Engine and to allow them to fit the Alternator of specified make 
and to market BEML Diesel Gensets to popularize the brand, performance, etc. 
M/s. Jeevan Diesels, accordingly has attempted to fit the Alternator and 
distributed the Engines. However, they could not make a much headway,  as 
compared to the existing players including Global players and thus, BEML 
discontinued their business with M/s.Jeevan Diesels for pilot marketing and 
popularize Gensets. Consequently the Engines produced for DG Sets have been 
used for captive use of Gen sets and on their Earth Moving equipments for 
applicable range. This maiden attempt was only to diversify into Gensets 
Business for better utilization of the installed capacity, along with other attempts 
of improving the performance of Engine Division. The  value of stock of engines, 
and other costs are part of overall business of Engine business and it would be 
appreciated that the company need to see the outcome of overall business 
performance of Engine division and not isolated efforts of business develop ment 
and steps taken by the company was to enhance the performance level of 
Engine Division. As regards the Agreement made with M/s Jeevan Diesels for 
marketing of the engines, BEML has informed that the same was entered into 
after due vetting by the Legal  Department of the Company. However, BEML has 
taken note of the recommendations of the Committee and the views of the 
Committee will be kept in mind for future guidance. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008) 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has taken note of the recommendations of the committee 
for future guidance. The company was unable to initiate any legal action on M/s. 
Jeevan Diesels for non observance of agreement terms for marketing of the 
engines. Hence the company‟s reply that the agreement with M/s. Jeevan 
Diesels was entered after vetting with the legal department indicates clearly 

 
15 
failure on the part of the company to appreciate the legal implicat ions of terms of 
the agreement. 
 
The Government reply is silent with regard to fixing of responsibility on the 
persons for drafting inappropriate terms and conditions in the agreement entered 
into with private party regarding marketing of DG sets thereby r esulting in 
substantial loss to the company.      
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The Management of the Company has taken various initiatives to 
completely exploit the existing infrastructure of Engine Division which has helped 
us to increase the number  of en gines produced from 215 Nos. in 2000 -01 to 
1040 Nos. in 2007 -08.  The Management has also diversified into the following, 
to increase the demand for supply of Engines.  
(i) New applications have been developed with appropriate modifications  
of Engines.  
(ii)   BEML have taken up designing of new Engine which can be converted 
as a Gas Engine considering the natural gas availability in the Country 
by investing Rs.60 Lakhs and the Engine is in final stage of completion.  
(iii)  BEML have also chosen as global  partner M/s. Heinzman, Germany  for 
developing Fuel Injection Pump to make BEML Engine as Electronic 
Engines in line with Global trends with investment of Rs.1.4 crores and 
to improve the fuel consumption efficiency in the era of ever -increasing 
Oil / Diesel prices.   
 
2. BEML, as a part of diversification and to increase the production of 
Engines, have developed Engine for Diesel Genset applications and produced a 
pilot batch to foray into Diesel Genset market. But, unfortunately the effort of 
diversification did not take -off, as the Genset makers offered much lower prices 
(below manufacturing cost) to BEML as they were using engines of other 
established makers with better brand image. They were demanding certain 
Warranties and Guarantees which would have further increased the expenditure. 
In view of the above, BEML had to practically withdraw from the effort of 
diversification into engines for Diesel Gensets.  
 
3. It was a maiden attempt of the Management with development of business 
in mind and it is a we ll-known fact globally that all the diversification efforts will 
not yield 100% results and all the R&D products will not become saleable 
products.  Further, all the Engines produced for this purpose has already been 
effectively converted and used for othe r applications in the Earth Moving 
machines and there is no loss caused to the Company in this connection as 
under: 
 
(i) 17 nos. were converted to engines applicable for PES100 Genset 
and supplied to Indian Army. 
(ii) Balance Genset engines were converted and used on regular 
models of EM equipment. 
 
4. For reasons already stated in the various replies, agreement for marketing 
DG sets is a developmental effort on the part of both the parties to the 
agreement. The agreement was finalized after due considerati on of the 

 
16 
circumstances and hence cannot be stated that the legal implications of the 
terms of agreement were not appreciated by the company.  The change in the 
market requirement subsequent to the agreement is a force majeure situation 
which cannot be hel d against both parties notwithstanding the terms of the 
agreement.  In view of the fact that the company has utilized the engines 
proposed in terms of the agreement, the company is not at loss on account of the 
same.    
 
5. Further, the efforts of the Mana gement yielding overall results of the 
Company should be looked at instead of the performance of individual division or 
branched-out business in isolation. BEML profit has increased from Rs.13 Crores 
in 2001-02 to Rs.348 Crores in 2007 -08 with the Increase in Sales from Rs.1424 
Crores in 2001 -02 to Rs.2713 Crores in 2007 -08.  The profit has grown over 26 
times and Dividend to 120% from traditional 20% and therefore, the appreciation 
or depreciation of action of Management should emanate from the overall res ults 
of the Company and not from an isolated incident. 
 
6. Any action against officials despite their sincere efforts for diversification 
and expansion efforts may affect the morale of the officers and officers may not 
take any initiative henceforth in the  Company to do any development work and 
non-routine nature, including calculated risk for business growth.  With this sort of 
approach of action the Company will remain where it is and may not make any 
further progress at all.  Overall efforts of the offic ers in exploring new 
opportunities should be appreciated and not to de -motivate the Executive 
community of the Company by taking action against them in case of variance in 
expected and actual results, so long as the overall sales, profits are achieved as 
targeted.  
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 13.02.2009) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed dissatisfaction 
over the failure in diversification activities undertaken by the Engine 
Division for improving its performance and recommended to take effective 
steps to diversify and capture market for diesel engines so as to improve 
the capacity utilisation of the plant and better market share besides fixing 
responsibility on the persons concerned for inappropriate business 
agreements leading to substantial loss to the Company.  In this regard, the 
Committee note from the action taken reply of the Government that t he 
Company has taken note of the recommendations of t he committee for 
future guidance . O n the aspect of fixing of responsibility on the persons 
concerned for drafting inappropriate terms and conditions in the 
agreement, it has been submitted by the Government that it was a maiden 
attempt of the Management wi th development of business in mind and any 
action against officials despite their sincere efforts for diversification and 
expansion efforts may affect the morale of the officers.   
 
 Taking note of the reply of the Government and observing that the 
Company has not suffered any loss by subsequently utilizing all the 
equipment manufactured during the course of its diversification activities 

 
17 
as well as the fact that the number of engines produced have increased 
from 215 in 2000 -01 to 1040 in 2007 -08, the Commi ttee would not like to 
pursue the matter any further but at the same time they would like to 
emphasise the need to draft the agreement/ terms and conditions in a more 
professional  manner leaving no scope for taking undue advantage by the 
private parties.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
18 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT (CHAPTER II) 
 
Recommendation No.2  
 
Poor production performance and under -utilization of installed 
capacity  
 
The Committee note that according to the Project Repo rt, the Engine 
Division was expected to manufacture 2400 engines of varying bore size 
category per year with manpower of 1500 and with the plant working in three 
shifts. However, since the machining facility for cylinder blocks was not enhanced 
beyond 1500, the installed capacity was adopted as 1500 engines per year and 
subsequently re -assessed at 1100.   According to audit, in terms of installed 
capacity of the Engine Division, the utilization ranged from 14 per cent in 2000-01 
to 42 per cent in 2005 -06.   Further, the Company did not utilize its engines in all 
its equipment manufacture resulting in under utilization of the manufacturing 
capacity of engines. The Company had been purchasing Cummins engines and 
utilizing the same for fitment in the equipment manufactured by them.   Except in 
2004-05 the number of equipment fitted with the Company's engine was less 
than 50 per cent of the total number of equipment manufactured. In spite of the 
availability of capacity in the Engine Division, the Company did not  use its 
engines in all its equipment manufactured.   An audit analysis in this regard 
revealed that fitting of the Company's engines in the equipment supplied to the 
major customers viz. Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries ranged only between 
15 and 45 per cent.  
 
According to the justification furnished by the Company, due to severe 
foreign exchange constraints, the machining facility was not enhanced beyond 
1500 with manpower of 263 people as against the projected requirement of 1500 
employees.   Fur ther, since the engines manufactured are only for captive 
consumption in the earth moving equipment, the production was planned and 
achieved in accordance with the demand/market share of BEML which has not 
gone up to 1100.  Regarding fitment of other make engines, the Company has 
come out with the reply that the manufacturing range of the Engine Division was 
in the range of 100 HP to 550 HP and the engines of other ranges were 
outsourced from Cummins.  
 
The Committee are not convinced with the justification  advanced by the 
Company towards poor production performance and under -utilization of the 
installed capacity. First of all, the Committee find that the projections made in the 
detailed project report for establishment of the Engine Division were projected on 
the higher side vis -a-vis the actual demand. Secondly, the Engine Division has 
failed to utilize even the re-assessed installed capacity of 1100 engines.   Thirdly, 
as per the latest information furnished by the audit, even after sixteen years of its 
inception, the Company has continued to offer their equipment fitted with the 
engines of both BEML as well as that of other makes in contravention with the 
policy decision taken by the Board itself on 22nd January, 2003 to offer all 
equipment only with BEML engines w.e.f. 1st April, 2003 wherever engines 
manufactured were within the range of Engine Division. The Committee note 

 
19 
from Ministry's reply that performance rating of BEML engines is high and feed -
back on customers satisfaction has revealed satisfactor y results. The Committee 
however note with concern that despite this high performance rating, the 
percentage of equipment fitted with BEML engines sold to its major customers 
has actually declined.   For Coal sector it has declined from 55% in 2002 -03 to 
44% in 2006-07 and for Cement sector from 80% in 2002-03 to 32% in 2006-07.  
 
The Committee find the performance of the Engine Division appalling in 
terms of low productivity and under -utilization.   For this purpose the Committee 
recommend that the Company  may take all necessary steps like adoption of 
suitable marketing strategies, development of appropriate infrastructure, finding 
appropriate diversification activities for the purpose of extension of the product 
range for various types of applications, con tinuous work on research and 
development to improve the engines making them at par with international 
standards, and finally formulating strategies and programmes to increase the 
production of viable models of engines instead of production and stacking 
engines of unviable models.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards the recommendation, covering Sourcing of Engine from 
outside and low Productivity and under -utilization of Engine Division, it is 
submitted that the approach with regard to application of Engin e covering BEML 
range and outside BEML range has been explained in detail in reply to 
recommendation No.1.  Sourcing some engines for BEML beyond range model 
may be required to be done as business necessity. While it is a fact that the 
Engine Division was producing quite a low volume of Engine prior to 2001 -02 
including spares and Recon Engine, however, the Engine Division production 
has been doubled, inclusive of Spares and Recon engines and produced 316 
Nos. during the year 2001 -02 and 1040 Nos. during 20 07-08, which is reflective 
of the fact that production, productivity and capacity utilization have been 
increased and for better utilization of installed capacity of the Engine Plant has 
been achieved.  It is further stated that with BEML plans for expansi on and 
diversification, it may be possible to achieve 1500 Nos. (equivalent) Engines with 
existing installed capacity with outsourcing of components/facilities despite the 
fact that the FMS capacity is limited to 1100 in the year 2009 -10.  BEML has 
proposed to achieve the Projected / Planned capacity of 2400 with further 
CAPEX of Rs.150 Crores, including diversification and expansion of the volume 
of Tatra Engine in 4-5 years time.  The recommendations of the Committee have 
been considered and action has be en taken accordingly by BEML.  BEML are 
proceeding on the similar lines to achieve installed capacity immediately in two 
years and the projected and intended capacity of 2400 within a period of 4 -5 
years. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008) 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The company has initiated action to increase the production capacity of its 
engines as clarified in the vetting remarks at Sl.No. 1 
 

 
20 
2. Presently, out of 34 viable models of engine required for captive use in 
manufacture of BEML equipment, the company has the capacity to manufacture 
and supply engines for 25 models (74%). They should not outsource Cummins 
engines for these 25 models. Only 6 models are not in the scope of BEML engine 
division as these are considered as below / above engine division range and 3 
models are under development. 
 
3. The company has initiated action based on COPU recommendations and 
are in the initial stages.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In-spite of initiating various actions for increasing Engine production, 
actual engine production is also constrained by customer requirement. 
 
2. In addition to producing engines with quality on par with that of 
competitors, the company is stri ving to reduce its cost of production through 
import substitution, vendor development, sub-contract /out sourcing with focus on 
major / minor assembly so as to increase the volume of production and revenue. 
 
3. The initiatives of the company duly supplemen ted by proposed additional 
capital expenditure towards critical machineries like FMS, line balancing of the 
machines will show results in the days to come. 
 
4. Diversification actions of the company particularly related to electronic 
engines will take more  time for yielding results. In fact BEML had deployed an 
Independent National body IIPE to undertake a study to confirm the current 
capacity based on the infrastructure already built in Engine Division and the IIPE 
has already submitted a report and clearly stated as follows:  
 
“Taking the above aspect into consideration, the team is of the opinion 
that the capacity for complete engine range from 650 to 750 per year”. 
 
Copy of Executive Summary of the report is enclosed herewith. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated13.02..2009) 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
High cost of production and Financial Performance  
 
The Committee note that since its inception, the Engine Division has 
incurred losses every year and its poo r financial performance can be attributed 
broadly to the factors namely, high cost of raw materials and components; under-
utilization of installed capacity; and dependence on single source supplies for 
raw materials and components.  
 
In the above context, the Committee note that the Company had made 
efforts to introduce certain cost saving measures by outsourcing some 
conventional activities like turning, milling, drilling, boring, tapping, grinding and 
key-way slothing etc. which was 10% of total purchases made during last 6 years 

 
21 
in order to get the jobs done on economic rates. The Committee also note that 
the Company had made efforts to bring down the cost of production by earning 
profits through increased sale of spares and after sale service of engines.    As 
regards dependence on single source supplies, the Company has advanced the 
justification that Engine Division is resorting to single tender on certain 
proprietary items which are critical functional items having bearing on the 
performance of the engi nes and also in those cases where the suppliers are 
specialized.  
 
Having noted the fact that the losses of the Engine Division over the years 
are coming down gradually mainly because of increasing production level of 
engines, the Committee would like to e mphasize the need for further speeding 
up of the production level instead of going for purchased engines of other makes. 
The Committee recommend that the various strategies proposed by the 
Company to achieve the targeted double turn over of the earthmoving  
equipments by 2013-14 as per their Corporate Plan be put in place expeditiously 
so that the demand for the engines is also enhanced accordingly. Further, the 
manpower utilization be matched with the installed capacity with a view to 
achieve optimum produc tion. The Committee further recommend that the issues 
like exploring development of alternative source of supply to get competitive 
price in procuring raw materials components and requirement of capital 
expenditure towards procuring additional machinery an d other overheads to 
improve production level of the engines be urgently addressed by the Board. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
With regard to the recommendation No.3, covering manpower utilization to 
be matched with installed capacity, outsourcing of some of the jobs, developing 
of alternative sources of purchase as against single source, procurement of 
additional machinery, etc., it is submitted that BEML has already taken various 
initiatives to outsource sizeable volume of work and the development of vendors  
and also to develop minimum two sources for a given component / part, 
excluding Proprietary and technology oriented parts.  The Committee was 
appreciative of the fact that the losses of Engine Division are coming down on 
account of increased production an d insisted implementation of BEML‟s 
Corporate Plan of 2013-14 in order to increase the volume of Engine Production. 
BEML has taken positive steps to increase the volume of production of engines. 
 
As regard the Capital expenditure for building additional in frastructure to 
reach the projected and the intended level of Production of 2400, the proposal is 
being put-up to the Board by the BEML for approval to expand the capacity with 
additional investment. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. 
No.12(2)/2008-D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008) 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Board members of BEML visited the plant and concluded that with 
additional investment on infrastructure, the rated capacity could be achieved to 
invest about Rs.150 crore and gradually achieve rated and projected capacity.  

 
22 
 2. The capital expenditure for building additional infrastructure to reach the 
projected and intended level of production of 2400 engines is yet to be put up 
before the Board by the BEML for approval to expand the capacity with additional 
investment.  
 
3. The various up gradation and diversification plans proposed by the 
company are still under implementation stage. 
 
4. Thus the implementation of the recommendation needs to be followed up. 
 
5. The growth of manpower in the division is as follows : 
2001-02  -  288 
2002-03  -  286 
2003-04  -  279 
2004-05  -  270 
2005-06  -  272 
2006-07  -  299 
2007-08  -  338 
 
Further it was noted that the division is now working in two shifts after l ow 
productivity was pointed out in the Performance Audit. 
 
(1)  Verification revealed that only one BE71 engine and 60 BL9H engines 
developed through in-house R&D were produced in 2007-08. 
 
(2) The Company outsourced the Design & Development of High Power 
Density Diesel Engine (Gas convertible Engine) to ARAI, Pune. The 
project was for 14 months and should have been completed by July 2007, 
however, same is in development stage. The company has paid only Rs. 
27 lakh out of Rs. 60 lakh based on the progress m ade by TRAI, Pune. 
Even after expiry of the 14 month project completion period less than 50% 
progress has been achieved. 
 
(3) Target of 50 Tatra Euro II, Euro III engines targeted for March 2009 seems 
unlikely to materialize. BEML has signed a MoU for ToT with Licence Fee 
and Royalty for Tatra Engine with Euro -II and Euro -III compliance in 
February 2008.   
 
(4)  In an effort to make the BEML Engine go Electronic the company 
engaged a Global Consulting firm M/s. Heinzman, Germany to develop 
Electronic FIP (F uel Injection Pump) for 140 Series Engines at a cost of 
Rs.1.4 Crores investment, to achieve Fuel Efficiency and to increase the 
Engine Demand. The period of the project is 13 months and is to be 
completed by June 2009. 
 
Thus the implementation of the reco mmendation needs to be followed up 
in respect of Sl. Nos (2), (3) & (4). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Capital expenditure of Rs.150 crores has been approved by the Board in 
its 279th Meeting held on 18 th September 08 for building additional infrastructure 

 
23 
to reach the projected level of production of 2400 engines and further action to 
implement the same is under progress. 
 
2. The company is phasing out capital expenditure plan of Rs. 150 crores 
over the years in order to ensure that investment will not remain idle for want of 
market requirement for BEML Engines though the growth in Mining and 
Construction equipment sector is promising in line with the company‟s plans to 
reach the turnover of Rs. 5,000 crores by  2013-14. 
 
3. Further to various initiatives for i ncrease in production the Management 
demanded minimum SMH of 100 pm for each direct worker from 80 SMH per 
month and implemented with effect from   01.09.2007. Further in order to 
increase VOP and Sales and cater to increase the order Book on Hand, 
Management introduced 3 shifts in all manufacturing plants in production areas 
and 2 shifts instead of single shift in Assembly with effect from 04 -06-2007 and 
thus the statement by Audit,  it was introduced in Engine Division after Audit 
report in Engine Divisio n is factually incorrect. While the man power is being 
restricted more or less to the present level though it is not matching with the 
requirement to achieve the planned capacity of the division, Company cannot 
commit on the man power front immediately til l additional capital investment is 
made to increase the infrastructure and Capacity. 
 
4. Due to recession in global economy, the lower end products at BEML like 
BE 71, BL 9H which cater to construction segment are affected badly, which will 
also affect Eng ine production during 2008 -09 and subsequently.  It is expected 
that with turn around in economy, the production and off take of these engines 
will significantly go up during 2010-11. 
 
5. As regard High Power Density Diesel Engine (Gas convertible Engine),  
ARAI is developing this Engine from scratch and not updating any of our existing 
engines.  This involves designing of about 300 critical components of new 
generation by ARAI.  Subsequently, castings and forgings have to be developed 
as per the new design.   This is time consuming since it involves development of 
patterns, core boxes, dies etc., and also involves trial/errors during 
manufacturing but surely help increasing Engine production.   
 
6. Regarding Tatra Euro II, Euro III engines, further progress o n these 
projects is being monitored regularly and Engine will be (Euro II) rolled during 
2009-10.  
 
7. BEML have also chosen as global partner M/s.  Heinzman, Germany for 
developing Fuel Injection Pump to make BEML Engine as Electronic Engines in 
line with Global trends with investment of Rs.1.4 crores and to improve the fuel 
consumption efficiency in the era of ever -increasing Oil / Diesel prices. Further 
progress on these projects is being monitored regularly and hopefully this 
Electronic engine will be fitted on BEML Equipment during 2009-10. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated13.02.2009) 
 

 
24 
Recommendation No.5  
 
Failure in the diversification activities  
 
The Committee note that in order to optimize the  capacity utilization and 
also to normalize the cost of production, the Engine Division intended to extend 
the application of the Company's engines to other products and also to sell them 
independently as separate aggregate. Accordingly the Division took u p the 
manufacture of engines for diesel generator (DG) set applications and K -300 
engines for compressor applications to private customers. As per the audit 
findings, the diversification efforts made to manufacture and sell the Company's 
engine for use in Diesel Generator sets were not successful resulting in loss of 
Rs.2.49 crores. Besides, the Company was left holding an inventory of finished 
stock of Rs.3.14 crores.  
 
In this regard, the Committee note that according to the Company, 
considering the huge demand for captive power generation through lower 
capacity DG sets, a decision was taken to enter the field of manufacturing DG 
sets. However, due to a large number of players both in organized and 
unorganized sectors in the market the Company could not ma ke much head way 
in marketing the DG sets. So the Company made efforts to find out suitable 
distributors who can market the engines for DG sets. The Company entered into 
an agreement with a private party, namely M/s.Jeevan Diesels for marketing the 
engines and based on the indications given by them, the manufacture of DG 
engines was taken up. However, the envisaged objective could not materialize 
as the said party was reluctant to adhere to the agreement based on changed 
market requirements.     
 
The Commit tee are not convinced with the performance of the Engine 
Division in the course of its diversification activities. The committee are 
constrained to note that the Company continued manufacturing DG sets for 
same party without any acceptable commercial terms  and the production 
continued even though the concerned party had not lifted the first lot of 10 DG 
sets. The Company failed to safeguard its interest by not legally involving for the 
said private customer in case of backing out nor the Company formulated any 
guidelines for entering into marketing agreement with private customers to 
safeguard its interests, particularly when new \ products were being launched.  
 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that effective steps should 
now be taken by the Compa ny to diversify and capture markets for diesel 
engines, with the overall objective of improving capacity utilization of the plant 
and a better market share. The Committee further recommend that the Company 
should carefully draw the terms and conditions of agreements with the customers 
to fully safeguard its own interests. The Committee also recommend that 
responsibility be fixed on the persons concerned for drafting inappropriate terms 
and conditions in the agreement entered into with private party regardin g 
marketing of DG sets thereby resulting in substantial loss to the Company and 
action taken thereon may be intimated. 
 

 
25 
Reply of the Government  
 
As regards foraying into Diesel Genset (DG Set) marketing, BEML has 
attempted to enter this market as part of  diversification efforts by manufacturing 
24 Nos. of Engines after the initial market study of Southern States, considering 
the fact that Engine Plant is located in the State of Karnataka and also the 
Logistic cost.  The Engine was produced by BEML and the  Alternator procured 
from outside firm to fit it on the Engine to make Diesel Genset.   Accordingly, 
BEML had identified one of the existing Diesel Genset marketing & Distributing 
firm by name M/s. Jeevan Diesels, in order to do a pilot marketing and popularize 
the BEML Gensets. The arrangement made with M/s. Jeevan Diesels was that 
BEML to supply Engine and to allow them to fit the Alternator of specified make 
and to market BEML Diesel Gensets to popularize the brand, performance, etc. 
M/s. Jeevan Diesels,  accordingly has attempted to fit the Alternator and 
distributed the Engines. However, they could not make a much headway, as 
compared to the existing players including Global players and thus, BEML 
discontinued their business with M/s.Jeevan Diesels for p ilot marketing and 
popularize Gensets. Consequently the Engines produced for DG Sets have been 
used for captive use of Gensets and on their Earth Moving equipments for 
applicable range. This maiden attempt was only to diversify into Gensets 
Business for be tter utilization of the installed capacity, along with other attempts 
of improving the performance of Engine Division. The value of stock of engines, 
and other costs are part of overall business of Engine business and it would be 
appreciated that the compa ny need to see the outcome of overall business 
performance of Engine division and not isolated efforts of business development 
and steps taken by the company was to enhance the performance level of 
Engine Division. As regards the Agreement made with M/s Je evan Diesels for 
marketing of the engines, BEML has informed that the same was entered into 
after due vetting by the Legal Department of the Company. However, BEML has 
taken note of the recommendations of the Committee and the views of the 
Committee will be kept in mind for future guidance. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008) 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has taken note of the recommendations of the com mittee 
for future guidance. The company was unable to initiate any legal action on M/s. 
Jeevan Diesels for non observance of agreement terms for marketing of the 
engines. Hence the company‟s reply that the agreement with M/s. Jeevan 
Diesels was entered aft er vetting with the legal department indicates clearly 
failure on the part of the company to appreciate the legal implications of terms of 
the agreement. 
 
The Government reply is silent with regard to fixing of responsibility on the 
persons for drafting inappropriate terms and conditions in the agreement entered 
into with private party regarding marketing of DG sets thereby resulting in 
substantial loss to the company.      
 

 
26 
Reply of the Government   
 
The Management of the Company has taken various initiat ives to 
completely exploit the existing infrastructure of Engine Division which has helped 
us to increase the number  of engines produced from 215 Nos. in 2000 -01 to 
1040 Nos. in 2007 -08.  The Management has also diversified into the following, 
to increase the demand for supply of Engines.  
(i) New applications have been developed with appropriate modifications  
of Engines.  
(ii)   BEML have taken up designing of new Engine which can be converted 
as a Gas Engine considering the natural gas availability in t he Country 
by investing Rs.60 Lakhs and the Engine is in final stage of completion.  
(iii)  BEML have also chosen as global partner M/s.  Heinzman, Germany  for 
developing Fuel Injection Pump to make BEML Engine as Electronic 
Engines in line with Global tre nds with investment of Rs.1.4 crores and 
to improve the fuel consumption efficiency in the era of ever -increasing 
Oil / Diesel prices.   
 
2. BEML, as a part of diversification and to increase the production of 
Engines, have developed Engine for Diesel Gens et applications and produced a 
pilot batch to foray into Diesel Genset market. But, unfortunately the effort of 
diversification did not take -off, as the Genset makers offered much lower prices 
(below manufacturing cost) to BEML as they were using engines o f other 
established makers with better brand image. They were demanding certain 
Warranties and Guarantees which would have further increased the expenditure. 
In view of the above, BEML had to practically withdraw from the effort of 
diversification into engines for Diesel Gensets.  
 
3. It was a maiden attempt of the Management with development of business 
in mind and it is a well -known fact globally that all the diversification efforts will 
not yield 100% results and all the R&D products will not become sale able 
products.  Further, all the Engines produced for this purpose has already been 
effectively converted and used for other applications in the Earth Moving 
machines and there is no loss caused to the Company in this connection as 
under: 
 
(i) 17 nos. were  converted to engines applicable for PES100 Genset 
and supplied to Indian Army. 
(ii) Balance Genset engines were converted and used on regular 
models of EM equipment. 
 
4. For reasons already stated in the various replies, agreement for marketing 
DG sets is  a developmental effort on the part of both the parties to the 
agreement. The agreement was finalized after due consideration of the 
circumstances and hence cannot be stated that the legal implications of the 
terms of agreement were not appreciated by the company.  The change in the 
market requirement subsequent to the agreement is a force majeure situation 
which cannot be held against both parties notwithstanding the terms of the 
agreement.  In view of the fact that the company has utilized the engines 
proposed in terms of the agreement, the company is not at loss on account of the 
same.    
 

 
27 
5. Further, the efforts of the Management yielding overall results of the 
Company should be looked at instead of the performance of individual division or 
branched-out business in isolation. BEML profit has increased from Rs.13 Crores 
in 2001-02 to Rs.348 Crores in 2007 -08 with the Increase in Sales from Rs.1424 
Crores in 2001 -02 to Rs.2713 Crores in 2007 -08.  The profit has grown over 26 
times and Dividend to 120% from traditional 20% and therefore, the appreciation 
or depreciation of action of Management should emanate from the overall results 
of the Company and not from an isolated incident. 
 
6. Any action against officials despite their sincere efforts for diversifica tion 
and expansion efforts may affect the morale of the officers and officers may not 
take any initiative henceforth in the Company to do any development work and 
non-routine nature, including calculated risk for business growth.  With this sort of 
approach of action the Company will remain where it is and may not make any 
further progress at all.  Overall efforts of the officers in exploring new 
opportunities should be appreciated and not to de -motivate the Executive 
community of the Company by taking acti on against them in case of variance in 
expected and actual results, so long as the overall sales, profits are achieved as 
targeted.  
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated 13.02.2009) 
 
(please see Chapter –I for comments) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
“Non-achievement of objectives  
 
The Committee note that the BEML set up its own Engin e Division in 1991 
in order to meet the requirement of Engines for captive consumption for its Earth 
moving equipment. The said objective included manufacturing of engine suitable 
for mining and construction equipment, achievement of higher technological 
base besides avoiding use of the engines of the other make which were having 
problems like poor quality, poor performance, non -reliability, high -down time, 
non-availability of spares and poor after sales services etc.  The other factors like 
vertical integr ation for maintaining the overall quality of the equipment, control 
from the Company side over the supplies of spares / engines and having a better 
after-sales service were also considered by the Company for establishment of its 
own Engine Division.  
 
In t he above context, the Committee note with concern that even after 
sixteen years of establishment of its own Engine Division, the Company has 
failed to fully achieve the objectives mentioned above. The Company has 
continued to offer the equipment manufactured by them fitted with the engines of 
other make even during the period up to 2006 -07 as pointed out by the audit in 
their latest findings.  The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
advanced by the Company that business -wise it was not viable  to manufacture 
the entire range of engines and secondly the customers of BEML equipment 
have preference for the engines of other make.  
 
The Committee find the above stand taken by the Company contrary to 
the basic objectives which inspired it to establis h its own Engine Division. The 
Committee fail to understand that even after lapse of 16 years the Company has 
not been able to produce, if not the entire range of engines at least the major 
varieties required for its own earth moving equipment. In the opin ion of the 
Committee the very purpose for which the Company started its own Engine 
Division has been defeated to a great extent.  
 
After going through the explanation / arguments given by the Company, 
the Committee find that it is a glaring example of lack of vision, poor planning and 
improper execution of their policy of establishment of its own Engine Division. 
While deprecating the failure on the part of the Engine Division in meeting its 
objectives, the Committee recommend that the Company must undertak e a 
thorough examination about the lapses in the matter and come out with a proper 
review of the causes of failure to achieve the objectives and accordingly take 
corrective steps. The Committee further recommend that the persons responsible 
for such seriou s lapses be identified and accountability be fixed and the action 
taken thereon may be communicated to the committee.”  
 
  
 

 
29 
The Ministry in their action taken reply has submitted as under:- 
 
“Though the very objective of establishment of Engine Division in  BEML 
as a production center for captive consumption has been achieved, 
however, on account of the following facts, the full complement of the 
installed capacity which is estimated at 1500 Engines per annum 
(although the cylinder block machine capacity is restricted to 1100 per 
annum)  could not be achieved: 
 
(e) The entire Infrastructure to be created for producing 2400 Engines 
per annum as projected in the Project Report, could not be installed for 
want of Capital Investment, on account of foreign exchange re strictions 
imposed by Government of India. 
 
(f) The capacity of Single FMS Machine used for producing Cylinder 
Blocks for all the 4 -Series of Engines is restricted to 1100 Nos. and only 
with outsourcing of Engine block machining 1500 nos. can be achieved.    
 
(g) The Manpower of 288 is quite inadequate and the Assembly was 
running only in Single Shift. 
 
(h) The constraint of diversification of the Engine range beyond the  
4-series Engine and restricted manufacture of Spares and Recon Engines. 
  
 
2. Notwithstanding the above, BEML has taken the following initiatives in the 
last 5 years to improve the Engine Division performance:  
 
(i) Increased the no. of Engines from 215 in 2000 -01 to 1040 with 
483% increase over last seven years. 
 
(j) Increased the Manpower from 288 in 2001 -02 to 338 in 2007 -08 
and started Engine Assembly production in 2 Shifts, using two bays out of 
the three Assembly bays established originally. 
 
(k) Changed the age old practice of treating all workmen as Indirect 
and made all direct workmen as directly responsib le for the required level 
of Production / Standard Man Hours (SMH) and also introduced Direct 
incentive scheme during 2007 -08 and thus the SMH has been increased 
to 199 SMH per workmen per month in 2007 -08 as compared to 101 SMH 
in the past (2004-05). 
 
(l) Initiated Engine Diversification and fuel efficient  
4-Cylinder Engine applicable to two Equipments (BE71 and BL9H) with 
potentially large quantity has been developed through in -house R&D.  The 
same has already been produced and introduced. 
 
(m) Outsourced the De sign & Development of High Power Density 
Diesel Engine (Gas convertible Engine) to ARAI, Pune and the same is 
under development and expected to be rolled out in November 2008.  
BEML has paid an amount of Rs. 60 Lakhs  as Technical fees to ARAI, 
Pune. 

 
30 
  
(n) In an effort to make the BEML Engine go Electronic and to convert 
BEML Engine to Electronic Engines, BEML has  already engaged a Global 
Consulting firm M/s. Heinzman, Germany to develop Electronic FIP (Fuel 
Injection Pump) for 140 Series Engines  at a cost of  Rs. 1.4 Crores 
investment, to achieve Fuel Efficiency and to increase the Engine 
Demand.  The Project is likely to be commissioned in the month of  March, 
2009 and later proposed to be extended to other series.  
 
(o) The original 4 -Series Engines have been ex tended from 7 Models 
numbering 270 in 2001-02 to 25 Models numbering 922 in 2007-08. 
 
(p)  BEML has signed an MoU for ToT with Licence Fee and Royalty 
for Tatra Engine with Euro -II and Euro -III compliance and already a 
Project Manager has been nominated to set -up the facility. The Engine is 
expected to be produced during 2008 -09 for Indian market and probably 
exported later to parent company, as global outsource. 
 
3. `In addition to the above, BEML is also exploring the possibility of 
outsourcing the Cylinder B lock Machining to increase the no. of Engines to be 
produced.  With the above initiative and the current changes brought about in the 
Engine Division, BEML is quite confident of achieving 1500 Engines, including 
equivalent spares and recon engines during 2009-10.   
 
4. With regard to fitting the other makes of Engine, it is respectfully submitted 
that BEML Engine with 105, 125, 140 and 170 mm bore size can meet the range 
of 100 HP to 750 HP and thus BEML‟s entire range of current Engine upto 750 
HP covers only to the extent of 25 models of equipments out of the total range of 
34 models, currently being produced and supplied.  For the rest of the 9 models 
falling below and above our capacity Engines, BEML has to necessarily procure 
and source from outside, wh ich is beyond their Technological capability to 
produce. They are thus, sourcing from outside after proper trial and evaluation, 
including the customer approval, on par with Global practice which includes 
Ashok Leyland, Kirloskar Oil Engines Limited, Cummi ns & MTU, which is 
essential and business necessity. 
 
5. Concerning the Customer preference of the Engine, Some customers 
have shown preference to certain make of Engines and in fact, BEML has 
produced documentary evidence to the Committee to establish tha t in respect of 
Coal India Subsidiary, MCL (Mahanadi Coalfields Limited) a tender has clearly 
preferred the Cummins / Caterpillar Make Engine to be fitted on the equipment 
for the Dozers.  
 
6. As regards the lack of Vision, Poor Planning and improper execu tion of 
the Engine Division, it is submitted that for the last five years BEML  has been 
taking adequate and  appropriate initiatives with long term perception to increase 
the volume of Engine production and also to increase the factory level profit, 
including the sale of spares with higher profits. As already stated above, BEML 
has taken adequate steps required to improve the Engine Production to 1500 
level with corresponding manpower and outsourcing.  Further for increasing the 
further volume of 2400 Engi nes, BEML is taking steps to diversify into 
manufacture of Tatra Engines and to increase the Engines Capacity through 

 
31 
purchase of another FMS unit and related infrastructure with planned additional 
investment of about Rs.150 Crs, including increasing of Ma npower and such 
steps when fructified would result in production of 2400 Engines, within another 
4-5 years.  However, it is respectfully submitted that the number of Engines to be 
produced, in-spite of having capacity, is directly linked to the market dema nd and 
thus Production cannot be linked to the capacity in a given year, but to the 
demand in the market, either for OEM application or for Spares to avoid piling up 
of stocks.  
 
7. With regard to identifying the persons responsible for not achieving the 
desired level of production and fixing accountability, it is respectfully submitted 
that the Engine Division which was started in the year 1991 -92 by the erstwhile 
BEML management in position, who, during 1988 to 1991 decided to go -ahead 
with the Project re stricting it to 1500 Engines. Only 215 Nos. of Engines were 
produced in 2000-01 and the persons responsible for low level of Production and 
low volume of Business as compared to installed Capacity have already served 
the Company with the best of their abil ities and demitted office.  The reasons for 
not achieving the desired level and the then market demand, including 
acceptability of BEML equipments by the Indian Customers and probably to 
some extent abroad, cannot be ascertained and responsibility may not be able to 
be fixed at this point of time on them. Present BEML Management has taken 
initiative for improvement in performance of Engine Division resulting in 1040 
Engines in 2007-08 including increasing spares business and Recon (with 473% 
increase as com pared to 214 nos. in 2000 -01) and making Engine Division 
profitable at factory level on transfer cost basis.  
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008 -
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008)  
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
In response to the COPU recommendation, the Board in its 274 th & 275th 
Board Meeting (25 th Jan. 2008 & 18 Feb. 2008 respectively) deliberated on the 
recommendation of the Performance Audit report. The Board members also 
visited the plant on 25 January 2008 and concluded that with additional 
investment on infrastructure the rated capacity could be achieved. The 
management had decided to invest about Rs. 150 crore and gradually achieve 
rated and projected capacity. The capital expenditure propo sal is yet to be 
placed before the Board for approval. Report of the examination of the lapses 
and review of the causes of failure has not been provided to audit. 
 
2. With regard to the reply that the various initiatives taken by the company 
in the last 5 years increased the Production of the engines from 215 in 2000 -01 
to 1040 in 2007 -08 with 483 percent increase over the last seven years, on 
verification of records it was found that the actual position was as under:  
 
Year       No. of engines produced 
2000-01  -  215 
2001-02  -  270 
2002-03  -  217  Does not include 
2003-04  - 331 reconditioned engines 
2004-05  -  481  (RECON) 

 
32 
2005-06  -  625 
2006-07  -  708 
2007-08  -  1040* 
 
*The production figure of 1040 engines stated in the reply includes 
incomplete engines and old reconditioned engines as detailed below: 
 
Sl. No. No. of 
Engines 
Remarks 
1 83 Engines not in complete shape as of 31 March 
2008. 
2 40 Old engines reconditioned. 
3 17 Engines not manufactured but other jobs like gear 
box machining and dri lling work of sister units 
offloaded to Engine Division, Mysore etc. 
considered as equivalent and to production of 17 
engines. 
 
3. Considering the comparable figures of regular production at 900 engines 
during 2007-08 the growth works out to 318% and not 483%. As per the internal 
production programme the division is planning to produce 1100 engines during 
2008-09. 
 
4. As regards the Committee‟s recommendation relating to fixing of personal 
responsibility / accountability, the company has not taken action a nd stated that 
“the persons responsible for low level of Production and low volume of Business 
as compared to installed capacity have demitted office after serving the company 
with the best of their abilities”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter has been  thoroughly examined and it was found that even 
though the land & building provided is sufficient for production of 2400 engines, 
the Engine Cylinder Block machining capacity was only for 1100 engines per 
annum.  Even though the manpower requirement was pr ojected at 1500, only 
288 persons were deployed in line with the demand and actual production levels. 
In addition, the production of engines depends on the market demand and even if 
there is a demand, BEML has to restrict its production to the extent of it s range 
covering 4 series of Engines namely 105,125,140 & 170 series. 
 
2. Based on the above analysis following corrective steps have been taken 
by BEML : 
 
(i)  Man power increased from 288 in 2001 to 338 in 2007-08. 
 
(ii)  Engine production started in two  shifts instead of single shift and 
third shift was also introduced where critical machines are operated. Also 
operating Assembly in 2 shifts basis from one shift with effect from 
04.06.2007 
 
(iii)  Direct incentive scheme was introduced for the direct wor k men on 
trial basis from 01 -03-2005 wherein minimum SMH was 80 and 

 
33 
subsequently the scheme was revised from 01 -09-2007 to motivate the 
employees and to increase production level wherein minimum SMH was 
raised to 100.  With this total SMH has increased fro m 10343  to 21413 
per month, almost over 100%. 
 
(iv)  Noting that the Engine Production could be increased by extending 
the applications to  certain equipment models instead of sourcing from 
outside Engine manufacturers, the current Management from 2002 
onwards has made all out efforts to continuously increase Engine 
Production.  BEML engine application has been increased from 7 Models 
during 2001-02 to 25 Models in 2007 -08.  This has resulted in increased 
engine production from 215 Engines in 2000 -01 to 10 40 Engine during 
2007-08.  Thus, the utilization of existing infrastructure has been 
increased by 5 folds compared to 2000-01 and is almost closer to 100% of 
the installed capacity. 
 
3. Out of 1040 Engines manufactured by the Division during 2007 -08, 83 
engines were reversed as advised by the auditors due to certain problems which 
had crept into the system during the implementation of ERP for the first time in 
the Company as certain parts of marginal and insignificant value were 
regularized later for drawals, contrary to earlier practice obtaining in many PSUs.  
 
4. In fact, with regard to reversal of 83 Engines it is submitted that it is not a 
case that no Engines were produced and simply declared to boost up production 
without really building the Engine. B ut on the contrary this is a case where the 
Engines have been built before 31 -03-2008. Due to certain problems which had 
crept into the system during the implementation of ERP for the first time in the 
Company, certain parts of marginal value were regulari zed later for drawls. Due 
to this, the Statutory Auditor declined to count them as production and therefore 
BEML agreed with the Auditor for reversal. 
 
5. The building up of the old engine which comes for rehabilitation and over -
haul requires complete dism antling, cleaning of parts, changing of parts and at 
times some machining and replacement with new Cylinder block. Then, these 
engines have to be rebuilt, assembled and tested with the same standards as 
applicable to new engines. This takes more SMH than r equired to produce a new 
engine. 101 old engines were rebuilt during 2007 -08.Therefore, it has been 
reckoned to equate to new Engine which is a practice in the Engine Industry. 
 
6. Further to 101 old Engines overhauled (worth of Rs 10 Crores), Engine 
Division also manufactures Dumper aggregates like Output Shafts and PTOs. 
Gear box housings for Tatra and BMP transmissions involving significant 
machining on FMS and other critical machines, are also manufactured by the 
division due to lack of facility at H&P division. 
  
7. In order to capture lucrative spares business the division manufactures/ 
supplies spare parts worth Rs.60 Crores and Rs. 15 crores of in -house spares 
produced equivalent to 25 engines which involves 5423 SMH.  
 
8. For all these extra activities, 9269 SMH of available capacity of the Engine 
Division is consumed which when equated with the new engines works out to 42 

 
34 
Engines [excluding rebuilt of old engines]. All the above are efforts unsolicited 
initiative of Top Management to increase production of Engine Division. 
 
9. The exclusion of 140 engines from 1040 engines stated produced in the 
vetting remarks of Audit does not significantly alter the growth rate even 
considering that such engines are not to be reckoned as produced.  Further, the 
reconditioned engines involve substantially much more value addition and are 
essential to reduce warranty cost and capture repair market and avoid 
repowering of BEML engine with other engines.  This also ensures customer 
satisfaction.  
 
10. In addition to the above and in order to reach the optimum production level 
of 2400 engines, Capital expenditure proposal of Rs.150 Crores has been 
approved by the Board in its 279th Meeting held on 18.09.08.  
 
 
11. As stated before, individual responsibility cannot be fix ed for low level 
production and low volume of business as compared to installed capacity on 
account of various reasons beyond the control of the persons in authority who 
have demitted the office prior to 2002 after serving the company with the best of 
their abilities.  
 
12. In view of the limited range of the applications of engines in the equipment 
basket of the company and the customers preference for the competitor engines 
have prevented the company and its officials from achieving significant volume of 
business as compared to installed capacity of 1100 nos. in the earlier years.   
 
13. Further, the current management of the company took various initiatives 
and have achieved year to year growth from 2002-03 as confirmed by the audit in 
their vetting remar ks. Hence, the question of fixing responsibility on the current 
Management also was not considered appropriate in the circumstances. Current 
Management having taken various initiatives to increase production progressively 
year after year as verified and co nfirmed in audit cannot also be made 
accountable for initiating action against the earlier Managements for accumulated 
lapses in achieving the installed capacity over the years.” 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008-
D(BEML) Dated13.02.2009) 
 
(Please see Chapter I for comments) 
 
Recommendation No.4  
 
Monitoring role of the Ministry  
 
The Committee note that the Government of India accorded approval for 
establishment of Engine Division in 1988 and thereafter the Engine D ivision was 
established by BEML in 1991 for manufacture of engines for captive 
consumption. The main factor which was considered by the government in 
granting such approval to BEML was that the engines which were being used by 
the BEML in the equipment man ufactured by them were suffering from many 
shortcomings. In addition to this, some other factors like increased value addition 

 
35 
to BEML if own engine is used in the equipment, saving foreign exchange, 
redeployment of surplus manpower from other divisions, i mproving bottom line 
for the Company as a whole, full control over spares and after sales service, and 
increased profit margin in spares market were also taken into consideration by 
the Government.  
 
The Committee note that as per the audit findings, the Engine Division has 
not fully achieved its objectives in rectifying the shortcomings faced by it prior to 
its establishment. The Committee do not subscribe to the view of the Ministry that 
BEML is a Board managed Company and its performance is reviewed by t he 
Board periodically. The Committee feel that there has been lack of constant 
monitoring on the part of the Board. The Committee are of the view that the 
concerned Ministry cannot absolve itself of its responsibility by coming out with 
such an irresponsib le reply because the representative of the Ministry serves as 
an important link between the Company and the Government. As such, there is a 
need for strengthening the monitoring mechanism which would definitely improve 
the performance of the Engine Division. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
As has been explained in the foregoing replies, it has been submitted that 
BEML has taken several initiatives to reach the installed capacity and also to 
move towards the Projected and intended capacity with additional infrast ructure 
with further CAPEX. As regards the Monitoring of the performance of BEML, it is 
further submitted that Periodical Board Meetings are held 4 to 8 times in a year, 
where the entire Business of the Company including the Engine Division, 
performance is reviewed.  Two directors on the Board are from the MoD.  BEML 
also make periodical presentations on the performance of each division to the 
Board and during the year 2006 -07, BEML made a specific presentation on 
Engine Division.  In addition Business perf ormance presentations to the Senior 
Functionaries of the Ministry, including the Additional Secretary, the Secretary 
and the Ministers during their visit to the Company are presented by BEML.  This 
also covers the performance of the Engine Division, and th us monitoring of 
performance of a high level is being done in a continuous manner. Further 
performance reviews and monitoring are done by the Ministry, including at the 
level of the Secretary and an annual review of Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings is being done at the level of Hon‟ble Raksha Mantri.  
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. No.12(2)/2008 -
D(BEML) Dated 20.8.2008) 
 
Remarks of Office of C&AG on the Reply of the Government 
 
The Board specifically reviewed the performance  and future plan of 
Engine Division in January and February 2008 in its 274 th  & 275 th  Board 
Meeting held.  No subsequent review had taken place after February 2008 till 
end of September 2008. 
 
2. Thus the implementation of the recommendation needs to be followed up. 
 
 
 

 
36 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Engine Division performance is being reviewed monthly by CMD 
and all the Functional Directors in the Engine Division.  During the 274 th Board 
meeting held at Mysore on 25 -01-2008, all Board members visited Engin e 
Division and witnessed the Business progress & production.  
 
2. The Board is also being apprised of the progress and the 
constraints as part of progress reports. Specific presentations are made to the 
Senior Functionaries of the Ministry during their vis it to the Company. Further 
performance reviews and monitoring are done by the Ministry including at the 
level of Secretary.  An annual review of DPSU is being done at the level of Hon‟ 
ble Raksha Mantri. 
 
(Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production) O.M. 
No.12(2)/2008-D(BEML) Dated13.02.2009) 
 
 
 

 
37 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
38 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
 
 
---NIL--- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:     V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO   
12 February, 2010        Chairman, 
Phalguna, 1931(S)         Committee on Public Undertakings. 

 
39 
MINUTES OF THE 15th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 12th FEBRUARY 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1300 hrs to 1315 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
4 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
5 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
6 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
7 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravinder Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri Sunil Verma  Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri K.P. Sasidharan Director General (Commercial) 
 
2. XXXXX   XXXXX   XXXXX  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the Draft Action Taken Report on 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Perfor mance of Engine Division of 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited based on C&AG Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 
2007) and adopted the same without any modification.  
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalize the Reports for 
presentation.  
 
5. The Committee then adjourned. 

 
40 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ 
observations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Perform ance of Engine 
Division of Bharat Earth Movers Limited based o n C&AG Report No. 9 
(Commercial) of 2007”. 
 
 
I Total number of recommendations 
 
5 
II Recommendations that have been accepted/ partially 
accepted by the Government [vide recommendations at Sl. 
Nos. [2, 3 & 5] 
 
Percentage of total 
3 
 
 
 
60% 
 
III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s replies [vide recommendation 
at Sl. Nos. 1 & 4] 
 
Percentage of total 
 
2 
 
 
 
40% 
IV Recommendations in respect of which rep lies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee . 
Percentage of total 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
Nil  
 
 
 
 