CPU. No. 979 
 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
EXPORT OF GOLD JEWELLERY BY MSTC LIMITED 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -third Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings on Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited  based on Audit 
Para No. 17.2 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011-2012). 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2014 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW Delhi 
 
February 2014 / Magha 1935 (S) 
 
33 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
     Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting held on 17 February 2014.  
 ANNEXURE  
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-third Report of C ommittee on Public 
Undertakings on „Export of Gold Jewellery by 
MSTC Limited‟ 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.   Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Executive Officer 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -third Report on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings ( 2012-13) on Export 
of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Ltd  based on Audit Para 17.2 of Report No. 3 of 2011 -2012 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
2. The Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Publ ic Undertakings (2012 -2013) 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April 2013.  
The Action Taken Replies  to all the 1 0 Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report were received from the Government on 15 January 2014.  The Committee 
considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 17 February 2014. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -third Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
17 February 2014 Chairman 
28 Magha 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations  contained in the Twenty -third Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings on “Export of Gold Jewellery by MSTC Limited” 
based on Audit para 17.2 of Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India, which was presented to Lok Sabh a and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 30 April, 2013. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the ten Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9                   (Total 9) 
 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s reply: (Chapter-III) 
Sl. No. 10                                  (Total 1) 
 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
(Chapter-IV) 
                                  (NIL)  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited: (Chapter-V)    
                       (NIL) 
        
 
3. The Committee desire that response to their comments in Chapter I of the 
Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 3) 
 
5. In their Twenty-third Report on the subject, the Committee had noted that before 
accepting the proposals for the export business of gold jewellery, MSTC Ltd. did not 
carry out due diligence on its part in verifying the credentials of the associates and 
foreign buyers and relied on the due diligence made by the insurers i.e. Export Credit 
Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd.(ECGC) and ICICI Lombard regarding the foreign 
buyers as a result of which huge sums of public money has been locked up in legal 
battle.  

 
 
  
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Government have, inter alia stated that prior to 
taking export turnover policy, ECGC officials visited MSTC office to discuss the kind of 
insurance that MSTC should take as it was a customized policy that ECGC had dec ided 
to issue and not their standard policy, since MSTC had no insurance experience of such 
business transactions. On 16 July, 2007 ECGC gave non -binding indication for credit 
insurance cover for export receivables for Multi Buyer Exposure (MBEP) (Customer  
specific).  
 
7. The Government have also stated that the policy was taken after discussion with 
ECGC insurance broker M/s Willis BA India Private Limited, New Delhi as MSTC had no 
such previous experience and hence totally depended on ECGC for appropriate  
insurance policy. While applying for the insurance cover to ECGC in form 144, it was 
clearly mentioned that suppliers/associates have experience with the proposed Foreign 
Buyers thus the existence of nexus between supplier & buyers was openly given to 
ECGC and they gave the policy and approved credit limits of each of the buyers 
knowing fully well the existence of suppliers through whom MSTC proposed to export 
the gold jewellery. Thus MSTC relied on due diligence made by the insurers.  
 
8. On the question of discussion with ECGC insurance broker M/s Willis BA India 
Private Limited, the Ministry in their subsequent reply have inter alia stated that MSTC 
has clarified that the Company being  new in the export of plain gold jewellery had 
detailed discussions with ECGC officials prior to taking the insurance policy. ECGC vide 
their letter no. KEB/DEV/2007 dated 3 August, 2007 had issued a non-binding indication 
for multi-buyer exposure policy (customer specific) which did not suit MSTC‟s proposal. 
Then there was  another round of discussions with ECGC officials.  ECGC, all on a 
sudden issued a non -binding indication for Export Turnover Policy (customer specific) 
vide ref. no.KEB/DEV/2007 dated 28 August, 2007 addressed to M/s. Willis B A India 
Pvt. Ltd., Flat No.3 06, 3rd floor, Mercantile House, 15, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New 
Delhi-110 001, A/C MSTC Ltd.. Prior to that MSTC did not have any knowledge about 
the above company and never had discussion with that company. Therefore, the 
discussions referred in the reply is actually a discussion between MSTC and ECGC 
officials. 
              
9. The Ministry of Steel in their Action Taken Reply have, inter alia, stated that 
the Company being  new in the export of plain gold jewellery had detailed 
discussions with ECGC officials prior to taking the insurance policy  and had 
taken the insurance poli cy after discussion with ECGC insurance broker M/S 
Willis BA India Private Limited, New Delhi. However, the Audit pointed out that no 
such discussion took place between the Company and the broker directly. 
Reacting to the audit comment, the Ministry clarif ied quoting MSTC that after 
issuing a non -binding indication for multi -buyer exposure policy (customer 
specific) which did not suit MSTC’s proposal, ECGC, all of a sudden issued a 
non- binding indication for Export Turnover Policy addressed to M/s Willis B  A 
India Pvt. and prior to that MSTC did not have any knowledge about the above 
company. Therefore, the discussion referred in the reply is actually a discussion 
between MSTC and ECGC officials. Although, the Ministry have clarified the 
matter, the fact re mains that before furnishing the Action Taken Reply to the 

 
 
Committee, the Ministry have failed to ensure that the information is factually 
correct and complete in all respects. The Committee, therefore, while deprecating 
the casual attitude of the Ministry  of Steel, expect the Ministry to exercise 
extreme care in furnishing information to the Parliamentary Committees in future. 
  
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 8) 
 
10. Noting that although the Company had succeeded in securing 13 decrees in its 
favour in the foreign courts after receiving its first decree on 13 December, 2011 had not 
ensured their execution, the Committee while expressing their strong displeasure over 
the undue delay had desired that besides making efforts for speeding up the legal 
process, the Comp any should also take necessary action to ensure execution of 
decrees in a time bound manner.  
 
11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have inter - alia stated that legal cases 
have been initiated against all the 46 defaulting buyers, 44 in UAE and 1 e ach in Kuwait 
and Singapore. Till date, 43 decrees have been received in favour of MSTC valued at 
Rs.672.30 crore. MSTC‟s advocates in UAE have been instructed to file execution 
cases in respect of all the 43 judgments received from UAE. As per their law, execution 
cases can be filed only after the mandatory period of six months after publication of the 
judgment. As a result of regular follow up by MSTC, the following execution cases have 
been filed. 
 
(i) M/s. Leo Diamond - 1146/2012. 
(ii) M/s. Metric Trading. - 437/2012. 
(iii) M/s. Noor Jahan General Trading - 1235/2012. 
(iv) M/s. Bodra Trading. - 1233/2012. 
(v) M/s. Labdhi International. - 1031/2012. 
(vi) M/s. Sajgyan Diam. - 12890/2012. 
(vii) M/S Star Alloys LLC FZE, Fujairah - 179/2013. 
(viii) M/s. Future Icon Trading (FZE) Dubai. - 109/2013. 
(ix) M/s. Hadar International Trade Agency, Abu Dhabi. - 1031/2012. Cassation  
case No. 543/2012. 
(x) Matz International 715/2013 
(xi) Mobicon International FZE 2386/2013 
(xii) Morning Rise General Trading 2385/2013 
 
12. The Ministry have also stated that the following six f oreign buyers have appealed 
against the decree passed in Court of 1st instance:-  
 
(i) M/s. Al Sidra Jewellery. 
(ii) M/s. Mine Gold & Jewellery. 
(iii) M/s. Hadir Projects & Environment Systems L.L.C. 
(iv) M/s. Zeeba Gems LLC. 
(v) M/s. Ghanim Trading. 
(vi) M/s. Hadar International Trade Agency. 
 

 
 
13. Foreign buyer at Sl.No.3 has already lost in appeal but MSTC are yet to receive the 
judgment. The executions of the cases are being vigorously followed up with UAE 
advocates by mail and personal visits to Dubai by CMD MSTC along with MSTC‟s 
advocates. 
 
14. Further, MSTC‟s Singapore lawyers have filed winding up case against a buyer 
on receipt of a decree in favour of MSTC by Singapore Court. 
 
15. The Committee note that pursuant to their instant Recommendation, things 
have been speeded up. Ti ll date, out of 46 cases in all, MSTC has managed to 
secure decrees valued at Rs. 672.30 crore in 43 cases in UAE and also filed 
execution cases in respect of 12 defaulting buyers. The Committee further note 
that as per the law in UAE, execution cases can be filed only after the mandatory 
period of six months after publication of the judgment. Notwithstanding this legal 
requirement, the Committee are confident that the Government will carry on with 
the good work with all promptness and take all these cases to their logical 
conclusion to ensure the interest of the public exchequer. 
   
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 9) 
 
16. In their Twenty -third Report, the Committee had desired that Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) and Enforcement Directorate (ED) must complete their investigations 
expeditiously and take the cases to their logical conclusion at the earliest, without 
compromising the interests of MSTC. They had also desired the Ministry of Steel to 
make a periodical review of the probe being conducted by the inve stigating agencies in 
the matter and ensure its completion with promptitude.  
 
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated that the CBI has filed 
chargesheet in the court of Special Judge, Mumbai against Shri Shishir Dharkar, then 
CMD of Pen Urban Co -operative Bank and M/s Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd.  Shri 
Vivek Vaidya, Director of M/s Ushma Jewellery Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd., Mrs. 
Gulraihna Ommer, Share Holder  & Director of M/s Space Mercantile  Co. Pvt. Ltd., Mr. 
Radheyshyam Bhomavat Director of M/s. Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd., Jayesh Desai, 
Director of M/s. Joshi Bullion and Gems Pvt. Ltd., Shri Vinod Motwani, Director, M/s. 
Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd., Shri Malay Sen Gupta, the then CMD of MSTC, Shri Utpal 
Sarkar, the then DGM (F&A) of  MSTC, Shri Tapas Basu, the then GM (F&A) of MSTC, 
Shri Shailendra Kumar Sihna, director of M/s. Advance Risk Solution Co. Pvt. Ltd., Shri 
Rahis Ahmed, Partner of M/s. Straregic Consultancy, Shri Rammurthy Mani, Managing 
director of M/s. Great Aid Projects  Pvt. Ltd,. Shri Prem Kumar Sharma, Ex -Director of 
Pen Urban Co. Operative Bank Ltd. and advisor of Shri Shishir Dharkar and Shri D.K. 
Jain, Manager of M/s. Space and Partner of M/s. Apollo General Trading LLC, Dubai, 
M/s. Ushma Jewellery Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd., M/s Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd.  
M/s. KA Malle Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Joshi Bullion & Gems Pvt. Ltd.,. M/s. 
Bond Gems Pvt. Ltd. and Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd. under various sections of IPC and 
Prevention of Corruption Act. 
 
 

 
 
18. Regarding the progress of action taken by Enforcement Directorate, the Ministry 
furnished the following: 
 
1. Investigation under FEMA, 1999 
 
Investigation regarding outstanding export proceeds in respect of exports made 
by the associates through MSTC has been completed and Complaints have been 
filed against the associates and its Directors/ officials. The Special Director, 
Western Region, Mumbai has issued 6 Show Cause Notices (SCNs) against the 
associates and its Directors/ officials. Investigations, in respec t of other issues i.e. 
receipt of advances from foreign buyers for export by the associates, holdings in 
foreign companies, etc. are under progress. 
   
2. Investigation under PMLA, 2002 
 
 An ECIR bearing No. 05/MZO/2012 dated 06 June, 2012 was registered o n the 
basis of the FIR filed by the ACB, CBI, Mumbai. Enforcement Directorate has 
seized pay order of 13 crores from M/s Skylark Buidcon Pvt Ltd on 26 July, 2012 
under section 17 (1) of PMLA, 2002 which were proceeds of crime received from 
M/s Space Mercan tile Co Pvt. Ltd. The Adjudicating Authority vide Order dated    
23 October, 2012 confirmed the retention of the seized amount. The defendants 
have filed appeals against the order of the Adjudicating Authority before the 
Appellate Tribunal for PMLA, which are pending. 
 
19. The Ministry have also stated that further investigation on the basis of charge 
sheet filed by the CBI in this case before the Special Judge for CBI, Mumbai is in 
progress. The Ministry of Steel are periodically reviewing the progress of action taken 
by the MSTC, CBI and Enforcement Directorate for recovery of outstanding dues.  
  
20. The Committee are glad to note from the Action Taken Reply of the 
Government that in pursuance of their instant Recommendation, a lot of headway 
has been made both by CBI and ED to bring the guilty to book. CBI has since filed 
charge sheet under various sections of IPC and Prevention of Corruption Act in 
the Court of Special Judge, Mumbai against various persons including officers of 
MSTC and ED has also compl eted substantial action under FEMA, 1999 and 
PMLA 2002. Furthermore, investigation is in progress both by CBI and ED at their 
ends. The Committee feel that in order to send the perpetrators of fraud behind 
the bars, it is necessary that the investigations should be brought to the logical 
conclusion at the earliest. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry 
should, through constant monitoring and coordination with all agencies including 
diplomatic channels, ensure expeditious completion of the probe  by the 
enforcement agencies so that the reality is brought to the fore and the ends of 
justice are served. 
  
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 1) 
 
The audit para 17.2 of the C & AG‟s 2011-12, Report No. 3 (Commercial) relating 
to MSTC‟s export of Gold Jewellery brought out that an amount of Rs. 611.79 crore 
(including financial charges) remained un-recovered after effecting exports during 2008-
09. The Committee‟s examination of the audit para reveals that the entire gamut of the 
transactions and securities are all presently sub -judice. In the 46 legal cases filed 
against defaulted foreign buyers in UAE, Singapore and Kuwait, 13 decrees amounting 
to Rs. 216.11 crore awarded so far by foreign courts in favour of MSTC. Arbitration 
against all the six associates suppliers started in December, 2009 is still continuing. 
Legal action to recover insurance claims from Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
(ECGC) is in progress. A suit against Pe n Urban Co -operative Bank for Rs. 162 crore 
for enforcing sale of mortgaged collateral securities is being initiated. It is observed that 
recoveries already made include Rs.52 crore through remittance from foreign buyers, 
Rs.13 crore from interest in Fixed Deposit (FD), Rs. 39 crore from mortgaged properties 
and Rs. 69.51 crore from arbitration award in favour of MSTC. In normal course, the 
Committee would not have selected a sub -judice matter for examination. The 
Committee, therefore, in conformity with pa rliamentary practice and in order not to 
prejudice the course of justice, refrain from making any observation on the substantial 
issues and bring out in most of the subsequent paragraphs mere facts of the case in the 
light of audit observations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Being a matter of records, no comments. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No comments 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comments 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 2) 
 
During the course of the Committee‟s examination of the subject, an impression 
was sought to be created that undue haste was shown by MSTC in approving the 
business of export of jewellery in July, 2007 soon after submission of corporate planning 
study by the National Productivity Council (NPC) in April, 2007. According to the then 

 
 
CMD of MSTC (Shri Malay Sengupta), export of jewellery had been recommended by a 
Professional Market Research Agency (ORG -India) as early as in the year 2005. 
Looking at the MSTC‟s foray into new businesses in totality, the Committee find that on 
the basis of NPC study of April, 2007, export of jewellery was not the only new business 
started during 2007-08 but there were four other new businesses of coal, steel, iron ore 
and oil & natural gas all of which commenced in the same year based on NPC report. It 
is a moot point as to how the allegation of undue haste can be singled out to only one 
item - „export of jewellery‟. The Committee note that the sale figure during 2007 -08 for 
the four commodities ranged from Rs.1053 crore to Rs.2626 crore whereas in the case 
of jewellery, the export figure stood much less at Rs.261 crore. It is observed that while 
business in respect of the four commodities continued in the successive years, export of 
jewellery was discontinued after 2008-09 due to the problem of non-recovery of dues.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Being a matter of records, no comments. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No Comments 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comments 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 3) 
 
During the examination of the subject, it was brought to the notice of the 
Committee that MSTC Ltd. did not carry out due diligence in verifying the  credentials of 
the associates and foreign buyers before accepting the proposals for the export 
business of gold jewellery as a result of which huge some of public money has been 
locked up in legal battle. MSTC has pleaded in this connection that credentia ls of the 
associates were verified through a numerous set of documents such as documentary 
evidence of prior export/dealing in gold jewellery, etc.; Income tax/Sales tax registration, 
RCMC from Gems and Jewellery Export Promotion Council, documentary evide nces 
regarding prior experience with STC, etc. MSTC reportedly obtained several documents 
on the overseas buyers including the D & B / TCM report, Chartered Accountants 
certificate of past experience. According to Audit, three out of six associates were 
defaulters in paying their dues to State Trading Corporation in the business of export of 
gold jewellery in the year 2007 -08. MSTC has contended that the associate suppliers 
and overseas buyers performed the contracts flawlessly during 2007 -08 and did not 
think of any other cross verification and the Company relied on the due diligence made 
by the insurers regarding the foreign buyers. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prior to taking export turnover policy, Export Credit Guarantee Corporation 
(ECGC) officials visited MSTC office to discuss the kind of insurance that MSTC should 
take as it was a customized policy that ECGC had decided to issue and not their 
standard poli cy, since MSTC had no insurance experience of such business 
transactions. On 16.07.2007 ECGC gave non -binding indication for Credit Insurance 
cover for Export receivables for Multi Buyer Exposure (MBEP) (Customer specific). At 
the time of discussion the pr oposed Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with the 
associate was shown to them. Based on that discussion the multi buyer exposure 
(MBEP) policy was replaced by non binding indication for an Export Turnover Policy 
(Customer specific) on 28.08.2007. When the MoA was given in Nov, 2008 officially, 
ECGC did not bother to cancel the policy on the ground that MSTC did not have any 
insurable interest in view of MoA. The policy was taken after discussion with ECGC 
insurance broker M/s Willis BA India Private Limited, Ne w Delhi as MSTC had no such 
previous experience and hence totally depended on ECGC for appropriate insurance 
policy. While applying for the insurance cover to ECGC in form 144, it was clearly 
mentioned that  suppliers/associates have experience with the pr oposed Foreign 
Buyers thus the existence of nexus between supplier & buyers was openly given to 
ECGC and they gave the policy and approved Credit Limits of each of the buyers 
knowing fully well the existence of suppliers through whom MSTC proposed to expor t 
the gold jewellery. Thus MSTC relied on due diligence made by the insurers.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
        It is stated in reply that the policy was taken after discussion with ECGC insurance 
broker M/S Willis BA Indi a Private Limited, New Delhi. However, after verification it was 
found that no such discussion took place between the company and the broker directly. 
Hence, this part of reply is not tenable. 
 
       In the reply, it was further stated that Form 144 was s ubmitted to ECGC which 
clearly mentioned that suppliers/ associates have experience with the proposed foreign 
buyers. Thus, the existence of nexus between suppliers and foreign buyers was openly 
given. It was observed that the form 144 had given informatio n regarding experience of 
the associates with foreign buyers. However, it did not mention that the associates were 
related parties and one of the associates was owner of few foreign buyers also. Thus, 
due diligence required by the Company was not performed . The MoA with associates 
was signed in August, 2007 and the policy was entered into in September 2007. As per 
the principle of insurance (utmost good faith), copy of the MoA should have handed 
over to ECGC at the time of entering into insurance policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         MSTC has stated that the company being new in the export of plain gold jewellery 
had detailed discussions with ECGC officials prior to taking the insurance policy. ECGC 
vide their letter no.KEB/DEV/2007 dated 3.8.2007 had i ssued a non -binding indication 
for multi-buyer exposure policy (customer specific) which did not suit MSTC‟s proposal. 
Then there was another round of discussions with ECGC officials.  ECGC, all on a 

 
 
sudden issued a non -binding indication for Export Turnov er Policy (customer specific) 
vide ref. no.KEB/DEV/2007 dated 28.8.2007 addressed to M/s. Willis B A India Pvt. Ltd., 
Flat No.306, 3rd floor, Mercantile House, 15, Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi -110 
001, A/C MSTC Ltd.. Prior to that MSTC did not have any knowledge about the above 
company and never had discussion with that company. Therefore, the discussions 
referred in the  reply is actually a discussion between MSTC and ECGC officials. 
 
             In the case of submission of form no.144 whatever the in formation were 
available to MSTC were given to ECGC. Relationships between the Asscocites were 
neither known at the time of export nor had it been reflected in the Dun & Bradstreet 
Report. Moreover, MSTC repeatedly declared that the company did not have an y 
experience in the export of gold jewellery and as such, was entirely depending on the 
ECGC‟s expertise for such export for finding  the credentials of the party. In fact, in the 
364th Board Meeting of ECGC dated 27.11.2009 clearly stated that in response  to a 
query from a Board member, the Management of ECGC stated “………before deciding 
on assuming risks, reports from 2 credit rating agencies were called and were cross 
checked and risks were underwritten taking into account the capacity and the 
willingness to pay of the foreign buyers.” Thus it is clear that ECGC never placed the 
burden of vetting the foreign buyers on MSTC.  Draft MOA was shown to ECGC prior to 
the issuance of the policy which ECGC acknowledged in the internal noting dated 
29.06.2007 while forwarding the proposal from Kolkata branch to H.O. for formulation of 
a customer specific policy. Therefore MSTC   acted on the principle of Insurance 
(utmost good faith). ECGC never asked for the signed copy of MOU which is exactly as 
per draft MOU referred by ECGC in their internal note. 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No   6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 9 of Chapter-I of the Report.] 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 4) 
 
Audit has pointed out that there was meager net worth of the associates selected 
by the Company as compared to advances paid to them. MSTC has pointed out that it 
did not pay any advance to the associate suppliers. Part payment towards purchase of 
gold jewellery was made after completion of perfor mance by the associates – after 
shipment and on acceptance of foreign buyers. It is observed from the statement of 
comparison between total volume of trading business of PSUs and their networth, 
furnished to the Committee that exposure of MSTC is one of th e least and is much 
lower than the financial institution/banks. All PSU trading companies have very thin 
margins – MMTC 0.11%, STC 0.09% and MSTC 0.47% in 2010 -11. The MSTC‟s 
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) as on 01 -04-2008 was about 9% which is stated to be 
the same as CAR followed by most of the banks and financial institutions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comments. 
  

 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No Comments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comments 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 5) 
 
The Audit has observed that as per agreement, the associates were required to 
bear all the risks and costs in case of non -payment of export proceeds by the foreign 
buyers. MSTC in September, 2008 reportedly modified original clause of the agreement 
enabling it to encash Post -Dated Cheques (PDCs) furnished by the associates in the 
event of non receipt of export proceeds from the foreign buyers. As per modified clause, 
the PDCs could be encashed only in the event of non -payment by the foreign buyers 
due to disputes with the associates relating to quantity, quality and price only. This is 
stated to have facilitated the associates to become risk free in the event of non-payment 
by the foreign buyers  on any ground and the entire such risk was passed on to the 
Company / Insurers. MSTC has argued in this regard that the relevant clause of the 
MOA needed suitable amendment to reflect the true spirit / purpose for providing PDCs 
by the associate. The rete ntion of PDCs for payment failure by the overseas buyers 
might have made the insurance policies infructuous. Payment risk of foreign buyers was 
hedged through insurance policy and PDCs of associate suppliers were to hedge the 
performance risk of associates. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the MoA executed between MSTC and Associate Suppliers, the Export 
contract is an integral part of MoA and in the event of foreign buyer failing to honour 
their contractual obligations, the associate supplier alone were to bear all the risks, 
costs and consequence for the same.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
 The reply is not tenable as the networth of associates suppliers was insignificant 
when compared to their credit exposure. Thus, associates were not in a position to 
honour their contractual obligations in the event of non-payment of export proceeds by 
foreign buyers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 MSTC has reported that while formulating the export policy, it was clearly 
informed to the Board of MSTC Ltd that: 

 
 
a)  The Ass ociate of MSTC would make the shipment as per export order in their 
(Associate) own cost. Pre shipment inspection of the consignment would be done 
by Appropriate Inspection Agency. 
 
b)  On receipt of the export document duly accepted by the overseas buyer,  MSTC 
would advance upto 85% of the export value to its Associates. 
 
c)  In the event of non -payment by the overseas buyer , the claim would be lodged 
with the insurance company /risk underwriting agency who would pay 90% of the 
shipment value to MSTC as per standard procedure. 
 
Accordingly in the insurance policy also the clause “Contract repudiation” had 
been deleted. Thus once the shipment is done the associate do not have any liability. 
As such, the credentials of the associates were not checked. The de fault of foreign 
buyers to pay on due date is covered by the insurance policy which was amply made 
clear to ECGC prior to the issuance of the policy. The clause of reimbursement was 
kept in the MOA as an extra ordinary precaution to put pressure on the ass ociates in 
case the party defaults since the buyers are nominated by the associates and are 
known to associates 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that in addition to a Multi buyer insurance policy taken out 
with ECGC to cover the risk of non -payment of export proceeds from overseas buyers, 
the Company entered in to a factoring mode arrangement with ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Company Ltd. in respect of four foreign buyers.  The policy with the ICICI 
Lombard stipulated that the Company should not enter into any export trade insurance 
policy without the written consent of insurer. Regarding coverage of four foreign buyers 
under two insurance policies, the Company stated that t he insurance policies of ECGC 
and ICICI Lombard are mutually exclusive and in the opinion of the Solicitor General it is 
not exactly a case of double insurance. According to Solicitor General, factoring mode 
arrangements are to be permissible both on the f ace of the ECGC policy as well as 
ICICI Lombard Policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MSTC has declared its total export turnover done through ECGC. The Policy with 
the other Insurance Company (ICICI Lombard) is relating to the purchase of Turnover 
by the Standard Chartered Bank (SCB) and in that policy SCB is principal insured and 
MSTC was only co -insured. Moreover in the policy period 29.08.07 to 31.08.08 there 
was no other insurance company as business with SCB was not done in that period. 
Out of total c laim of Rs.450.74 cr. in the entire period, Rs.322.79 cr. was for this 1 st 
policy period which has also been wrongfully denied by ECGC. 
 
 
  

 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
The reply is not tenable. As per the ECGC policy, the poli cy was a whole 
turnover policy. Thus all exports should have been done through them. Further, the 
foreign buyers were given over exposure i.e. more than their financial strength by giving 
credit under two insurances. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
                MSTC  declared its total export turnover done through ECGC.  for the exports 
that were purchased by Standard Chartered Bank (SCB). Under RPA  it is the bank who 
had taken policy from ICICI Lombard, where SCB is a lead Insured and MSTC is the co-
insured. In fact for recovery Standard Chartered Bank has filed a case against the 
insurance company in Bombay High Court all by themselves. Thus, as far as MSTC is 
concerned, entire export made under the ECGC policy had been declared to ECGC and 
there is no breach of contract. 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 7) 
 
Out of 47 foreign buyers to whom gold jewellery worth Rs.638.20 crore was 
exported during 2008-09, 46 foreign buyers did not pay their dues of Rs.598.63 crore on 
their due dates. The Company which paid Rs. 68.78 crore as interest, bank charges and 
discounting charges to the banks besides incurring crystallization loss of Rs. 53.06 
crore could realize only an amount of Rs. 10.48 crore from the ass ociates after 
encashment of FDR amounting to Rs. 25 crore which the Company received in April 
2009. The Committee have been informed that the Company had also received, in 
November 2008, two Bank Guarantees (BGs) amounting to Rs.62 crore from two 
associates as security towards exports to be made in future i.e. after December, 2008. 
However, since no export took place after November 2008, the aforesaid BGs could not 
be encashed. Further, the Company received 14 FDRs amounting to Rs.100 crore from 
two associa tes issued by Pen Co -operative Bank in April 2009 with the condition to 
encash the same on maturity between October 2010 and June 2011. These also could 
not be encashed because of RBI directive dated 22 September 2010 precluding the 
bank from making any pa yment or discharging any liability or obligation. During audit 
scrutiny, it was revealed that the bank was having a meagre deposit of Rs. 400 crore 
only and one of its Directors was an ex-Director of an associate (Space). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Being a matter of record, no comments. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
 The reply is silent about why the company has accepted FDRs and Bank 
Guarantees which were issued as security by a non -Scheduled urban Co -operative 
bank with a meager deposit instead of a nationalized/ Scheduled bank. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
                MSTC has stated the  company accepted the FDRs and BGs from Pen Urban 
Cooperative Bank as most of the amount was transferred to the Associates account 
maintained with that bank. The principle of doctrine of indoor management put onus on 
the respective companies/banks to work within rule and capacity. If the bank has issued 
the FDRs and BGs it is binding on them to pay on due date and in this particular case 
the bank might have paid if RBI would not have intervened and close the operation by  
under Section 35A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 since 23.09.2010. 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 8) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Company has initiated legal action 
against all defaulters including associates, insurers and foreign buyers, invoking judicial 
provisions in force in the country and abroad and till November, 2011, have incurred 
legal expenses of over Rs. 3.17 crore in recovery action for gold jewellery matter. 
Detailing about the steps taken for recovery of unrealized money through courts and 
otherwise, the Chairman and Managing Director of the Company during his deposition 
before the Committee stated that the Company has succeeded in securing 13 decrees 
in their favour in the foreign courts during last six months at various points of time. 
Beside, the Company has also put up their case strongly in the hearing of National 
Consumer Grievance Forum which agreed to treat MSTC as „consumer‟ overruling the 
objection of ECGC in the consumer complaint against ECGC. The Committee however, 
note with dismay that the Company which received its first decree way back in 13th 
December, 2011 have n ot ensured its execution so far. The Committee express their 
strong displeasure over undue delay in this regard and desire that besides taking efforts 
for speeding up the legal process, the Company should also take necessary action to 
ensure execution of decrees in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Legal cases have been initiated against all the 46 defaulting buyers, 44 in UAE 
and 1 each in Kuwait and Singapore. Till date, 43 decrees have been received in favour 
of MSTC valued at Rs.672.30 crore. 
 
MSTC‟s advocates in UAE have been instructed to file execution cases in 
respect of all the 43 judgments received from UAE. As per their law, execution cases 
can be filed only after the mandatory period of six months after publication of the 
judgment. As a result of regular follow up by MSTC, the following execution cases have 
been filed. 
 
1. M/s. Leo Diamond - 1146/2012. 
2. M/s. Metric Trading. - 437/2012. 
3. M/s. Noor Jahan General Trading - 1235/2012. 
4. M/s. Bodra Trading. - 1233/2012. 
5. M/s. Labdhi International. - 1031/2012. 

 
 
6. M/s. Sajgyan Diam. - 12890/2012. 
7. M/S Star Alloys LLC FZE, Fujairah - 179/2013. 
8. M/s. Future Icon Trading (FZE) Dubai. - 109/2013. 
9. M/s. Hadar International Trade Agency, Abu Dhabi. - 1031/2012. Cassation  case 
No. 543/2012. 
10. Matz International 715/2013 
11. Mobicon International FZE 2386/2013 
12. Morning Rise General Trading 2385/2013 
 
Six foreign buyers have appealed against the decree passed in Court of 1st instance:-  
 
1. M/s. Al Sidra Jewellery. 
2. M/s. Mine Gold & Jewellery. 
3. M/s. Hadir Projects & Environment Systems L.L.C. 
4. M/s. Zeeba Gems LLC. 
5. M/s. Ghanim Trading. 
6. M/s. Hadar International Trade Agency. 
 
Foreign buyers at Sl.No.3 has  already lost in appeal but MSTC are yet to receive 
the judgment. The executions of the cases are being vigorously fo llowed up with UAE 
advocates by mail and personal visits to Dubai by CMD MSTC along with MSTC‟s  
advocates. 
 
MSTC‟s Singapore lawyers have filed winding up case against a buyer on receipt 
of a decree in favour of MSTC by Singapore Court. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No Comments 
 
Reply of the Government 
No  Comments 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No   6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 15 of Chapter-I of the Report.] 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SI No. 9) 
 
The Committee noted that besides initiating legal action, MSTC referred the case 
of defaulters to the CBI for a probe after repeated extensions sought by overseas 
buyers on flimsy grounds raising a suspicion of criminal conspiracy. Based on t he 
information gathered during investigation, CBI has stated that the extant case is 
indicative of foul play involving associates, insurers and foreign buyers. The agency 
further pointed out that as new links are also being unearthed, its domain of probe 
continues to widen procrastinating completion of the investigation process and task of 
sending the perpetrators of fraud to jail. The Enforcement Directorate also is 

 
 
investigating the case under the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) and 
Prevention of M oney Laundering Act (PMLA). The Committee desire that CBI and ED 
must complete their investigations expeditiously and take the cases to their logical 
conclusion at the earliest, without compromising the interests of MSTC. The Committee 
also desire the Mini stry of Steel to make a periodical review of the probe being 
conducted by the investigating agencies in the matter and ensure its completion with 
promptitude.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has filed chargesheet in the  court of 
Special Judge, Mumbai against Shri Shishir Dharkar, then CMD of Pen Urban Co -
operative Bank and M/s Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd.  Shri Vivek Vaidya, Director of 
M/s Ushma Jewellery Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd., Mrs. Gulraihna Ommer, Share Holder  
& Director of M/s Space Mercantile  Co. Pvt. Ltd., Mr. Radheyshyam Bhomavat Director 
of M/s. Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd., Jayesh Desai, Director of M/s. Joshi Bullion and 
Gems Pvt. Ltd., Shri Vinod Motwani, Director, M/s. Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd., Shri M alay 
Sen Gupta, the then CMD of MSTC, Shri Utpal Sarkar, the then DGM (F&A) of MSTC, 
Shri Tapas Basu, the then GM (F&A) of MSTC, Shri Shailendra Kumar Sihna, director 
of M/s. Advance Risk Solution Co. Pvt. Ltd., Shri Rahis Ahmed, Partner of M/s. 
Straregic Consultancy, Shri Rammurthy Mani, Managing director of M/s. Great Aid 
Projects Pvt. Ltd,. Shri Prem Kumar Sharma, Ex -Director of Pen Urban Co. Operative 
Bank Ltd. and advisor of Shri Shishir Dharkar and Shri D.K. Jain, Manager of M/s. 
Space and Partner of M/s. Apollo General Trading LLC, Dubai, M/s. Ushma Jewellery 
Packaging Export Pvt. Ltd., M/s Space Mercantile Co. Pvt. Ltd.  M/s. KA Malle 
Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Joshi Bullion & Gems Pvt. Ltd.,. M/s. Bond Gems Pvt. 
Ltd. and Bonito Impex Pvt. Ltd. u nder various sections of IPC and Prevention of 
Corruption Act. 
 
Progress of Action taken  by Enforcement Directorate. 
  
1. Investigation under FEMA, 1999 
 
 Investigation regarding outstanding export proceeds in respect of exports 
made by the associates thr ough MSTC has been completed and Complaints 
have been filed against the associates and its Directors/ officials. The Special 
Director, Western Region, Mumbai has issued 6 Show Cause Notices (SCNs) 
against the associates and its Directors/ officials. Invest igations, in respect of 
other issues i.e. receipt of advances from foreign buyers for export by the 
associates, holdings in foreign companies, etc. are under progress.   
 
2. Investigation under PMLA, 2002 
 
 An ECIR bearing No. 05/MZO/2012 dated 06.06.2012 was registered on 
the basis of the FIR filed by the ACB, CBI, Mumbai. Enforcement Directorate has 
seized pay order of 13 crores from M/s Skylark Buidcon Pvt Ltd on 26.07.2012 
under section 17 (1) of PMLA, 2002 which were proceeds of crime received from 
M/s Space Mercantile Co Pvt. Ltd. The Adjudicating Authority vide Order dated 

 
 
23.10.2012 confirmed the retention of the seized amount. The defendants have 
filed appeals against the order of the Adjudicating Authority before the Appellate 
Tribunal for PMLA, which are pending. 
 
 Further investigation on the basis of Charge sheet filed by the CBI in this case 
before the Hon‟ble Special Judge for CBI, Mumbai is in progress. 
 
                  The Ministry of Steel is periodically  reviewing the  progress of action  taken 
by the MSTC, CBI  and  Enforcement Directorate for recovery of outstanding dues.   
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No Comments 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No Comments 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No   6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
 
[Please also see comments of the Committee at Para 20 of Chapter-I of the Report.] 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl. No. 10) 
 
Emphasizing the need for Government representatives in the Board of PSUs to 
report to the Ministry about important developments in Board Meetings, the Steel 
Secretary deposed before the Committee that “all the Directors (Government nominees) 
on the Board o f Company have to report any major decision taken by the Company to 
the Government. In the period when this happened, unfortunately, that did not happen 
and there was no reporting to the Government.” Further, the Committee were informed 
that Central Vigilance Commission in addition to CBI and ED are currently looking in to 
the suspected criminal conspiracy involving the officials of Ministry and MSTC and a 
CVO report has also been sought to fix the responsibility against the wrong doers. 
According to the re port, collusion of some officials of the MSTC / Ministry with the 
suspected persons has been discovered and suspension order was issued. However, 
the culprit remained scot-free for unknown reason for a longer duration. Taking a strong 
exception to the non -implementation of the decision to issue a suspension order to a 
staffer in the Ministry, the Secretary, Steel, candidly admitted that this was a „serious 
lapse‟ and assured the Committee that immediate action would be taken against the 
guilty in the matter . He added that since CVO report suggests that CBI inquiry is still 
underway, the responsibility against the erring officials will be fixed as soon as the 
inquiry report is made public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Steel referred the matter  t o Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
on 18.8.2009 for investigation and taking necessary action on urgent basis and a copy 
of the same was also endorsed to Central Vigilance Commission(CVC). The CBI filed a 
charge sheet against various persons including  the officers of MSTC in Februrary,2013. 
Neither the CBI nor the CVC have recommended any action against any official of the 
Ministry of Steel.  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
No Comment 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No comment 
 
(Ministry of Steel‟s O.M. No. 6(4)/2010-MFdated 15 January 2014) 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
-Nil-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-Nil-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
17 February 2014 Chairman 
28 Magha 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 th February 2014 from 1500 hrs to        
1530 hrs in Room No. 147 (Chairman‟s Chamber), Parliament House (Third Floor), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
4. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5. Prof. Saugata Roy 
6. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
7. Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Sh. P. C. Koul, Director 
2. Sh. M. K. Madhusudhan, Additional Director 
3. Sh. G. C. Prasad, Dy. Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Sh. P Sesh Kumar, Director General (Commercial)-II 
2. Sh. B. C. Mandal, Dy. Director 
 
  

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG to 
the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
 
(i)  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
 
(ii)  Report on action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
 Recommendations contained in the Twenty -third Report  on Export of Gold 
 Jewellery by MSTC Limited based on Audit Para 17.2 of Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 
 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports on the basis 
of factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX Matter not related to this Report. 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY -THIRD 
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) ON ‘EXPORT OF 
GOLD JEWELLERY BY MSTC LIMITED’ 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations 
 
10 
II. Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government (vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9) 
 
Percentage of total 
 
9 
 
 
90 
III. Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply ( vide recommendation at          
Sl. No. 10) 
 
Percentage of total 
 
1 
 
 
 
10 
IV. Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 
Percentage of total 
 
Nil 
 
 
0 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
 
Percentage of total 
Nil 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 