C.P.U. NO. 960 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2013 - 2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
JOINT VENTURE OPERATIONS OF ONGC VIDESH LIMITED 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[BASED ON C&AG REPORT NO. 28 OF 2010-11 (PERFORMANCE AUDIT)] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.2.2014 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5.2.2014 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY 2014 / MAGHA, 1935 (S) 
 
27 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2013-14)   
Composition of the Committee (2011-12)  
Composition of the Committee (2012-13)   
Introduction  
 PART I  
 BACKGROUND ANALYSIS  
Chapter-I Evaluation of E&P Opportunities  
Chapter-II Joint Ventures  
Chapter-III Success rate of OVL 
 
 
 PART II 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 22 August 2012.  
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 7 January 2014 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.     Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
4. Shri Haokip Kakai Executive Assistant 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (2013 -14) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -
seventh Report on Joint Venture Operations of ONGC Videsh Limited  based on Audit 
Report No. 28 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit). 
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (201 1-12) had selected the above said 
subject for detailed examination. However, the examination of the Subject could not be 
completed during the term of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2011 -12).The 
Committee on Public U ndertakings (2012 -13) reselected the subject and further 
continued the examination.   Since the examination remained inconclusive during the 
term of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2012 -13), the present Committee again 
selected the Subject to complete the unfinished task. 
  
3. The Committee (2012-13) took evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas and ONGC Videsh Limited  on the subject at their Sitting 
held on 22 August 2012.   
  
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Repo rt at their Sitting held on            
7 January 2014. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas and ONGC Videsh Limited for tendering evidence before 
them and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with the examination 
of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of Comptroller & Auditor General of India.  
 
7. The Committee  also wish to express their sincere thanks to the predecessor 
Committees for their valuable contribution in the examination of the subject. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 January 2014 Chairman 
17 Pausha, 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2011-2012) 
 
Chairman 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4. Shri Ramesh Bais 
5. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7. Smt. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
9. Shri Baijayant Panda ‘Jay’ 
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivajirao Patil 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
12. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13. Shri Uday Singh 
14. Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Vacant *  
17. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
18. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
19. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
20. Vacant # 
21. Vacant # 
22. Shri N.K. Singh 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________  
 
*  Vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 27.1.2012.  
 
#  Vice Ms. Mabel Rebello and Shri Tapan Kumar Sen ceased to be members of the 
Committee consequent upon their retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2.4.2012.  
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 
Chairman 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant * 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.     Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.     Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________  
 
* Vice Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. passed away on 25 April, 2013.  
 
 
  

 
 
PART I 
 
Background Analysis 
 
Introductory 
 
ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) is a wholly owned overseas arm of Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation Limited. The Company though incorporated on 5 March 1965 got its 
present name on 15 June, 1989. Previously it was known as Hydrocarbons India Private 
Limited. The Company is engaged in prospecting, acquisition, exploration, development 
and production of oil and gas acreages abroad with its operations spanning in 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Far East, Middle East, Africa and Latin 
America. The Compa ny has incorporated/acquired four overseas wholly owned 
subsidiaries (ONGC Nile Ganga B.V., ONGC Narmada Limited, ONGC Amazon 
Alakananda Limited and Jarpeno Limited) and one JV Company (ONGC Mittal Energy 
Limited) for acquiring stake in various blocks at producing, exploration and development 
stages. The affairs of the Company as of March 2010 were being managed by a board 
of Directors consisting of 13 Directors including four functional Directors, two 
Government nominee Director and seven part time Directo rs who are whole time 
Directors on the board on ONGC. The Chairman and Managing Director (CMD) of 
ONGC is also the Chairman of the Company.   
 
The Company had acquired 45 exploration and production (E&P) assets up to 
March 2010. Out of 45 assets, 14 were p roducing, developing/discovered assets, 23 
assets were under exploration  and remaining eight had been abandoned by the 
Company up to March 2010 due to  non-discovery of hydrocarbons. Producing and 
developed assets of the Company had proven hydrocarbon reserves of 185.995 Million 
Metric Tonne Oil Equivalent (MMTOE). The Company acquired 36 assets having an 
investment of Rs.6,206.83 crore at exploration stage and achieved success in only five 
projects (only one project is producing and the remaining four are still under 
development) where it was the non -operator. Eight projects with a cost of Rs.1,066.17 
crore had to be abandoned and remaining 23 projects were still in the process of 
exploration. Thus, as a sole operator, the Company has not achieved any s uccess so 
far and needs to improve its core competence in the evaluation of investment 
opportunities. 
 
The performance audit of joint venture operations of the Company was reportedly 
taken up for the first time because since incorporation in 1965 to March 2004, the 
Company had acquired only eight  Exploration and Producing (E&P) assets and its 
turnover was just Rs. 3,245 crore in 2003 -04. However, during the period 2004 -10, a 
total of 37 new E&P assets were acquired by the Company. Also, out of  eight assets 
abandoned by the Company since incorporation, seven assets were abandoned during  
this period due to non discovery of hydrocarbons and after incurring an expenditure of 
Rs. 997.66 crore. Audit reviewed the Company's transactions, on the basis  of records 
available in India, relating to acquisition, exploration, development and production of oil 
and gas fields abroad through Joint  Ventures (JVs) and through its subsidiary or JV 
Companies for the period from 2004 -05 to 2009-10 and examined the adequacy of the 
systems for due diligence, formation of joint ventures and  internal controls in respect of 
these overseas Exploration and Producing (E&P) assets. 

 
 
 
The Performance audit was conducted to assess: 
 
 The adequacy of due diligence process for identification, appraisal and 
evaluation of investment opportunities in the E&P assets; 
 
 The rationale behind formation of JVs and adequacy and reasonableness of 
terms and  conditions of Joint Operating Agreement (JOA) and Exploration and 
Production Sharing  Agreement (EPSA)/Production Sharing Contract (PSC) 
governing JV operations to safeguard financial interests of the Company; and 
 
 The adequacy of internal control and internal audit arrangement to provide a 
reasonable assurance to the stakeholders on the investment. 
 
A sample of 20 out of 45 E&P assets were taken up in Audit on Judgmental 
sample basis, classifying E&P assets into Producing, Developing, Exploration and 
Abandoned categories up to March 2010 as detailed below: 
 
E&P No. of 
Assets 
Total 
Investment as 
of March 
2010 (Rs. In 
Crore) 
No. of assets 
selected for 
audit 
Total 
investment in 
assets selected 
for audit (Rs. In 
crore) 
Percentage of 
Investment in 
selected E&P 
assets to total 
Investment 
Producing, 
Developing/ 
Discovered 
14 49,195.79 7 44,196.06 89.84 
Exploration 23 2,229.94 7 1,242.81 55.73 
Abandoned 8 1,066.17 6 978.88 91.81 
Total 45 52,491.90 20 46,417.75 88.43 
 
According to Audit, a performance review covering 20 of the Company’s 45 E& P 
assets for the period April 2004 to March 2010 identified two areas that require 
strengthening, viz, the Company’s systems for evaluation of investment opportunities for 
acquiring and exploiting E&P assets and for formation of Joint Ventures as also its 
internal control systems.  
 
The Audit findings and other issues related with the subject matter are dealt with 
in the succeeding chapters of this Report. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES 
 
A. Evaluation Process  
 
 According to Audit, OVL got investment opportunities through international 
bidding rounds invited by the host countries for exploration and production (E&P) 
activities, offers for farm out of  participation interest from the existing consortium 
partners of a Block, information from  empanelled Merchant Bankers/Consultants of the 
Company and diplomatic and other channels. 
 
 When asked about the systems/processes that have been put in place by the 
Company for the purpose of acquisition, exploration, development  and production of oil 
and gas acreages abroad by way of direct/joint, indirect operations through subsidiaries 
and joint ventures  companies, OVL in a written reply stated that a cquisition of any 
international E&P opportunity involves fierce competition am ongst many prospective 
buyers. The information on the offered opportunity is made available for a limited time 
window necessitating quick response in order to remain in the competition.  OVL carries 
out necessary diligence within the same limited time window making use of 
data/information available from the data room and also in the public domain.  The 
company follows a due diligence process involving technical, financial, legal and 
accounting teams before putting up to the Board/Government (as the case may be) for 
approval. Usually for producing/discovered assets, the company engages independent 
international technical, legal, financial, tax and accounting consultants in addition to in -
house teams for the due diligence. In case of exploration ventures, t he inherent risk 
assessed by the in -house technical team continues to remain even if multiple expert 
opinions are obtained.   The processes followed by OVL in accessing an in ternational 
E&P opportunity are stated to be as under: 
 
(a)  Scouting of Opportunity:  OVL comes to know about an available 
opportunity in the market through subscribed websites and publications, 
International Investment bankers, OVL’s partners in different projects or 
directly from the seller etc. 
(b)  Preliminary Evaluation: When an opportunity comes to the notice, OVL 
makes a preliminary evaluation based on public domain information and 
industry specific subscription of E&P information services. 
(c)  Confidentiality Agreement: If the preliminary evaluation is encouraging 
then OVL enters into Confidentiality Agreement (CA) or Non –Disclosure 
Agreement (NDA) with seller. The signing of CA or NDA enables the seller 
to share data and Information Memorandum with prospective buyers.  
(d)  Detailed due diligence: Internal Multi -Disciplinary team is constituted to 
evaluate the opportunity. Simultaneously Legal, Technical and Financial 
consultants are engaged based on size, complexity or requirement of the 
opportunity. Sellers Data is accessed through virtual data rooms wherever 
available and/or physical data rooms.   
(e)  Legal, Financial Technical consultants submit their due diligence reports 
on the opportunity. The multi -disciplinary team also presents their findings 

 
 
to the management of OVL. Based on this, a decision is made wherein an 
opportunity is dropped or is perused further. 
(f) The Board is informed about the findings of the teams and approval is 
taken for the bidding, bid amount and conditions if any. 
(g)  The Bid is submitted to the bidder after Board approval in cases where the 
bid value is within the power of the Board. 
(h)  GOI Approval for bids over Board approval limit: 
 
 If the bid value is in excess of USD 75 million ( Rs.300 crore), then a non -
binding or conditional bid is submitted and the seller is informed that the 
bid is subject to the Government of India approval. 
 Cases requiring government approval are routed through Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECS) before seeking Cabinet Committee of 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) approval. The case is presented to ECS for its 
recommendation to the CCEA for requisite approval. 
 In case of such bids where OVL succeeds, CCEA  is approached for 
approval. 
 
(i)  The definitive agreements are signed only after obtaining approval from 
the Board or CCEA as the case maybe. 
(j)  Political C learance: Permission is obtained from Ministry of External 
Affairs to enter a new country. 
(k)  RBI Approval: After Government approval and definite agreement, RBI is 
approached for approval of foreign currency remittances, wherever 
required. 
 
When asked to give detailed reasons for acquisition of only 8 E&P assets 
between 1965 and March, 2004 and the subsequent spurt in such acquisition when 37 
assets were acquired between 2004 and 2010, the Company stated that ONGC Videsh 
was promoted by ONGC as its wholly owned subsidiary in March  1965 as 
‘Hydrocarbons India Private Limited’ to conduct exploration and development of Rostam 
and Raksh oil fields in Iran and undertaking a service contract in Iraq as overseas arms 
of ONGC. Its name was changed to ONGC Videsh Limited in June, 1989 with the prime 
objective of marketing the expertise of ONGC abroad. Throughout the nineties, the 
Company was engaged in providing its expertise in evaluating exploration contracts. It 
also made exploration efforts in Egypt, Yemen and Tunisia, which were not successful.  
ONGC Videsh re -oriented its focus on acquiring oil and gas assets in the mid -
nineties. However, it could not compete in the international market due to lack of 
empowerment which prohibited its ability to mak e quick decisions. The Company was 
granted special empowerment by the Government of India in January 2000 whereby 
power to take investment decisions up to Rs. 200 Crore (equal to NAVRATNA powers) 
was delegated to the Board of Directors of ONGC Videsh.  In addition, a fast track 
approval system was put in place for investments beyond the power of the Board for 
approval by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) through Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECS). The delegated authority of the Board was enhanced to 
Rs. 300 Crore in February 2005. The special empowerment facilitated ONGC Videsh to 

 
 
successfully acquire oil and gas assets in foreign countries. ONGC Videsh, which had 
one asset in year 2000, gradually learnt to compete in the international arena, and could 
successfully conclude many large transactions around the world in subsequent years. 
 
 
B. Absence of a documented Policy 
 
Audit scrutiny has revealed that OVL , for acquisition of E&P assets, does not 
have a defined/documented policy. However, it constituted an Internal Multi Disciplinary 
team to evaluate the opportunities available to it and  simultaneously engaged Legal, 
Technical and Financial consultants. The Multi Disciplinary team's  advice along with the 
findings of the consultants is presented to the Management of the Company for decision 
making and approval by the Board for bidding in respect of those E&P assets which  
prima facie appeared viable to the Company. In case, the investment amount exceeded 
the financial competence of th e Company i.e. USD 75 Million or Rs. 300 crore 
whichever is less, the  proposal is forwarded for approval of Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries (ECS) and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).  
 
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that there was neither a need nor was it 
considered desirable to  have a defined procedure/policy for acquisition of oil and gas 
opportunities as each opportunity was a unique case. 
 
According to Audit, Ministry’s reply is not tenable as a documented policy will 
define the basic parameters around which the due diligence process could be carried 
out to appropriately mitigate the risk , as E&P business is capital intensive with 
uncertain returns. 
 
When asked as to how the Company ensure d consistency, uniformity and 
transparency in evaluation of the investment opportunities, formation of JVs and extent 
of acquisition of participation interest in the E&P assets , in the absence of a defined 
policy, the Minis try of Petroleum  and Natural Gas , in a written reply submitted that a 
task force was constituted to document the process followed by OVL for acquisition of 
assets as a documented policy and the same is in place now.  Farm in & Farm out into 
JVs depends on the provisions of contracts, risk reward perception & market condition s 
and there can be no specific prescription of risk/reward sharing under all circumstances. 
Each opportunity being unique in itself, it is neither possible nor desirable to prescribe a 
specific format or percentage of acquisition in a particular asset. The  provisions in the 
JOA/PSC etc. are normally as per the Standard International Practices for Joint 
Ventures.  The standard format for participation in overseas Joint Ventures is followed 
by oil majors including Exxon Mobil, Shell, BP etc. and also in joint  ventures where OVL 
is operator.   
 
Contesting the reply of the OVL, Audit in their vetted comments stated that OVL’s 
reply is not tenable as the Company is still not having any approved documented policy 
for evaluation of E&P opportunities and is only having a set procedure approved by MD 
not by the Board. Further, in the absence of a documented policy for formation of JV or 
farming-in or farming -out of PI in view of high risk and capital intensive business, the 
Company depri ved itself from mitigating the impact of known risks, leveraging the 
combined financial strength and sharing the experience of JV partners. 

 
 
 
In response to the aforesaid audit para, OVL stated that the Company entered 
into expansion and growth stage only f rom the year 2000. In the formative stage of the 
Company, a system to deal with the opportunities on a case -to-case basis based on 
their uniqueness was considered as a better approach rather than resorting to an iron 
clad policy framework. During the course of time, consistent though unwritten, practices 
on various aspects of acquisition of oil and gas assets evolved, which the Company 
followed. OVL consistently followed the practice of due diligence engaging consultants 
for assessment of Producing & Discov ered assets but selectively availed third party 
opinion in case of complex exploration opportunities. However, the Board of Directors of 
the Company has since approved the documented Policy. 
 
The representatives of the Ministry and OVL appeared before the Committee on 
22 August, 2012 to tender evidence on the subject matter. The Committee came to 
know that just five days before their appearance before them the OVL Board held a 
meeting on 17 August, 2012 and approved a documented policy for acquisition of E& P 
assets. 
 
Initially during the course of oral evidence on 22 August, 2012 a representative of 
the Company gave the following justification for not having a well defined do cumented 
policy for the purpose: 
 
“With your permission, I would like to explain to you and to this Committee. The 
ONGC Videsh is a very old Company, which was incorporated in 1965 but till 2000 we 
had only one asset, which is the asset in Vietnam, block 6.1, which is now a producing 
block. All other blocks have been acquired by 2000 and till the review period, the ONGC 
Videsh had 45 blocks in 17 countries. So, that means the rest of the 44 blocks were 
acquired during the 10 year period from 2000. The Company was in the stage of growth 
and the Company was evolving.” 
 
When queried as to how  so many acquisitions took place without a policy being 
in place, the witness changed track and stated: 
 
“Policy was there but it was not documented.” 
 
The Secretary of Petroleum and Natural Gas endorsing the views of the 
representative of the Company added: 
 
“There was a policy all through but it was not documented.” 
 
Clarifying further on his statement, a representative of the Company stated: 
 
“It was the policy, which was known to all operating persons. It evolved over a 
period of time because there was less experience. As we got the experience, we refined 
the policy.” 
 
 
 
 

 
 
The Secretary, P&NG added further: 
 
“…the policy which they have come out with, also defines very broad contours. It 
is because if they exactly define their policy as to which set are t hey going to 
take, it will be known to everybody. We are in competition in the international 
market. There are other countries and other companies vying for the same asset. 
If they know that as to what the minimum value that has to be given to an asset, 
naturally they will place to little higher value and we will be out. So is the case 
with selection of asset. If we say that we have to select an asset particularly with 
these parameters, then other would know whether we are going to come in or 
not. If there was a well defined parameters, that will be to the detriment of the 
acquisition of assets.” 
 
In a written reply furnished to the Committee , OVL informed that the existing 
policy in practice has been reviewed, updated and documented as ‘Business 
Development Policies for Acquisition of Oil and Gas Assets’ and approved by the Board 
of Directors of the Company in its 371st Board meeting held on 17th August 2012.  
 
When asked to furnish a detailed note on circumstances necessitating the 
review, updation and documentation of Business Development Policies for acquisition of 
Oil and Gas Assets and its approval in the 371st meeting of the Company’s Board held 
on 17 August, 2012.  More so, when the constant refrain of the Ministry/Company 
before the Committee was that there was neither a need nor was it considered desirable 
to have a defined policy for acquisition of Oil and Gas opportunity as each opportun ity 
was a unique case, t he Co mpany in a written reply stated that a s shared during the 
interaction with Govt. Audit Teams and deposing before the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (COPU), business development policies though not documented at that 
time, but the same were being internally practiced regularly. However, with the advice of 
audit, a broad Business Devel opment Policy has been documented now.Oil and gas 
resources are treated as strategic commodities and therefore, the competition to gain 
ownership over these assets is very intense. ONGC Videsh, which has taken the 
initiative to secure oil and gas assets ov erseas, has gained expertise over a period of 
time, largely on -the-job, i.e. during the course of going through the processes of 
responding to the milestones as set by seller.  The systems, policies and procedures for 
conducting commercial transactions for  assets abroad have evolved over a period of 
time, largely post 2000, after special empowerment was accorded to its Board by the 
Government of India. It is a fact that defining a rigid policy framework for acquisition of 
Oil and Gas assets abroad can be a practical challenge in the conduct of business in an 
environment where targets and deadlines are set unilaterally by seller, and also 
changed unilaterally by seller as per its convenience. International E&P transactions are 
not necessarily open auction pro cess available to all interested. It’s highly discretionary 
where owners decide whom to involve in the process & whom to sell, when and how. To 
be successful, a buyer has to build inherent capabilities to respond effectively and 
timely. It has to assess, e valuate, analyze risks, negotiate milestones and conclude 
deals within the time given by seller. Accordingly, it needs to have flexibility to make 
quick decisions. Also, the competitive parameters vary in each case. It is for these 
circumstances that makin g a policy framework at the learning phase of Company was 
considered challenging.  
 

 
 
The Ministry has further stated that o ver the period of last 10 -12 years, ONGC 
Videsh has grown manifold. The experience gained through the decade has provided 
the confidence to aim even higher targets, in the pursuits of meeting energy security of 
the Country. ONGC has adopted Perspective Plan 2030 for ONGC Group Companies in 
May 2012. It has set an annual production target for ONGC Videsh at 20 MMtoe of oil 
and gas by FY'18 and at 60 MMtoe by FY'30.  The targets set would require a CAGR 
(Compounded Annual Growth Rate) in production @ 22.5% from FY’13 to FY’18; and 
9.6% from FY’19 to FY'30. The targets are undoubtedly very challenging; but are 
achievable. To achieve the targets, the scope and magnitude of ONGC Videsh’s 
pursuits to acquire E&P assets abroad, would need to be increased manifold from the 
current level. As such the Company requires reviewing existing systems and 
procedures, and putting in place sound poli cies, systems and procedures to act as 
broad guidelines covering all facets of ONGC Videsh functions and businesses, 
including the core functions of acquisition of overseas oil and gas assets. Accordingly, 
the Business Development Policy (BD Policy) has be en formulated in 2012 to serve as 
broad guidelines while retaining the requisite flexibility. The Board, while approving the 
BD Policy, has deliberated the practical challenges that might arise on account of 
dynamic nature of international energy business,  and accordingly, advised retaining 
flexibility and review of the policies periodically.  The BD Policy shall require periodic 
review, mid-course corrections and alignment in line with the enhanced business targets 
and fast changing geo-political situation.” 
 
 When asked whether the absence of a documented policy for E&P acquisitions 
brought to the notice of the nodal Ministry and, i f so, when and what action was taken, 
thereafter by the Ministry, the management replied in  the negative but also submitted 
that after the BD Policy was documented in 2012 and approved by its Board, the 
Ministry has been intimated of the same. 
 
A copy of the ‘Business Development Policies for Acquisition of Oil and Gas 
Assets’ was furnished by the Company on 20 November, 2013.  It is observed  that 
several aspects crucial to exploration and production acquisitions have been codified 
in the said Policies.  The policies provide for  requisite flexibility to enable the 
executives to respond to competition in the dynamic global E&P m arket. The policies 
cover areas like  due diligence of opportunities, appointment of consultants, types of 
opportunities to be pursued, minimum thresholds for exploration assets, production 
and discovered assets, non -associated natural gas assets, country -wise exposure 
limits, product portfolio, operatorship, contracts/acquisitions, participation through joint 
ventures, analysis and valuation of proposals, relinquishment and divestment of 
blocks, etc.  
 
C. Inadequate technical study and non-revalidation of data  
 
 
Block 5B, Sudan 
 
 According to Audit t he Company acquired (May 2004) Block -5 B, Sudan with 
23.5 per cent participation interest at USD 24.06 million ( Rs. 109.44 crore) with “carry 
over finance” of 3.72 per cent participation interest of Sudapet (National oil Company 
of Sudan), as per sale/purchase condition, from OMV Aktiengesellschaft, Austria. 
Audit noticed that pre-acquisition technical study by the con sultants - Gaffney, Cline & 

 
 
Associates (GCA), brought out that the assessed reserve in the block was based on 
limited data made available by the seller, without permission to copy data from the 
data room, limited available time (only two days) for review o f data; and also pointed 
out the prevalent security problems in the designated Block area. Despite these 
reservations expressed by the consultant, the Company acquired this risky asset 
without revalidating the data. 
Audit observed that the consortium upto the year 2006, could not implement the 
scheduled seismic and drilling plan for want of accessibility to the area and restrictions 
by the local authorities. Non -implementation of Minimum Work Commitment (MWC) led 
to additional security charges, idle hiring charges for drilling rig, other incidental and 
operational charges after acquisition of the block.   
Audit examination further reveal ed that GCA had also prioritized three prospects 
for drilling namely; Wan Machar, Barada -I and Kasafa -I with “un -risked speculative 
recovery” potential of 1267.2 Metric Million Stock Tank Barrel (MMstb), 317.1 MMstb 
and 26.4 MMstb respectively. The operator drille d only one prioritized swamp “Wan 
Machar” in addition to two wells (Munny Deng and Nyal) in non - prioritized swamp 
during 2008. The drilling of two prioritized swamp wells was dropped due to less 
prospectivity of reserves in Kasafa -I and allotment of Barada-I to third party by the local 
authorities. The three wells drilled brought no hydrocarbon discovery, and thus forced 
the Company to relinquish the block (19 February 2009) after incurring an expenditure 
of USD 89.5 Million equivalent to Rs. 423.84 crore. 
 
The Management (OVL) stated (January 2010) that due diligence has to be 
carried out with limitation of time and on the basis of available data and seeking 
different opinions is neither feasible nor desirable as there is no specific technology 
which can predict availability of hydrocarbons at particular locations except by drilling. 
Further, the security risks of the Block were known at the time of acquisition and this 
was factored in while negotiating the acquisition price. 
 
 
 The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management. 
 
 
 Audit stated that they  do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as 
reasons for overlooking significant reservations expressed by the consultant were not 
available on record. Considering the limitation of time and non availability of technical 
data, as the Company was not in a position to conduct due diligence, it should not have 
gone ahead in acquiring this asset which caused high risk. 
 
It was further stated by Audit that their  technical expert opined that the 
Company's reply stating security risk in the stock was known at the time of acquisition 
and was duly factored in was not corroborated in view of increase in cost from USD 34 
million to USD 89.5 million which showed lack of understanding of ground realities and 
project planning. The prospects are prioritized no t by only un -risked resources but with 
due consideration of chance of success, i.e., risked resources. If Barada area had been 
allotted to third party by local authorities in violation of PSC and it had un -risked 
resources higher than Munny Deng and Nyal; then the Company should have asked for 
reduction in work commitment. This would have substantially reduced the Company's 
risk and money outgo. 
 

 
 
On being asked to state the reasons for overlooking the significant reservations 
expressed by the Consultant, OVL in a written reply submitted that for the benefit of 
proper understanding on the referred case, the reservations of consultant as 
observed by audit are extracted from the report and the same is reproduced below: 
 
“METHODOLOGY:  ‘This evaluation has been based on data reviewed and 
notes taken in the two day data room visit to OMV's Vienna offices between the 
29th and 30th  April, 2003. Due to the imposition of a no copying rule in the 
data room and the limited time available for the review GCA has not been  able 
to perform a full audit of the undeveloped fields. Spot checks have been made 
to ascertain the overall reasonableness of the data and the interpretations.   
 
The consultant had given single evaluation report for two Blocks, namely 
Block 5A, a discovered block and Block 5B a rank exploratory block. No 
exploratory drilling data was available in respect of the Block 5B  whereas the 
Block 5A had considerable exploration inputs in the form of seismic API and 
exploratory drilling at the time of evalua tion for acquisition by OVL. Hence, the 
reservations expressed by the consultant regarding data availability are in 
reference to Block 5A. Thus, there was no overlooking of reservations as 
indicated by consultant relating to Block 5B.  For a virgin area like Block 5B, the 
regional geological information was considered during technical evaluation of 
the block. This block, covering an area of 20,119 Km² is located in the southern 
part of prolific producer Muglad Basin. At the time of acquisition of this Block , a 
number of discoveries were made in Block -6, 1, 2, 4 and 5A (Muglad Basin) 
adjacent to the  north of Block 5B.  Based on Interpretation of available  2D 
seismic data, structural closures at Bentiu and Abu Gabra levels were identified 
with more than 3.0 bil lion stock tank barrel (stb) of hydrocarbon resource 
potential. This block was acquired along with acquisition of Block 5A where 
TharJath and Mala discoveries were already made in the same structural trend 
and geological set -up.  Limitations on time and da ta at pre -sale stages are 
generally mentioned by all external consultants and decisions need to be 
based on given data and time constraints.” 
 
Audit contended that the OVL’s reply stating that the reservations expressed by 
the consultants was related to Block 5A not for Block 5 B is not tenable as the 
consultant in its report dated May 2003 has specifically expressed that the constraints 
/ limitations regarding adverse security situation was relating to Block 5B because the 
operator was not able to enter the contract area even after a lapse of 2 years. Further, 
the E&P business being highly risky and capital intensive, the Company should have 
given due consideration to the limitations expressed by the consultant/in-house team. 
 
 In response to Audit observ ation, OVL stated that it is a standard practice 
followed by the sellers of E&P assets that they give access to their data room to the 
prospective buyers for a limited period, say for 2 to 3 days, in view of time constraints 
with the seller and there being  multiple prospective buyers to view the data. Also, the 
sellers do not allow copying of the data in view of their concern for confidentiality.  As 
regards the reservations of the consultants, they include such statements invariably as 
disclaimer in their reports to restrict their legal liabilities, which therefore need not be 
overemphasized.  It may be mentioned that security is an important but not the sole 

 
 
consideration in arriving at the oil and gas investment decisions. It is known that at the 
time of acquisition of Blocks 5A and 5B the Company was already operating in its 
GNOP, Sudan asset successfully. Security concerns were raised at the time of 
acquisition of GNOP asset by the Company as well. Incidentally, security concerns are 
prevalent in most of  the oil endowed countries.  If, OVL were to take same perspective 
on security risk in case of GNOP, then it would have lost the opportunity to benefit from 
the GNOP project.  To conclude security situation in Sudan then and now remains very 
challenging exposing to many risks even to the extent of disrupting physical operations. 
However, none of these factors alone have been strong enough reasons for OVL or for 
that matter any other oil company to discontinue its operations in Sudan.  The decision 
to acquire the Block 5B was taken not only on the basis of the report of consultant but 
also considering the overall regional oil prospectivity trend, knowing the fact that 
adjoining   blocks such as Blocks 6,1,2, 4 and 5A were having oil discoveries in similar 
geological set up. To summarise, a holistic approach, even considering the 
risks/concerns expressed by the consultants, was taken while taking an investment 
decision for Block 5B and there was no overlooking of consultant’s reservations. 
 
The Committee enquired as to why did the Company not ask for reduction in the 
work commitment to reduce its risk and money outgo, w hen the Barada area was 
allotted to third party by the local authorities in violation of the production sharing 
contract and the other area (Munny deng and Nyal) allotted in lieu of Barada had lesser 
unrisked resources .  In response, OVL stated that c onsidering the Arial extent of the 
block, the minimum exploratory work requirement to evaluate the hydrocarbon potential 
of the block was more than the Minimum Work Commitment (MWC) as defined in the 
EPSA. Hence, there was no need felt by the consortium for downward revision of MWC.  
 
In their vetted comments, Audit stated that Management’s reply is not tenable as 
Barada area had been allotted to third party by local authorities in violation of PSC and 
it had unrisked resources higher than Munny Deng and Nyal; therefore, the Company 
should have sought for reduction in MWC which w ould have substantially reduced the 
Company’s risk and money outgo.   
 
In response to the aforesaid Audit observation, OVL stated that w hile acquiring 
acreage under an Exploration Production Sharing Agreement (EPSA), physical 
exploration programme is plann ed not only to honour the contractual obligation of 
Minimum Work Commitment (MWC) but also for full appraisal of the acreage to explore 
possibility to find oil and gas. Many a times, exploratory work is increased beyond MWC 
depending on mid -course review e tc., but contractually, cannot be less than MWC.  In 
the instant case, as the Block -5B is located to the south of prolific Muglad basin with a 
number of discoveries, the Consortium did not feel the necessity to contest the MWC 
with the authorities based on the prospectivity perception. 
 
 Congo Block  
 
As per Audit t he Company acquired (February 2007) 20 per cent Participating 
Interest (PI) from ENI (Operator), who was holding 60 per cent PI in Block “Mer Tres 
Profonde Node” (MTPN) in Congo by swapping with ONGC's 34 per cent PI in Block 
MN-DWN – 2002/1 in India based  on equitable technical worth and not governed by 
financial worth.At the time of swapping, the Block was in 3rd phase of exploration with 

 
 
commitment of one well. Till the end of phase -II the consortium drilled two wells i.e. 
HTNM-I, and ZULU MARINE -I but b oth were plugged and abandoned due to non -
discovery of hydrocarbons. 
 
Audit pointed out that in-house team while evaluating the investment opportunity 
mentioned in their report that Operator had provided 2D &  3D seismic data only for 
view purpose, and the parameters considered by them for volumetrics and estimated 
volumes calculated were based on earlier (2002) interpretation. With this limitation the 
team had estimated the total reserve of 634.75 MMb for the block as estimated by the 
operator in respect of five prioritized prospects i.e. Hiti East, Hiti Central, Nkasu, Ntangu 
and Tehitebi.  Despite these reservations expressed by the in -house team as well as 
disappointing results of earlier drilled two wells, t he Company acquired this risky asset 
without revalidating the data, deviated from its prescribed procedure for evaluation of 
investment opportunity through technical, legal and financial consultants. 
 
Further, it was observed by the Audit that after revalidation of 3D data, operator 
had replaced the earlier prioritized five prospects as mentioned above with another 
prospect i.e. HVAM-1 and estimated total reserve of 322.8 MBOE in 5 layers in view of 
the discouraging results of already prioritized prospects. However, on drilling of HVAM-I 
prospect operator discovered only a reserve of 20.22 MBOE in one layer. The operator 
also could not achieve the targeted depth of 5024 meters due to operational problem as 
drilling was stopped at a target depth of 4,516 mete rs. Therefore, the potential of the 
Oligocene section of the Paloukou Formation which was a secondary exploration target 
was not explored. 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that as a result of commercially unviable discovery of oil, 
the block was relinquished (Dece mber 2009), thereby rendering the entire expenditure 
of USD 11.59 million equivalent to Rs. 67.78 crore by the Company and USD 8.65 
Million equivalent to Rs. 36.11 crore by ONGC (USD 8.65 million @ Rs. 45/USD) 
infructuous, which could have been avoided, had the Company preferred revalidation of 
the data from an independent technical consultant rather than solely relying on the 
estimated reserve as provided by the operator. 
 
Management stated (Dec. 2010) that the operator is the custodian of all data 
generated in a block and in any consortium both partners and host government rely on 
data/information generated by operator. Further, being a swap deal, the company 
decided to carry out internal technical evaluations without appointing a third party 
consultant and the company engages technical, financial and legal consultants for due 
diligence of only producing/discovered assets of significant value. As the investment in 
this exploration acreage is comparatively lower in comparison to discovered or 
producing assets, it was considered adequate to rely on in house assessment. 
 
Audit stated that they  do not agree with the Management's viewpoint as reserve 
estimation by the Company was solely based on data provided by the operator, which 
was only for viewing purposes w hile the latest data was also not provided for 
evaluation. Further, despite knowing the discouraging results of two drilled wells in the 
block, the Company relied on the old data provided by the operator without revalidation 
from outside consultants. The f act that technical, legal and financial consultants are 
engaged by the company for due diligence of only producing/discovered assets of 

 
 
significant value and not for exploration blocks, is not correct as the Company had 
engaged outside consultants for evaluation of many of its previous exploration blocks. 
 
It was further stated by Audit that their  technical expert while confirming their 
observation opined that swap deal done by the Company was on the basis of visual 
assessment of seismic data and the calcul ations were based on old 2002 data, while 
the deal took place only in 2007. The Company's in -house assessment was based 
primarily on the operators approach instead of going through third party consultation. 
Further, the Company ought to have a differential  approach for a totally unexplored 
area vis-à-vis areas already having unfruitful results. 
 
When asked as to why the Company made reserve estimation solely based on 
data provided by the operator, which was only for viewing purpose and was old data of 
2002 when the deal took place after five years in 2007, the OVL in a written reply stated 
that when a prospect is generated as a result of survey and G&G work, the potential of 
the prospect is reported as resource potential. The outcome of drilling a well on su ch 
prospect could result in a discovery or it may turn out to be dry (unsuccessful). When 
there is a discovery, it could be oil or gas and the resources is normally reported in a 
probabilistic range due to the fact that their actual parameters that contrib ute to 
assessment of reserves are unknown and are therefore also expressed in a range with 
different kinds of distribution. It is to be mentioned that the data sources for evaluation 
of a block either for OVL team or third party consultant would be the sam e as provided 
by the operator (sole provider) in their data room. In this case, the data of 2002 was the 
latest available data as provided by the operator for evaluation.   After OVL’s entry the 
3D data was reprocessed and re -interpreted and it was seen that the biggest prospect 
in the block was Hivoua -1 (HVAM-1) which was estimated to hold 322.8 MMBOE of 
unrisked reserves. It is a common practice with exploration companies to re -prioritize 
and re-rank prospects based on new information and hence Hivoua was prioritized over 
the other prospects. Technical problems prevented the well HVAM -1 from reaching the 
Oligocene reservoir (which had an estimated pre -drill potential of around 56MMbbls). 
The remaining potential of the Oligocene section of Paloukou Forma tion was 
insufficient to justify any further investment in a deepwater scenario and hence 
consortium decided to abandon the well to save on time and costs. These types of 
operational decisions are purely on technical, economical and operational merits and 
common during exploration phase. 
 
Contending the Ministry’s reply, in their vetted comments, Audit pointed out that 
the in-house team of OVL had estimated the prospectivity of the block based on the 
data (upto December 2001) as made available by the seller that too for viewing purpose 
only. Even though its prescribed procedure provided for evaluation of investment 
opportunity through outside consultants, the company acquired the stake in a risky 
asset and did not get the data revalidated from independent co nsultants despite 
knowing the limitations expressed by its in-house team.   
 
In reply to aforesaid Audit observation, OVL stated that it is worth mentioning that 
OVL’s entry into MTPN (Congo) was under a broader strategic swap deal between 
ONGC and ENI.   At the time of assessing the worth of the offer, the evaluation team 
considered all the available data including the 2D seismic data of 2002, which was the 
latest available data as provided by the Operator in line with the industry practice.   After 

 
 
OVL’s entry, the 3D data was reprocessed and re-interpreted which validated the earlier 
findings leading to prioritization of prospects for drilling and upon drilling, hydrocarbon 
was discovered but volume was not commercially viable.   Presence of multiple plays 
warrants probing of available prospects individually by separate wells. Existence of dry 
wells in the block on different prospects does not impact the prospectivity of unprobed 
prospects. In the instant case, two dry wells were located on different prospect s which 
were taken into account in evaluating the prospectivity of the remaining structures. The 
identified prospect was taken up for drilling on account of higher probability and 
expected volume of accumulation.  
 
In a post evidence reply, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
further stated that there were two dry wells drilled previously in a block should not 
be the only consideration for rejecting a block in a highly petroliferous basin like 
the Congo bas in. In fact, the well drilled in the block, after OVL’s entry, was 
proved to be successful with oil find, even though sub -commercial because of 
being located in ultra -deep water. It was further stated  that OVL has derived better 
monetary benefits in the swap deal. As per the deal, the past cost of the two blocks was 
not to be considered for payment by either party. As at the time of the swap deal, the 
past costs in Block MTPN, Congo was approximately US$ 117.67 Million (for 20% 
participating interest of OVL  this translates to US$ 23.534 Million). The corresponding 
past cost of Block MN -DWN-2002/l was approximately US$ 25.44 Million (for 34% PI of 
ENI Congo this translates to US$ 8.65 Million). As a promotional measure, in addition to 
its own proposed 34% sha re, ENI also agreed to carry ONGC's 36% of the cost of 
drilling 3 wells of Phase -I MWP in Block MN -DWN-2002/l (up to US$ 11.349 Million  in 
each well, translating to US$ 34.047 Million for the three wells).  
 
Ministry has contended that the deal was a sound  business decision based on 
strategic consideration. However, both the blocks in Congo as well as in India did not 
prove successful. 
 
D. Incorrect Analysis and Interpretation of Data  
 
As per Audit Daewoo International Corporation (DIC) offered 20:10:10 farm-out 
participation interest (July 2008) out of its 100 per cent stake in Block AD7, Myanmar 
to its JV partners, i.e., the Company, KOGAS (Korean Gas Corporation) and GAIL 
respectively. Company's technical team of geoscientists assessed (11 August 2008)  
potential reserves of 6.5 Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF) but on the other hand its Geologist 
& Geophysicists (G&G) Group opined (18 August 2008) that sands, considered for 
reserve estimates, had shaled out in major part of A1/A3 block as a result of which 
established pools were not expected to be present and reserves evaluated by the 
technical team were based on untested and un-established sand and on thin study. 
 
However, the Company approved (September 2008) acquisition of 20 per cent 
participation interest b y ignoring the opinion of G&G Group, with investment up to 
USD 20.8 million ( Rs. 93.6 crore) including “past cost” under Minimum Work 
Commitment (MWC) with an exploration period of six years.  
 
The operator drilled two exploratory wells under MWC and had given low 

 
 
priority to the third prospect based on the discouraging results of the drilled wells and 
the low reserve estimates of the third prospect. However, the Company before 
relinquishing the block, got seismic data and drilling results of two wells re -examined 
from its G&G Group, who reconfirmed its earlier recommendation that block did not 
seem attractive from the point of view of hydrocarbon discovery. The Company 
decided (January 2009) not to enter into the next exploration phase and relinquished 
the block after incurring an expenditure of US$ 15.26 million (equivalent to Rs. 74.99 
crore). 
 
 
The Management stated (January 2010) that G&G team opined that G3, G5 
and G6 sands which were gas bea ring in the Blocks A1 and A3 were not seen in 
Block AD7. The G7 Sand which was the target in Block AD7 was not established and 
not tested in that area. According to G&G team, the technical evaluation team had 
taken 233 square km area and 20 metre thickness  of reservoir for computation of 
reserves, which prima -facie appeared to be a maximum reserve case. Thus, there 
was no contradiction in views of G&G Group and Technical team. 
 
The Ministry added (October 2010) that the block was taken with the 
knowledge that the gas bearing pools in A1 and A3 sands were not extending to AD7 
and primarily required for establishing a potential new pool in AD7. 
 
Audit contended that they do not agree with the Ministry/Management's 
viewpoint as G&G Group had clearly informed in  August 2008 that established pools 
of gas were not expected to be present. Further, our technical expert also opined that 
G3, G5 and G6 sands which were gas bearing in Blocks A1 and A3 were not 
extending to AD7 Block; hence the risk in hydrocarbon prospec tivity of the Block in 
view of only single stratigraphic G7 play was very high. Further, he opined that the 
observations of G&G group contradicted the Technical Group and were not 
considered in the subsequent approval process. 
 
Enquired as to what precise factors weighed with the Company in ignoring the 
opinion of its G&G group which clearly informed that established pools of gas were not 
expected to be present , OVL in a written reply has submitted that the company has 
not ignored the opinion of the G&G group.  There was no contradiction in opinion 
between G&G Group and Technical Team regarding the Hydrocarbon prospectivity of 
the G -7 sand in Block AD -7. Both the groups had the same opinion regarding the 
presence/absence of sands and the hydrocarbon prosp ectivity of the block, 
particularly in a well -established ‘channel–levy’ depositional environment in the area. 
The G&G group only expressed the limitations in estimating the resource potential.   It 
is well established fact and followed worldwide that new r eserves can be established 
only when exploration areas were expanded based on new prospects and new ideas 
which are often untested. The decision to farm -in to Block AD -7 was based on sound 
understanding of the risk-reward perception followed in the industry. 
 
 Disagreeing with the Ministry’s reply, Audit stated that G&G Group had clearly 
mentioned in August 2008 that established pools of gas were not expected to be 
present in AD -7 block and G -7 sand is un -tested & un -established sand; however, 
these reservations were not considered in the subsequent approval process. Further 

 
 
G&G Group, after re -examining of seismic data and drilling results of two wells, 
reconfirmed its earlier recommendation that the block did not seem attractive from the 
point of view of hydrocarbon discovery.  
 
In their reply to the aforesaid Audit observation, OVL contended that it is 
factually not correct to state that Block was acquired against the recommendations of 
G&G group and there was no disagreement between the technical team and  the G&G 
Group on either the presence or the prospectivity of G -7 sand in the Block AD -7. The 
G&G group is part of the overall technical team framework which carries out the due 
diligence.  The G&G Group only expressed the limitations in  estimating the resource 
potential and risk of G -7 sand in the Block AD -7 because of being an untested 
objective in the area.  In exploratory areas, in general, target sands  / reservoirs are 
not established at the time of Farm -in decisions and these only provide the value  
multipliers in case proven on drilling.   In the instant case, additional sands were 
expected besides G -7 and therefore, it would not have been appropriate to 
downgrade the prospectivity of the Block as a whole. Moreover, the seismic 
expression as observed  by the G&G team depends on the thickness and the 
continuity of the sand over a reasonable area and is always not diagnostic. 
 
E. Inadequate technical evaluation of Block in Libya   
 
According to Audit t he technical team of the Company after visiting data room 
of the Operator Turkish Petroleum Overseas Company (TPOC) found both blocks, 
NC-188 and NC -189 in Libya, attractive with higher discovery and larger potential 
reserves in NC-188 as compared to NC-189 with presence of a good number of leads 
and recommended further detailing thereof. 
 
Audit pointed out that t he Company without further detailing or revalidation of 
team's report from an independent consultant approved (January 2002) acquisition of 
49 per cent participation interest in the above assets and entered into farm -in 
agreement with TPOC (22 August 2002)  on payment (April 2003) of USD 0.15 million 
for study expenses and USD 3.5 million towards 49 per cent of past cost. The 
operator after drilling two wells during November 2003 to June 2004 in Block NC -188 
found it bearing high exploration risks with only small limited reserve structures and 
therefore, decided to relinquish it. The in -house technical team of the Company re -
evaluated the data and opined (March 2008) that the Block did not have any 
significant left over potential and recommended no further ac tivity. The Company 
decided (May 2008) to relinquish its 49 per cent participation interest in NC - 188 after 
incurring total expenditure of Rs. 68.51 crore on survey, drilling and other 
miscellaneous activities, which could have been avoided had the recomm endation of 
the technical team been revalidated before acquiring the block. 
 
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that the team that visited Ankara in October 
2001 had made preliminary evaluations and recommended further detailing for each 
block. However, another team that visited Ankara in January 2002 found that several 
leads identified earlier had been confirmed as prospects and did not recommend 
further detailing. 

 
 
 
Audit contended that they do not agree with the Ministry's viewpoint as the 
Company did not  engage any technical consultant to validate the prospects of the 
project assessed by the in -house team. Our technical expert also agreed with Audit 
and opined that the decision of the Management to go for Block NC - 188 without 
further detailing, in view of no activity since 1993, was not a prudent decision. 
 
When asked as to why the Company did not re -evaluate the prospects of the 
project before further drilling, OVL stated that in case of Libya blocks NC -188 and NC -
189, the leads identified by the technic al team in the year 2001 were confirmed in 2002 
by the constituted OVL/ONGC team based on evaluation of re -processed data at 
Ankara. It is well established that the outcome of exploration efforts is probabilistic in 
nature and always contains an element of  risk, particularly in areas where data control 
points are limited.   It is to be mentioned that the first well in NC -188 was drilled only 
after a detailed study by India’s most prestigious Exploration Institute - Keshav Dev 
Malaviya Institute of Petroleum Exploration of ONGC in Dehradun and its 
recommendation in 2003. 
 
In their vetted comments, the Audit contended that OVL’s  in-house expert had 
recommended to go for a final techno -economic analysis and then engage suitable 
consultants for technical, financial and legal aspects of the project. 
 
In response to Audit observation, OVL stated that a  team led by Group General 
Manager (Exploration) visited Ankara in October 2001 and made preliminary 
evaluations and found both blocks, NC -188 and NC-189 in Libya, attractive with higher 
discovery and larger potential reserves in NC -188 as compared to NC -189 with 
presence of a good number of leads and recommended further detailed analysis of data 
of both the blocks.  Accordingly, an OVL team led by General Manager (Exploration) 
visited Ankara in January 2002  and found out that several leads identified earlier  were 
confirmed as prospecti ve based on evaluation using reprocessed seismic data. The 
team consisting of experts from KDMIPE, the premier E&P institute of ONGC, studied 
the data including techno-economic analysis and submitted their recommendations for 
acquiring the Block.  As such two rounds of studies were already undertaken and it was 
considered adequate for farm-in decision. 
 
The Committee enquired as to in how many cases OVL has gone against the 
experts advice and invested in an asset and also how many time OVL had ignored 
better advice available and put money in those explorations whereby it ended up with 
either no produce or less produce or abandoned the asset. In response, one of the 
representatives of OVL during evidence deposed as under:- 
 
“Let me submit that there are three specific cases where the experts, three 
consultants, advised on three projects and when we invested, we failed. In one of the 
cases, the expert advice was to investment, but we overruled it and we did not invest. 
The other company invested and found out that the area was dry. In normal cases, if we 
have the consultants, we take into cognizance their advice and corroborate with our 
own in-house analysis and then take the decision.” 
 
The representative of OVL further added:- 

 
 
 
“What I had specifically mentioned sir, that there were three cases where we had 
gone with the advice of consultants and we failed. So, just to support our reply in many 
of the points that hiring a consultant is not a certainty for success.” 
 
In this regard in a post evidence reply MoPNG stated that ONGC Videsh 
generally has two sets of ‘experts at its disposal - one is the in -house or a ONGC - 
nominated team and the another is hired consultant’s team for certain projects. The in -
house or ONGC-nominated team members are experts in thei r own discipline with vast 
industry experience, as in the case of hired consultants also. Normally the opinions of 
the two experts team match because both get a chance to carry out due diligence using 
the same data set. There may however be difference of o pinion on some aspects 
because of the fact that geology is a science with dependence on visualization capacity, 
rather than being mathematical science. Based upon the recommendations of the two 
experts, the Management finally takes a diligent view weighing  all the pros and cons of 
the proposal using its collective wisdom, belief, conviction matched with its risk -taking 
capacity at that point of time and also the strategic interest of the company. The 
proposals are subjected to a stringent approval process w here at each stage a critical 
scrutiny is made by the experienced and the knowledgeable seniors at the Board and 
Government levels. At no stage of the stringent screening and approval process, a 
better advice available was ignored. 
 
In nutshell, OVL did no t go ‘’against the expert’s advice’’ in any of the cases. If 
there was a difference of opinion, the advice understood to be better was followed. 
 
Contending the aforesaid reply of the Ministry Audit stated that in a number of 
cases it was pointed out that there was either a difference of opinion in its two groups or 
reservations/limitations were expressed by its consultants, but the Company had 
proceeded further and the reasons for ignoring or accepting an advice were not 
available on record. The Committee expressed concern that in certain cases viz Block 
5-B, Sudan, where despite reservation expressed by consultant, OVL acquired the risky 
asset without revalidating the data. The Committee further noted that in Block AD7, 
Myanmar despite reservation expressed by its G&G (Geologists & Geophysicists) group 
for acquisition of the asset, OVL approved the acquisition of 20% PI. The Committee 
asked as to whether any parameters have been fixed as to in which case to engage a 
consultant and in which case not to engage a consultant. In response, the MoPNG in its 
reply stated that, as submitted earlier, OVL has option for using two sets of experts (i) 
In-house experts drawn from ONGC -OVL and (ii) outside consultants  followed by OVL 
in specific projects. As prac tice followed in OVL, for all producing assets, decision have 
been made on the basis of both, in -house as well as outside consultants. In -high 
value/complex exploration blocks with or without discovered components also, outside 
consultants were hired to su pplement the in -house expertise. However, for 
smaller/routing exploratory block (with sparse data sets), in -house expertise of ONGC 
and OVL was used for technical assessment & decisions were made on the basis of 
their advice. Because, in the current audit process, mostly the surrendered exploration 
assets have been selected, it appears as if in most of the cases independent 
consultants were not used, which is factually not correct. 
 

 
 
In this regard two primary issues needs to be understood; (a) The basis dat a 
available for both in -house study or outside consultant is same at a given point of time 
which leads to similar opinion in most of the cases and (b) The outside consultant’s 
study provide a second opinion on the subject for decision making and does not 
necessarily guarantee the success. This was even demonstrated in few cases,  wherein 
we hired the outside consultants, took decisions to acquire the asset in line with their 
recommendations but even then failed to achieve the desired result. 
 
Contending the Ministry’s reply, Audit in their vetted remark stated, ‘’ Ministry’s 
reply that OVL engages outside consultants only in respect of high value/complex 
exploration blocks is not acceptable as it has also engaged outside consultants in many 
of its various ex ploration blocks which involve significantly less cost than producing 
blocks (e.g. Blocks JDZ- Nigeria, 285- Nigeria, BMS-73 Brazil, 127 Vietnam etc.) 
 
Further, OVL’s reply that audit has considered mostly the surrendered assets is 
not correct as producing  assets involving 90 per cent of total investment in producing 
assets, and exploration assets covering 56 per cent of investment in exploration assets 
were also reviewed and suitably commented in the said report. 
 
When asked the reason behind engagement of  independent international 
technical legal, financial, tax and accounting consultants in addition to in -house teams 
for due diligence in estimation of reserves in producing/discovered assets and not in 
exploration ventures, the management in a written repl y stated that hiring of outside 
experts on technical , financial, legal and tax & accounting is primarily to augment the in 
–house capability in respective domain areas as well as to provide second opinion on 
very large value decisions, where in large and complex data sets are available for 
analysis in a very short period of time for facilitating decision making. It is ONGC 
Videsh’s experience that geological and geophysical (G&G) data available at the time of 
farm out/farm -in of exploration asset is genera lly limited because of initial stage of 
exploration activity for which engaging external consultants may not be necessary in all 
the cases.  The geoscience division of ONGC Videsh evaluates the nature and scope of 
geo-scientific data available and as per r equirement, domain experts are involved from 
ONGC. Having a policy to compulsorily engage technical consultant is not considered 
prudent in view of the above statement. Accordingly, it has been provided in the BD 
Policy that for exploration ventures, Compa ny would take decision to engage external 
consultants on a case to case basis depending upon data availability and geological 
complexity of the property.  Producing and discovered assets contain larger amount of 
data which might comprise the subsurface G&G , reservoir, production, surface 
engineering, and commercial, legal, financial, taxation, accounting, project management 
and operational data.  Accordingly, the relevant external consultants are generally 
engaged for due diligence. 
 
Whether the Company inv ariably stuck to this criterion or there have been some 
instances of non-adherence and to furnish details of all such cases where this criterion 
has not been adhered to along with justification for the same, case-wise, MoPNG stated 
that ONGC Videsh has adh ered to the aforesaid practice invariably excepting some 
cases where specific inputs /information were available otherwise. 
 
On being asked to explain as to what extent evaluation / revalidation of the data 

 
 
by its technical team has helped the Company in s ucceeding in the 
prediction/estimation of reserves, the Company in a written reply stated that to make an 
insight in to the efficacy of evaluation/revalidation carried out by OVL technical teams, it 
is submitted that OVL has taken up 45 ventures, out of wh ich in 31ventures exploration 
has been concluded as per PSC provisions leading to discovery of hydrocarbons in 13 
ventures. Of these, six are commercial and are currently under various stages of 
development/production. Seven of remaining blocks with sub -commercial discoveries, 
after integrating the exploration results, OVL / Consortium decided not to enter into 
development/subsequent activity phase. The seven blocks with sub -commercial 
discoveries along with 18 remaining ventures which were found either dev oid of 
hydrocarbon or without a viable prospect, were relinquished. However, data obtained 
from exploration activities in all the unsuccessful ventures have provided significant 
exploration insight in to the respective basinal areas for making use of in OV L’s future 
endeavors. 
 
 When asked to furnish a detailed note on the steps taken by OVL to strengthen 
capability of its in-house technical team for evaluation and revalidation of data, OVL in a 
written reply stated that to strengthen the capability of in -house technical team,  OVL 
resorts to four pronged action  as detailed below: 
 
 Induction of State -of–the-art software and hard ware system: Globally, 
invention of new geo -scientific tools has always kept pace with the explo ration 
needs or in other words, the tools available have always been a deciding factor 
while choosing an exploration target. It has been the endeavor of OVL to 
identify, deploy and absorb new technology as and when they are available. 
Technology induction of OVL has been in conformity with the policy & approach 
of the parent company i.e. ONGC. Besides, facilities and resources of ONGC 
are readily available and used by OVL as and when required. OVL has also 
inducted a wide array of G&G interpretation softwar e like Petrel, Landmark, 
Kingdom suite and Geo -frame etc. with appropriate hardware configuration on 
stand-alone basis. 3D Basin Modelling technology, the PetroMod software 
system available in ONGC, is also used for improved confidence in evaluation of 
opportunities. 
 
 
 Skill development of technical team: Entire technical manpower of OVL is 
drawn from ONGC’s experienced pool of technical work force with adequate 
skills and experience. Further to this, skill development is a continually 
addressed by exposing  the executives to different training courses organized by 
ONGC Academy/others and also through work association with technology 
service providers as well as through participation in Joint Ventures. 
 
 Subscribing global database:  To update and improve the professional insight 
of its technical as well as business development teams, OVL has subscribed to 
various global databases like Tellus, IHS and Wood Mackenzie etc. comprising 
comprehensive global information on E&P and Business development. 
 
 Knowledge management specially intrinsic knowledge:  Knowledge 
management specially the intrinsic knowledge (experience) is captured by 

 
 
encouraging professionals/teams to share their experience after interaction with 
domain experts. All the in terpretation works are preserved in database and IT -
enabled system such that the captured knowledge can be revisited and used by 
other individuals and teams. 
 
F. Unfruitful expenditure due to improper evaluation of reserve estimates 
   
Audit scrutiny revealed that t he Company received (July 2006) farm in offer for 
30 per cent participation interest in Blocks 11 and 12, Offshore, Turkmenistan from 
Tristone Capital, advisor to Maersk Oil (MO). At the time of offer the consortium (Maersk 
Oil & Wintershall) provided seismic data acquired by it from Western Geco in 2003 and 
drilling report of the first well (Garadashlyk -I) which was abandoned without testing in 
2006 due to mechanical problems. The in -house team of the Company analyzed 
(August 2006 ) the seismic data & the information of the region as provided by the 
operator and felt sufficient hydrocarbon had migrated to the Garadashlyk prospect and 
also identified two large scale prospects with recoverable reserves of 186 Million barrel 
(MMb) of oil and recommended that the proposal was worth pursuing. 
 
Audit noticed that the Company instead of following its prescribed procedure for 
evaluation of this investment opportunity through technical, legal and financial 
consultants, got the same evaluated by its in -house team which studied only old data 
and drilling report of first well which was abandoned without testing in respect of which 
no test report was available. 
 
The Management stated (January 2010) that detailed independent techno -
economic analysi s of the identified prospects based on the understanding of the 
prospectivity of Blocks 11 and 12 by the Company's technical team was carried out, and 
the latest technical data acquired by the seller was subsequently studied during due 
diligence by the Company's technical team. 
 
The Ministry added (October 2010) that the technical team had discussed the 
hydrocarbon potential based on the parameters like reservoir quality, trap integrity, 
source and migration of hydrocarbon into the trap and prolific hydroca rbon presence 
towards south of the Block 11 and 12 was a valid indication that the block was within 
known possible hydrocarbon province. Since the OVL team was technically sound, the 
necessity to hire consultants was not felt. 
 
Audit contended that they do not agree with the Management/Ministry's viewpoint 
as possible prospects available in Garadashlyk structure could not be tested in the 
abandoned well. The above facts revealed that the decision to acquire 30 per cent stake 
in 2006 based on estimated 186 M Mb of oil recoverable reserves of the seller, was 
done without associating technical, legal and financial consultants for evaluation of an 
investment opportunity. Further, this was also based on old seismic data of 2003 and by 
relying only on drilling repo rt of the first well which was abandoned without testing; 
thereby rendering the entire expenditure of USD 14.96 million ( Rs. 67.32 crore) 
unfruitful.  It was also stated by Audit that their  technical expert, while agreeing with the 
audit observation felt t hat basic elements like presence of charge, seal and reservoir 
were required to be necessarily present in any block but in this case, none of the three 
elements were present and hence, due diligence itself was defective. 
 

 
 
When asked about the reasons for c onsidering old seismic data of 2003 and 
relying only on drilling report of the first well which was abandoned without testing , OVL 
submitted that the Evaluation of the Prospectivity of the Blocks 11&12 was carried out 
on the latest seismic data provided by  the M/s Maersk Oil, the seller. The conclusions 
drawn were very much based on the latest geo -scientific data available at the time of 
the acquisition of acreage. As it was an exploration block, the risk perception was 
understood based on the probability o f success.  Most of the traps for hydrocarbons in 
South Caspian Basin, where the Blocks 11 & 12 is situated, are structural in nature. 
Numerous anticlines and shale diapir related structures are present in Turkmenistan 
part of the basin. Stratigraphic trap s in the form of pinch -outs are envisaged in the NE 
part of the basin, where the well Darta Deniz -1 was drilled, subsequent to acquisition.  
Considering the fact that the two identified prospects, Garadashylk and Darta  Deniz are 
two different  plays, it is   hereby impressed that the negative drilling results of well 
Garadashylk-1 (the First well)  has no bearing on the prospectivity of the well Darta 
Deniz-1.Gradashylk prospect is a structural prospect and Darta  Deniz is a stratigraphic 
prospects with an element of structural aspect. The hydrocarbon strike in Darta Deniz -1 
would have opened a vast area for further exploration in the area.  
 
Enquired about the reasons for not associating technical, legal and financial 
consultants for evaluation of the investm ent opportunity, OVL submitted that  usually for 
producing / discovered assets, the company engages independent international 
technical, legal, financial and tax and accounting consultants in addition to in -house 
teams. Presence of prolific hydrocarbons is established to the south of the Block and its 
close vicinity was the guiding factor for the technical experts to envisage the presence 
of the hydrocarbon in the block. Since the opportunity involved a very straight -forward 
case of Exploration with clearly defined structural and stratigraphic plays, no need was 
felt to hire external consultant at that time. 
 
Disagreeing with the Ministry’s reply, Audit stated that possible prospects 
available in Garadashylk structure could not be tested in the abandoned well . This 
reveals that the decision to acquire stake in 2006 based on estimated 186 MMB of oil 
recoverable reserves of the seller, was done without associating independent 
consultants for evaluating the opportunity. Further, this was also based on drilling re port 
of the first well which was abandoned without testing and by relying on old seismic data 
of 2003. Moreover, basic elements like presence of charge, seal and reservoir which 
was necessarily required to be present in any block were absent in this case and hence, 
due diligence itself was  defective.  Also, OVL did not follow its own set procedure for 
evaluation of E&P opportunities through independent technical consultants. The 
contention that this opportunity involved a very straight forward case and the need to 
hire external consultant was not felt, is also not acceptable because this fact was not 
discussed and recorded in any of the company’s documents.   
 
In response to the Audit observation, OVL stated that t he technical team had 
made use of all availa ble geo -scientific data, including re -processed seismic data of 
2003 vintage (which was the latest data provided by the seller), to understand the 
prospectivity of oil and gas in the block.  The well Garadashylk-1 was drilled before the 
acquisition on a st ructural feature which could not be tested due to drilling 
complications.  However, the prioritized prospect Darta  Deniz which was taken up for 
drilling after entry of OVL into the consortium, represented a stratigraphic feature falling 

 
 
in the alignment of  prolific south Caspian proven oil and gas corridor.   Drilling and all 
available G&G data generated from the well Garadashylk -1 was used to understand the 
petroleum system elements like charge, seal and reservoir in the block by integrating 
the data with t he regional geology. Attempt to understand and model the Petroleum 
System elements was undertaken and factored into techno -economic analysis in the 
form of associated probabilities. Any review in post -drilling stage is a common process 
adopted by E&P companies globally.  However, it would not be appropriate to challenge 
the validity of the envisaged model on hind -sight. It is emphasized that the views of 
technical expert is a second opinion which is taken normally for high value producing 
assets wherein lar ge volume of complex data is available for integration/analysis. For 
exploration assets like the instant case, the risk call is being taken by the company 
based on the then available data set.  In the instant case, the due diligence report by 
the technical team was accepted after detailed deliberations / discussions with different 
experts in ONGC/OVL.   OVL consistently followed the practice of due diligence 
engaging consultants for assessment of Producing & Discovered assets but selectively 
availed third party opinion in case of complex exploration opportunities. 
 
When asked to comment on the Audit observation that due diligence was 
defective so as to ascertain the existence of basic elements like charge, seal and 
reservoir, OVL submitted that a s per the procedures for the due diligence of an 
exploration venture, the technically competent G & G team of OVL was involved in 
evaluating the prospectivity of the Blocks 11 &12. The technical team had discussed in 
their report the possibility of hydrocarbon occur rence in the block based on the 
envisaged quantification of reservoir quality, trap integrity, source and migration of 
hydrocarbons in to the trap etc., as per the standard industry practice. After a detailed 
deliberations/discussions with different expert s in ONGC/OVL, the due diligence report 
was accepted. The audit observation that presence or absence of basic elements 
charge, seal and reservoirs could have been ascertained well in advance and the 
company could find the absence of these elements only aft er drilling the second 
prospect, i.e., Darta Deniz -1 is untenable and thus the due diligence cannot be 
considered as defective. It is to be mentioned that the prolific hydrocarbon presence 
towards south of the Blocks 11 & 12 is a valid indication that the block is within the 
known possible hydrocarbon province. Two wells were drilled to test two different plays 
(one structural and the other strati-structural). Hence drilling of 2nd well i.e., Darta Deniz-
1 was necessary for proper evaluation of hydrocarbon prospectivity of the block. 
 
  
Contending the reply of the OVL, Audit stated that the acquisition of stake was 
solely based on seller’s estimates of recoverable reserves and also based on old 
seismic data of 2003 and by relying only on drilling report of t he first well which was 
abandoned without testing. Had the Company gone for validation of technical data 
through independent consultants, it would have known about the presence/ absence of 
basic elements.   
 
In response to the aforesaid Audit observation, OVL submitted that the technical 
team of OVL had carried out due diligence of the opportunity including the 
reserves/potential resources.  It may be mentioned that most of the risk perception at 
the time of a ssessment of exploration opportunity is taken care of by analysis of the 
efficacy of elements of Petroleum System and the Chance of Success, which are a part 

 
 
of techno -commercial evaluation.   On the necessity of engaging an independent 
consultant, OVL cons istently followed the practice of due diligence engaging 
consultants for assessment of Producing & Discovered assets but selectively availed 
third party opinion in case of complex exploration opportunities.   As regards the usage 
of old seismic data and drilling data of only one untested well is concerned: 
 
i. Seismic data is not perishable and its utility is enhanced by re -processing and 
integration of new drilling information. In the present case also, reprocessing 
with the drilling information of Garadashlyk-1 was undertaken.   
 
ii. E&P evaluation at any point of time can be done with the available data and 
dry/abandoned wells, even if untested, offer valuable information for improved 
perception on risk and reward. 
 
G. Wasteful Expenditure  
 
Audit examination revealed that the Company acquired 100 per cent participation 
interest through signing Appraisal, Development and Production Sharing Agreement 
(Agreement) (2005) with Qatar Government represented by Qatar Petroleum for Najwat 
Najem Block, (NN) Qatar which permitted only extraction of Crude Oil in case of 
discovery from the designated block and in case gas or any other mineral was 
discovered, access to that was contractually not allowed to the Company. Audit noticed 
that at the time of signing the agreement,  the Company estimated volume of Original Oil 
in Place (OOIP) at 187.72 million metric barrel of oil equivalent (MMBO) (Proved Oil -
98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil -89.561 MMBO). The estimation of Oil reserves was solely 
based on maps and data provided by Qatar P etroleum without revalidation of 
Company's estimated reserves from an independent technical consultant especially 
when the Company was aware that it does not have contractual right on gas, if any, 
discovered. 
 
Audit examination further revealed that t he Company on drilling discovered that 
two layers were bearing non -producible oil to the tune of 17.68 MMBO and 21.31 
MMBO, one layer had only 14.6 MMBO oil as proved, out of that only 2.24 MMBO was 
recoverable, one was water bearing and another three layers were gas bearing on which 
contractually the Company did not have any right. Moreover, actual recoverable crude 
oil discovery of 2.24 MMBO as compared to its estimated OOIP of 187.72 MMBO was 
significantly low. As a result of commercially unviable discovery o f oil and no contractual 
right on the gas, the block was relinquished (May 2008) rendering entire expenditure of 
Rs. 369.45 crore (USD 82.10 million @ Rs. 45/USD) infructuous, which could have been 
avoided had the Company preferred revalidation of the data for vetting of its estimated 
reserves from an independent technical consultant rather than solely relying on the 
maps and data provided by the Qatar Petroleum. 
 
 The Management stated (January 2010) that estimated 187.72 MMBO OIIP (Oil 
Initially in Place) (Proved Oil -98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil -89.561 MMBO) based on 
the data made available by Qatar Petroleum and the system used for estimation of 
reserves was as per industry standard and practice. One cannot specify beforehand as 
to how much deviation are permitted. 
 

 
 
 The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management. 
 
 Audit contended that they do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint 
as reserves estimation by the Company were solely based on maps and data provided 
by Qatar Petroleum and despite knowing that the deviation can not be specified, the 
Management did not go for revalidation of data from independent technical consultan t. 
Further, internationally accepted Petroleum Resources Management System also 
indicates that the resource evaluation process consists of identifying a project 
associated with petroleum accumulation(s), estimation of the quantities of Petroleum 
Initially-in-Place, estimating that portion of those in -place quantities that can be 
recovered by each project; while the Company estimated only reserves of oil and not 
gas and that too , exclusively based on maps and data provided by Qatar Petroleum. 
 
 Audit further stated that their technical expert opined that analysis estimated by 
the Company on 2D data indicated OIIP of the order of 188 MMBO out of which 98 
MMBO was placed in proved category which got reduced to less than 15 MMBO on 
drilling of appraisal well. S uch a situation is not expected in standard industry practice. 
Risk in final analysis could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself if standard 
definitions and guidelines of Petroleum Resource Management System had been 
practiced by the Company. 
 
 On being asked why the Company made estimation solely based on maps and 
data provided by Qatar Petroleum without revalidation of data from i ndependent 
technical consultant, the MoPNG submitted that initially, OVL made estimation based on 
the data made available by Qatar Petroleum. The data available at the time of studies is 
the only source of information which is to be used by any bidder to evaluate the Block. 
OVL did seek experts’ opinion and the 3D seismic data was reprocessed and 
reinterpreted by Ge o-Data Processing and Interpretation Centre (GEOPIC), ONGC 
which is renowned for its professional standards. It is also pertinent here to mention that 
further to this, a Multi -Disciplinary Team of experts from ONGC and OVL checked and 
revalidated the inter pretation based on the reprocessing (by GEOPIC). It would not be 
proper to use the term ‘infructuous’ for expenditure on dry wells. 
 
 
 
 Contending the Ministry’s reply, Audit pointed out that reserves estimation by the 
company were solely based on maps and  data provided by Qatar Petroleum and 
despite knowing that the deviation cannot be specified, management did not go for 
further validation from independent consultant. Moreover, the company also did not use 
internationally accepted Petroleum Resource Manag ement System which indicates that 
the resource evaluation process consists of identifying a project associated with 
petroleum accumulation(s), estimation of the quantities of Petroleum Initially -in-Place, 
estimating that portion of those in -place quantitie s that can be recovered by each 
project; while the company estimated only reserves of oil not gas.   
 
In reply to aforesaid Audit observation, OVL in a written reply stated that the data 
made available by Qatar Petroleum was the only source of information to estimate the 
reserves and evaluate the block, and even an independent consultant would have used 
the same data as  no additional data would be available with him.   It is also a fact that 

 
 
estimation by any agency whether in -house or third party consultant  is based on two 
primary inputs, i.e., the geometry of the trap and the reservoir thickness along with rock 
and fluid properties. Final variation in reserves by different evaluators using the same 
data-set usually does not vary beyond permissible limit.   Hence, it may be construed 
that the variation between established OOIP and the Pre -drill expectations is essentially 
due to risk associated with exploration & appraisal drilling and in -line with the industry 
occurrences.  The expected quantity of gas in the  block was not estimated as the right 
to exploit gas was not available to the Contractor as per the contractual terms. 
 
When asked why the Company did not practice the standard definition and 
guidelines of Petroleum Resource Management System to mitigate risk in final analysis 
as has been observed by Audit, the MoPNG in a written reply submitted that the reserve 
estimation at the pre -acquisition stage was carried out utilizing the services of ONGC 
premier R&D institutes/internal technical team which follow  PRMS system. However, it 
is emphasized here that the studies are of dynamic nature and values are updated with 
fresh and additional information derived as a result of further exploration/appraisal 
activity. 
 
 Disagreeing with the OVL’s reply, Audit pointed out that the estimate of 
Hydrocarbon (HC) available in the block was only regarding oil and the quantity of gas 
was not estimated. However, had the company/ONGC institute used PRMS, it would 
have worked out the quantity of oil as well as Gas -in-Place and the recoverable quantity 
thereof.  As Gas-in-Place and recoverable quantity has not been mentioned in this case, 
it indicates that PRMS was not used. Further, the estimation of reserve was based on 
2D data, which indicate OIIP of the order of 188 MMBO out of which 98 MMBO was 
placed in approved category, it further got reduced to less than 15 MMBO on drilling of 
appraisal well, as such situation is not expected in standard industry practice.  
 
In further response to the Audit observation, OVL submitted that t he expected 
quantity of gas in the block was not estimated as the right to exploit gas was not 
available to the Contractor as per the contractual terms, and not due to the usage or 
non-usage of the PRMS.  It is not appropriate to say that standard practices of reserves 
definitions were not followed .  On the issue of estimated oil volume in the block, it may 
please be noted that the Pre -drill estimated OOIP of 187.72 MMBO comprised two 
components viz., 98.159 MMBO (proved) and remaining 89.5 61 MMBO (possible). 
Drilling by OVL could establish 38.99 MMBO OOIP (17.68+21.31 MMBO). The lower 
established OOIP volume may be attributed to deviation in predicted geological model 
rather than due to non-adherence to PRMS.  The sharp reduction in estimated reserves 
was due to: 
 
i. Unexpected occurrence of gas in 3 out of 4 reservoirs which was not 
predictable at the time of acquisition. 
ii. The gas was not available to the Contractor as per the contractual terms. 
 
The OVL further stated that d uring appraisal drilling, such surprises and 
deviations are not uncommon. 
 
  

 
 
H. Deferment of production due to overlooking of d ue diligence during 
evaluation  
 
As per Audit review, Mansarovar Energy Columbia Limited (MECL), a 50:50 JVC 
with Sinopec (National Oil Company of China) was formed by the Company to acquire 
E&P assets of Omimex de Columbia in Columbia for USD 875 million, of which OVL's 
share was USD 437.5 million.  Before acquisition, Denton Wilde and Sapte, the 
consultant appointed by the Company for due diligen ce pointed out that the loss of 
Ecopetrol (National Oil Company of Columbia) as a sole buyer of the produce of 
Omimex field might be detrimental to field production; the seller did not have any 
ownership right over a part of real estate as the complete tit le including rights and 
obligations attached with the assets transferred from the erstwhile owner had not been 
passed to them. 
 
Audit pointed out that d espite being aware of these points of caution expressed 
by the consultant, the Company went ahead with the acquisition but failed to insert an 
appropriate clause in agreement for safeguarding its interest in the event of non-lifting of 
crude oil by Ecopetrol in view of Ecopetrol being a single buyer of the entire production 
from the Omimex field.   In the ab sence of appropriate clause in the agreement, MECL 
had to defer production of 2,10,000 barrels of crude oil (Company's share was 1,05,000 
barrels being 50 per cent) during 2009 due to non -lifting of crude oil by Ecopetrol on 
account of non-functioning of its refinery. Ecopetrol also expressed its inability to lift the 
entire quantity of heavy crude oil from the Omimex field in 2010. 
 
The Management stated (January 2010) that the observations of due diligence 
report as brought out, had never caused any opera tional problem in the field and the 
Company did not face any production restriction due to the same.  The Ministry further 
stated (October 2010) that daily production of the field was affected due to an accident 
in the refinery, restrictions on the lifting of the product from the Ecopetrol refinery due to 
fall in the water level of the river. 
 
Audit contended that they do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint 
as the Company did not safeguard its interests despite a caution from the consultant 
that any loss of Ecopetrol Refinery as a buyer of the field production would be a 
significant detriment to the Compa ny. It was further stated by Audit that their  technical 
expert felt that the Company had never faced any operational problem in the field nor 
faced any production restriction but the same does not rule out the possibility. 
Production due to non lifting of  crude by Ecopetrol was a loss to the Company on 
account of non/delayed realisation of revenue. 
 
In this regard, the Committee enquired as to  why the Company ignored the 
caution expressed by its consultant appointed for due diligence in the instant case , the 
OVL stated that Mansarovar Energy Colombia Limited (MECL) had acquired Omimex 
de Colombia Ltd. ("Omimex") from Texas based Omimex Resources Inc for US$ 875 
Million of which OVL’s share was USD 437.5 Million. Denton Wilde and Sapte (DWS), 
the consultant, had subsequently re viewed the documents in response to the legal due 
diligence queries and confirmed vide revised schedule I, that they have seen the 
complete chain of titles w.r.t Cocorna association Contract. The public deed and 
certificate from property Register with resp ect to 018-0030613 were received and it was 
confirmed by DWS that Omimex has rights to the property under, easements section, 
page 34 of Legal due diligence report dated 14 July 2006.   

 
 
Contending the OVL’s reply, Audit stated that the consultant has specifically 
pointed out in Notes on page 35 of its report dated 14 -07-2006 that the seller did not 
have any ownership right over a part of real estate as the complete title including rights 
and obligations attached with the assets transferred from the ers twhile owner had not 
been passed on to them. 
 
In response to the Audit observation, OVL stated that there are always some 
infirmities and inherent risks in any acquisition which are factored in during evaluation.  
In the instant case, title on a very small  part of total assets i.e. land was not fully clear 
which was subsequently addressed by paying an amount of about USD 0.7 million 
(USD 0.35 million - OVL’s share). This amounted to less than 0.1% of the acquisition 
value.  We may further add that net profit  (OVL share) from this project was US$ 150 
million during 2011-12 alone on an investment of US$ 437.50 million. 
 
When asked to state the reasons as to why the company failed to insert 
appropriate clause in the agreement for safeguarding its interests in the event of non -
lifting of crude oil by the sole buyer , OVL stated that  MECL, a 50:50 JV of OVL and 
Sinopec (National Oil Company of China) holds assets constituting of 100% interest in 
Velasquez field, 50% interest in the Nare association contracts where  the Colombian 
national oil company, Ecopetrol S.A. ("Ecopetrol") holds the remaining 50% and 
Velasquez-Galan Pipeline running 189 Km from Velasquez property to 
Barrancabarmeja refinery of Ecopetrol.  It is to be pointed out that MECL is producing 
heavy oil and Ecopetrol being the major national oil company of Colombia is having all 
the pipeline infrastructure which is used to evacuate the crude oil which otherwise would 
not have been possible to evacuate heavy oil. So Ecopetrol being the only buyer and 
hence it is committed as per the contract to buy/lift all the quantity of oil produced in the 
association.  Ecopetrol, a National Oil Company of Colombia, is a major stakeholder of 
the association contract and the refinery in reference is wholly owned by Ecop etrol. It is 
important to mention that, whenever a National Oil Company refinery enters into an 
agreement to lift crude from producers, the contract provision of “Take or Pay” is not 
included generally. OVL acquired its share of Omimex de Colombia Asset th rough 
MECL. There was no new contract signed between MECL & Ecopetrol or Colombian 
Government after this takeover. The Nare and Cocorna contract were in force and the 
provision contained therein was binding on the purchaser and factored in while bidding 
for the Asset.  MECL had to restrict production in 2009 due to operational constraint in 
the field and maintenance & accident in the refinery. The average production of MECL 
(Gross) in the financial year 2010 -11 was 30275 BOPD and entire quantity has been 
purchased and lifted by Ecopetrol.   
 
Contending the OVL’s reply, Audit stated that generally “take or Pay” clause is 
not included in the agreement with NOC; which indicates that the scope to include this 
clause was available, but the company never tried t o include such clause in the 
agreement which could protect its financial interest in the block in case of deferment of 
production and non -lifting of crude oil especially in the light of the fact that Ecopetrol 
was the only buyer. 
 
In their further response to the Audit observation, OVL stated that the Nare and 
Cocorna contracts were in force and the provisions contained therein were binding on 
the purchaser and factored in while bidding for the Asset. OVL had only two options i.e. 
either to acquire the assets within the boundaries of existing contract with 

 
 
Ecopetrol/Government or leave it. There was no possibility to amend the contract or 
enter into a new contract in this regard.   The company took a considered decision to 
acquire the asset considering all technical and commercial aspects in view. 
 
  

 
 
Chapter - II 
 
JOINT VENTURES 
 
 
According to Audit, g lobally Joint Ventures are formed with the core intention of 
risk and experience sharing with joint ventures (JV) partners and the mode of formation 
varies strategically from country to  country depending on the law of the land. 
Internationally, Incorporated/ Unincorporated Joint  Ventures/Subsidiaries are created 
based on host country's statutory requirements; their  laws; Production Sharing 
Contracts. A dditionally, the structure for holding a  participation interest in a particular 
asset is also a function of tax laws wherein the companies strive  to determine the best 
structure for avoidance of double taxation considering Bilateral Investment  Protection 
Agreements, Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements.  As exploration and production 
(E&P) business is high risk and capital intensive, so the Company also  managed it 
either through incorporated or unincorporated JV to mitigate the risk, leverage the  
combined fi nancial strength and share experience of the JV partner. JVs are also 
entered into for getting access to the resources of the JV partners which could be rigs, 
logistics, existing contracts,  etc. Every joint venture operation is always governed 
through a jo int operating agreement (JOA) and a  unanimous decision by the JV 
partners, but in E&P business the operator has ultimate control on  each activity of the 
operation and other partners act as only non -operators and participate only in  the 
Technical, Operational, Administrative and Financial meetings for decision making. 
Operator also has the authority to take the decisions on day -to-day activities and take 
assistance from its  affiliated companies. E&P JVs are a jointly controlled operation but 
the role of other partners being  passive is fraught with the risk of unilateral decisions 
being made for operating activities without  the unanimous consent of the JV partners. 
Also other risks are violation of mandatory regulations of  the regulator by the JV partner 
entailing unreasonable financial burden on the JV partners, noncompliance  of the terms 
and conditions of JOA, etc. 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the OVL formed incorporated or unincorporated Joint 
Ventures in 29 E&P assets while the  remaining assets re mained wholly owned by the 
Company. Review also revealed that the Company  had no specific policy detailing the 
considerations for extent of acquisition of participation interest  in offered E&P assets. 
For farming -in and faming -out of participation interest , the Company was  solely 
dependent on either participation interest offered to it or its own perception of risk and  
reward. 
 
Out of 45 E&P assets, Audit reviewed 15 joint ventures and five owned E&P 
assets involving an  investment of Rs.46,417 crore. The in adequacies noticed by Audit 
in three of the Joint Ventures scrutinised by them are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
a). Un-realistic estimation of reserves / production  
 
As per Audit the Company acquired (January 2009) Imperial Energy Corporation 
Plc, (IEC) an Exploration and  Production Company, which was operating in Tomskh 
region of Russian Federation through its  subsidiary Jarpeno Limited, Cyprus, at a cost 

 
 
of USD 2.12 billion (Rs 10,320 crore) with CCEA  approval (August 2008) subject to 
stipulation that the IRR should be more than 10 per cent and an  option to farm out a 
part of its stake to a Russian firm.  Before acquisition, the technical consultant and the 
Company had estimated the 2P reserves of IEC  crude price at USD 85/bbl, the 
Company asse ssed the project as viable with the average daily rate of  production of 
35,000 barrel oil per day (bopd) for 2009 and thereafter , to enhance the production  
upto 80,000 bopd by 2011. 
 
Audit stated that during review, it was observed that at the time of rea ssessment 
of the viability of the project due to  fall in crude price, the actual daily rate of production 
for 2008 as on 20th October 2008 was only  about 5,634 bopd as against the projected 
production of 11,000 bopd (which was what the Board  was informed in April 2008 at the 
time of appraisal). Further , the actual average production during  2009 and 2010 (till 
August) was 9067 bopd and 14,724 bopd respectively against the projected  production 
of 35,000 bopd, due to tight reserve position and delay in drilli ng the wells as envisaged 
even after 18 months of its acquisition. The Company also did not exercise the option of 
farming out  a part of its stake to a local partner to leverage their combined financial 
strength and shared  experience of the JV partner. Thi s resulted in financial loss to the 
Company as discussed below.  
 
According to Audit c onsequent to low production, the Company could not 
achieve IRR of 10 per cent and incurred  losses of USD 37.892 million (Rs.174.15 crore 
@ Rs 45.983/USD) & USD 212.464 million (Rs 1007.99  crore @ Rs 47.443/USD) for 
the years 2008-09 & 2009-10 respectively. Besides, due to non achievement of targeted 
production, the Company also suffered a production loss of about 10.8  million barrel. 
Moreover, the Company had to reduce t he proven reserve size of the asset during  
2009-10 by 1.527 Million Metric Tonne (MMT) indicating the inflated size of reserves as 
estimated by the Company at the time of its acquisition. The Company did not address 
the reservations  expressed in 2007 by Ru ssian Resources Ministry regarding inflated 
reserve position declared by  IEC, at the time of evaluation of investment opportunity in 
2008. Thus, un-realistic estimation of reserves/production rate resulted in a huge loss of 
Rs. 1182.14 crore during the per iod 2008-09 (January to March' 09) to 2009 -10 which 
could have been mitigated if the Company had farmed out a part of its stake to a local 
firm.  
 
Management replied (Dec. 2010) that due to discouraging and very different 
drilling results of 28  wells in th ree fields in 2008 & 2009; production could not be 
achieved as envisaged at the time of  acquisition. As a result of poor production, project 
cash flows were impacted and losses were incurred. Therefore, the Company is 
carrying out various studies to identi fy the problem which  resulted in poor performance 
of the 28 drilled wells and to find solution. Unless these studies give  some conclusive 
results, a realistic production profile cannot be generated and hence an economic  
analysis cannot be carried out to co mment on a likely IRR. Further, management 
replied that there was no reason to doubt the correctness of reserves data used by OVL 
and reported to the  Government as the reserves were calculated by companies of 
international repute.  
 
 
 

 
 
Audit contended that Management's reply is not tenable as the subsequent 
drilling results and reduction of proved  reserve size by 1.527 MMT during 2009 -10 
raises doubt about the reserve size of the IEC and  economic viability of the take over. 
The fact that the Company even now  is not in a position to  generate a realistic 
production profile and bring out an economic analysis confirms that all the  problems 
associated with these fields were not properly assessed at the time of evaluation of  
opportunity which led to poor production  performance and consequent losses. 
Investment risk in  the final analysis could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself 
by farming out a part of its stake  and in view of discouraging results now, it will be 
difficult for the Company to farm out a p art of its stake to a local firm. Thus, not creating 
a joint venture by farming out a part of its stake has worked  to the detriment of the 
Company's interests here and left it to bear a loss of  Rs.1182.14 crore during 2008 -09 
to 2009-10 and; also the poor performance of the wells drilled during 2008 -09 has left 
the Company in a position of unlikely generation of a realistic production  profile and 
IRR. It was also stated that Audit’s  technical consultant while confirming the ir 
observation opined that it is a  known fact that  tight reservoir had poor productivity and 
also poorer recovery in comparison to a normal one. The  prediction for production 
levels was highly optimistic rather than realistic. Therefore, the Company  should have 
been more cautious when the seller had indicated a very rosy picture especially when  
Russian Ministry had expressed doubts about the reserves quoted by the seller. 
 
On being asked to furnish the reasons as to why the Company did not mitigate 
the risk by exercise of the option of farming out a part of its stake to a local partner, the 
OVL in a written reply stated that i t may be noted that farm out option depends, 
amongst other thing, on risk reward perception & market conditions.   During the 
acquisition process of Imperial Energy, OVL had explored the possibilities of partnering 
with Rosneft. Though Rosneft had initially expressed its willingness to partner OVL in 
the project, the firm withdrew from the same in October 2008 due to its unfavourable 
internal financial condition and the Global Financial Crisis prevalent at the time.  
However, while acquiring the company; there was an apprehension that approval by the 
host g overnment may put a condition of giving certain PI to Russian entity.  In this 
context, Government approval was sought to farm out suitable participa ting interest to 
Russian entity (IEC) on mutually agreed terms at an appropriate time. 
 
Contesting the reply of the OVL, Audit pointed out that the company did not give 
an open offer to farm -out part of its stake to Russian E&P firms to mitigate the risks in 
this project in line with CCEA approval. Further, the Company had taken up the matter 
only in a meeting with President, Roseneft, who declined on account of its internal 
financial crisis as it had a large exposure of bank borrowings of USD 18 billion. 
Moreover, when no interest was shown by Roseneft, the company did not explore other 
possibility to farm-out part of its stake to any other Russian E&P firm.  
 
 In reply to Audit contention, the OVL submitted that t he enabling authorisation 
was obtained from CCEA for farming out a part of the asset in view of OVL’s 
apprehension that Russian Government may ask to give certain PI to a Russian entity 
based on the background information as mentioned below: 
 
 
 

 
 
(a) China Petrochemical Corporation (Sinopec) won the TNK -BP’s Udmurtneft  
assets under a tender process in June - 2006 and shortly later sold 51% of 
the stake to the Russian major Rosneft leaving the Russian company as the 
operator of Udmurtneft, as per the mutual agreement encouraged by the 
Russian Government.  It is widely und erstood that the Russian govt. 
approved the deal only when Sinopec agreed in a pre -sale agreement to give 
51% stake and operatorship to Rosneft. This view is also supported by the 
very one sided deal in favour of Rosneft wherein Sinopec financed Rosneft 
for their share (51%) and which was to be repaid by Rosneft out of earnings 
of Udmurtneft. 
 
(b) Further, Investments by foreign companies in strategic assets of Russia, like 
Oil and Gas, required government approvals in an undefined manner before 
the passing of the Foreign Strategic Investment law by the Russian 
Government in May 2008. As per the new law, the requirement of 
Government approvals for foreign investments in the Russian strategic assets 
was formally defined. However, as the process for acquisition of  Imperial 
Energy by OVL coincided this period, the approval process was not entirely 
clear and hence had carried many uncertainties. 
 
On being asked  explain the reasons for partnering with only a single company, 
namely Rosneft, for farming out part of the  stake and not other firms , the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in the reply stated in its reply stated that farm out option 
depends, amongst other thing; on risk reward perception &prevailing market conditions. 
In the acquisition strategy formulated a s per the conditions prevalent at the time of 
making the offer for acquisition of the asset in August 2008, OVL had no plan to farm 
out any stake of the target asset and no participating interest (PI) has been farmed -out. 
However, approval of Government of India was sought for possible farming out suitable 
Participating Interest (PI) to Russian entity ( IEC) on mutually agreed terms at an 
appropriate time as there was an apprehension that while according approval for the 
acquisition, the Russian Government may put a condition of giving certain PI to a 
Russian entity as was done in an early case involving SINOPEC (China) in case of 
Udmurtneft. 
 
When asked as to why the Company failed to achieve the target level of 80,000 
bopd as well as 10 % IRR and by when the targets are likely to be achieved  the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in a written reply stated that t he production levels 
of Imperial Energy has not been commensurate to the levels envisaged at the time of 
acquisition primarily due to unforeseen g eological complexities resulting in low 
productivity from the tight reservoirs of the asset. It may be noted that such reservoirs 
elsewhere in the world have been successfully exploited due to availability of 
technology &  favorable fiscal (tax) regime. In this context, Imperial Energy is in the 
process of identifying suitable technology to exploit the tight reservoirs. In this direction, 
Imperial Energy has already completed the process of invitation of EOI to identify / 
shortlist potential technology partn ers. The company has received encouraging 
response from few firms. Imperial Energy plans to complete the process of 
engagement of the technology partner shortly. It is planned that the team of experts 
from the technology partner along with the Imperial Ene rgy team shall initially review 
the existing G&G data, identify the suitable technology and then initiate pilot studies 
based on the identified technology after feasibility studies. The full -fledged 

 
 
development of the oilfields shall follow the pilot progr am based on its results. With the 
induction of suitable technology the company is hopeful of improving its production 
levels. With regard to the possibility of achieving IRR of 10%, it may be noted that the 
estimated IRR at the time of asset acquisition wa s on cash flow basis achieved on full 
project life which extends over more than 20 years under licenses granted to it valid till 
2028-32 (and further extendable). The achieved IRR at the end of project life would 
vary based on the results of the ongoing ef forts of Imperial to commercially exploit the 
tight oil reserves of the asset. 
When asked as to why the Company did not address the reservations expressed 
in 2007 by Russian Resources Ministry regarding inflated reserve position declared by 
IEC before acqu isition, the OVL in a written reply has stated that t he issue of 
reservations by Russian Resources Ministry regarding inflated reserve position 
declared by IEC had been raised in July 2007, and there had been no negative reports 
on reserves till August 2008 (In fact there are no such reports till date, and there are no 
disagreements on reserve estimates with the Russian authorities). During due diligence 
by the legal consultant all violations of the licensing obligations and Russian regulatory 
requirements were identified. It was identified that fines were imposed on IEC in April 
2007 for environmental issues citing violation of the Russian Land Code, the Russian 
environmental legislation and a breach of its licensing obligations. IEC appealed in 
court against the imposition of the fine and the application was approved and the fine 
was invalidated by court for breach of its licensing obligations and fine amount 
decreased for the breach of the Russian Land Code requirements. Hence it was 
presumed that there wa s some misunderstanding, which had been clarified 
subsequently. It may be further elaborated that an expert Committee of the Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Russian Federation had reviewed the activities of Imperial in April, 
2007 for possible violation of RF legislation by Imperial Energy. The committee 
reviewed the entire license obligations including booking of reserve under GKZ system 
under RF legislation. No adverse remark/overestimation of reserves was expressed. It 
is pertinent to mention here such ex pert reviews are routinely carried out once in every 
three years. Such a review had also been carried out recently during January, 2010. No 
adverse comments on reserve estimation have been expressed by this committee also.   
The system followed in Russia fo r reserves categorization (A, B, C1, C2, C3 etc) is 
quite different from the SPE categorization (1P, 2P, 3P) and it is not uncommon to see 
differences in them. OVL follows the SPE categorization and had the reserves 
calculated by companies of international  repute–DeGolyer & McNaughton and Pangea. 
Hence there was no reason to doubt the correctness of reserves data used by OVL and 
reported to the Government. It is also true that the reserves need to be revised from 
time to time based on additional data genera ted during the course of exploitation, or 
results obtained from production/testing of wells. The reserves often undergo upward or 
downward revisions, in any field– even very old producing fields based on fresh inputs. 
 
 Disagreeing with the OVL’s reply, Audit contended that the company had 
reduced the proven reserve size of the asset during 2009 -10 by 1.527 Million Metric 
Tonne (MMT) which indicates that reserves as estimated by the company were inflated. 
Further, the com pany did not take due precaution before participating in this huge 
capital intensive project and also did not resolve the reservations expressed by Russian 
Resources Ministry regarding inflated reserve position declared by IEC. Moreover, the 
company neithe r informed this issue to its board nor to CCEA at the time of seeking 
approval.  

 
 
 
 In response to the Audit observation, the OVL stated that t he issue of 
reservations by Russian Resources Ministry regarding inflated reserve position 
declared by IEC had bee n raised in July 2007. However, the Company considered the 
reserves certified by its technical consultant based on SPE guidelines and endorsed by 
its in-house evaluation. Incidentally, the reserves considered for acquisition were lower 
than the certified r eserves by international consultant hired by the seller. Further, the 
reserves were independently certified by an independent consultant as on 31.12.2008 
and in subsequent years.  The reserves certified by such consultant were within normal 
variation as pe r international norms.   In addition, the reserves were also got certified 
from an international reserves certification agency for the purpose of ONGC’s 
disinvestment by the Govt.  as on 1 st October 2010 and 1 st April 2011 and again the 
certified reserves we re within acceptable range as per international norms.   More 
importantly, the discovered fields and reserves details were submitted to GKZ -Russian 
regulating authority on reserves for review and acceptance of the development scheme. 
No negative comments/ o bservations were expressed by the authority.   As regards 
reduction in reserves by 1.527 MMT during 2009 -10, it is stated that the reduction is 
insignificant and amounts to less than 2% of reserves. 
 
 When asked whether the company has reassessed the econom ic viability on the 
basis of actual production in the instant case , the OVL in a written reply submitted that 
with only 8 oil fields (including 2 new) on production and exploration efforts in other 9 
fields being in early stage, there is an inherent limita tion in building up a firm long term 
profile. It would be possible for the company to come out with a firm profile from all its 
fields and to be in a position to conclusively arrive at the right project evaluation 
parameters only upon availability of decis ive inputs expected through various 
exploratory, delineation and developmental activities on the majority of the oilfields, 
which are in progress.   However, considering the data generated from the 
exploratory/delineation campaign made till date, the compan y has initiated analysis of 
the production potentials of its oilfields under different inputs (investments) scenarios. 
 
 While contending the OVL’s reply, Audit stated that the parameters considered 
by it for assessment of viability before acquisition of asset were not on realistic data and 
provided by the seller. However the investment risk could have been mitigated in the 
initial stage itself had the company used standard definitions and guidelines of PRMS 
for reserve estimation and prospect evaluation.   
 
 In response to the Audit observation, OVL stated that s ome surprises have been 
encountered in terms of sustained productivity of the wells which has made it difficult to 
maintain the production levels within optimum CAPEX and OPEX levels. This has 
eventually hampered the economic viability under tight fiscal regime in vogue in Russia. 
To overcome the problem, an alternate and innovative approach has to be adopted by 
applying state of the art technologies for imaging of the subsurface and implementing 
the production strategy.  Accordingly, Imperial Energy is currently engaged in extensive 
efforts towards scouting for the right technology for exploitation of the tight sand 
reservoirs. It is planned that on identification of the suitable technologies, the s ame 
shall be implemented through pilot programs prior to its application for full scale 
development of the fields.   Efforts are also on to establish a new play to replicate the 
recent development in producing from tight shale/sand in North America.   

 
 
 
 On being asked to furnish details of the steps being taken by the Company to 
increase the production and red uce further losses in this case, the OVL in a written 
reply submitted that since acquisition in January 2009, OVL adopted a strategy to ramp 
up the pro duction from the existing fields, delineate    the existing discovered  fields for 
putting additional areas on development/ production with the existing facilities and 
drilling of new prospects while fulfilling the license requirements & also to concurrently  
introduce new technology in specific sectors for mitigation of risk.   The focused 
approach has resulted  in increase in production on sustainable basis from 6,260 bopd 
(year end 2008) to 13,616 bopd  & 15,900 bopd at the year end of 2009 & 2010 
respectively. At present the production of Imperial fields is hovering around 17,000 
bopd. The delineation efforts have also resulted in additional areas from two of 
its producing fields in Maiskoye & Dvoinoye coming on production and discovery of new 
pools in S. Maiskoye & Dvoinoye which have also been put on production concurrently. 
Exploratory efforts have led to the discovery of three new fields like Middle Maiskoye, 
W. Maiskoye & East Festivalnoye, out of which two fields have been put on production. 
The company has also benefitted from induction of new technology in blanket coverage 
of 3D seismic for all the producing fields, drilling of horizontal  development wells  & 
induction /pilot testing of different  frac technology.  New technology like Surgi  Frac for 
horizontal wells, multi stage fracs for vertical deviated wells and blind fracs in Horizontal 
wells have been attempted. The company is examining the possibility of using the latest 
radial drilling technology in hard Tyumen formation to increase the drainage are a and 
thus improve productivity.   Efforts have also been made to reduce costs by optimizing 
its lift equipments, bringing transparency and increasing competition in its tender 
processes, initiating the tender process early to best utilize the working weath er 
window, expedite approval processes etc.   Another major effort has been in achieving 
better netback price of the crude oil by transporting it to the new eastern route instead 
of the earlier western route to Murmansk.   Thus all round efforts are being ma de by the 
company to improve returns on its investment. 
 
 Not accepting the aforesaid reply of OVL, Audit pointed out that the efforts taken 
by the company are inadequate as it has still not been able to increase production even 
near to the target level of  80000 bopd as estimated at the time of acquisition. Further, 
the project is still incurring huge losses which would make it difficult to achieve the 
target of 10% IRR.   
 
 In reply to Audit contention, the OVL stated that b y carrying out exploratory and 
developmental activities during the last 3 years, Imperial Energy has developed a better 
understanding and insight on the asset through acquisition of a host of Geological, 
Geophysical, Reservoir and Production data by application of the advanced tools and 
techniques. Using the incremental data set, Imperial Energy is currently engaged in 
carrying out a comprehensive analysis through its in -house team of experts and 
external domain experts for identification of sweet spots as well as right technology for 
exploitation of the tight sandstone reservoirs. IEC has also identified certain US based 
firms with specialized proprietary technologies and having practical experience with 
similar reservoirs in Bakken Oilfield of USA, for carrying out pilot studies in its o ilfields. 
All these measures are expected to bring improved production performance in future. 
 
 

 
 
Enquired about the initiative s undertaken by the Company for induction / 
deployment of state-of-the-art technology for exploration and production of hydrocarbon 
assets, the OVL, in a written reply, stated that it has been the endeavor of OVL to 
identify, deploy and absorb new technology as and when the same are available. OVL 
has inducted a wide array of G&G interpretation software like Petrel, Landmark, 
Kingdom suite and Geo -frame etc. with appropriate hardware configuration. 3D Basin 
Modelling technology, the PetroMod software system available in ONGC, is also used 
for improved confidence in evaluation of opportunities. Executives of  OVL are also 
undergoing hand s-on training on PetroMod.  Besides, many state -of-the-art 
technologies are proprietary and are available with Service providers. Requirement for 
such technologies are made use of by hiring the services.  
 
b). Formation of JV without prior approval  
 
According to Audit ONGC Mittal Energy Limited, Cyprus (OMEL) signed an MOU 
(November 2005) with Nigerian  Government with an investment commitment of US$ 
6.0 billion in the downstream project and  other strategic sectors like railways, power, 
road, etc. in N igeria for participating in the forthcoming  exploration licensing in April 
2006. In terms of MOU, OMEL was awarded (June 2006) two blocks viz.  OPL 212 (now 
OPL 285) and OPL 209 (now OPL -279). Block-279 with 40 per cent participation 
interest was awarded to  OMEL along with 60 per cent carry  finance condition of 
participation interest held by Exploration and Production Limited (EMO) at  overall 
financial commitment of US$ 140 Million from OMEL. The Board of the Company 
approved (June 2006) its share of investm ent of US$ 44.63 million as signature bonus 
and Minimum Work  Commitment (MWC) in the First Exploration Phase with an 
understanding of likely distribution of  37.5 per cent stake in favour of Shell and TOTAL 
(a French Oil Company). 
 
Audit further stated that OMEL signed an agreement with EMO for acquisition of 
additional 20 per cent participation interest (24 February 2007) for consideration of US$ 
50 million within seven days from the date of PSC and  the Board of the Company had 
to approve (26 February 2007)  the same to avoid commitment  failure on the part of 
OMEL. However, the additional stake increased the financial commitment of  the 
Company to US$ 96.90 million, which was beyond the financial powers of the Company 
i.e Rs. 300 crore or US$ 75 million, which ever was less.  OMEL transferred (23 May 
2007) 14.5 per cent participation interest along with proportionate carry finance share to 
TOTAL for US$ 29.07 million worked out at weighted average cost of its earlier 40  per 
cent participation interest and additional 20 per cent participation interest including carry 
finance participation interest of EMO without approval of CCEA/GOI. Transfer of 14.5 
per cent  participation interest at weighted average cost instead of higher cost of 
additional 20 per cent  participation interest resulted in loss of US$ 7.18 million ( Rs. 
32.31 crore). Audit noticed that transfer  of stake to TOTAL by OMEL and formation of 
an unincorporated JV with TOTAL was done without  mandatory prior approval of the 
Nigerian National Petroleum Company  (Regulator).TOTAL was authorized to carry out 
Geological & Geographical (G&G) activities as it had Nigeria Deep  water terrain 
expertise. TOTAL carried out G&G activities in France which resulted in violation of  
Nigerian Law and led to disallowance of an e xpenditure of US$ 9.87 million for cost 
recovery purposes. Similar disallowance of equivalent amount was noticed in another 
Block OPL 212 (now OPL 285) which led to overall disallowance of US$ 19.74 million of 
which the Company's share was US$ 10.07 million equivalent to Rs. 45.32 crore @ Rs. 

 
 
45/US$. Ultimately OMEL had to establish its own G&G centre at Lagos, Nigeria. 
 
The Management stated (January 2010) that the Board approved participation in 
OPL-279 considering that the amount involved is within the approved limit as the JVC 
was in discussion with TOTAL for farm -in of the block. The Management further stated 
that pro-rata share including carry finance was charged from TOTAL to utilize their over 
40 years E&P experience in the Nigerian basins. 
 
The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.  
 
Audit contended that they do not agree with the Ministry/Management's 
viewpoint as the formation of JV with TOTAL by  transfer of part stake at lower price by 
Rs. 32.31 crore with an aim to exploit TOTAL's 40 years of experience in Nigerian Basin 
also did not fructify because TOTAL carried out G&G activities outside  Nigeria in 
contravention of Nigerian Law leading to cost rejection of Rs. 45.32 crore by the host  
Government. Also, ultimately to avoid further cost rejection; the Company had to set up 
a G&G centre in Nigeria. The Ministry/Management's reply that the Company approved 
the investment  while probable transfer of participation interest to TOTAL was in the 
process of discussion indicates  that investment beyond its financial powers was 
approved by the Management on the ground that  total investment net of probable 
transfer of part participation interest would be within its financial competence. 
 
It has also been stated by Audit that their  technical consultant also opined that 
investment profile was known to the Company and approval of CCEA should have been 
obtained prior to signing of contract. Further, execution of G&G  activities outside 
Nigeria in spite of TOTAL's long work experience in Nigeri a brought out weak planning, 
project Management and lack of study/adherence to guidelines. Goodwill of TOTAL 
could not be equated with financial loss to the Company. 
 
When asked to explain as to why the approval of CCEA was not obtained prior to 
signing of contract despite the fact that investment profile was known to the Company, 
the OVL in a written reply submitted that t he Board of the Company approved 
participation in OPL -279 considering that the amount involved is within the approved 
limit including ev en the additional stake purchase from EMO, as the JVC was in 
discussion with TOTAL for farm-in in this block. The deed of assignment to TOTAL was 
under discussions from early stage, though consented to by the Nigerian National 
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) on the 3rd of March 2008. Later after the Project team 
was set up at Lagos for execution of work program and detailed studies, it was found 
that additional work, over and above the committed minimum work need to be carried 
for fast -tracking the development  work following discovery if any. This also involved 
additional expenditure over and above the approved limits of the Board. In this latter 
case as soon as the planning process was over and the same was got approved from 
the regulator, the Company approach ed the Government of India and obtained ECS 
and CCEA approval. 
 
 Audit stated that OVL’s reply re -establishes the fact that the company approved 
the investment beyond its financial powers. Moreover, no circumstances allow the 
company to approve the budget/  expenditure over and above its approval limit as the 
same has deprived ECS/CCEA to review the reasonableness or otherwise of such huge 

 
 
expenditure before its approval. Moreover the investment profile was known to the 
company; therefore the company should have obtained prior approval of CCEA before 
signing the contract.   
 
 In reply to this Audit observation, the OVL stated that t he Board of the Company 
approved participation in OPL -279 considering the fact that the amount involved  
including the additional stake purchase from EMO was within its empowerment, as the 
JVC was in discussion with TOTAL for farm -in in this block. The deed of assignment to 
TOTAL was under discussions from initial stage, much before February 2007, though 
consented to by the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) in March 2008. 
At no stage, the investment in the project has exceeded OVL’s empowerment. 
 
  On being asked why transfer of 14.5 % participation interest was made at 
weighted average Cost instead of higher cost of additional 20 per -cent participation 
interest as pointed out by Audit, the OVL in its written reply has stated that the company 
has charged past cost under Article 4.1.1 of the Farm -in agreement of OM EL with 
TOTAL E&P dated 23rd May 2007. However, discussions with TOTAL were going on 
much before Feb 2007 and at no stage the company has exceeded its financial powers. 
As mentioned above, discussions with TOTAL were going on much before February 
2007. Acc ordingly, the pro -rated share including carry of EMO was charged from 
TOTAL i.e. 24.1667% of USD 115 Million (i.e. Signature Bonus of USD 65 Million plus 
USD 50 Million paid for acquiring additional P.I)  for farming in 14.5% P.I to TOTAL. The 
intent was t o utilize TOTAL’s over 40 years E&P experience in the Nigerian basins.  
Further, the farminee had also agreed to help the consortium by sharing the rigs 
needed to drill the wells. (The company had also considered these tangibles while 
looking at the weight ed cost average method for past cost). Stake sale was within the 
Board approved powers which was under discussion for long time. However, as the 
revised work program would have exceeded the board approved limits, the company 
has obtained the approval of CC EA of GOI after the recommendation of ECS. The fact 
that part of the stake was transferred to TOTAL to rope in its expertise has also been 
apprised to the Government. The company need not have obtained prior approval from 
regulator. The company has followe d the standard industry practice adopted in farm 
outs and has approached regulator when the agreements were final and the regulator 
has duly approved the Farm-in. 
 
In response to OVL’s reply Audit observed that t he company itself has accepted 
that at the t ime of allotment of bock, it was neither having firm agreement with TOTAL 
regarding farm-out of part stake to it nor prior approval from the regulator/Govt. of India 
was obtained. Further, the investment profile was known to the company beforehand 
and the commitment involved in this opportunity was beyond its financial limits.   
Moreover, the aim of the company behind involving TOTAL in this block by transfer of 
part stake at a price lower by Rs. 32.31 crore also did not fructify because TOTAL 
carried out G& G activities outside Nigeria in contravention of Nigerian Law leading to 
cost rejection of Rs. 45.32 crore by the host Government.  
 
In reply to aforesaid Audit observation, the OVL stated that it reiterates its 
position that the weighted average cost real ization from TOTAL for the part stake sale 
was based on Article 4.1.1 of the Farm -in agreement with due approvals. This 
divestment, additionally, helped the company in utilizing TOTAL’s expertise in deep -
water operations and resources in conducting the com mitted activities within the PSC 
time frame.  

 
 
 
 Enquired as to why did the company not stop ‘TOTAL’ (a French Company) from 
carrying out G&G activities outside Nigeria, without obtaining the approval of Nigerian 
Government, the OVL stated that d isallowance of some G&G cost was due to the 
reason that part of the work was carried out outside Nigeria for which OMEL was not 
having facilities in Nigeria. The operator has however, written to the regulator to waive 
off this disallowance citing that the company was newly formed and took time in creating 
necessary facilities in Nigeria and has now started carrying out all interpretation work in 
Nigeria itself. The company is still pursuing this claim with NNPC. 
 
 Disagreeing with OVL’s reply, Audit  pointed out that at the time of carrying out 
G&G activities outside Nigeria, the company was well aware that this would lead cost 
rejection as per Nigerian laws, Further, the request of OMEL to waive off the 
disallowance has still not been acceded to by the host Government . Moreover, it also 
indicates lack of proper planning, project management and adherence to guidelines.   
 
 In reply to the aforesaid Audit contention, OVL in a written reply submitted that 
there is no financial loss incurred by the Company on this account since no costs of this 
project was ultimately recoverable.   The work was carried out outside Nigeria for which 
OMEL was not having facilities in Nigeria. This was required to complete the MWC 
within the contractual time frame to avoid levy of penalties as creation of new facilities in 
Nigeria would have taken considerable time.  The operator has, however, written to the 
regulator to waive off this requirement citing that the company was newly formed and 
took time in creating necessary facilities in Nigeria and subsequently carried out all 
interpretation work in Nigeria itself.  The Company kept the issue alive by repeatedly 
submitting request for waiver, which as per precedence in Nigeria could have been 
considered favourably post commercial discovery. In the  absence of commercial 
discovery, cost recovery issue is no more relevant.   
 
c). Avoidable exposure to risk due to non-forming of JV  
 
Audit examination revealed that the Company acquired 100 per cent participation 
interest in Najwat  Najem Block, (NN) Qatar and estimated volume of Original Oil in 
Place (OOIP) at 187.72 million metric barrel of oil equivalent(MMBO) (Proved Oil -
98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil-89.561 MMBO) and also noticed a risk of pre existing poor 
event continuity attached with its reserves estimations. Further, it was also noticed that 
the Company decided to appraise the block by itself despite knowing the fact that about 
12-16 leading E&P international oil companies were interested in the Block as they had 
purchased bid documents in view of  the potential of the field with huge reserves. Thus, 
the Company had a fair chance to mitigate the possible risk of poor event continuity 
attached with its own estimation of oil reserves through formation of a JV by transferring 
its part participation int erest at a good price along with carry finance of its own share 
which was a prevalent practice in the international exploration business. Hence, 
decision of the Company to appraise the block by itself despite knowing the risk and 
interest shown by other E&P international oil companies, was not prudent. This not only 
deprived the Company of mitigating the impact of risk known to it, leveraging the 
combined financial strength and sharing experience of the JV partners but also resulted 
in financial loss.  
 

 
 
The Management stated (January 2010) that the decision to share the risk or 
reward in respect of any project is always based on Geo -scientific studies and was 
project specific. Najwat   Najem, Qatar Project was a discovered field, the Company 
decided to appraise the project itself and if found commercial to develop the same. The 
Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.  
 
Audit stated that they  do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as 
risk sharing and experience sharing was more a matter of prudent financial 
management, particularly in projects involving high exploration risk and huge capital 
investment. The Company being aware of pre -existing poor event continuity should 
have sold out a part of its risk at a good price along  with carry finance as it was a 
discovered field and could have minimized its losses. Our technical expert opined that 
the estimate of 187.72 MMBO of OIIP with proved OIIP component of 98.159 MMBO 
does not conform to standards of petroleum resources manage ment system. The 
investment risk in final analysis, could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself if 
standard definitions and guidelines of Petroleum Resource Management System had 
been practiced by the Company for reserve estimation and prospect evaluation.  
 
When asked as to why the OVL did not follow the standard definitions and 
guidelines of Petroleum Resource management System for reserve estimation and 
prospect evaluation, the Company in a written reply stated that the reserve estimation 
at the pre-acquisition stage was carried out utilizing the services of ONGC premier R&D 
institutes/internal technical team which follow PRMS system. However, it is emphasized 
here that the studies are of dynamic nature and values are updated with fresh and 
additional information derived as a result of further exploration/appraisal activity. 
 
 Not agreeing with OVL’s reply, Audit pointed out that the OOIP was estimated at 
187.72 MMBO giving proved reserve of 98.159 MMBO which does not conform to the 
standard definitions and guidelines of PRMS.   
 
 Responding to the aforesaid Audit observation OVL submitted that o n the issue 
of oil volume in the block, it may please be noted that the Pre -drill estimate of OOIP of 
187.72 MMBO comprised two components viz., 98.15 9 MMBO (proved) and remaining 
89.561 MMBO (possible). Drilling by OVL could establish 38.99 MMBO OOIP 
(17.68+21.31 MMBO). The lower established OOIP volume may be attributed to 
deviation in predicted geological model rather than due to non -adherence to PRM S.  
The sharp reduction in estimated reserves was due to: 
 
i. Unexpected occurrence of gas in 3 out of 4 reservoirs which was not 
predictable at the time of acquisition. 
ii. The gas was not available to the Contractor as per the contractual terms. 
 
It was also st ated by OVL that d uring appraisal drilling, such surprises and 
deviations are not uncommon.   
 
  On being asked as to why the company decided to appraise the block by itself 
despite awareness of pre -existing poor event continuity, the OVL in a written repl y 
submitted that t he decision to share the risk or reward in respect of any project is 
always based on techno -commercial and strategic considerations. Qatar Petroleum 

 
 
(QP) had awarded Najwat  Najem project to OVL as it was a discovered field and OVL 
decided that the field appraisal could be done by itself.  OVL did not receive any 
expression of interest to farm -in in the block from 12 -16 leading E&P companies as 
mentioned. Even if OVL had decided to take Partner (s), there could have been criticism 
for the farm-out decision if the project would have been successful. 
 
 Disagreeing with OVL’s reply, Audit contended that  the company should have 
explored the possibility of farming -out part of its stake, to the E&P companies who 
bought the bid documents and shown t he interest in this block as it was a discovered 
block, at a good price along with the option to carry finance of its stake. Further, it would 
have also mitigated the risk present in the block by virtue of poor event continuity.   
 
 In reply to this point,  the OVL submitted that t here is no disagreement to the fact 
that divestment is a definite process of risk sharing in E&P business, doing so for a 
discovered property with lesser risk would have amounted to sharing the reward also 
with the prospective farm ee. In this case, OVL decided to appraise the discovery by 
itself in expectation of associated reward, which did not materialise.   It may also be 
noted that E&P is a high risk, high -reward business. Higher stake is associated with 
higher risk and higher re ward and there is no benchmark to establish the appropriate 
level of participation in a project. In hind -sight, a particular decision can always be 
questioned but decision has to be taken at the time of participation in the domain of 
uncertainty. 
 
 In their post evidence reply, OVL has stated that even if it had decided to take 
Partner(s), there could have been criticism for the farm -out decision if the project would 
have been successful.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
SUCCESS RATE OF OVL 
 
 
 
According to Audit, out of 45 oil assets that were acquired by the ONGC, 14 were 
producing, developing/discovered assets, 23 assets were under exploration and 
remaining eight had been abandoned by the Company up to March 2010 due to non -
discovery of hydroc arbons. Producing and developed assets of the Company had 
proven hydrocarbon reserves of 185.995 Million Metric Tonne Oil Equivalent (MMTOE).  
 
Audit examination revealed that t he no. of assets acquired at exploration stage 
was  36 having an investment of Rs. 6,206.83 crore  and achieved success in only five 
projects (only one project is producing and remaining four are still under development) 
where it was the non-operator. Eight projects with a cost of Rs. 1,066.17 crore had to be 
abandoned and remaining 23 projects were still in the process of exploration. Thus, as a 
sole operator, the Company has not achieved any success so far and needs to improve 
its core competence in the evaluation of investment opportunities.  
 
During evidence held on 22.8.2013 the Committee enquired about the return on 
investment i.e. Internal Rate of Return (IRR) generated by OVL on its investments in the 
E&P assets. In response, one of the representatives of OVL deposed as under:- 
 
“Coming to the specific question of IRR, we have invested in Greater Nile Oil 
Project in Sudan in 2003. We have invested about $ 700 billion. Till now, we have 
earned 46 per cent return on an annualised and compounded method basis, even 
ignoring that this asset still exists.” 
 
The Secretary, MoPNG added:- 
 
“…………In the case of exploration and production assets, the success rate is 
never 100 per cent. It is good that Audit has chosen incidentally majority of such assets 
where our exploration has not yielded results. In fact, it is good. So, some of the thin gs 
have come out for us to take precaution in future, but the global success rate is 
somewhere around 30 per cent while in the case of OVL it has been around 42 cent. In 
our country, the success rate of exploration is only 20-25 per cent. 
 
When asked to ex plain the parameters  based on which calculation of 42 per 
cent success rate of OVL was arrived at, the representative of OVL during evidence 
deposed as under:- 
 
“The finding cost is the precise parameter by which one can know whether the 
exploration is very efficient or otherwise. Till now our exploration cost is $ 1.11 per 
barrel of oil or oil equivalent of gas, which is quite good. This is on 3P - proved plus 
probable plus possible- reserves basis. In case we take only proved and probable, then 
this would increase to $ 1.26 per barrel. If we take only proved reserves, even then it 
comes to $ 1.65 per barrel of oil or oil equivalent of gas.” 
 

 
 
The representative further added:- 
 
“……….In cost of finding oil, even if we take only proven reserves, then the co st 
comes to $ 1.65 per barrel. If we compare it internationally, more than 90 per cent of 
international companies will have the cost per barrel, which is more than this.” 
 
On being asked as to how the success rate of 42 per cent was worked out, the 
MoPNG in their post evidence reply stated that 42 % success rate for OVL was arrived 
at by considering 133 oil & gas bearing wells drilled out of a total exploratory wells of 
316 drilled during the period 2001 -2009 in various exploratory, discovered and 
producing projects of OVL. 
 
In response to the Ministry’s aforesaid reply, Audit in their vetted comments 
contended that Company has worked out its success rate on the basis of data for the 
years 2001-2009 only whereas the Company was in operation since 1965.Moreover, it 
was observed that out o f 133 wells, 109 wells were drilled in two producing blocks 
(GNPOC and 5A, Sudan) where the discovery had already been established. Further, it 
was observed that the Company, while working out its success ratio, has also included 
those discovered wells whi ch have later on been abandoned due to unviable discovery 
and the respective E&P blocks had also been relinquished. 
 
When asked to state whether they agree with the aforesaid comments of the 
Audit, MoPNG in their further written reply stated that finding O il and Gas in exploratory 
wells reflects technical success; hence OVL has considered the same for calculating the 
Success Ratio. However, a project, despite having successful Oil and Gas wells, may 
be sub -commercial as commercial viability depends on many other aspects such as 
location, infrastructure requirement, oil price, gas price and gas utilisation etc.  In the 
instant case, even of Oil and Gas wells of the blocks relinquished due to sub -
commercial discoveries are not considered, the Success Ratio rema ins 40.19% as 
against 42%, which compares well with the global trend of success rate during the same 
period. 
 
Not agreeing with the Ministry’s reply, Audit in their vetted comments stated that 
the Company has also included those wells which were drilled in  such E&P blocks, 
which were acquired by it at either producing or discovered stage. Therefore, it does not 
depict the actual success ratio of exploratory efforts of the Company. Further, during 
verification it was observed that the Company has acquired 45  exploratory blocks till 
date of which it explored 31 blocks and succeeded in commercial viable discovery in 
only six blocks; remaining 25 blocks have been relinquished due to no/unviable 
discovery. Thus, actual success ratio of exploratory efforts of the Company, on the 
basis of only exploratory blocks instead of drilled wells, works out to 19.35 per cent 
(6/31*100) as against 40.19 per cent. This is the appropriate measure to assess the 
effectiveness of discoveries in exploratory blocks as compared to dis covered/or 
functional blocks. 
 
Enquired about the  inter-firm comparison of success rate in respect of 
exploration and production of hydrocarbon assets at domestic level as well as at 
international level, the MoPNG stated that in case of exploration venture s, the success 
rate with respect to exploration wells is calculated by dividing the number of Oil & Gas 

 
 
bearing wells drilled vis-à-vis the total exploratory wells drilled in a particular period and 
expressed in percentage.  For an inter -firm comparison, the average success rate of a 
number of international companies (Independent, Integrated and NOCs), as furnished 
by the Ministry of P&NG , ranges from 24% -60% for the year 2010.  The details of these 
companies are given in Annexure-I. 
 
  The Ministry further stated that OVL does not possess the data for making an 
inter-firm comparison at domestic level. 
 
 
Finding cost  
 
 According to the MoPNG, the finding cost of oil in respect of OVL since its 
inception which is based on 1P, 2P and 3P  reserves is USD 1.65/boe, USD 1.26/boe 
and USD 1.11/boe respectively. ONGC’s domestic finding cost is USD 4.31/boe and 
USD 3.37/boe based on 1P and 3P reserves respectively (11 year moving average).  
 
 However, Audit contended that their verification had revealed that OVL, while 
working out its finding cost, has also included the reserves of Farsi Block, Iran wherein it 
is having only a service contract and not ownership on the hydrocarbon reserve. After 
excluding Farsi block’s reserves, its actual finding cost is USD 5.14/boe, USD 2.60/boe, 
& USD 2.02/boe on the basis of 1P,2P &3P reserves respectively. 
 
 In the light of aforesai d Audit observation, the Ministry of PNG was asked the 
explain the factual position in the matter. In response, Ministry in a written reply stated 
that the finding cost, with or without Farsi block, Iran for 1P, 2P and 3P as reported in 
the para above are confirmed. It is correct that the Company do not have ownership on 
the hydrocarbon reserve under service contract but it is undeniable fact that these 
reserves have been established due to exploratory efforts of the Company. As such it 
would be appropriate  to consider exploration cost and reserves established in Farsi 
block for working out the finding cost. It may kindly be noted that the finding cost of 
OVL, even without considering Farsi block, is comparable to the range of finding cost of 
many international companies. 
 
Further, when asked how OVL fare in comparison with domestic oil exploration 
and production firms both public and private companies as well as international oil 
producing companies with regards to finding cost of oil, the MoPNG in a written  reply 
stated that finding cost of OVL compares well with the International oil companies. A 
comparative statement showing finding cost of international companies  as furnished by 
Ministry of P&NG  is given in Annexure -II. Finding cost of international comp anies 
varies between USD 1.60/boe to USD 15.80/boe (11 year moving average till 2011), 
except for BP which is very high at USD 77.88/boe for 1P reserves, with median at USD 
5.24/boe. OVL’s finding cost since inception is USD 1.65/boe and ONGC’s finding cos t 
for 11 year average is USD 4.31/boe. 
 
Investment in any project is based, among other thing, on the Internal Rate of 
Return (IRR). On being asked about the projected IRR vis -à-vis actual IRR in respect of 
each of the projects of OVL abroad the MoPNG in a written reply stated that the 

 
 
expected/ projected/targeted IRR varies from project to project and is calculated based 
on the associat ed risks, expected oil/gas production profile, expected oil/gas prices, 
estimated Capex & Opex throughout the project life, the prevalent market conditions 
etc. Actual IRR of a project is known after completion of the project life cycle, as IRR for 
project accounts for all cash flows over the life of the project. Since all the producing 
and development projects are under various stages of development/production, it may 
not be possible to calculate the actual IRR of the projects. Out of the 10 producing 
projects (considering GNPOC, Sudan and GPOC, South Sudan project as one project 
as these were acquired as single project at the time of acquisition), 4 (four) projects 
have already paid back the investment made therein. Out of these four projects, the 
actual I RR of 3 projects worked out based on cash flows till 2012 is well above the 
projected IRR (actual IRR in some cases being more than 2 times of projected IRR) and 
in one project, actual IRR is moving towards projected IRR. However, as brought out 
above, actual IRR may go under change on completion of project life cycle due to future 
development expenditure, other factors etc. In case of other projects which are yet to 
achieve cash breakeven (i.e. payback of the investment made is yet to occur), it may 
not be possible to calculate the actual IRR. 
 
When asked about the IRR on similar projects within the country, the MoPNG in 
a written reply stated that information on IRR of projects is a business secret which 
companies keep confidential by all means to maintain  their competitive position. As 
such, IRR of similar projects in country or abroad is not available in public domain. 
 
 However, it was learnt that a commercial evaluation of an ONGC -Cairn deal is 
already in public domain on the internet (http:/www.infrali ne.com/org/images/ONGC-
Cairn Deal.htm) and it specifically mentions about IRR. The Ministry, were, therefore, 
requested to furnish their comments on the stated position of the Government about 
IRR in the light of the document referred to above. In a writte n reply submitted by the 
Company in the matter on 27 November, 2013, it was reiterated that ‘information on key 
various commercial parameters including IRR, etc. is a business secret and its 
disclosure would hurt the commercial interests of the organisation, notwithstanding such 
unauthorized disclosures. It was further stated that efforts are, however, taken at the  
Company’s end to plug various loose points wherein from such unauthorised disclosure 
happen, such that the Company’s interests are not adversely affected’.  
  

 
 
PART- II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
  
ABSENCE OF AN E&P POLICY 
1. The Committee are surprised to note that ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL), 
which started focusing on acquiring oil and gas assets from the year 2000, did 
not have a well defined policy for acquisition of Exploration and Production (E&P) 
assets all these years.  The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas also seems to 
have been oblivious to this serious lacuna in the policy framework of OVL 
throughout this period . When this shortcoming was brought to their notice, the 
MoP&NG initially took the stand that there was no need for such a policy.  
Subsequently, it was conveyed that such a policy if put in black and white would 
be detrimental to the functioning o f the Company as its competitors would be 
able to predict its acquisition strategies easily.  Later on, both the Ministry and 
the Company veered to another argument that a policy, though not documented, 
was always in vogue.  However, surprisingly, on 17 Au gust, 2012 i.e. just five 
days before the representatives of the Ministry and OVL had to testify in the 
matter before the Committee on 22 August, 2012, the Board of OVL met and the 
‘existing policy’ in practice was reviewed, updated and documented as ‘Busi ness 
Development Policies for Acquisition of Oil and Gas’ and approved.  The 
Committee while strongly deprecating the vacillation of the OVL and the Ministry 
in the matter, take satisfaction in the fact that a much needed corrective has been 
put in the Sys tem, albeit , very belatedly.  Now that a documented Policy for 
acquisition of E&P Assets has been put in place by OVL, the Committee hope that 
due diligence process could be carried out to mitigate risks involved in the high 
risk and capital intensive Exploration and Production business.  
BLOCK 5B, SUDAN 
2. OVL acquired Block –5B, Sudan (May, 2004) with 23.5 percent participation 
interest at USD 24.06 million with “carry over finance” of 3.72 per cent 
participation interest of Sudapet (National Oil Company of Sudan). The 
Committee note from the Audit Report th at the consultant s in their pre-

 
 
acquisition technical study of the Block 5B, Sudan had expressed several 
reservations.  These included the assessed reserve in the Block being based on 
limited data made available by the Seller; denial of permission to copy data from 
the data room; only two days being given for review of data; and the security 
problems in the Block area.  The OVL, however, overlooked the reservations of 
the consultants.  The Consortium could not implement the scheduled seismic and 
drilling plan till 2006 for want of accessibility to the area and restrictions by the 
local authorities.  Coupled with this , the non -implementation of Minimum Work 
Commitment (MWC) led to OVL incurring additional security charges, idle  hiring 
charges for drilling rig and other incidental and operational charges after 
acquisition of the Block.  To further compound the problems out of the three 
prospects prioritized by the consultant for drillin g, the Operator drilled only one 
prioritized well in addition to two wells in the non -prioritized swamp during 2008.  
The drilling of the remaining prioritized swamp wells was dropped due to the less 
prospectivity of reserves in one of them and allotment of the other to a third party 
by the local authorities in complete violation of the agreement.   The three wells 
drilled brought no hydrocarbon discovery, and thus forced the Company to 
relinquish the Block on 19 February, 2009 after incurring an expenditur e of USD 
89.5 million equivalent to Rs. 423.84 crore.  The Audit pointed out that while going 
for this acquisition , OVL took cognizance of the adjoining Block 5A which it was 
also prospecting and completely ignored the security scenario in Sudan. 
 
3. OVL in its defence has submitted before the Committee that the advice of 
the consultant s regarding Block 5B, Sudan was not overlooked and  that such 
reservations are invariably included by consultants in their reports as a 
disclaimer to restrict their legal liab ilities.  As regards only two days being given 
for review of data, OVL contended that it is a standard practice followed by the 
Sellers of E&P assets in view of time constraints and also the Sellers do not allow 
copying of data in view of their concern for  confidentiality.  About the security 
concerns raised by the consultant s, OVL informed that security situation in 
Sudan was and remains a challenge but the Company was already prospecting in 
Block 5A which is adjacent to Block 5B , hence, there was no reaso n for any 
undue alarm.   OVL has also submitted that none of these factors are strong 

 
 
enough reasons for OVL or for that any other oil company to discontinue its 
operations in Sudan.  The decision to acquire Block 5B was taken not only on the 
basis of the report of consultant s but also considering the overall regional oil 
prospectivity trend, knowing the fact that adjoining   blocks were having oil 
discoveries in similar geological set up. A holistic approach, even considering 
the risks/concerns expressed by the consultant was taken while making an 
investment decision for Block.  
 
4. The Committee are of the considered view that since the operator was not 
able to enter the contract area even after a lapse of considerable period and 
further E&P business being highly risky and cap ital intensive, OVL should have 
given due consideration to the limitations expressed by the consultant s instead 
of brushing aside the reservation s expressed by them as a mere disclaimer. 
Going by this strange logic and if the consultant’s genuine concerns were to be 
so non -chalantly ignored, there was then no need for even hiring a consultant.  
The Company would have better safeguarded its financial interests , had it gone 
for revalidation of the data before proceeding further in the matter.  The 
Committee feel that the decision of  OVL not to contest Minimum Work Contract 
(MWC) with the authority based on the prospectivity perception of block 5B is 
totally imprudent as  operating a producing property in a country does not 
provide guarantee to the success in another E&P opportunity.   Moreso, when the 
Seller had already violated the production sharing contract by allotting part of the 
area to a third party.  
 
MTPN BLOCK, CONGO 
 
5.  OVL acquired (Feb 2007) 20 per cent Participating Interest in the MTPN 
Block, C ongo, from ENI (Operator) by swapping with ONGC’s 34 per cent PI in 
Block MN-DWN in India.   According to the Audit, the reservations of the in house 
team of OVL about the operator providing 2D and 3D seismic data only for 
viewing purpose and the parameters considered by them for volumetrics and 
estimated volumes calculated being based on a 2002 interpretation were 
overlooked by the Company and it went ahead with the acquisition.  Moreover, 
the decision to acquire the Block with total reserves of 634.75 MMB estimated by 

 
 
the operator in respect of five prioritized prospects viz.  Hiti East, Hiti Central, 
Nkasu, Ntangu and  Tehitebi was taken ignoring the disappointing results of 
earlier drilled two wells viz. HTNM-1 and ZULU Marine -1 which had to be 
abandoned due to non -discovery of hydrocarbons.  Further, the Committee note 
that after revalidation of 3D data, the operator had replaced the earlier prioritized 
five prospects with another prospect i.e. HVAM -1 and estimated total reserve of 
322.8 MBOE in 5 layers in view of the discouraging results of already prioritized 
prospects. However, on drilling of HVAM -I, OVL discovered only a reserve of 
20.22 MBOE in one layer. The operator also could not achieve the targeted depth 
of 5024 meters due to operational problem as drilling was stopped at a target 
depth of 4,516 meters.   
 
6. The Committee are not at all convinced by the logi c extended by OVL that 
being a swap deal, the Company decided to carry out internal technical 
evaluations without appointing a third party consultant and the Company 
engages technical, financial and legal consultants for due diligence of only 
producing/discovered assets of significant value.  The other contention that  as 
the investment in this exploration acreage was comparatively lower in 
comparison to discovered or producing assets, it was considered adequate to 
rely on in -house assessment and that t he o utcome of drilling a well on such 
prospect could result in a discovery or it may turn out to be dry (unsuccessful) 
are also untenable. The explanation of OVL that the data sources for evaluation of 
a block either for OVL team or third party consultant woul d be the same as 
provided by the operator is also unsound.  By this strange logic of the Company , 
there is no need for having third party consultant in any of such projects.  It is 
common knowledge that same set of data is open to different interpretations by 
different experts. The Company’s alibis for selective reliance on in -house teams 
and third party consultant in these projects are not convincing and raise  doubts 
about the Company’s approach.   The Committee recommend that henceforth the 
Company should invariably follow due diligence in all projects before acquisition.  
Furthermore, the mechanism of in -house evaluation and circumstances where 
evaluation by independent consultant  would be necessary  should be codified in 

 
 
the documented policy brought out b y the Company so that in future no scope is 
left for subjective decisions. 
AD7 BLOCK, MYANMAR 
7. The Committee note from the findings of the Audit that the Company 
approved acquisition of 20% participation interest in AD7 Block, Myanmar based 
on the assess ment of its technical team of geoscientists on 11 August, 2008.  
While doing so, it conveniently ignored the assessment of its Geologist and 
Geophysicists (G&G) Group on 18 August, 2008 which had warned that the 
assessment of the technical team was based o n untested and un -established 
sand and on thin study. The G&G Group reconfirmed its earlier recommendation 
when it was later on asked to re -examine seismic data and drilling results of two 
of the wells drilled in the Block.  The Company relinquished the Bl ock in January, 
2009 after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 74.99 crore.  
8. OVL’s plea that both the groups had same opinion and the G&G Group had 
merely expressed limitations in estimating the resource potential does not carry 
convictions with the Committ ee.  Furthermore, the Committee are also not 
convinced by the reasoning of OVL that the decision to farm -in Block AD -7 was 
based on sound understanding of the risk -reward perception followed in the 
industry.   The Committee feel that when there was a diffe rence of op inion 
between two of its own in -house entities, OVL was bound to adopt further due 
diligence and extreme caution in the matter.  Instead, OVL threw caution to winds 
and went for the acquisition in a cavalier manner.  The result was obvious, as i t 
had to relinquish the acquisition within a few months after losing substantial 
public funds.  The Committee while deprecating the action of the Company in the 
instant case desire that a well laid out procedure should be evolved and put in 
place to decide  on such diffe rence of opinion amongst the in -house evaluations 
and/or between in -house and independent evaluation so as to ensure that the 
decisions are invariably taken in the interest of public exchequer and OVL.    
 
NG-188 AND NC-189, LIBYA 
 
9. The Committee note that OVL acquired 49% participation interest in NC -188 
and NC -189 Blocks in Libya and entered into farm -in agreement with Turkish 

 
 
Petroleum Overseas Company without further detailing or revalidation of its 
technical team’s report from an  independent consultant.  It is on ly after drilling 
two wells in NC-188 Block, the Company realised that there were high exploration 
risks with only small limited reserve structures  in the blocks .  The in -house 
technical team in its re -evaluation of data also opined that the Block did not have 
any significant left over potential.  The project was accordingly relinquished after 
incurring an expenditure of Rs. 68.51 crore.  
 
10. OVL’s argument that the decision to acquire the two blocks was taken 
based on the positive feedback from two rounds of studies - two visits to Ankara 
of its team led by GM (Exploration) and study by expert from KDMIPE, the premier 
institute of ONGC – reflects inadequacies in the in -house evaluation. OVL ha s 
informed that the capability of in -house technical team has been strengthened by 
induction of state -of-the-art software / hardware, skill development of technical 
team, subscription to professional global d atabase and knowledge m anagement. 
The Committee desire  that OVL should take such further steps as may be 
necessary to ensure that in-house capability is not found wanting in any respect.   
 
11 AND 12 BLOCKS, TURKMENISTAN  
 
11. The Committee note that OVL a cquired 30% participatory interest in  11 and 
12 Blocks, Turkmenistan on the recommendation of its in-house team.  According 
to audit, the acquisition was based on seller’s estimates of recoverable reserves 
and also based on old seismic data of 2013. OVL has contended that seismic data 
is not perishable and its utility is enhanced by re -processing and integration of 
new drilling information and that E&P evaluation at any point of time can be done 
with the available data and dry / abandoned wells, even if untested, offer valuable 
information. The Committee feel that he question is not whether such information 
is valuable or not , but whether such information is sufficient to make a 
commercial decision involving huge funds. The Committee, therefore, as desire d 
in a preceding para, recommend strengthening of in -house capability and 
processes. 
 
 

 
 
NN BLOCK, QATAR 
  
12. The Committee note that OVL signed an agreement with Qatar Petroleum 
for acquisition of 100 per cent participation interest in NN Block in Qatar with the 
express stipulation that it could only extract crude oil from the designated Block 
and had no right ov er gas or any other minerals discovered from the Block.  
Inspite of this stipulation, the Company without following any due diligence relied 
solely on the maps and data provided by Qatar Petroleum for estimation of oil 
reserves without getting it revalidat ed from an independent technical consultant.  
Consequently, against the estimated OOIP of 187.72 MMB, the Company on 
drilling discovered that the actual recoverable was a meagre 2.24 MMB.  With 
such low reserves and no contractual right on the gas , the Com pany had to 
relinquish the Block in May, 2008, thereby, rendering the entire expenditure of Rs. 
369.45 crore infructuous.  The Company’s argument that the 3D seismic data was 
reprocessed and re-interpreted by Geo-Data Processing and Interpretation Centre 
(GEOPIC), ONGC which is renowned for its professional standards and a Multi -
disciplinary Team of experts from ONGC and OVL  checked and revalidated the 
interpretation based on the reprocessing (by GEOPIC) does not justify the 
exclusion of independent consult ant’s advice while going for such an important 
strategic investment decision  involving 100 per cent participation . The 
Company’s second argument that since the data made available by Qatar 
Petroleum was the only source of information and to estimate the re serves and 
evaluate the block even the independent consultant would have to use the same 
data also appears tenuous as in the given circumstances when the Company’s 
rights in the acquisition were restricted to crude oil only , it was all the more 
essential t o be doubly sure about the estimation of reserves through an 
independent consultant.   
 
ACQUISITION OF E&P ASSETS OF OMIMEX DE COLUMBIA BY MECL 
 
 13. The Committee find from the Audit Report that at the time of acquisition of 
E&P assets of Omimex de Columbia in Columbia by Mansarovar Energy 
Columbia Limited (MECL) - a 50:50 JVC of OVL and Sinopec (National Oil 
Company of China), the consultant appointed by the Company had cautioned that 

 
 
Ecopetrol (National Oil Company of Columbia ) being the sole buyer of the 
produce of Omimex field, their loss might be detrimental to field production.  The 
Company, however, went ahead with the acquisition without even inserting an 
appropriate clause in agreement for safeguarding its interest in th e event of non -
lifting of crude oil by Ecopetrol.  As a result, MECL had to defer production of 
2,10,000 barrels of crude oil (Company's share was 1,05,000 barrels being 50 per 
cent) during 2009 due to non -lifting of crude oil by Ecopetrol on account of no n-
functioning of its refinery.  Further, the Company also incurred loss on account of 
non/delayed realisation of revenue due to non lifting of crude production by 
Ecopetrol.  
14. Justifying its decision OVL has stated that Ecopetrol  being the major 
national oil company of Columbia is having all pipeline infrastructure which is 
used to evacuate the crude oil otherwise it would not have been possible to 
evacuate heavy oil. Furthermore, Ecopetrol is a major stakeholder of the Nare 
association contract in whic h MECL holds 50% interest. About non -inclusion of 
an appropriate clause about lifting of crude in the agreement OVL has informed 
the Committee that whenever a National Oil Company refinery enters into an 
agreement to lift crude from producers, the contract  provision of “Take or Pay” is 
not included generally.    The Committee while agreeing with the concerns of the 
Audit about the risks involved in the project due to only a single buyer being 
there to lift the crude produced also appreciate the factual posi tion explained by 
OVL. The Committee understand that since OVL did not have much leverage in 
changing the contract and it had to either acquire or leave the asset it has taken a 
calculated risk to bid for the asset.  Nevertheless, the Committee desire that  OVL 
should endeavour to ensure that Ecopetrol continues to cooperate with MECL in 
all manner and lift the entire production regularly so as to avoid a repeat of 2009.  
Since, a Company of the Government is involved in the tie -up from the other side 
the Mi nistry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should also fully support the 
endeavours of the Company through the channels of Ministry of External Affairs.  
ACQUISITION OF IMPERIAL ENERGY CORPORATION 
15. The Committee note that Imperial Energy Corporation Plc (IEC) an E&P 
Company was acquired by OVL in January, 2009 for Rs. 10 ,320 crore.  Cabinet 

 
 
Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA) had approved the acquisition with the 
stipulation that the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) would be in the excess of 10% 
and an option to farm-out part of its stake to a Russian firm.  As OVL’s 
assessment, the project was viable with average daily rate of production of 35,000 
barrels for 2009 and up  to 80 ,000 barrels per day by 2011.  Due to unrealistic 
estimation of reserves/production , OVL has suffered a huge loss of Rs. 1182.14 
crore during the period 2008 -09 to 2009-10.  Since OVL did not chose to farm -out 
part of its stake to a local partner , the entire loss has to borne out by it.  
Moreover, the Company has also suffered a production lo ss of 10.8 million 
barrels and has not been able to achieve the stipulated IRR of 10%. 
16. OVL’s contention that though M/s Rosneft (a local company) initially 
expressed it willingness to partner in the project but withdrew from the same in 
October, 2008 d ue to various compulsions is devoid of merit as the acquisition 
was done only in January, 2009 i.e. three months after the withdrawal of Rosneft.  
The Ministry’s admission that the production levels of IEC have not been 
commensurate with the levels envisag ed at the time of acquisition primarily due 
to unforeseen geological complexities from the tight reservoirs of the asset, in 
the opinion of the Committee, is a tacit admission of the shortcomings pointed 
out by the Audit in this acquisition.  The Company’s  assertion that such 
reservoirs elsewhere in the world have been successfully exploited with 
appropriate technology and favourable fiscal (tax) regime also confirms the 
Committee’s growing apprehensions that things are not well with this acquisition 
of the Company and there would be further financial implications before there is 
any possibility of IEC’s balance sheet coming out of red.  While expressing their 
disapproval of the Company’s error of judgement in the instant case, the 
Committee also feel that t he Ministry has also not acquitted itself well as this 
acquisition was beyond the powers of the Company and had been done with the 
approval of CCEA.  The Committee, therefore desire a comprehensive review of 
this acquisition and its performance alongwith its future prospects so as to arrive 
at a well considered decision about its future.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised the outcome of such a review at the earliest.    
 

 
 
NN BLOCK, QATAR 
17. The Committee note that OVL acquired 100% participation interest in 
Najwat Najem Block, (NN) Qatar and estimated the volume of Original Oil in Place 
(OOIP) at 187.72 million metric barrel of oil equivalent (MMBO) in spite of risk of 
pre-existing poor event  continuity attached with its reserves estimations.  
Further, OVL decided to appraise the Block by itself despite knowing that about 
12-16 leading E&P international oil companies were interested in the Block.  This 
go alone decision not only deprived the C ompany of mitigating the impact of risk 
known to it, by leveraging the combined financial strength and sharing 
experience of the JV partners but also resulted in financial loss.    
18. OVL has submitted to the Committee that being a discovered field it 
decided to do the field appraisal on its own.  It has also submitted that it did not 
receive any expression of interest to farm -in in the Block from the 12 to 16 
leading E&P companies which were interested in the project and decided to 
appraise the discovery by itself in expectation of associated reward which did not 
materialise.  OVL has also contended that even if it had decided to take partners 
there could have been criticism if the project would have been successful.  The 
Committee take exception to this c onvoluted set of logics extended by the 
Company to cover up the errors in its commercial judgement.  Had the Company 
made any serious efforts to rope in partners, the risk factor involved in the 
project would have been mitigated to a considerable extent.  The Committee 
recommend that given  the high risk nature of exploration and production 
industry, the Company should exercise more prudence when faced with similar 
situations in future.  
Success Rate in exploration 
19. According to Petroleum Secretary, the global success rate in exploration 
and production assets hovers somewhere around 30% while in the case of OVL, it 
has been around 42%. It is observed from the information furnished by the 
Ministry of P&NG that t he international companies ’ average success rate during 
2010 ranged between 24% and 60%.  In so far as the exploration success rate of 
OVL is concerned , varying figures have been furnished by the Government and 

 
 
the Audit.  The Government has indicated it to be 42% on a holistic basis and 
40.19% if the oil and gas wells of the blocks relinquished due to sub -commercial 
discoveries are not considered.  However, according to Audit the success of 
exploratory efforts of OVL on the basis of only exploration blocks instead of 
drilled wells, works out to a  mere 19.35% (6/31x100) as against 40.19% indicated 
by the Government.  Notwithstanding the claims and counter claims of the 
Government and the Audit in the matter, the Committee strongly feel that even 
the highest success rate of 42% indicated by the Government is nowhere near the 
global best of 60%.  Apparently, the Company has a long way to go before it can 
even think of being amongst the global leaders in this business.  In the opinion of 
the Committee, if OVL is to carve out a niche for itself in the intensely competitive 
business of oil exploration, it has to be fully geared up in its operations, 
evaluation, delivery and production. The Committee, therefore, desire 
Government and OVL to suitably re -orient the functioning of the Company with a 
view to enable it to be a global leader without any further loss of time.  
Finding Cost 
20. On the parameter of finding cost, the Committee have been informed  that 
based on 1P reserves (proved reserves) , the finding cost of international 
companies varies between USD 1.60/boe and  USD 15.80/boe (11  year moving 
average upto 2011 ) with median at USD 5.24/boe. The finding cost (11 year 
average) of ONGC, the parent Company of OVL is stated to be  USD 4.31/boe.  
OVL’s finding cost according to the Company is USD 1.65/boe based on IP 
reserves.  The Audit has, however, worked out the finding cost of OVL at USD 
5.14/boe for 1P reserves as it had excluded the Farsi Block reserves in Iran 
because OVL only had a service  contract for the project and no ownership on 
hydrocarbon reserve.  The Committee tend to go by the justifications given by the 
Audit while assessing the finding cost of OVL at USD 5.14/boe.  They, however, 
feel that even this figure compares well with the  global average of USD 5.24/boe.  
The Company should, however, not rest on its laurels as there is still a lot of 
scope for improvement given the fact that there are companies with as low a 
finding cost as USD 1.60/boe.  The Committee, therefore, desire OV L to strive to 

 
 
bring down its finding cost so that it is comparable with the best in the field with 
prompt induction of appropriate technologies and business practices.    
Internal Rate of Return 
21. Comparison of anticipated and actual Internal Rate of Re turn (IRR) of a 
project indicates the success or otherwise of a venture. The Committee have, 
however, not been provided with this  information in respect of OVL’s projects 
abroad, citing reasons such as IRR varying from project to project; IRR being 
known o nly after the completion of project life cycle, IRR calculation not being 
possible for projects which are yet to achieve cash break even; IRR being a 
business secret which companies keep confidential by all means to maintain their 
competitive position . Th e Committee are not convinced of  these reasons and 
would like the Ministry of P&NG to ascertain from the Ministry of Finance and t he 
Department of Public Enterprises whether the information regarding IRR of a 
project is treated as commercial secret and whether there are any guidelines 
regarding IRR concerning public undertakings and the Committee be apprised of 
the position. Incidentally, the Committee find at least one instance of IRR  of OVL 
being in public domain on the internet.  This was, however, te rmed as a n 
unauthorised disclosure by OVL  when a clarification was sought from it.  The 
Committee desire that the case of unauthorized disclosure of IRR on internet be 
inquired into and a report , fixing the responsibility and action taken be furnished 
to the Committee immediately.   
 
 
 
New Delhi;   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 January 2014 Chairman 
17 Pausha, 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

 
 
Annexure - I 
Exploration Drilling Success Ratio, 2010, (%) 
Sl. No. Companies Type Success Ratio % 
1.  Abraxas Petroleum Corporation Independent 30 
2.  Apache Corporation Independent  56 
3.  Beach Energy Limited Independent 31 
4.  BHP Billiton Limited Independent 25 
5.  Bill Barrett Corporation Independent 34          
6.  Chevron Corporation Integrated 57 
7.  China Petroleum Corporation NOCs 45 
8.  Compton Petroleum Corporation Independent 50 
9.  CREDP Petroleum Corporation Independent 39 
10.  Dee Three Exploration Ltd. Independent 27 
11.  dealEx Enerty International Inc. Independent 50 
12.  ECOPETROL S.A. NOCs 26 
13.  Energen Corporation Independent 40 
14.  Energy XXI (Bermuda) Limited Independent 27 
15.  Eni S.p.A. Integrated 39 
16.  Hess Corporation Integrated 47 
17.  Mart Resources, Inc. Independent 24 
18.  MDU Resources Group, Inc. Independent 43 
19.  Mitsul & Co. Ltd. Integrated 50 
20.  Niko Resources Ltd. Independent 30 
21.  Occidental Petroleum Corporation Independent 49 
22.  OMV Aktiengesellschaft Integrated 27 
23.  Peterobras Argentina, S.A. Integrated 50 
24.  Petroleos Mexicanos NOCs 59 
25.  Premier Oil plc Independent 57 
26.  Repsol YPF, S.A. Integrated 44 
27.  Sasol Limited Integrated 33 
28.  Statoil ASA NOCs 60 
29.  Sure Energy Inc. Integrated 40 
30.  Sure Energy Inc. Independent 33 
31.  Total S.A. Integrated 53 
32.  Trans Atlantic Petroleum Ltd. Independent 26 
 
Source: Data sourced from public domain. 
  

 
 
Annexure - II 
 
Finding Cost Comparison       (USD / BOE)  
INTERNATIONAL Companies* For 1P 
BP 77.88 
Husky energy 15.80 
Suncor 15.31 
Anadarko 13.70 
Nexen  9.78 
Talisman 9.13 
Hess 8.76 
Murphy 8.73 
Devon 6.38 
Statoil 6.34 
Eni 6.14 
Chevron 5.54 
Noble Energy 5.49 
OMV 5.00 
Petrobrass 4.97 
Apache 4.95 
Conoco Phillips 4.57 
BG Group 4.42 
Marathon Oil 4.06 
Shell 3.69 
EOG 3.60 
BHP Billiton 3.35 
TOTAL 2.81 
Canadian Natural 2.69 
Exxon 2.67 
LUKOIL 1.60 
*Average finding cost last 11 years (2001-2011) based on 3 years 
rolling average from HIS) 
 
 
OVL (average since inception) 
ONGC (average of 2001-01 to 2011-12) 
1.65 
4.31 
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22nd August, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1615 
hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6 Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
7 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
9 Shri Uday Singh 
10 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
11 Shri Tariq Anwar 
12 Shri Anil Desai 
13 Shri Naresh Gujral 
14 Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Rajeev Sharma    -     Director 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg -    Additional Director 
  
 
OFFICE Of C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik  Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit 
Board 
2 Ms. Revathy Iyer   Director General (Commercial)-II 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (P&NG) and ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) 
 
1 Shri G.C. Chaturvedi Secretary, Ministry of P&NG 
2 Shri Sudhir Vasudeva CMD, OVL 
3 Shri D.K. Saraf MD, OVL 
 
 
2.  The Committee met to take the oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and the ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) in connection 
with examination of Report No. 28 of C&AG of India, Union Government (Commercial) 
of 2010-11 (Performance Audit) on Joint Venture operations of ONGC Videsh Limited.  
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) and ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) and drew their 
attention to Direction 58 of t he Directions by the Speaker regarding evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committees.   
 
4.  The Committee then initiated the discussion on the Audit Report.  D uring the 
course of discussion, the Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects 
pertaining to the subject and the explanations / clarifications on the same were sought 
from the Secretary, MoPNG and CMD, OVL. Since the information on a number of 
issues raised by the members was not readily available with the representatives of the 
Ministry/OVL, the Committee directed that the same may be furnished to the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat within a week’s time. The Committee also decided that after perusal of the 
information so received, the MoPNG and OVL might again be called for further 
evidence, if required. 
 
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7th January 2014 from 1200 hrs to 1310 hrs 
in Room No. 53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
4.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
7.  Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
9.  Shri Anil Desai 
10.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
11.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
12.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri P. Mukherjee Deputy C&AG 
2. Shri Gautam Guha DG (Commercial)-I 
3. Shri P. Sesh Kumar DG (Commercial)-II 
 
  

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and  the Officers of C&AG to 
the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
(i). Joint Venture Operations of ONGC Videsh Limited based o n Audit Report 
No. 28 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit); and,  
 
(ii). XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
4. Since the Lok Sabha stands adjourned sine-die, the Committee decided to 
present the two Reports to Speaker, Lok Sabha under Direction 71A (1) of ‘The 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’  and authorized the Chairman to finalize the two 
Reports after suitably incorporating the audit vetting remarks and on the basis of factual 
verification and present  them to Speaker, Lok Sabha and then to Parliament as and 
when Parliament sitting is reconvened.    
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXX Matter not related to this Report. 