1 
 
 
 
 
C.P.U. No. 955  
 
 
 TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA  
LIMITED- MERGED ENTITY OF  
ERSTWHILE AIR INDIA AND INDIAN AIRLINES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on National 
Aviation Company of India Limited – Merged Entity of Erstwhile Air India and Indian 
Airlines) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2013  
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2013   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2013 / Vaisakha, 1935 (S) 
 22 
 

2 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012) (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER   l Report  
 
5 
CHAPTER   lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government.  
 
17 
CHAPTER   lII Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies.  
 
33 
CHAPTER   IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
 
43 
CHAPTER   V Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
53 
 
APPENDICES 
  
 
I 
 
 
II 
 
 
III 
 
 
IV 
 
Minutes of the sitting of Committee held on 
22.06.2011 
 
 Minutes of the sitting of Committee held on 
20.10.2011 
 
Minutes of the sitting of Committee held on 
12.01.2012 
 
Minutes of the sitting of Committee held on 
26.04.2013 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
55 
 
 
57 
 
 
59 
 
 
61 
 Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on 
the recommendations/ observations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha). 
 
63 
 
  

3 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  --  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant* 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri G. C. Prasad  Deputy Secretary 
 
* Vacancy caused due to passing away of Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. on 25 April, 2013. 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -second Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (15 th Lok Sabha) on National Aviation Company of India 
Limited – Merged Entity of Erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines. 
 
2. The Fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2009 -2010) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 March 2010.  The 
Action taken replies to all the 18 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received from the Government in September 2010 and subsequently the updated 
replies were recei ved in June 2011, August 2011 and January 2012.  The Committee 
took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India on 22 
June 2011, 20 October 2011 and on 12 January 2012.  Written replies to the issues 
raised during the evid ence were sought by the Committee and received from the 
Government in August 2011, December 2011, February 2012 and May 2012.  The 
Committee on Public Undertakings considered and adopted this Report at their sitting 
held on 26 April 2013. 
 
3. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 4th Report (2009-10) of the Committee is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
29  April, 2013 Chairman, 
09 Vaisakha 1935(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observation / Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2009 -10) on “National Aviation 
Company of India Limited – Merged Entity of Erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines” 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 March 
2010. 
 
2. The Action taken replies to all the 18 recommendations contained in the Report 
were received from the Government in September 2010 and subsequently the updated 
replies were received in June 2011, August 2011 and January 2012.  The Committee 
took oral evidence of  the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India on 22 
June 2011, 20 October 2011 and on 12 January 2012.  Written replies to the issues 
raised during the evidence were sought by the Committee and received from the 
Government in August 2011, December 2011, February 2012 and May 2012.  
 
3. The replies have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16   (Total 10) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8        (Total 02) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3 and 6, Para No. III & 11     (Total 04) 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V) 
Sl. Nos. 17 and 18        (Total 02) 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that  the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Consolidation of merger process 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1) 
 

6 
 
 
 
6. On the issue  of consolidation of the merger process, the Committee fe lt that 
there is a need for consistency in plans and policies of the company for the merger to 
consolidate and for this purpose there is a need for some credible leadership at the top. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the leadership of NACIL should  be put 
on a mission mode with a mandate spelt out in unequivocal terms to turn around the 
Company within a specified period.  The postings in the top slot of the Company should 
invariably be governed on the basis of performance and accountability.   
 
7. The Government in their action taken r eply furnished in September, 2010 and in 
their subsequent updated replies furnished in June, 2011 stated that  the observations 
of the Committee have been noted.  NACIL has prepared a turnaround plan and its 
implementation is being reviewed by Group of Ministers from time to time. 
 
8. When asked to submit specific and precise reply on the issues rai sed in the 
Committee’s recommendation, t he Ministry in their updated reply furnished in August, 
2011 submitted that Government is following up the financial position of Air India 
Limited at the highest level. The Company has come up with a viable Turn Around Plan 
and Financial Restructuring Plan, which is being evaluated by a Group of Officers 
drawn from different Ministries. AIL being a Company, has to have a Board of Directors 
to run its affairs.  
 
9. With a view to strengthening the Board, PESB has been requested to select 
competent persons for the three important posts of Functional Directors i.e. Personnel, 
Finance and Commercial.  Recommendations will be followed up. 
 
10. On the issue of Turn -around plan, the Ministry in their post evidence replies 
furnished in December 2011 stated that t he Turn -around plan has been vetted by 
Deloitte for assumptions relating to yield, growth & LFs and certain moderations have 
been made to the original Turn -around plan prepared by the Company in consultation 
with SBI CAPs. This in turn has also been seen b y a Committee of Officers appointed 
by the Group of Ministers who have recommended the following actions for 
implementing the Turn-around plan/FRP of AI. 
  
- The performance of PLF & yield of the company should be benchmarked to 
achieve 73% by 2015 and 75% b y 2020. Yield and utilization parameters should 
be in line with the market leaders. 
- The FRP should be as per the plan suggested by SBI CAPs which involves 
restructuring of STLs into LTLs and issue of CRPS. An equity infusion as 
envisaged above in Pt.10. 
- Induction of aircraft to be based on route planning & economics and could be 
reviewed after 2014-15. 
- Hiving off of MRO & GH as separate subsidiary companies as proposed in the 
Turn-around plan. 
- Revenue Generation through monetization fo  assets as proposed in the Turn -
around plan. 
- Cargo & Mail Revenue and other revenues as proposed in the Turn-around plan. 
- HR Policy review across AI including subsidiaries and right-sizing of staff through 
an appropriate VRS package. 
- Completion of Integrated IT Systems for improving performance. 
- Customer Oriented Services as proposed in the Turn-around plan to be focused. 
- Ownership of the Turn-around plan vide employees & Management of AI. 

7 
 
 
 
- An Oversight Committee to ensure implementation of the Turn -around plan and 
achievement of milestones.  
 
If these above measures are taken, the company would be Earnings Before 
Interest, Taxes Depreciation and Amortization ( EBIDTA) positive in 2013, cash 
profit 2018, EBT positive 2020, Total Net worth Positive 2020. 
 
11. On the issue of credible leadership and postings in the top slot of the Company, 
the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation  stated during the evidence before the 
Committee on 20 October, 2011 as follows: 
 
“I would like to apprise the Committee that there was  a change in the 
management on 12 th August 2011.  The new CMD joined on 12 th August 2011.  
The Ministry and the Air India Management feel that now there is a positive 
atmosphere.  I would not say comparatively it has improved tremendously but 
there is a positive atmosphere.  We feel there is new energy that will flow in the 
organisation.  There is a direct dialogue established between the Management 
and all the Unions not once but on an on -going basis which has generated trust 
and confidence between Management and employees.  Hon. Members might be 
aware that before the change in the Management there was disturbance almost 
every day in terms of operations and in terms of employees’ dissatisfaction.  We 
feel for the past over two months there is a comparativ e peace in the 
Organisation.” 
 
12. The Secretary, Civil Aviation stated in this connection on 12 January 2012 as 
follows: 
 
“The Government has taken a decision in August and has brought in a new top 
leadership positions …….  The company has shown sign of im provement in all 
parameters.  All parameters are clearly showing that with the change in the 
management, work culture and with the commitment of the employees, this 
company can do well.   There is a great potential.  It can really do wonders.  It is 
what I also feel at this point in time.” 
 
13. It is observed that name of the Company is now changed to Air India Limited 
effective from 24 November 2010. 
 
14. The Committee in their original report had observed that the merger of the 
erstwhile Indian Airlines and Air India into National Aviation Company of India 
Limited was an ill -conceived and an erroneous decision.  Considering the fact 
that the merger cannot be undone at this stage, the Committee had emphasised 
on the need for  consistency in plan and policies of the Company alongwith 
credible leadership at the top for the merger to consolidate and had 
recommended that (i) the leadership of NACIL be put on the  mission mode with a 
mandate spelt out in unequivocal terms to turn around the Company within a 
specified period; and that, (ii) the posting in the top slot of the Company should 
invariably be governed on the basis of performance & accountability. 
 
 It is observed that name of the Company has since been changed to Air 
India Limited effective from 24 November 2010.  T he Com mittee note that the 
action taken replies furnished initially did not convey any initiative being taken or 

8 
 
 
 
proposed to be taken by the Go vernment on the recommendations of the 
Committee.   The Government was very casual in stating that the observations of 
the Committee have been noted.  At a later stage,  the Government informed that 
a new CMD has been appointed to the Company on 12 August 2011 and also that 
the PESB has been requested to select competent persons for the three 
important posts of Financial Directors i.e. Personnel, Finance and Commercial.  
Further, a new Turn Around Plan (TAP) and Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP) 
has been p repared and approved by the Government for implementation.  
According to the TAP and FRP, in the event the proposed measures enumerated 
in these plans are taken, Air India would turn EBITA (Earnings Before Interest, 
Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization) po sitive by 2013, Cash Positive by 
financial year 2018, Profit Before Tax positive by financial year 2020 and Net 
Worth Positive by 2020.  Also, there is a provision for an Oversight Committee to 
ensure implementation of the TAP and achievement of milestones. 
  
According to the Turn Around Plans, it will take another seven years for Air 
India to break even.  It is not clear why it should take so many years for Air India 
to improve its performance.  In any case, the Committee would like to know 
whether Air Ind ia has become EBITA positive (Earnings before Interest, Taxes, 
Depreciation and Amortization) in 2012 as envisaged in the Turn Around plan.  
The role and responsibility of Oversight Committees and the top management 
appear to be blurred and it is not clear  who will be held responsible in the event 
of performance deficiencies.  The Committee hope that there will be clear 
demarcation in this regard to ensure accountability. 
 
Implementation of the merger plan 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
15. On the issue of im plementation of the merger plan  the Committee note d that 
irrespective of the merits of the merger plan, the present gravity of spiraling losses 
could have been averted had the implementation of the merger plan been strictly 
adhered to within the stipulated  timeframe. The Committee, therefore, recommend ed 
that a fresh, realistic and definite timeline for completion of pending processes of 
merger, such as establishing a uniform code – a pre -condition for joining the Star 
Alliance, setting up Strategic Busines s Units (SBUs), cross utilization of resources, IT 
augmentation, customer services, sales and marketing, finance, ground handling, 
MRO, operations and flight safety, training, cargo, etc., may be worked out and put in 
place immediately.  The Committee furt her recommend ed that reasons behind the 
undue haste in merger and lack of monitoring after the merger should be probed to fix 
the responsibility for the same and that the government must set up an effective 
monitoring mechanism to review the progress made on the revised merger schedule 
every quarter.  The Committee also recommend ed that all the loss attributable to 
merger of IA and AI should be recouped by the Government as the decision of merger 
was a policy decision spearheaded by the Ministry-in-charge. 
 
16. The Government in their a ction taken reply furnished in September, 2010 
submitted that the decision to merge IA and AI was not taken in haste but it was a well 
considered decision both at the company level and in the Govt.  A presentation was 
made before the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on the issue of me rger in March 2006, 
where an ‘in -principle’ view was taken that the merger of two airlines would be in their 
best interest.  While approving the merger, Air India Board decided to invite Expression 

9 
 
 
 
of Interest from various consultancy/Accounting firm and constituted a Committee for 
selection of the Consultant and oversee the process of merger.  After following the due 
process, the Consultant were appointed to draw the road -map of merger.  A Core 
Group was constituted to monitor the progress and to co -ordinate with Consultants at 
the top level.  Hon’ble Prime Minister was requested to constitute a Group of Minister s 
to consider the proposal at pre-Cabinet stage.  The Group of Ministers so constituted, in 
its first meeting, desired that the proposal be first considered by a Committee of 
Secretaries.  The Committee of Secretaries considered the proposed merger of two 
airlines and agreed to the proposal.  The GOM was briefed about the recommendations 
of CO S and it was decided that before the proposal is finally recommended to the 
Cabinet, the Ministry of Civil Aviation may (i) hold a round of talks with Employee 
Unions to keep them on board; (ii) prepare a note on management structure of the 
merged company vis-a-vis comparable international airlines; and (iii) suggest a 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism to take care of the employee grievances.  The action 
was accordingly taken and the same was briefed to GOM.  GOM after careful 
consideration, approved and decide d to recommend to the Cabinet the proposal to 
merge Air India and Indian Airlines into a new merged entity.  Thereafter, Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 1.3.2007 approved the proposal.  Losses of NACIL are not attributable 
to merger.  Infact 2008 & 2009 were  the worst years for aviation in India and globally, 
due to very high fuel prices touching upto $ 145 per barrel and then the economic 
slowdown.  However, NACIL has been directed to speed up the integration process and 
it has formed different sub-committees at Board level to monitor the progress.   
 
17. The Ministry in their aforesaid reply also informed about the milestones achieved 
in areas of route rationalization, Feeder & HS services, Through flight numbers, MRO -
SBU, Cross Utilization of MRO facilities , Boeing MRO at Nagpur, IT Aigmentation, 
Training, Cargo System and Sales & Marketing.  
 
18. On the issue of time line fixed for completion of merger related activities, the 
Ministry in their post -evidence reply furnished  in December, 2011 stated that the  
merger has been completed in many identified areas and the major milestones are 
being achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious financial position of the company. 
The major milestone of a Single AOP has been achieved and issued by DGCA. The cut 
over to the new PSS system has also been completed and the Company has migrated 
to a Unicode system. Integration of both the companies have also been completed in 
many area like Finalization of CMD, Board of Directors, organization structure for Air 
India (then NA CIL), selection of leadership team - Functional Directors, Executive 
Directors. In regard to Functional Director and Executive Director levels Organizational 
Structure have been finalized however compensation harmonization is yet to be 
harmonized.  Further, General Manager and Dy. General Manager level Organizational 
Structure have been finalized in respect of majority of the departments. Other areas 
completed are for Material Management - Integrated Policy, Financial Synergies / quick 
wins in Insurance, Fu el procurement - ATF, banks & fund management, common 
Accounting policies, legal & tax issues, Passenger Service System (PSS) Delegation of 
Administrative and Financial Powers etc. At the time of merger 226 critical activities had 
been identified and target ed for completion. Out of these,  about 170  of the identified 
areas have since been completed (December 2011). The area of integration of 
manpower and the solution to the HR issues is a major task and involves a high 
integration cost. The delay in harmoni zing is due to the critical financial condition being 
faced by the company and also the high cost of integrating the manpower on issues like 
level mapping, compensation harmonization etc for all employees including pilots. 

10 
 
 
 
 
19. Regarding the steps taken fo r improvement in the Customer Services, the 
Ministry in their reply furnished in February 2012 submitted that the following steps 
have been taken/being taken for improvement in Customer Services: 
 
(i) A separate cell has been set up for entertaining and evalua ting suggestions/ 
feedback to be obtained directly from cabin crew to bring rationalization/ 
improvement in services. 
(ii) Action has been initiated to procure adequately quantity of Hindi newspapers 
and magazines. 
(iii) Hold-over of Inflight Entertainment contents on wide body aircraft used to be NIL 
which has been increased to a Library of Contents available to on -board offering 
wider choice. At present 152 movies/other programmes of different 
classifications are available for viewing. 
(iv) Inflight content updation on narrow body aircraft has been reduced from monthly 
to fortnighty. 
(v) Mood lighting has been done in the wide body aircraft intended to uplift 
passenger experience and the feedback indicates that it elevates passenger 
experience and provides clean and posh look of cabins. 
(vi) Cabin boarding music has been changed to Indo -west Fusion having a rich 
sound to be played at boarding, taxing, landing and arrival taxing at audible level 
and the feedback indicates that combined with mood lightin g it has a mind 
altering and calming effect on passengers. 
(vii) Efforts are being made to upgrade cabin management by having neat  and tidy 
cabins, clean and hygienic toilets, controlled temperature to have positive effect 
on passengers. 
(viii) Call Centre Services: upgradation/under upgradation. 
 
- FFP Cell - Implemented with effect from 26 Feb. 11 offering membership, 
redemption and related services - functional. 
- French Toll Free – Seat assignment/Excess Baggage related offers for 
Indian origin passenger travelling ex-France has been implemented. 
- Tele Check-in for AI International Sectors being finalized. 
- Dial-a-Ticket (DAT) for AI International Sectors with payment collection 
through Domestic and International credit cards – works in progress. 
- Feedback Cell - Accessible through a Toll Free No. for handling customer 
feedback and complaints – work in progress; committee to negotiate being 
constituted. 
- Web Chat & SMS Pull – work in progress. 
 
20. The Committee had recommended that there should be a definite timeline 
for completion of pending processes of merger.  The Committee regret to note 
that neither any timeline has been fixed nor the integration processes completed 
even three years after presentation of the Committee’s Report.  The Committee 
have been informed in Decem ber 2011 that out of the total 226 critical activities 
identified and targeted for completion at the time of merger, only 170 of the 
identified areas have been completed.  The Committee reiterate that remaining 
identified activities be completed expeditiously within a time frame. 
 
 The Committee desire to know as to why, having engaged a consultant 
with huge cost, the road -map on merger as visualized by them could not be 

11 
 
 
 
achieved.  The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the matter 
should be probed and responsibility fixed.  
 
 The Committee also do not agree that losses of NACIL were not 
attributable to merger.  It is common knowledge that merger did involve 
considerable cost.  Besides, the adverse fall out of merger in the effective 
functioning of the Company in the inter -regnum period of merger processes did 
contribute to the losses.  The Committee expect Air India to analyze these 
aspects and quantify the amount involved in this regard for seeking a claim as 
recommended by the Committee.  
 
Analysis and review of routes / time slots 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6) 
 
21.  On the issue of allegations of favour being shown to private operators vis -à-vis 
Air India regarding allotment of routes and time-slots, the Committee felt  that it is in the 
public interest for the Ministry of Civil Aviation to dispel any misgivings over 
transparency of route and time -slot allocations raised by allegations of favors being 
shown to private operators for some consideration or the other. The Committ ee, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should conduct a transparent 
review of the entire route and slot allocations, both in the domestic and international 
sectors, and effect necessary changes to ensure that NACIL is neither put at  any 
disadvantage nor appear to be placed in any disadvantageous position.  
 
22. The Government in their action taken reply furnished in September 2010 stated 
that the slots requests of airlines are analysed vis -a-vis capacity parameters i.e. 
runway, apron, terminal building, watch hours etc. Based on this analysis, the slot as 
requested by the airlines are either approved or a list of alternate offers is generated.  
The basic principle of the slot allocation process is historic precedence  whereby 
airlines are entitled  to a series of slots which have been  received from the airlines for 
new/additional flights, change of time due to operational reasons etc. are examined by 
the airport operator and cleared, if found acceptable, within the notified capacities .  In 
the entire process, there is no room for preferential treatment to any airlines 
 
23. In June 2011, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that an analysis as desired 
by the Hon’ble Committee, with all its ramifications has been done.  A review of sl ot 
allocations will also shortly be underway.  
 
24. In their updated action taken reply furnished in August 2011, the Ministry further 
submitted that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has  no role in selection of domestic routes 
by airlines. The routes of oper ations on domestic sector are chosen by the airlines 
including Air India. Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines for all 
airlines with a view to achieve better regulation of air transport services of different 
regions of the country, including north-east region, which is monitored by DGCA. So far 
as slots are concerned, these are allocated by AAI, DGCA and Airport Operators in a 
fair and transparent manner.  The Ministry has no role in the matter.  So far as 
international routes are concerned, MoCA allocates only traffic rights under Air Services 
Agreements and Air India has the first right to operate to any international destination 
and it is only on their refusal that these are offered to other Indian Carriers.  
 

12 
 
 
 
25. The Committee deprecate the contradictory stand of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on the matters of route and slot allocations to Air India and private 
airlines.  The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
should conduct a transparent review of the entire route and slot allocations, both 
in the domestic and international sectors and effect necessary changes to ensure 
that Air India is not put at any disadvantage.  The Ministry  of Civil Aviation 
initially informed in June 2011 that an analysis as desired by the Committee with 
all its ramifications has been done and the review of slot allocations will also 
shortly be underway.  However, the Ministry changed its stand in August 2011 
and held that it has no role in selection of domestic routes by airlines ; that the 
Route Dispersal Guidelines are monitored by DGCA; and that slots are allocated 
by Airports Authority of India and DGCA and airport operators in a transparent 
manner.  The Committee expect the Ministry of Civil Aviation to clarify their 
aforesaid contradictory views and apprise the Committee of the outcome of the 
analysis and review undertaken regarding route and slot allocations.  
 
Fleet Acquisition and utilization of aircraft 
Para No. III & 11 
 
26. The Committee noted, inter-alia, that in one of the aspects of fleet management 
relating to the maintenance of airworthiness of aircrafts, the Company is having 
unutilized manpower capacity. The Committee noted that the engineering force in the 
company is capable of effectively running maintenance operations for 300 aircraft, while 
the company itself has only some 100 aircrafts. However, on the other aspect, there are 
disparaging reports in the media about a lot of aircraft capacity lying idle due to the 
grounding of certain types of aircraft for one reason or the other.  The Committee noted 
that utilization of aircraft in the company is at a low of 9 hours per day while the 
benchmark is at 16 hours per day.  The Committee recommend ed optimal utilization of 
the available manpower who otherwise have necessary skill and experience to maintain 
airworthiness of aircraft. 
 
27. The Committee also recommended that the steps necessary to increase the 
utilization of aircrafts should be expedited without delay to bring up the average 
utilization to 16 hours per day per aircraft.  The Government in their action taken reply 
elaborately explained about the need for details of new Aircraft Fleet Acquisition and 
optimal utilization of available manpower. 
 
 Regarding aircraft utilization, it has been stated that the aircraft utilisation mainly 
depends upon the commercial schedule and the maintenance check requirements.  Air 
India’s Engineering Department takes all steps to make the aircraft available within the 
planned grounding schedule after completion of the checks. 
    
(i)  The details of planned utilization per available aircraft, i.e. excluding aircraft 
earmarked for disposal, per day in Winter 2011 (as on date) are as under: 
 
Aircraft Winter 11 (Planned) 
B777 13.8 
B747 4.5 
A330 10.0 

13 
 
 
 
A320 family 10.7 
 
(ii)  The utilization of B747-400 is kept low due to high cost of operation. 
 
(iii)  A330 aircraft utilization is low as one aircraft is under maintenance. 
 
(iv)  For the period April 2009 to February 2010, Air India’s owned B777 -200LR and 
B777-300ER fleet is being utilized at 12.08 and 13.39 block hours per day per 
a/c respectively. 
The comparison of the aircraft utilization  (source: Airbus Industrie monthly 
service report – September 2011) of Air India and the Industry, for the type of aircraft 
operated by Air India, is given below:- 
 
A319 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 6.34 1.39 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 6.74 1.34 
LUFTHANSA 7.39 1.28 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
7.66 1.27 
U.S.AIRWAYS 7.91 1.75 
CYPRUS AIRWAYS(CYP) 8.27 2.03 
TAM-LINHAS 
AEREAS(TAM) 
9.11 1.13 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.13 1.79 
SILK AIR 8.47 2.02 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.27 1.64 
AIR CHINA 8.54 1.90 
TIGER AIRWAYS 6.97 2.50 
AIR INDIA Ltd. 7.59 1.35 
WORLD AVERAGE 8.57 1.71 
 
A320 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 6.50 1.50 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 7.39 1.72 
LUFTHANSA 7.47 1.39 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
8.09 1.40 
U.S.AIRWAYS* 9.26 2.47 
CYPRUS AIRWAYS(CYP)* 8.42 2.29 
EGYPT AIR(MSR)* 9.33 2.11 
TAM-LINHAS 
AEREAS(TAM)* 
10.90 1.55 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.24 1.58 
INDIGO 9.50 1.49 
GO AIR 11.01 1.46 
SRILANKAN AIRLINES 8.97 1.81 
SILK AIR 8.92 1.97 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.90 1.71 
AIR CHINA 7.38 1.80 
QATAR AIRWAYS 11.25 2.46 
TIGER AIRWAYS 10.50 2.30 
AIR INDIA Ltd.* 8.03 1.76 
WORLD AVERAGE 9.09 1.89 

14 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:  *   Airbus A320 Operator with V2500A1 engines 
 
A321 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 5.80 1.21 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 6.10 1.26 
LUFTHANSA 7.65 1.45 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
9.42 1.74 
U.S.AIRWAYS 10.08 2.84 
EGYPT AIR(MSR) 8.03 2.24 
TAM-LINHAS 
AEREAS(TAM) 
12.01 2.32 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.31 1.73 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.07 1.69 
AIR CHINA 8.36 2.16 
QATAR AIRWAYS 12.16 2.69 
AIR INDIA Ltd. 9.13 1.95 
WORLD AVERAGE 8.72 2.03 
A330 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 12.07 6.80 
SRILANKAN AIRLINES 13.72 3.57 
AIR CHINA 11.39 4.74 
LUFTHANSA 13.78 6.68 
JET AIRWAYS 13.85 7.21 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 12.83 6.72 
QATAR AIRWAYS 13.73 5.18 
AIR INDIA LTD 9.17 4.22 
WORLD AVERAGE 11.99 4.72 
 
28. The Committee do not disagree that aircraft utilization mainly depends 
upon the commercial schedule and the maintenance check requirement.  It is 
observed from the information furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that 
aircraft utilization also depen ds upon the type and model of aircraft.  The 
Committee note that daily utilization of A330 by Jet Airways was 13.85 hrs.  The 
Committee desire that Air India should devise its commercial schedule and 
maintenance check requirements in such a way as to, amon g other things, 
maximize aircraft utilization.  
 
Training & independent subsidiary of NACIL 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 14) 
 
29. The Committee had recommended, inter-alia,  that the training infrastructure and 
manpower inherited by NACIL from its pre -merged entities be galvanized into an 
independent subsidiary of NACIL with improved capacities to cater to such of the 
professional trainings as required by the airline industry  in general, and to be operated 
as a separate unit of business capable of competing internationally. 
 
30. The Committee  in their original report had recommended, among other 
things, that the training infrastructure and manpower inherited by NACIL from its  
pre-merged entities be galvanized into an independent subsidiary of NACIL with 

15 
 
 
 
improved capacities to cater to the training requirements of the airline industry 
which should be operated as a separate unit of business capable of competing 
internationally.  From the replies furnished by the Government, the Committee 
note that efforts are being made to integrate the training set -ups inherited by 
NACIL from its pre -merged entities including establishment of a full fledged 
Aviation Training Business Unit which would function at their Central Training 
Establishment at Hyderabad.   The reply is, however, silent about transforming 
the training institution as an independent subsidiary of NACIL now renamed as 
Air India Ltd. . The Committee would like to be apprised o f the progress made in 
this regard. 
 
 
Pay and allowances of the employees of Air India and Indian Airlines 
Recommendation/observations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Sl.No. 17 & 18) 
 
31. On the issue of pay scales/emoluments drawn by the persons of NACIL (Air 
India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines), the Committee observe d that the designation and 
the pay scales/emoluments drawn in the two organizations are not at par as the 
persons holding the same designation in NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (In dian Airlines) 
are getting different emoluments/scales of pay.  The Committee note d the difficulties in 
addressing the concerns of the employees enjoying the same designations and having 
different pay scales in the two organizations.  This obvious difficult y which should have 
been foreseen at the outset did not seem to have even occurred to those who worked 
out the merger process. The Committee, however, felt  that as far as possible, it may be 
ensured that there is no loss of emoluments and a feeling of ali enation amongst the 
employees of the two organizations.  The advisable course of action would, therefore, 
appear to be to merge the two sets of employees with reference to the scales of pay 
and not based on their designations. The final action taken in thi s regard may be  
communicated to the Committee. 
 
32. The Government in their action taken reply submitted in September 2010 stated 
that  It is a fact that pay -scales have not been harmonized at any level or grade and all 
the employees including EDs, GMs, Dy .GMs and other categories are governed by 
their respective scales of pay, service regulations and certified/standing orders as per 
their erstwhile companies. Committees have been formed to look into the issues of 
Postal Life Insurance (PLI) parameters and restructuring the PLI and process is still on.  
 
33. In their updated action taken reply furnished in January 2012, the Government 
have further submitted about t he terms of reference of the Justice Dharmadhikari 
Committee, which inter-alia, include the following:  
 
i) To examine the principles of integration across various cadres and determination 
of level and seniority; 
ii) To examine the principles of Pay/Wage rationalization and restructuring between 
all the employees of the erstwhile airlines;  
iii) To examine the principles governing the structure of pensionary scheme, death -
cum-retirement gratuities and other terminal benefits having financial implication;  
iv) To examine and make recommendations with respect to the general principle 
parameters of the different Productivity Linked Schemes and bring them in line 
with airline practices. 

16 
 
 
 
 
34. On the issue of cut or advancement of allowances of the employees, the 
Committee noted that they  have been apprised that there has  been a shifting of 
allowances of NACIL (Air India) employees from salary (wage) slip to PLI slip issued to 
them.  The Committee felt that at this junct ure such kind of action on the part of 
management does not seem to be proper as the merger of two sets of employees has 
not been fully effected so far.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that any cut or 
advancement should be proportionate to the scale of pay as it otherwise will be against 
the assurance “No employee would be placed at a disadvantage at any stage” which 
was communicated to the employees before merger of the two organizations.  
 
35. The Government in the action taken reply furnished in September 2010 and later 
in their updated replies furnished in June 2011 and August 2011 submitted that f rom 
the time the PLI was introd uced in NACIL - (A) in 1996, the salary slip and the PLI slip 
used to be separate and was issued / payment released on two different dates. 
Recently with the financial crisis in the Company, the PLI Slip and salary slip are being 
released almost the same t ime, which is at the end of the month. However, no 
allowance of the NACIL - (A) employees has been shifted from the Salary Slip to PLI 
Slip. However, there has been a shift of allowance in NACIL(I) from salary slip to PLI 
slip. As and when a policy is taken with regard to wage cut, if any, it will be ensured that 
no employee would be placed at a disadvantage.   
 
36. In their latest status on the Justice Dharmadhikari Committee Report,  the 
Government in their action taken reply furnished in May 2012 informe d that the 
Committee has since submitted its report to the Government on 31 st January 2012.  
The Ministry has constituted a 3 -member Committee consisting of officers from the 
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Civil Aviation and an Independent E xpert 
to examine the recommendations of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee and formulate a 
time-line for its implementation. 
 
37. The Committee note that a three member Committee has been constituted 
consisting of officers from the Department of Public Enterp rises, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and an Independent Expert to examine the recommendations of the 
Justice Dharmadhikari Committee report and formulate time-line.  The Committee 
would like to be informed of final action taken on the issues of pay scales / 
emoluments, allowances, etc. of the employees in pursuance of Dharmadhikari 
Committees’ recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

17 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
Structure of Leadership after the merger 
 
Closely linked with the aspect of leadership is its structure.  The Committee note 
that prior to the merger, both Air India and Indian Airlines had in place a fairly well 
placed infrastructural base.  The Committee, therefore, feel that it is quite logical to take 
benefits from the respective positive aspects of the subsidiaries (viz. Air India and 
Indian Airlines) of the merged entity.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
making of NACIL into a holding company under which two se parate wings, NACIL -
Indian Airlines with its Headquarters at Delhi and NACIL -Air India with its Headquarters 
at Mumbai, each headed by a Managing Director who shall report to Chairman, NACIL, 
needs to be seriously considered.  In the opinion of the Committ ee, this arrangement 
alone would substantially redress the problems faced by the Company in the various 
integration processes, especially of manpower which is presently debilitated by 
differences in working conditions and work culture between employees of the two 
erstwhile separate companies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Air India is of the view that a fully merged company operating as a single unit in 
the organisational model is best suited to realise the benefits of a merged entity.  
However, in a merger o f companies of such large dimensions there are several 
constraints in implementing the merger process. 
 
However, the issues which have already been addressed are: 
 
a) Organization structure finalized. 
b) Slotting of manpower from top to Dy. General Manager for different functions 
completed. 
c) Appointments to the post of Executive Director carried out and their seniority 
integrated. 
d) Appointments to the post of General Manager carried out and their seniority 
integrated except in cadres of Engineering and Operations (Flying). 
e) Delegation of Powers finalized, approved by the Board and implemented. 
f) Service Regulations and Conduct Rules finalized and placed before Board for 
approval. 
g) Passage Regulations finalized and forwarded for examination and approval of 
Board. 
h) Road m ap formulating Management’s proposal to integrate the seniority 
designations and career progression pattern for different category of employees 
represented by various Union/Associations made ready for discussion and 
certain preliminary discussions commenced. 
 
The process of integration of both the erstwhile Companies is under progress 
and in many areas including areas of Sales, Marketing, IT, IOCC, PSS, ERP, Ground 

18 
 
 
 
Handling, HR, Properties and Facilities etc. progress has been made. With the cut over 
to the new PSS system, the Company has migrated to a Unicode system effective 
February 27, 2011.   
 
Operations Training Manuals have been merged and put up to DGCA for 
approval.  Part of Operations Manual of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines have 
been merged and changes recommended by DGCA are in the process of being carried 
out. 
 
Manpower of the two erstwhile airlines is yet to be integrated. In the meanwhile, to 
facilitate completion of pending manpower integration activities, an independent 
committee has been set up comprising of Justice D.N. Dharmadhikari, a Retired Judge 
of Supreme Court, along with Prof. R. Dholakia from IIM Ahmedabad, Shri Rajeshwar 
Dayal, Retired Director, Dept. of Public Enterprises and Shri Syed Nasir Ali, Director in 
the Civil Aviation Ministry. The terms of reference of the Committee is as follows: 
 
 To ex amine the principles of integration across various cadres and 
determination of level and seniority; 
 To examine the principles of pay parity between all the employees of the 
erstwhile airlines; 
 To examine and suggest harmonized working conditions of various  categories 
of employees of erstwhile airlines depending upon the requirements; 
 To examine the above a), b), and c) in the light of the cost neutrality principle; 
 To examine the principles governing the structure of pensionary  schemes, 
death-cum-retirement gratuities and other terminal benefits having financial 
implication; 
 To examine and make recommendations with respect to the general principle 
parameters of the different Productivity Linked Incentive Schemes and bring 
them in line with airline practices. 
 
The three member committee is headed by Retd. Justice Dharmadhikari and 
would interact with the Management, Unions/Associations, third party and other 
stakeholders. The Committee has already met all the Unions/representative  bodies of 
employees of erstwhile airlines and  proposes to submit its report by the end of January 
2012. 
 
At the time of merger 226 critical activities had been identified and targeted for 
completion. Out of these 161 of the identified areas have since bee n completed. 58 
items are in progress and 7 not initiated. 
 
Performance dependency  Total  
 
Completed*  
 
In-progress  
 
Not 
initiated  
Operational Integration  123 97 21 5 
Contingent on management 
decisions  
38 30 6 2 
Contingent on IT readiness  35 24 11 0 
Contingent on HR Integration 
decisions 
30 10 20 0 
Total  226 161 58 7 
% Completed   71% 26% 3% 
 

19 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4) 
 
Position of CMD and his accountability in the merger process 
 
The Committee note that a mechanism for ensuring accountability in the 
implementation of the entire merger process is conspicuous by its absence. The 
position of CMD, designated as the Merger Champion, was turned into a musical chair 
of sorts during such a crucial phase in the consolidation of the merged entity, absolving 
the occupants of any liability to face the accountability.  This in turn gave scope for 
literally ‘passing the buck’.    The Committee recommend that responsibilities f or 
managers put in charge of these pending matters should be properly defined and 
stringent accountability procedures put in place to ensure timely execution of defined 
tasks. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Integration of both the companies have been completed in many areas like 
Board of Directors, Organization structure, selection of leadership teams - Functional 
Directors, Executive Directors, some General Managers(holding independent charge), 
Customer Services, Integrated Material Management Policy, financial Synergies/quick 
wins in Insurance,  Fuel procurement, Bank & fund management, common accounting 
policies, legal & tax issues, delegation of administrative and financial powers and 
integration of manpowe r upto the level of General Manager. In some other areas 
including Sales and Marketing, IT, PSS, ERP, Ground Handling, Human Resource, 
property and facilities etc., the integration process is underway.  The process is being 
monitored closely by the Company 's management, the board and at various levels in 
the Government. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Disbursement of funds 
 
The Committee note that as per various newspaper report s, huge amounts of 
money were made available through financial institutions for facilitating the merger.  
The documents on record, however, do not reveal as whether these funds had been 
expended / disbursed judiciously or not. The Committee desire that this matter might be 
looked into by the appropriate authority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Huge amounts of money were not made available through financial institutions 
for facilitating the merger.  However Air India had to borrow from various Banks for 
meeting its working capital requirements which increased in the period following the 
merger due to a number of factors including global recession, steep increase in fuel 
prices, fall in yields and load factors and the c onditions prevailing in the airline industry, 
etc. and to meet its fuel expenses, lease of aircraft, payment to vendors and Airport 

20 
 
 
 
Authorities, payment of interest on borrowings, wages, repayment of loans for aircraft 
acquisition etc.  In view of the cash  losses of approximately Rs.350 to Rs.400 crores a 
month, the requirements of working capital also increased by nearly Rs.4500 crores 
every year which was equivalent to the cash loss.  The working capital  borrowings 
which was around Rs. 6550 crores in Nov ember 2007, increased to nearly  Rs. 21,500 
crores as on   30th November 2011. Pending the finalization of the FRP, no fresh 
borrowings were resorted to towards enhancement of Working Capital in the last 2 / 3 
months other than Buyers credit in order to clear the arrears of spares and stores. 
Utmost restraint was observed in the utilisation of the enhanced working capital limits 
and a number of cost costing measures were already put in place to contain the losses.  
Amongst them included the rationalisation o f routes, closure of uneconomic stations, 
reduction of overtime and other employee perquisites, return of leased aircraft, phase 
out of old fleet, reduction of contractual employment, fuel conservation programmes, 
induction of brand new fleet on major trun k routes and setting up of committees to 
closely monitor costs. 
 
 (Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9) 
 
Capital infusion 
 
The Committee have taken note of the prolonged neglect of aircraft acquisition in 
the pre-merged Air India and Indian Airlines and the need to enhance the fleet strength 
of the NACIL to have a critical mass of capacity to give it a shot at regaining its lost 
market share. The Committee are concerned to note that the project financial closure of 
the pre-merged entities have been allowed to be swept away by the confusion reigning 
in the much eulogized merger. Considering the irreversibility of the mess that has been 
created by the sloppy handling of the merger process and the need to look to the future, 
the Committee feel that capital infusion into the ailing public airline to make the 
company credit worthy for its operational credit requirements has become imperative to 
salvage the remnants of the legendary airlines.  However, the Committee desire that 
strict compliance to defined performance benchmarks should be made a precondition to 
a phased capital infusion.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Sir, you have also mentioned the most current concern, which has been 
expressed by lenders on our financial restructuring plan…….As we have been told, the 
main concern of bankers is that, if I may very briefly mention, out of Rs.22,000 crore 
working capital, which was given by the bankers to f inance their gap of cost and 
revenue, they are incurring about two -and-a-half thousand crore rupees interest per 
annum. This was sought to be restructured. So, there were three components of 
Rs.22,000 crore. One was a component of about Rs.11,000 crore whi ch was converted 
into a long -term loan with a reduced interest, moratorium, etc. The second component 
was about seven-and-a-half thousand crore rupees to be converted into CPRS*. There, 
the provision was that if the company will make the profit, they will pay dividend. 
Otherwise, after agreed period, the Government of India stands guarantee to repay that 
money. Some Rs.3,000 crore was kept as a cash credit limit. Now, the bankers are 
saying that they are going to receive a big hit on account of two componen ts. One is, 
what is being sought to be converted into long -term where interest rates are being 

21 
 
 
 
reduced and the bankers will have to forego their interest for their moratorium period, 
etc. 
 
Their second worry is that now they are backing out from the earlie r agreed 
share arrangement. They are saying that CPRS procurement by banks will then not 
enable them to earn interest for the next 15 or 20 years. Their seven -and-a-half 
thousand crore rupees will remain without interest. So, now they are saying that --as we 
have been told, we have no official communication from the lead bank, thatis, SBI -- 
instead of shares, banks would be interested in giving bonds on which Air India will 
have to then pay interest to these banks. So, that is where we are with respect to FR B. 
We have received a communication now from Air India again based on what is 
appearing and what SBI Caps has told.  
 
I have personally discussed just now with the CMD of SBI Caps and I have 
asked him to send a formal report. We have already spoken with th e Department of 
Financial Services. Next week the hon. Finance Minister is convening a meeting to 
have a look at the current demand of the bankers. So, in the absence of clarity from the 
bankers, I would say we are getting slowed down because if bonds are to be acquired 
by banks, then the problem of Air India remains the same. They will have to pay the 
interest which they are not in a position to pay.  
 
Secondly, you have asked some essential features of turnaround plan. In fact, 
on page 12 and 13 last time  the hon. Committee had asked us to give us 10 bullet 
points on the TAP and FRB. So, I have listed there the salient features of the 
turnaround plan where the most important feature is the performance in terms of load 
factor and yield of the company which has to be benchmarked with some of the 
competitors. 
 
(Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting held on 12 January 2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
Separate Business Unit of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) 
 
The Committee see hope in the new line of planning whereby the Engineering 
strength of the company is proposed to be channelized into forming a separate 
business unit of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) as a subsidiary. The 
Committee strongly recommend that NACIL should be encouraged to develop MRO as 
a separate and professional business unit catering to the aviation industry as a whole.  
The Committee also recommend that the processes involved towards this enterprise be 
expedited in consultation with  the employees and that the Government extend all 
necessary support to the Company in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The plan for merger of erstwhile Indian Airlines & Air India into NACIL envisaged 
the potential creation of Strategic Business Uni ts (SBUs) as profit centres in the areas 
of Full Service Passenger Airline (PAX), Low Cost Carrier (LCC), MRO etc. The market 
for MRO business is expected to grow with the rapidly expanding Indian Aviation 
market.  
  

22 
 
 
 
It is therefore decided that Air India Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) which 
was incorporated in 2004 in erstwhile Air India would be hived off and operationalise as 
a subsidiary company with management independence.  
 
Furthermore, MRO business may help Air India to monetize the value of i ts 
current assets and infrastructure to raise funds to support the parent company.  Efforts 
shall be made for taking approval from FAA/EASA and other regulatory agencies. This 
will also help Air India to take third party workload. 
 
The operationalisation of AIESL is also a part of Turn Around Plan of Air India. 
 
Boeing MRO at Nagpur 
 
Air India and Boeing Company are setting up an MRO facility at Nagpur funded 
by Boeing.  The facility will have two wide-body hangars, GE-90/GEnx Engine Overhaul 
Facility and s eat refurbishment/ component overhaul / composite repair/ specialized 
engine piece part repair shops.  The present status is as under: 
Unit holder approval from SEZ Authorities obtained.  Registration of lease deal of 50 
acres of land completed with MADC.  L&T is appointed as design & build contractor. 
Compound wall and Support Building and other ancillary building work is in progress, 
ground floor slab has already been completed. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
Assignment of Ground Handling activities 
 
The Committee note that the pre -merged entities, IA &  AI had a monopoly of 
ground handling activities within India prior to the Open Sky Policy of 1994, and that the 
private airport operators, who also came into the scene in the wake of this policy had 
been given the authority, under the new policy, to assig n ground handling activity to 
entities of their choice in the airports operated by them.  However, when these 
operators, notably at Bangalore and Hyderabad, notified their invitations for 
expressions of interest, the national carriers were disqualified by a requirement to have 
international experience.  The Committee further note that this has resulted in idle 
manpower capacity to the National Carrier, cutting into its operational margins. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that NACIL whose two subsidiarie s have decades of 
expertise and experienced workforce with respect to international operations should be 
assigned the ground handling activity exclusively and other avenues may be sought 
only when NACIL is not in a position to carry out the job.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Air India Ltd. has entered into a consortium at Bangalore and Hyderabad airports 
with SATS due to the pre -condition of the laid down tender requirements.   For other 
airports, Air India Ltd. is in the process of discussions with SATS.  Du e diligence 
process is in progress and Air India Ltd. has sought the details of ownership which are 
yet to be sorted out.  Air India Ltd. is also considering to carry out ground handling 
through its subsidiary, AIATSL, to enable provide ground handling to all carriers in the 
country. 

23 
 
 
 
 
Air India & Singapore Airport Terminal Services (SATS) have since formed a 
single 50:50 Joint Venture (JV) Company (Air India SATS Airport Services Pvt. Ltd.) 
that would serve as the vehicle to house their three existing groun d and cargo handling 
JVs in Bangalore & Hyderabad & other potential operations in other metro airports. 
 
These endeavours are aimed at developing superior capabilities and 
competitiveness in the field by reaping on a strong local footprint and knowledge wi th 
experience and know-how in ground handling of these partners.  This will help in facing 
the competition in the ground handling business where quality of services & priority 
pricing play a very important role. 
 
Air India has appointed AI SATS as the offi cial ground handler of Air India flights 
and its customer airlines currently handled by Air India at the new T3 at Delhi and 
accordingly, AI SATS took over ground handling at T3 effective Sept. 2010. Presently, 
AI SATS is undertaking ground handling activi ties in Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhi and 
Mangalore. 
  
In other Airports in the country, Air India plans to carry out ground handling 
activities through its subsidiary company, Air India Air Transport Services Limited 
(AIATSL), in conformity with the Ground Handling Policy.  
  
Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has come out with Draft Civil Aviation 
Regulations (CAR) for Ground Handling Activities in India and all Ground Handlers in 
India shall require "Security Clearance" from DGCA to perform their ac tivities.  Air India 
has already started working on the same.  
 
Air India achieved another milestone to be the first airline in India providing 
ground services to enter the ISAGO (IATA Safety Audit for Ground Operations) registry 
with its Mumbai station.  Air India was also the first Airline in India to clear the IATA 
Operational Safety Audit (IOSA) in 2003.  Quality Management System (QMS) ensured 
timely and successful registration of IOSA as well as ISAGO for Air India.  
The addition of this registration i ndicates the clear commitment of Air India to be 
proactive and go beyond the minimum safety and quality standards in all spheres of 
Aviation. 
 
Compliance with ISAGO will go a long way in reducing the number of accidents, 
requires less additional audit oper ations, reduces costs, unifies standards and ensures 
greater safety and quality standards.  
 
ISAGO Audits were conducted by an Auditor deputed from IATA accredited 
Audit Organisation for Air India Headquarters and by Airline Auditors from an ISAGO 
Audit Pool Member Airline for Mumbai Station. 
 
Audits covered the Headquarters Organisation & Management systems as well 
as the station’s Management System, passenger and baggage handling, load control, 
aircraft handling and loading, aircraft ground movement, cargo and mail handling. 
 
The ISAGO Corporate Registry expires on July 03, 2012 while Mumbai Station 
Registry expires on October 13, 2012. Renewal Audits are due in 2012. 
 

24 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012) 
 
  

25 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
Corporate Work Culture 
 
  The Committee note that during the evidence, the CMD had admitted the lack of 
Corporate Work Culture in the Company.  In this regard, the Committee have taken 
note of the plans now made to redress the same by a proposed introduction of a new 
staff training plan requiring the staff to undergo training in hospitality and other areas of 
work every six months.  The Committee recommend that the management of NACIL 
should effectively carry out their training plan so as to cultivate attitudinal changes 
amongst the employees to enable them to compete with the corporate competitors.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Corporate Work Culture evolves over a period of time.  The period of two years 
is too short for this to e volve.  However, the Company has effected cross transfers for 
carrying the culture of the erstwhile companies across which would result in moving 
forward jointly and assist in evolving a corporate work culture for Air India.  The training 
programmes which are being conducted in the Regions and CTE, Hyderabad are 
training the staff of both the erstwhile companies. 
 
Air India has taken following steps to improve the corporate work culture, by 
introducing Airline Company Resource Management (ACRM).  
 
The Crew Resource Management (CRM) which was initially meant for the 
cockpit crew and cabin crew was further extended to flight dispatchers (DRM). It was 
also felt that the other interlinked departments such as engineering, traffic, commercial, 
etc. too needed CRM training to enhance safety and ensure synergy amongst various 
departments. Therefore, it was decided to conduct Airline Company Resource 
Management involving representatives from all departments of the airline. This course 
is conducted to improve the aware ness, coordination and efficiency towards all 
operational areas besides improving safety and quality standards. This is also to 
comply with the IOSA requirement.  
 
This training is being conducted by approved and trained CRM Facilitators of the 
“Human Fact ors Cell”.  The Airline Company Resource Management Training being 
carried out by the approved and trained CRM Facilitators will help in improving the 
corporate work culture.  Further, this has helped in improving the inter -departmental 
synergy. 
 
Representatives from Commercial, Cargo, Traffic Services, Ground Handling 
(including Ramp), Engineering & Maintenance, Operations, HRD, Finance, MMD, 
Medical Services, Headquarters, etc. have undergone the ACRM training.   
A series of training modules were conducte d covering most of the employees of 
Air India to come to the grips of merged scenario of Air India which was found essential 
with the tough competitive environment around in Indian aviation. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012) 
 
 During the evidence of the Committee on 12.1.2012, CMD, Air India on the 
aforesaid issue further stated as under: 

26 
 
 
 
“…… over a period of time as old people retire young people will come and the 
hospitality services will improve as age is a very important factor in the 
hospitality services.  There is a difference in their energy and attitude.  I am 
completely satisfied, and you must have also seen that the young staff that is 
lying, behavior is very positive, they smile more, they are more communicating, 
they care more.  Even with M.Ps. who are travelling in business class, they 
should get the best hospitalities -we are wo rking on it.  When you reach the 
airport, they should greet and take you but for this we needed an additional 180 
persons whose burden on us was rupees one crore.  We have to rethink on this.  
Our air staff that is deployed in Delhi, we are working with th em on whether 
business class people are properly received and escorted and taken to the 
plane.  For our air hostess and cockpit crew, we have issued a detailed SOP in 
December 2011 that if any VIP is travelling in the plane, then the type of 
behavior and s ervices that are to be provided to them.  It will take time to 
crystallize and to percolate down to the lowest level. But I am sure that within a 
couple of months you will start seeing a difference in the way our staff behave 
with all the people who are tr avelling in the Business Class and for dealing with 
complaints of general customers, we have developed a system to deal with the 
first thing is that the complainant should get a response that his complaint has 
been noted and we are taking action on it.  Fi fteen days have been fixed for this 
and the complaint should be addressed within this time.  If a person has faced 
personal problem, we will respond to it.  Sometimes, complainant has been 
given compensatory tickets  and we have satisfied that when they tra vel next 
time, their tickets would be upgraded so that their loyalty remains with us.  We 
are trying to retain the legacy of the 50-60 years with us and we are also trying to 
improve it.  Our services at one time was well known and it was the best.  We 
are even trying to provide the same best services even today.” 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
Training 
 
 The Committee note that both pre -merged companies, IA & AI, have adequate 
training facilities devoted to the training of their own personnel which have now been 
inherited by NACIL.  The Committee also note that in the emerging market reality of stiff 
competition and falling margins, especially in the airline industry, it is no longer 
financially sustainable to have devoted training facilities.  
 
The Committee , therefore, recommend that the training infrastructure and 
manpower inherited by NACIL from its pre -merged entities be galvanized into an 
independent subsidiary of NACIL with improved capacities to cater to such of the 
professional trainings as required b y the airline industry in general, and to be operated 
as a separate unit of business capable of competing internationally.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The first main step in training was to integrate the Training set -ups of erstwhile 
NACIL(A) & NACIL(I) which has resulted in the following action being taken:- 
1) With the issue of a single AOP for Air India Ltd., the Operations Training Manuals of 
erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines have been merged and put up to DGCA for 
approval.   

27 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
2)  Air India has already been sharing training resources and Groun d Instructors. 
Erstwhile NACIL-A Instructors have carried out training for MNPS, Flight Planning on 
the A330 for Pilots and Despatchers, Train the Trainer courses, etc. We have also 
conducted combined Human Factors and CRM courses on various occasions. 
Instructors from Mumbai have also travelled to Hyderabad to assist the CTE Instructors 
when they faced shortages in their Ab-initio pilot training and internal CRM courses.  
 
3)  Air India has recently agreed to send one senior contract Instructor to Hyderabad 
for joining their Navigation & Performance section.  He will primarily operate from 
Hyderabad and will be called to Mumbai as and when necessary.  
 
4)  ERP :- IATA Training was organised by QMS across all functional areas of both 
erstwhile NACIL-A and NACIL-I with a large number of personnel qualified already.   
 
Air India Limited has a written Emergency Response Plan with structures, 
procedures and check lists. Air India Limited has around 355 trained SAT (Angels of Air 
India) members and the numbers are growing.  Continuous training programme for 
Airport Managers based in India and abroad has also been planned. The Court of 
Inquiry appreciated the response of Air India ERP Team for the air crash of IX -812 at 
Mangalore on 22nd May 2010.  
 
The fully functional Emergency Command Centre(ECC) at BOM was 
inaugurated on September 06, 2011. 
 
5)  ACRM : - Human Factors and Airline Company Resource Management which 
focuses on safety, quality, efficiency, team work, motivation and integration and above 
all greater happiness while working, has already commenced. This training is being 
carried out across functional areas for both erstwhile NACIL -A & NACIL -I by DGCA 
approved Human Factors and CRM Facilitators.  
 
Efforts are being made to establish a full -fledged Aviation Training Business Unit 
to generate revenue by leasing out a much -in-demand training facilities and man -
power.  Initially this unit will function within the amb it of our Central Training 
Establishment at Hyderabad, leasing out the spare training capacity available after 
meeting our own in-house requirements.  Logistics are being worked out to develop this 
unit as an independent Strategic Business Unit (SBU). 
 
Complete synergy has been achieved in Commercial Training activities between 
erstwhile AI & IA.  Training on the new PSS system for frontline Officers, Staff & 
Ground handling agents in Reservation, Ticketing and Load & Distribution Plan (LDP) 
System had been  successfully completed. In compliance with IOSA requirement the 
Integrated Single “Airlines Operators Manual” (AOP) has been completed.  
 
CTE, Hyderabad is undertaking training of “Private candidates” for Airbus - 320 
Type rating courses for revenue gener ation. During 2010-11 the course was conducted 
for two batches generating revenue of Rs.8.77 crores. After training completion of 
ensuing second batch shortly, we propose to induct one more batches which is 
expected to fetch approximately Rs.5 crores. 
 

28 
 
 
 
The third Airbus 320 simulator will be added to CTE this year. A new State-of-the 
Art Airbus 320 simulator acquired at the cost of Rs. 47 crores  is likely to arrive shortly.  
The work of modifying the building for housing the new Simulator has already 
commenced.  No sooner the Simulator arrives a fresh batch of A 320 Type Rating 
Endorsement Course can be started which will augment the revenue. 
 
Conversion training of Pilots to Boeing 787 Dreamliner at Singapore has 
commenced. 
 
As per Civil Aviation Regulation (CAR) (Section 7, series G, Part III) English 
Language Proficiency of Pilots has become mandatory w.e.f. 22.03.2010.  Air India, 
CTE is the sole organisation that has successfully structured the course curriculum, 
obtained approval of DGCA for c onducting the course and Assessment of English 
Proficiency. During 2010-11, it has generated revenue of Rs. 10 lakhs. 
 
The project on a separate Aviation Training Business Unit is being worked out with 
Turnaround Project Committee (TAP). Utilising of exist ing resources and Identifying 
courses for external candidates/Organisations is underway. 
Revenue earned from training during the last three years is summarised below: 
 
Year Revenue earned 
(Rs. In Crores) 
2008-09 6.82 
2009-10 4.91 
2010-11 9.59 
 
Financial Investment and additional manpower crunch is impeding the revenue 
earning capacity of CTE as Profit Centre. 
 
In order to increase revenue and utilise  the spare capacity at Central Training 
Establishment Air India has recently advertised inviting applications for the Course of 
Flight Dispatchers for External Candidates.  The first course is likely to start during the 
first week of January 2012.  Air Ind ia is likely to conduct two batches of the Flight 
Dispatchers Course during the current financial year and a revenue of Rs. 80 lakhs is  
envisaged to be earned from the same. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at Para No. 30 of the 
Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No. 15) 
 
Protection of Interests of Employees 
 
 The Committee note that there had been a large number of repor ts and 
representations from the employees and the staff of both the companies.  As is evident, 
there is a high level of disenchantment and discontentment with the process of merger.  
Employees of any organization and their welfare are the key to the succes s of any 

29 
 
 
 
organization.  Customers can be served well if the employees are well trained and 
motivated. Lamentably, employees of the merged entity are unduly discriminated.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that this manner of riding roughshod over its 
employees has become a general perception rather than the general regret of the 
Company. 
 
The Committee also observe that with a view to check attrition, PLI (Productivity 
Linked Incentive Scheme) was introduced with the advent of Open Sky Policy.  At that 
point of time, employees of Indian Airlines and Air India were not allowed to go to 
private airlines on higher pay scales.  While appreciating the perhaps ‘laudable 
objective’ to safeguard interests of the now merged entities, the question/issue that 
arises is the fairness of treatment for employees who had been loyal and stayed on and 
are now being forced to accept cuts. 
 
The Committee feel that basic incentives for employees need to be reviewed. A 
maxim to be borne in mind is that governance, both of countries and of organizations, is 
an art and one that respects the human factor. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that steps should be taken to protect the interests of the employees who have then 
been held back from getting better packages in the private s ector on the one hand, 
while on the other, they  should be required to perform to their optimum potential that 
justifies such incentives by giving them advance training in their respective area of work 
and introducing a corporate regimen.  The Committee fu rther recommend that on 
issues relating to service matters, no unilateral decision should be forced upon and a 
consensual approach should prevail when discussion with employees’ representatives 
becomes a part of corporate culture. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the merger of the two companies, there is an integration Cell headed 
by an Executive Director to deal with the various employee related integration issues.  
The Management, as a matter of principle, has been involving the Unions/Associations 
in dialogue for any change in work practice and has a consensual approach for 
resolving any issue. 
 
To address various IR issues including Pay/Wage rationalisation , restructuring 
etc. in respect of Air India, Government has constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of retd. Justice D.M. Dharmadhikari of Supreme Court.   The Committee 
has already had discussions with all the Unions/Associations/body of representa tives of 
employees of both the erstwhile airlines with the intention of taking views of 
representative bodies of all the employees.   Opportunity has been extended to all 
employees to ensure consensual approach in resolving the issues of integration across 
various cadres etc. 
 
Further in order to redress the grievances of individual Employees/ 
Unions/Group of Employees regarding their personal/Organizational problems, CMD 
has decided to have an Open House Session on every Wednesday.   While on the first 
three Wednesdays, the same will be held at Mumbai, on the last Wednesday,  it will be 
held at Delhi.  The Open House Session has already started functioning. 
 
Grievance redressal machinery is also in place to deal with the various  
representations of employees o f both the companies with regard to integration related 

30 
 
 
 
issues. In order to retain the employees with the Company, in erstwhile NACIL(A), 
there was a substantial increase in emoluments by way of flight related hourly 
payments and PLI way back in 1996 in order to make the emoluments of specialized 
categories like Pilots, Engineers and Cabin Crew competitive with those in the private 
sector or with other airlines.  
 
Erstwhile NACIL(A) had a VRS Scheme, to provide an exit opportunity to 
employees who wanted to leave the services of the Company. Even as on date, 
there is a 2 years Leave Without Pay Scheme for the employees of Air India Ltd. and 
further the Standing Orders / Service Regulations of both the erstwhile companies 
permit the employees to avail early retirement on a voluntary basis.  
 
Air India Ltd. is in the process of addressing the issues related to service matters 
on priority through  bilateral discussions.  Efforts are also being made to encourage 
participative / consensual approach, through discussions and deliberations.  
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012) 
 
On the issue of addressing pro blems with integration of manpower and human 
resources, the Government in their action taken reply furnished in February 2012 
submitted as under: 
“Consequent upon the merger, all efforts have been made for harmonisation of 
the HR issues. The integration of  manpower and the solution to the HR issues is 
a major task and involves a high cost, which is a significant factor causing delay 
in harmonizing, considering the critical financial condition of the Company. The 
Management and the employees and the unions have engaged in dialogue to 
address the various policies on HR integration related issues. The HR Sub 
Committee of the Board Of Directors had been  formed to address all HR merger 
related issues and the same are before it. In the meanwhile, during a process of 
dialogue with the Unions by the Management including meetings of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation with the Unions in February 2011, a consensus was arrived that 
an independent Committee of experts headed by a retired judge of High 
Court/Supreme Court, outside the organization, would be constituted to 
impartially examine all the issues by engaging management, employees and 
unions. To resolve the di sparities to the HR issues like level mapping, 
compensation harmonization etc for all employees including pilots the 
Government of India vide its Notification no AV.18016/03/2011 -AI  dated 11th 
May, 2011 has appointed an independent committee of external e xperts headed 
by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court Of India, Justice (retd) D.M. 
Dharmadhikari. The other members include Prof. R. Dholakia from IIM 
Ahmedabad, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal, Retired Director, Dept. of Public Enterprises 
and Shri Syed Nasir Ali, Director in the Civil Aviation Ministry. The terms of 
reference of the Committee are as follows:    
 To examine the principles of integration across various cadres and determination 
of level and seniority; 
 To examine the principles of  pay/wage rationalization and restructuring  between 
all the employees of the erstwhile airlines; 
 To examine and suggest harmonized working conditions of various categories of 
employees of erstwhile airlines depending upon the requirements; 
 To examine the above a), b), and c) in the light of the cost neutrality principle; 

31 
 
 
 
 To examine the principles governing the structure of pensionary schemes, death -
cum-retirement gratuities and other terminal benefits having financial implication; 
 To examine and make recommendations  with respect to the general principle 
parameters of the different Productivity Linked Incentive Schemes and bring them 
in line with airline practices 
 Any other matters that would be referred to the Committee. 
 
The Committee had interacted with the Managem ent, Unions/Associations, third 
party and other stakeholders and is to submit its report within six months to the Hon’ble 
Minister of Civil Aviation. A Committee of Officers has been constituted to examine the 
report and also to determine the milestone for its implementation.   
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated February, 2012) 
 
On the aforesaid issue, the Government in their action taken reply furnished in 
May 2012 further submitted as under: 
 
“Before the merger the Ministry in a letter to the employees had inter alia stated 
that 'to keep the process as smooth as possible, manpower of both the airlines 
would be integrated gradually in a calibrated manner.'  In the 2009-10 deposition 
before COPU, Secretary, Civil Aviation had said that all HR related matters were 
presently put in a kind of pause mode till the company comes out of the Financial 
crisis. Besides that integration of manpower and harmonization of seniority may 
also lead to certain indus trial relations issues which in the present financial 
status the Company is not in a position to absorb. Hence, the integration process 
is being taken up in steps gradually.  Subsequent to the merger, all efforts were 
made for harmonization of the HR issues . Management and the employees and 
the unions had been engaged in dialogue to finalize and formulate various 
policies to address these issues. The HR Sub Committee of the Board of 
Directors had been formed to address all merger related issues. A process of  
dialogue with the Unions by the Management including meetings of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation with the Unions also took place. A consensus was arrived that 
an independent committee of experts headed by a retired Judge of the High 
Court/ Supreme Court ou tside the organization could impartially examine all the 
issues engaging the management, employees and the unions. A Committee 
headed by retired Supreme court judge Justice Dharmadhikari was thereafter 
appointed by the Government in May 2011.   The Justice Dharmadhikari 
Committee has since submitted its report to the Government on 31 st January 
2012.” 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated May, 2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
Promotions of Officers Cadres 
 
 In this connection, the Committee also note that promotions in the officers 
cadres of both NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines) are vacancy based and 
are carried out through a process of selection. 
 
The Committee, however, understand that promotio ns in officers grade both in 
NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines) have been made in a subjective manner 

32 
 
 
 
prior to the date of commencement of merger as well as after the merger exercise.  
This, the Committee understands, has been the case in respec t of vacancies in higher 
grades as also in cases of resultant vacancies in some cadres.  Thus, a situation has 
arisen where officers in some cadres have had smooth advancement in their careers 
whereas officers in other cadres, though eligible for promotion s against the vacancies 
available in their cadres, have been denied their due advancement in career.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that NACIL should have a relook into all such cases 
and ensure that the genuine aspirations of the officers in each ca dre are judiciously 
addressed and promotion exercises which have already become due should be first 
completed before merging the cadres on the basis of seniority.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to meet the requirements of both the companies and also the aspirations 
of their respective employees, and in absence of harmonized procedures of promotions 
at the time of merger, the promotion in both the companies were carried out based on 
their respective promotion policies.  Further no promotions have been m ade in a 
subjective manner prior to the date of commencement of merger in both the companies 
but have been as per the respective promotion policies applicable.  However, 
promotions to the Executive levels of Dy. General Manager and above were held back 
from the date of merger and were carried out in a harmonized manner starting with 
promotions to the grade of Executive Director and subsequently to the grade of Dy. 
General Manager. 
 
No employee has been denied due advancement in career if he was eligible for  
promotion against the vacancies available in their cadre and also found suitable.  
Efforts were made to implement promotions in all cadres based on the erstwhile rules of 
promotion prevailing in both the erstwhile airlines, however, a letter was received from 
Member Secretary of Justice Dharmadhikari Committee wherein Air India has been 
advised that all promotion exercises to be taken up only after the submission of the 
Report of the said Committee.   The Committee most likely will be submitting its report 
by the end of January 2012. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012) 
  

33 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
Route Dispersal Guidelines 
 
The Committee note that NACIL is operating 18.4% of its flights on social sector 
routes like Category II, IIA and III routes whereas the DGCA’s Route Dispersal 
Guidelines prescribe only 10% as mandatory requirement for s uch sectors.  Thus there 
is an 8.4% excess deployment by NACIL on social sector routes.  At a time when the 
airline industry is struggling with their financial margins, the Committee are perturbed by 
the lack of transparency in the enforcement  of Route Di spersal Guidelines under which 
all Scheduled Operators are required to operate a fixed percentage of their flights in the 
so-called social sectors.  The Committee particularly desire that no additional burden is 
forced upon NACIL by virtue of it being a pu blic carrier.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that necessary amendments should be carried out in the Route Dispersal 
Guidelines of the DGCA, alternatively ensuring, (a) strict compliance by all scheduled 
airlines to operate the mandatory 10% of their scheduled flights in Cat II/IIA/III routes, 
i.e. social or non -commercial sectors, or (b) compensation to airlines operating such 
flights in excess of the mandatory percentage by those airlines that are either wilfully 
not complying, or are, for some reason, unable to fulfil the required percentage of social 
sector flights out of their total scheduled flights, the full extent of losses plus a certain 
margin which shall be punitive in nature.  
 
The Committee also recommend that a mechanism may be evolved to make the 
said guidelines mandatory for all private airlines and for punitive action against the 
violators. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No airline can at any time violate the Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG). If the 
deploy is excess of the RDG, it is on comme rcial considerations alone. Air India 
currently deploys about 20% of its capacity on Cat II routes. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
 On the issue of rescheduling / reorganization / revamping of flights to  improve 
the performance of the airline, the Government in their action taken reply furnished in 
February 2012 submitted as under: 
 
“AI has taken several measures to improve and restructure its schedules. Some 
of the significant measures in this regard are given below: 
 
1. All long-haul routes to North America, UK, Europe and Far East have been 
upgraded and are now operated with the new B777 -200LR / 300ER aircraft.  
This has served to standardize the in -flight services / comforts on these 
services. On the domestic sectors all the metro and other high density routes 
are operated with new IFE fitted A321, A320 and A319 aircraft. 

34 
 
 
 
2. Operations on the regional international routes, operation on India -Dubai / 
Bangkok / Singapore / Muscat have all been upgraded to new IFE fitted A321 
/ 320 / 319 aircraft to provide superior in -flight comforts to improve the 
product perception and passenger load factors and revenues 
3. The ground times at New York, Chicago and Toronto have been reduced to 
increase B777 aircraft utilization without adversely impacting the schedules 
4. The utilization of all aircraft across fleet types has been progressively 
increased with the exception of B747 (the airline has consciously reduced the 
utilization due to the higher costs associated with this aircraft).  
 
 
 
 
5. The block times and ground times on the A320 family of aircraft has been 
reviewed to improve on time performance on the domestic and regional 
international routes 
6. AI’s hub operations at Delhi have been progressively strengthened to derive 
the greater hub benefits. Delhi is currently linked to 21 international and 48 
domestic destinations by means of direct flights. AI’s international operations 
from Delhi inc lude 21 non -stop flights per week to North America, 28 flights 
per week to Europe/UK, 29 flights per week to Far East/South East Asia, 35 
flights per week to Gulf and 20 flights per week to South Asia, making for a 
total 133 international services weekly f lights.  On the domestic routes from 
Delhi Air India operates a total of 507 weekly flights (incl. Alliance Air). The 
hub operations at Delhi have given rise to about 3000 International transfer 
passengers per day at Delhi which includes sixth freedom traf fic generated 
notably from Bangkok and Kathmandu to Europe/UK. 
7. The international connectivity to / from major Indian metros other than 
Mumbai and Delhi has been significantly enhanced through increased 
number of conveniently connecting (hub and spoke) flig hts to attract more 
long-haul traffic to AI from the gateways at Delhi and Mumbai.  The long -haul 
flights from / to Delhi have convenient onward connections to Chennai, 
Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Kolkata and Hyderabad, besides convenient 
connecting flights to / from all other destinations such as Bangalore, Cochin, 
Trivandrum, Patna, Lucknow, etc. 
8. In order to make AI the first choice carrier for passengers travelling between 
Ahmedabad and Newark, Hyderabad and Chicago, Amritsar and Toronto, the 
airline has extended the B777 aircraft all the way up to the above mentioned 
cities in India.   
9. With the same objective, through flight numbers have been allotted from 
interior points to long -haul destinations via Delhi for instance, Chennai -Paris, 
Kolkata-London, Amritsar-London. 
Year B777 A320 family 
2010-2011 11.97 8.3 
Summer-11 12.3 9.7 
Winter 11 13.7 10.8 

35 
 
 
 
10. On the major domestic routes, the frequency of operations have been 
progressively increased to provide for spaced -out, multiple option of flights in 
a day. Air India currently offers 
a. 14 non-stop flights per day on the Delhi-Mumbai** route.  
b. 6 flights per day on the Delhi-Chennai route 
c. 5 flights per day on Delhi-Kolkata, Delhi-Hyderabad, Delhi-Bangalore and 
Mumbai-Bangalore routes 
d. 4 flights per day on Mumbai-Chennai, Mumbai-Hyderabad and Mumbai-
Ahmedabad routes  
e. 3 flights per day on Delhi-Patna, Delhi-Ahmedabad, Delhi-Amritsar  and 
Mumbai-Goa routes 
f. 2 flights per day between Delhi and Srinagar, Bhubaneswar, Lucknow, Pune, 
Ranchi, Amritsar, Ahmedabad, Varanasi (in winter season only), Guwahati, 
Cochin and Goa; and between Mumbai and Ahmedabad and Nagpur; and 
between Chennai and Cochin, Trivandrum, Hyderabad and Bangalore; and 
between Bangalore and Hyderabad and Cochin; and Kolkata and Guwahati 
and Agartala.  
**In addition AI offers 3 daily flights with one -stop on DEL-BOM vv route, one 
each via Jaipur, Gwalior and Aurangabad: 
11. All A 320 family operations on domestic routes have been raised to the level 
of daily services  
12. Round-robin / one-stop services on the following routes have been converted 
into non-stop flights between Mumbai and Raipur / Bh ubaneswar / Lucknow / 
Varanasi and Vizag.  
AI’s performance has improved in the current financial year with 
significant improvement in the second half of the year.  The same improved 
trend has been maintained in Jan 12 as may be seen from the data furnished  
below: 
 
Passenger 
Revenue 
(Rs Cr) 
Capacity  
ASK (m)  
Passengers 
 (m)  PLF (%) Yield/RPK 
(Rs.) 
Q1   
Apr-Jun10 2531 11289 3.267 67.8 3.31 
Apr-Jun11 2500 10870 3.097 68.3 3.37 
Change % -1.2% -3.7% -5.2% 0.4 pts 1.9% 
Q2  

36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Passenge
r Revenue 
(Rs Cr) 
Capacit
y ASK 
(m) 
Passenger
s 
(m) 
PLF 
(%) 
Yield/RP
K (Rs.) 
International services   
Jan-11 554 2978 0.473 64.5 2.88 
Jan-12 701 2976 0.525 68.9 3.42 
Change 
% 26.5% -0.1% 11% 
4.4 
pts 18.5% 
Domestic services  
Jan-11 293 843 0.581 69.8 4.99 
Jan-12 407 1002 0.691 69.6 5.83 
Change 
% 38.8% 18.8% 18.9% 
-0.1 
pts 17% 
Network 
Jan-11 847 3821 1.054 65.7 3.38 
Jan-12 1108 3978 1.215 69.1 4.03 
Change 
%  30.7% 4.1% 15.3% 
3.4 
pts 19.4% 
**Provisional Figures 
Route Rationalization measures planned for the immediate/short term 
Jul-Sep10 2611 11931 3.163 66.4 3.29 
Jul-Sep11 2848 11607 3.364 70.3 3.49 
Change % 9.1% -2.7% 6.4% 3.9 pts 5.9% 
Q3 
Oct-Dec10 2799 11718 3.431 65.9 3.62 
Oct-Dec11 3095 11842 3.665 66.5 3.93 
Change % 10.6% 1.1% 6.8% 0.6 pts 8.4% 
Cumulative      
Apr-Dec10 7941 34938 9.861 66.7 3.41 
Apr-Dec11 8443 34318 10.126 68.4 3.60 
Change % 6.3% -1.8% 2.7% 1.6 pts 5.6% 

37 
 
 
 
Replacement of B 747 operations with B 777 ER aircraft 
AI has consciously reduced the utilization of B 747 to the minimum level 
required to retain currency of pilots’ licenses and substituted these hours with 
increased utilization of B777 aircraft with lower costs. The utilization of B747 
aircraft has been red uced from 5.8 hours per aircraft in Summer 11 season to 
4.5 hours per aircraft from start of Winter 11 schedule and further down to 2.4 
hours per aircraft from Feb 2012. The cost savings on this account is estimated 
at about Rs 18 Lakhs per day from start of Winter 11 schedule and Rs. 51 Lakhs 
per day during the months of Feb and Mar 2012. 
Withdrawal of one of the two daily services on the Delhi – London route 
Effective 3rd Feb 2012, AI has reduced capacity on Delhi – London route 
by withdrawing one of the two daily services on this route which had lower PLF / 
revenues and had given rise to deficit over cash cost of about Rs. 98 Cr. 
between Apr – Dec 12 (about Rs.120 Cr annu alized). This measure is expected 
to give rise to incremental revenues on the flight that has been retained on the 
route to the extent of about Rs. 15 Lakhs per flight (About Rs. 55 Cr. 
annualized).   
Effective from Summer 12 season, AI plans to continue t o operate only 
one flight on this route.  
Withdrawal of some selected services on the DEL – Frankfurt route 
To reduce the cash burden in the immediate term Air India has planned to 
reduce 12 services on the Delhi -Frankfurt route during the months of Februa ry 
and March. The net benefit from this measure has been estimated at about Rs. 4 
Cr. during the period February-March 2012.    
Transfer of 4 round trip services per week on India -Dammam routes to 
B737/A320 aircraft 
AI is in the process of firming up plans  to transfer the operations between 
Calicut / Trivandrum / Cochin / Delhi and Dammam from B777 aircraft to B737 
/A320 aircraft which would be more appropriate in terms of capacity even while 
giving rise to cost reduction.  
Replacement of B777-200LR aircraft with B787 aircraft 
AI would plan to lease out 5 of the 8 B777-200LR aircraft and concurrently 
substitute the B777-200LR services on the routes to London, Frankfurt and Paris 
with the cost efficient B787 aircraft. This substitution is expected to result i n 
reduction in cash cost of operation of about 1 Cr. per day.  
Introduction of non-stop services to Melbourne/Sydney with B787 aircraft 
 It has been planned to introduce daily non -stop services between Delhi 
and Melbourne/Sydney with 2 out of the 7 B787 ai rcraft expected to be inducted 
in 2012-13. These services are expected to give rise to positive cash margins. 
Launch of all economy services with A320 aircraft to counter competition from 
LCC 
It has been planned to convert the old fleet of A320 aircraft wi th 145 seats 
(20 Business class and 125 Economy seats) into all economy configuration of 

38 
 
 
 
168 seats as to gain greater penetration in the low fare market segments which 
has been growing significantly over the past 5 years or so i.e. by offering more 
capacity and thereby increasing revenues. 
Other schedule initiatives planned on A320 aircraft 
In the Summer  12 schedule, AI plans to restructure the existing round 
robin on Delhi -Raipur-Nagpur-Delhi route with terminator flights each on Delhi -
Raipur and Delhi -Nagpur routes. It has also been proposed to extend the 
services between Dubai and Hyderabad so as to or iginate and terminate at 
Vizag and simultaneously upgrade the services between Delhi and Vizag to be 
on A320 family aircraft. The airline is also examining the viability of extending the 
Delhi-Abu Dhabi services up to Bahrain. It has also been proposed to introduce 
a second daily service between Mumbai and Cochin.” 
 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated February 2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
Energy Audit 
 
The Committee regret to note that though fuel prices is  a major component of 
loss, as claimed by the management of NACIL, there is no serious effort to improve the 
fuel consumption norm for aircraft in use.  This becomes clear as the NACIL or the 
Ministry did not even possibly refer to the huge fuel loss incur red on account of idle 
flying hours before landing and on account of long stretch of taxying after landing – all 
due to air traffic congestion in airports.  The Committee recommend a mandatory 
energy b a external agency auditor to assess the avoidable fuel  losses and fix fuel 
compensation norm for aircraft in use. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has engaged IATA, a premier organisation for conducting a fuel 
efficiency GAP analysis in the year 2008.   
 
(a)  Fuel carried on board an aircraft is subject of DGCA regulations. Different aircraft 
have different levels of Fuel consumption. In order to control this Air India has 
invested in state of the art, brand new aircraft. 
(b) Long stretch of Taxing/ long duration of holding in air is due to infrastructura l 
limitations especially at Mumbai and Delhi and this is not under the control of 
airline. 
(c)  Company has continuously been making efforts to improve fuel efficiency thru 
changes to company policies on operational issues. One such effort Titled "Fuel 
Efficiency Gap Analysis (FEGA) '  was conducted in collaboration with IATA. 
Under this initiative grassroot level analysis was carried out resulting into 
modification of various policies. Company has also received an award from Govt. 
for these efforts. 
 
There have been serious efforts by Air India to improve Fuel consumption norms 
for aircraft in use. It may be pertinent that Air India obtained the Energy Conservation 
Award for the year 2009 from the Bureau for Energy Efficiency and Ministry of Power. 
The details are as follows:  

39 
 
 
 
 
Air India efforts for Fuel Savings:  
 
The Chairman and Managing Director has constituted a Steering Committee for 
Green Initiatives which includes Operational Efficiency, Fuel Management and 
Emission Reduction. The Steering Committee m onitors all matters of operational 
efficiency, fuel management and reduction of fuel costs. The Steering Committee is 
headed by the Chairman and Managing Director and consists of the Nodal Officer and 
Executive Directors of the Operational Departments. Sub -committees have also been 
formed to ensure implementation of all projects determined by the Steering Committee 
and help in the introduction of new processes and procedures for Fuel Efficiency.  The 
committee sets targets and actions for all departments. S imultaneously, a new Energy 
policy has been put into place which serves as a guideline to the operational 
departments in achieving the twin objective of reduction in fuel consumption and carbon 
emissions and ultimately, reduction in costs to the airline. The new energy policy 
envisaged vital changes in operational techniques, equipment settings and use, fuel 
management, flight planning, engine maintenance, cabin weight management, etc. 
 
Emission Reduction 
 
Similar procedures adopted in operational areas have helped the airline reduce 
carbon emissions.  The European Union Trading Scheme (ETS) has mandated for the 
aviation industry that all flights with origin or destination in the European Union will have 
to be necessarily covered by the scheme.  Air India has already submitted the ETS 
required plans for the annual emission and tonne kilometer monitoring in August, 2009. 
Air India has successfully cleared the EU -ETS Audit and verification process, which 
was conducted by M/s. Bureau Veritas (EU accredited verifier)  from the 22nd of March 
to 25th March 2011.  The verification Report and data was submitted to the 
Environment Agency of UK on 31st of March, 2011, within the stipulated time -line.  Air 
India has also received the confirmation of receipt from the Environment Agency. 
 
The current status of fuel savings from September, 2008 to August, 2011 is as 
follows:- 
 
Savings achieved - Rs. 693.61 crores   
Achieved Fuel Savings in kg – 177 Million Kgs. 
 
Environment Management System 
 
Corporate-wide Environment Management System policy has been signed.  
QMS has been given additional responsibility of Environment Management System and 
various initiatives have been commenced.  Various initiatives were introduced with al l 
key departments of all AOPs for reduction in CO2 emissions , Tree Plantations were 
carried out, workshops were conducted, commenced introduction of DMS.                                  
 
For the period (Sept-08 to Aug-11) 
Reduction in CO2 emissions = 558 Million Kgs. 
Introducing a formal "Environment Management System(EMS)".  
 
Air India received the "Earth Care Award -2011" on 9th Sep 2011 for excellence 
in climate change mitigation and adaptation, from The Times of India & JSW 

40 
 
 
 
foundation.  Air India’s ef forts for excellence in climate change mitigation and 
adaptation were once again recognized by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency and the 
Ministry of Power, Government of India conferred the National Energy Conservation 
Award, 2011 on December 14, 2011.  The department - wise guidelines under the 
Energy policy are:  
 
Flight Operations  
 
Fuel Policy - A standard fuel policy for all airlines in the group has been 
developed based on a revised common fuel policy which provides maximum fuel 
benefits. APU Reduction:  Significant progress has been achieved in APU (Auxiliary 
Power Unit) usage. Flight crews and ground personnel have been sensitized and 
revised procedures for usage have been introduced. Flight Operations: Flight 
Operations has introduced a training / sens itizing' program to all pilots for the 
improvement of fuel efficiency and reduction of the environment impact. 
 
Pilot Technique: Air India has improved pilot technique in fuel efficiency by 
providing more fuel information to pilots via a company fuel effic iency chapter in the 
Flight Operations Manual and with the introduction of a dedicated fuel training program. 
Landing Flap Settings: A systematic review of landing flap settings has been 
performed and revised procedures introduced. 
 
Use of Idle Reversers o n Landing: Air India has initiated the use of idle reverse 
thrust on landing.  The use of idle reverse thrust minimizes fuel consumption, reduces 
engine maintenance and decreases noise and pollution at airports. 
 
Low Noise Low Drag Approaches: Decelerated Approach Procedure (Low Noise 
Low Drag Approach) procedures have been introduced for most of the flight in Air 
India's current operation. 
 
Reduced Acceleration: Air India has reduced the acceleration altitude to 1,500 
AGL for most flights. 
 
Aircraft Communication, addressing & reporting system (ACARS) : Air India has 
expedited the activation of ACARS on all the aircraft that are presently equipped. This 
will facilitate better tracking and monitoring of data, besides promoting effective 
communication between the aircraft and ground.  Engine out taxi : Standard operating 
procedure for Engine out taxi is being finalised and is being sent to DGCA for approval. 
 
Flight Planning and Dispatch  
 
Flight Planning: Fuel efficient flight planning through better selectio n of shorter 
routes, consideration of computerized latest information on winds etc. has been 
introduced. The Air India group has purchased a new flight planning system and it has 
started with the implementation phase for the new Flight Planning system, whi ch will 
result in even higher savings in 2010.  
 
Cost Index: Air India has converted from fixed Mach flying to Cost Index flying, 
resulting in more fuel savings. Contingency Fuel: Air India has reduced contingency fuel 
from 10% to 6% and 5%, depending on different aircraft types. Additional Fuel: Air India 

41 
 
 
 
has reduced the amount of fuel being added by Pilots and Dispatcher based on 
statistical data. 
 
An Alternate Selection: Air India has changed the earlier practice and introduced 
the revised procedure to a dopt an alternate airport policy that uses the closest suitable 
alternate airport in good weather conditions. 
 
Centre of Gravity (C of G): Air India has introduced a more aft C of G setting to 
decrease the drag on the aircraft, which helps in fuel savings. Zero Fuel Weight Error: A 
reduction of the error between the EZFW(Estimated Zero Fuel Weight) and the 
AZFW(Actual Zero Fuel Weight) has been achieved to produce more accurate 
calculations for determining carriage of fuel.  Fuel Management Information: Air  India 
has created an in -house statistical fuel management information system, which is 
monitoring fuel data on a continuous basis.  
 
Maintenance & Engineering  
 
Engine: Engineering has optimized the engine core water wash program to the 
most effective interval for each engine type, Fan -blade and IGV hand wash have been 
introduced. TSFC will become a high priority in engine build standards during 
refurbishment.  Airframe: New procedures have been established which take into 
consideration deteriorating aircr aft performance, uneconomical use of aircraft systems 
and unnecessary carrying of weight.  
 
Maintenance: Reduced the amount of drag each aircraft is generating due to dirt 
and rough surfaces especially in the critical zones of the fuselage, wings and 
empennage.  Weight Management: All unnecessary weights have been removed from 
the aircraft. Carrying un-needed weight (such as unnecessary parts, dirt, and moisture) 
is inefficient.  Reporting and Monitoring: Formal meetings between M&E and Flight 
Operations co ncerning weight management have been established and a person 
nominated to monitor the results of corrective actions and follow up on the status of 
agreed programs.  
 
Commercial  
 
Cabin: The requirement of cabin items such as ovens, galleys, class dividers etc. 
has been assessed and where possible, changed to lighter weight material.  
Magazines: Seat pocket contents such as the number of in -flight magazines and weight 
of the individual magazine have been reviewed and reduction were implemented were 
possible.  Catering: Return catering and other unnecessary of overloading of items 
have been assessed.  Weight has been loaded based on the number of meals offered 
and flight time.  Items such as cutlery, china and trolleys have been assessed  for 
possible weight reductions or possible replacement by lighter alternatives. Duty free 
weights were reviewed and are now loaded per seat load factors, influence of 
destination on sale of goods and analysis of unsold material. Potable water uplift has 
been changed to consid er the number of PAX, duration of flight and cultural aspects.  
Loading: The amount of reserve materials carried on board, such as pillows, blankets 
etc. were assessed.  Training: Training programs were developed to increase 
awareness of fuel conservation in the Commercial area.  The current status of fuel 
savings from September, 2008 to August, 2011 is as follows :- 
 

42 
 
 
 
Savings achieved - Rs. 693.61 crores   
Achieved Fuel Savings in kg – 177 Million Kgs. 
 
Air India is procuring new Information Technology solutions for improving fuel 
Savings:  
 
New Flight Planning System:  
 
Contract has been signed with M/s. FWZ for setting up a new Flight Planning 
System which would give the most optimal routes to fly takin g into consideration the 
weather patterns, notams, over-flying permissions and also provide inputs for economic 
fuel tankering by taking into account the fuel prices prevalent at various places thereby 
resulting in huge Fuel & cost savings to the airline a nd also reduce the environmental 
impact on this account. The contract would include erstwhile NACIL -A, erstwhile 
NACIL-l, Air India Express and Alliance Air.      
 
Another initiative launched is the acquisition of a new Flight Planning System 
from M/s FWZ of Austria. This system allows the automatic recalculation of the optimal 
route and fuel uplift for individual flight prior to take off.  FWZ Flight Plans are being 
utilised in Air India Narrow Body Operations with certain constraints which are being 
sorted out.   Full implementation has been achieved on the Eastern Region in respect 
of Airbus A320 family.  A large number of flights in the Western & Northern Region are 
also b eing dispatched using FWZ Flight Planning System. On utilization of the FWZ 
New Flight Planning System, our accumulated saving upto 30 th September, 2011 is 
approx. USD 2000514 (Approx. Rs. 9 crores @ USD = INR 45).   
 
Environment Management System 
 
Corporate-wide Environment Management System policy has been signed.  
QMS has been given additional responsibility of Environment Management System and 
various initiatives have been commenced.  Various initiatives were introduced with all 
key departments of all A OPs for reduction in CO2 emissions , tree Plantations were 
carried out, workshops were conducted, commenced introduction of DMS.  
 
For the period (Sept-08 to Jun-11) 
Reduction in CO2 emissions = 524 Million Kgs. 
Introducing a formal "Environment Management System (EMS)".  
 
Air India received the "Earth Care Award -2011" on 9th Sep 2011 for excellence 
in climate change mitigation and adaptation, from The Times of India & JSW 
foundation. 
 
 
  

43 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Merger of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines 
 
The Committee feel that there is a need for consistency in plans and policies of 
the company for the merger to consolidate and for this purpose there is a need for 
some credible leadership at the top.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
leadership of NACIL should be put on a mission mode with a mandate spelt out in 
unequivocal terms to turn around the Company within a specified period.  The postings 
in the top slot of the Company should invariably be governed on the basis of 
performance and accountability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted.  NACIL has prepared a 
turnaround plan and its implementation is being reviewed by GoM from time to time. 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 10.9.2010) 
 
On the issue of Turn -around plan, the Ministry in their post evidence replies 
furnished in December 2011 stated that t he Turn -around plan has been vetted by 
Deloitte for assumptions relating to yield, growth &  LFs and certain moderations have 
been made to the original Turn -around plan prepared by the Company in consultation 
with SBI CAPs. This in turn has also been seen by a Committee of Officers appointed 
by the Group of Ministers who have recommended the foll owing actions for 
implementing the Turn-around plan/FRP of AI.  
 
 The performance of PLF & yield of the company should be benchmarked to 
achieve 73% by 2015 and 75% by 2020. Yield and utilization parameters should 
be in line with the market leaders. 
 The FRP  should be as per the plan suggested by SBI CAPs which involves 
restructuring of STLs into LTLs and issue of CRPS. An equity infusion as 
envisaged above in Pt.10. 
 Induction of aircraft to be based on route planning & economics and could be 
reviewed after 2014-15. 
 Hiving off of MRO & GH as separate subsidiary companies as proposed in the 
Turn-around plan. 
 Revenue Generation through monetization fo assets as proposed in the Turn -
around plan. 
 Cargo & Mail Revenue and other revenues as proposed in the Turn-around plan. 
 HR Policy review across AI including subsidiaries and right-sizing of staff through 
an appropriate VRS package. 
 Completion of Integrated IT Systems for improving performance. 
 Customer Oriented Services as proposed in the Turn-around plan to be focused. 
 Ownership of the Turn-around plan vide employees & Management of AI. 

44 
 
 
 
 An Oversight Committee to ensure implementation of the Turn -around plan and 
achievement of milestones.  
If these above measures are taken, the company would be EBIDTA positive in 
2013, cash profit 2018, EBT positive 2020, Total Networth Positive 2020. 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated December 2011) 
 
On the issue of credible leadership and postings in the top slot of the Company, 
the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation stated during the evidence before the 
Committee on 20 October, 2011 as follows: 
 
“I would like to apprise the Committee that there was a change in the 
management on 12 th August 2011.  The new CMD joined on 12 th August 2011.  
The Ministry and the Air India Management feel that now there is a positive 
atmosphere.  I would not say comparatively it has improved tremendously but 
there is a positive atmosphere.  We feel there is new energy that will flow in the 
organisation.  There is a direct dialogue established between the Management 
and all the Unions not once but on an on -going basis which has generated trust 
and confidence between Management and employees.  Hon. Members might be 
aware that before the change in th e Management there was disturbance almost 
every day in terms of operations and in terms of employees’ dissatisfaction.  We 
feel for the past over two months there is a comparative peace in the 
Organisation.” 
 
 The Secretary, Civil Aviation stated in this c onnection on 12 January 2012 as 
follows: 
 
“The Government has taken a decision in August and has brought in a new top 
leadership positions…….  The company has shown sign of improvement in all 
parameters.  All parameters are clearly showing that with the ch ange in the 
management, work culture and with the commitment of the employees, this 
company can do well.   There is a great potential.  It can really do wonders.  It is 
what I also feel at this point in time.” 
 
 It is observed that name of the Company is n ow changed to Air India Limited 
effective from 24 November 2010. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
Review of Progress made on merger 
 
The Committee notes that irrespective of the merits of the merger plan, the 
present gravity of spiralling  losses could have been averted had the implementation of 
the merger plan been strictly adhered to within the stipulated timeframe.  The 
Committee therefore, recommends that a fresh, realistic and definite timeline for 
completion of pending processes of me rger, such as establishing a uniform code – a 
pre-condition for joining the Star Alliance, setting up of Strategic Business Units 
(SBUs), cross utilization of resources, IT augmentation, customer services, sales and 
marketing, finance, ground handling, MRO , operations and flight safety, training, cargo, 
etc. may be worked out and put in place immediately.  The Committee further 
recommends that reasons behind the undue haste in merger and lack of monitoring 

45 
 
 
 
after the merger should be probed to fix the respon sibility for the same and that the 
government must set up an effective monitoring mechanism to review the progress 
made on the revised merger schedule every quarter.  The Committee also recommends 
that all the loss attributable to merger of IA and AI shoul d be recouped by the 
Government as the decision of the merger was a policy decision spearheaded by the 
Ministry-in-charge. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The decision to merge IA and AI was not taken in haste but it was a well 
considered decision both at the co mpany level and in the Govt.  A presentation was 
made before the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on the issue of merger in March 2006, 
where an ‘in -principle’ view was taken that the merger of two airlines would be in their 
best interest.  While approving the merger, Air India Board decided to invite Expression 
of Interest from various consultancy/Accounting firm and constituted a Committee for 
selection of the Consultant and oversee the process of merger.  After following the due 
process, the Consultant we re appointed to draw the road -map of merger.  A Core 
Group was constituted to monitor the progress and to co -ordinate with Consultants at 
the top level.  Hon’ble Prime Minister was requested to constitute a Group of Minister to 
consider the proposal at pre-Cabinet stage.  The Group of Minister so constituted, in its 
first meeting, desired that the proposal be first considered by a Committee of 
Secretaries.  The Committee of Secretaries considered the proposed merger of two 
airlines and agreed to the proposal.  The GOM was briefed about the recommendations 
of COS and it was decided that before the proposal is finally recommended to the 
Cabinet, the Ministry of Civil Aviation may (i) hold a round of talks with Employee 
Unions to keep them on board; (ii) prepar e a note on management structure of the 
merged company vis -a-vis comparable international airlines; and (iii) suggest a 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism to take care of the employee grievances.  The action 
was accordingly taken and the same was briefed to GOM .  GOM after careful 
consideration, approved and decided to recommend to the Cabinet the proposal to 
merge Air India and Indian Airlines into a new merged entity.  Thereafter, Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 1.3.2007 approved the proposal. 
Losses of NACIL a re not attributable to merger.  Infact 2008 & 2009 were the 
worst years for aviation in India and globally, due to very high fuel prices touching upto 
$ 145 per barrel and then the economic slowdown.  However, NACIL has been directed 
to speed up the integr ation process and it has formed different sub -committees at 
Board level to monitor the progress. 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 10.9.2010) 
 
The merger has been completed in many identified areas and the major 
milestones are being achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious financial position of 
the company. The major milestone of a Single AOP has been achieved and issued by 
DGCA. The cut over to the new PSS system has also been completed and the 
Company has migrated to a Unicode system.   Integration of both the companies have 
also been completed in many area like Finalization of CMD, Board of Directors, 
organization structure for Air India (then NACIL), selection of leadership team - 
Functional Directors, Executive Directors. In regard to Functional Director and 

46 
 
 
 
Executive Director levels Organisational Structure have been finalized however 
compensation harmonization is yet to be harmonised. Further, General Manager and 
Dy. General Manager level Organisational Structure have been finalized i n respect of 
majority of the departments. Other areas completed are for Material Management - 
Integrated Policy, Financial Synergies / quick wins in Insurance, Fuel procurement - 
ATF, banks & fund management, common Accounting policies, legal & tax issues, 
Passenger Service System (PSS) Delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers 
etc.  At the time of merger 226 critical activities had been identified and targeted for 
completion. Out of these,  about 170  of the identified areas have since been complete d 
(December 2011 ) The area of integration of manpower and the solution to the HR 
issues is a major task and involves a high integration cost. The delay in harmonizing is 
due to the critical financial condition being faced by the company and also the high c ost 
of integrating the manpower on issues like level mapping, compensation harmonization 
etc for all employees including pilots. 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated December 2011) 
 
The following steps have been taken/being taken for improvement in Custo mer 
Services: 
(i) A separate cell has been set up for entertaining and evaluating suggestions/ 
feedback to be obtained directly from cabin crew to bring rationalization/ 
improvement in services. 
(ii) Action has been initiated to procure adequately quantity of Hindi  newspapers 
and magazines. 
(iii) Hold-over of Inflight Entertainment contents on wide body aircraft used to be NIL 
which has been increased to a Library of Contents available to on -board offering 
wider choice. At present 152 movies/other programmes of different 
classifications are available for viewing. 
(iv) Inflight content updation on narrow body aircraft has been reduced from monthly 
to fortnighty. 
(v) Mood lighting has been done in the wide body aircraft intended to uplift 
passenger experience and the feedback indicat es that it elevates passenger 
experience and provides clean and posh look of cabins. 
(vi) Cabin boarding music has been changed to Indo -west Fusion having a rich 
sound to be played at boarding, taxing, landing and arrival taxing at audible level 
and the feedbac k indicates that combined with mood lighting it has a mind 
altering and calming effect on passengers. 
(vii) Efforts are being made to upgrade cabin management by having neat  and tidy 
cabins, clean and hygienic toilets, controlled temperature to have positive ef fect 
on passengers. 
(viii) Call Centre Services: upgradation/under upgradation. 
 
- FFP Cell - Implemented with effect from 26 Feb. 11 offering membership, 
redemption and related services - functional. 
- French Toll Free – Seat assignment/Excess Baggage related offers  for 
Indian origin passenger travelling ex-France has been implemented. 
- Tele Check-in for AI International Sectors being finalized. 
- Dial-a-Ticket (DAT) for AI International Sectors with payment collection 
through Domestic and International credit cards – works in progress. 
- Feedback Cell - Accessible through a Toll Free No. for handling customer 
feedback and complaints – work in progress; committee to negotiate being 
constituted. 

47 
 
 
 
- Web Chat & SMS Pull – work in progress. 
(MCA O.M. No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated February 2012) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Route and Slot Allocation 
 
The Committee feel that it is in the public interest for the Ministry of civil Aviation 
to dispel any misgivings over transparency of route and time -slot allocations raised by 
allegations of favours being shown to private operators for some consideration or the 
other.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of civil Aviation should 
conduct a transparent review of the entire route and slot allocations, both in the 
domestic and international sectors, and effect necessary changes to ensure that NACIL 
is neither put at any disadvantage nor appear to be placed in any disadvantageous 
position. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The slot requests of airlines are analysed vis -à-vis airport capacity parameters 
i.e. runway, apron, terminal building, watch hours, etc.  Based on this analysis, the slots 
as requested by the airlines are either approved or a list of alternate offers is generated.  
The basic principle of the slot allocation process  is historic precedence, whereby 
airlines are entitled to a series of slots which have been allocated to and operated by 
them.  Subsequent requests received from the airlines for new/additional flights, change 
of time due to operational reasons, etc. are e xamined by the airport operator and 
cleared, if found acceptable, within the notified capacities.  In the entire process, there 
is no room for preferential treatment to any airline. 
 
The observations of the Committee are noted. 
(MCA O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 10/09/2010) 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation has  no role in selection of domestic routes by 
airlines. The routes of operations on domestic sector are chosen by the airlines 
including Air India. Government has laid down Route Dispers al Guidelines for all 
airlines with a view to achieve better regulation of air transport services of different 
regions of the country, including north-east region, which is monitored by DGCA. So far 
as slots are concerned, these are allocated by AAI, DGCA and Airport Operators in a 
fair and transparent manner.  The Ministry has no role in the matter. So far as 
international routes are concerned, MoCA allocates only traffic rights under Air Services 
Agreements and Air India has the first right to operate to any international destination 
and it is only on their refusal that these are offered to other Indian Carriers.  
(MCA O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated August 2011) 
 
Recommendation (Para III) 
 
Fleet Acquisition and Management 
 
The Committee are  skeptical of NACIL’s request for Rs. 10,000 crore capital 
infusion from the Government towards fleet acquisition.  The Company, as well as the 
Government have not presented any details of project financial closure for the 

48 
 
 
 
acquisition projects of the erstw hile Indian and Air India, which were finalized before 
merger of the two airlines was even mooted.  The Committee feel that the lack of 
continuity of policies as is manifest in the failure of concerned entities to adhere to 
plans (made by predecessors in p ositions of authority) regarding the revenue sources 
for financing the acquisition projects reveal an underlying lack of sense of ownership 
and public responsibility.  The Committee are also concerned about the delay in the 
delivery of the more fuel efficient Boeing 787 and Airbus A-320/321/319 aircraft. 
 
The Committee note that in one of the aspects of fleet management relating to 
the maintenance of airworthiness of aircrafts, the Company is having unutilized 
manpower capacity.  The Committee note that the  engineering force in the company is 
capable of effectively running maintenance operations for 300 aircrafts, while the 
company itself has only some 100 aircrafts.  However, on the other aspect, there are 
disparaging reports in the media about a lot of air craft capacity lying idle due to the 
grounding of certain types of aircraft for one reason or the other.  The Committee note 
that utilization of aircraft in the company is at low of 9 hours per day while the 
benchmark is at 16 hours per day.  The Committee recommend optimal utilization of the 
available manpower who otherwise have necessary skill and experience to maintain 
airworthiness of aircraft. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Capital infusion from the Government is a must for the expansion plan of the 
company.  The total original cost of acquisition of the fleet is Rs.44,000 crores for 111 
aircraft.  Aircraft acquisition has a long gestation period in the sense that the project 
yields returns only after a considerable period of time. The investment in t he aircraft 
project is also very high.  Under such circumstances, financing the entire acquisition 
through borrowings would result in a high debt leverage and interest cost.  Besides, the 
debt equity ratio would also be adverse for any further lending to t he company by 
financial institutions.  It is necessary therefore to have a proper balance between debt 
and equity to offset the high debt equity ratio.  In view of this, government's induction of 
equity in the company will not only improve the debt equity ratio but would also increase 
the confidence level amongst the banks and financial institutions to lend to the working 
capital requirements of the company as also improve the credit rating of the company. 
 
 
(a)  New Aircraft Fleet Acquisition by erstwhile NACIL. 
In accordance with Aircraft Purchase Agreement dated 20 th Feb.2006 entered 
between erstwhile Indian Airlines and Airbus France, 43 new A320 family aircraft have 
been  inducted by erstwhile NACIL-I. The details about their delivery is given below: 
 
A320 family Aircraft Delivery from Airbus 
Year Scheduled 
Delivery 
Actual Delivery Type of aircraft Delivered 
2006 1 1 1- A319 
2007 10 10 5 - A321 + 5 A319 
2008 8 8 5 - A321 + 3 A319 
2009 17 17 8 - A321 + 9  A319 
2010 7 7 2 – A321 + 1- A319  + 4- A320 
 
 

49 
 
 
 
(b) Optimal utilization of available manpower:  
The engineering manpower in Air India (Airbus Group) was 4405 in the year 
2006 to contain the total engineering workload of Air India (Airbus Group) fleet.  This 
strength is reducing steadily due to attrit ion etc and as a result of which the present 
engineering manpower strength reduces to 4044 in 2011. Once the subsidiary for MRO 
is operationalized, it will be able to do business in excess of the Air India business by 
taking on airplanes from other airlines/operators.   
 
Manpower Details: 
 
Executives 152 
Aircraft Engineers 683 
Support Services Engineers 73 
Foreman & Inspectors 404 
Technicians 1557 
Non-Technical Staff 406 
Helpers/ Safaiwallahs 769 
Total 4044 
 
The Productivity Index in respect of Engineers has increased by 17.6% from 
2007-08 to 2010-11 while in respect of Technicians the figure is 128% from 2002 -03 to 
2010-11.  At the same time to utilize the Engineering capabilities in a more cost 
effective way, process has been started to develop a strategic business unit for which 
detailed business plan is under preparation 
 
The manpower details as on 30.11.2011 of wide-body group is as under: 
 
Executives    - 184 
Aircraft Engineers   - 517 
Technical Officers   -   96 
Manager-Service Engineering  - 201 
Service Engineers   -         1267 
 
Fleet size: 
B747-400    - 5 
B777-200LR    - 8 
B777-300ER    -         12  
Total fleet size    -         25 
 
The present manpower of Engineering Department is sufficient to meet the 
maintenance requirement of erstwhile NACIL(A) fleet. It may be noted that the Base & 
Line Maintenance checks of all the aircraft in erstwhile NACIL(A)’s fleet is undertaken 
in-house. Moreover, the maintenance, Overhaul, Repair & Testing of the engines, 
APUs, components & accessories fitted on B747 -400 and A310 aircraft are carried out 
in-house. Some of the components & accessories fitted on B777 aircraft and it’s 
Engines/APUs are also carried out in -house. Since, at times due to operating pattern 
and grounding plans there are some lean period. This spare capacity is utilized to 
undertake third party work to optimize the utilization of manpower. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
 

50 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
Utilization of Aircrafts 
 
The Committee note that a lot of idle capacity is being allowed to exist in the 
company despite ambitious acquisition orders.  The Committee hope that th e initiatives 
taken to cut down such idle capacity taken by the present management would realise 
tangible benefits.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the steps necessary to 
increase the utilization of aircrafts should be expedited without delay to bring up the 
average utilization to 16 hours per day per aircraft.  The Committee enjoin the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation that the company be fully protected from any kind of extraneous 
pressure to retain commercial unviable routes or to operate unprofitable new routes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Air India prepares fleet plans and aircraft acquisition proposals, based on 
guidelines of Management/inter -departmental committees.  The current summer 2010 
schedule is based on the inputs received from Engineering, Operations and Inflight 
Services Departm ents in respect of aircraft, cockpit crew and cabin crew resources 
respectively. The resources made available by these Departments have been deployed 
fully to the extent available, but limited by the constraining resource. 
 
Aircraft  Utilization  
 
The airc raft utilization mainly depends upon the commercial schedule and the 
maintenance check requirements. Air India’s Engineering Department takes all steps to 
make the aircraft available within the planned grounding schedule after completion of 
the checks. 
 
The details of planned utilisation per available aircraft, i.e. excluding aircraft 
earmarked for disposal,  per day in Winter 2011 (as on date) are as under: 
 
Aircraft Winter 11 (Planned)  
B777  13.8 
B747  4.5 
A330  10.0 
A320 family   10.7 
 
The utilization of B747 -400 is kept low due to high cost of operation.  A330 
aircraft utilization is low as one aircraft is under maintenance. 
 
For the period April 2009 to February 2010, Air India’s owned B777 -200LR and 
B777-300ER fleet is being utilized at 12 .08 and 13.39 block hours per day per a/c 
respectively.   
 
The comparison of the aircraft utilization of Air India and the Industry, for the type 
of aircraft operated by Air India, is given below.  
 

51 
 
 
 
Industry Data:  SOURCE: AIRBUS INDUSTRIE MONTHLY SERVICE REPORT- SEP’ 
2011 
A319 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 6.34 1.39 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 6.74 1.34 
LUFTHANSA 7.39 1.28 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
7.66 1.27 
U.S.AIRWAYS 7.91 1.75 
CYPRUS AIRWAYS(CYP) 8.27 2.03 
TAM-LINHAS 
AEREAS(TAM) 
9.11 1.13 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.13 1.79 
SILK AIR 8.47 2.02 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.27 1.64 
AIR CHINA 8.54 1.90 
TIGER AIRWAYS 6.97 2.50 
AIR INDIA Ltd. 7.59 1.35 
WORLD AVERAGE 8.57 1.71 
 
A320 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 6.50 1.50 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 7.39 1.72 
LUFTHANSA 7.47 1.39 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
8.09 1.40 
U.S.AIRWAYS* 9.26 2.47 
CYPRUS AIRWAYS(CYP)* 8.42 2.29 
EGYPT AIR(MSR)* 9.33 2.11 
TAM-LINHAS 
AEREAS(TAM)* 
10.90 1.55 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.24 1.58 
INDIGO 9.50 1.49 
GO AIR 11.01 1.46 
SRILANKAN AIRLINES 8.97 1.81 
SILK AIR 8.92 1.97 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.90 1.71 
AIR CHINA 7.38 1.80 
QATAR AIRWAYS 11.25 2.46 
TIGER AIRWAYS 10.50 2.30 
AIR INDIA Ltd.* 8.03 1.76 
WORLD AVERAGE 9.09 1.89 
 
NOTE:  *   Airbus A320 Operator with V2500A1 engines 
 
A321 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 5.80 1.21 
BRITISH AIRWAYS 6.10 1.26 
LUFTHANSA 7.65 1.45 
SWISS INTERNATIONAL 
AIRLINES 
9.42 1.74 
U.S.AIRWAYS 10.08 2.84 
EGYPT AIR(MSR) 8.03 2.24 
TAM-LINHAS 12.01 2.32 

52 
 
 
 
AEREAS(TAM) 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 10.31 1.73 
CHINA EASTERN 
AIRLINES 
8.07 1.69 
AIR CHINA 8.36 2.16 
QATAR AIRWAYS 12.16 2.69 
AIR INDIA Ltd. 9.13 1.95 
WORLD AVERAGE 8.72 2.03 
A330 
Operator  Daily Utilisation(Hrs.) Stage Length(Hrs.) 
AIR FRANCE 12.07 6.80 
SRILANKAN AIRLINES 13.72 3.57 
AIR CHINA 11.39 4.74 
LUFTHANSA 13.78 6.68 
JET AIRWAYS 13.85 7.21 
KINGFISHER AIRLINES 12.83 6.72 
QATAR AIRWAYS 13.73 5.18 
AIR INDIA LTD 9.17 4.22 
WORLD AVERAGE 11.99 4.72 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  

53 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
Pay and Allowances of Air India and Indian Airlines 
 
The Committee further observe that the designation and the pay 
scales/emoluments drawn in the two organizations are not at par as the persons 
holding the same designation in NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian A irlines) are 
getting different emoluments/scales of pay.  
 
The Committee note the difficulties in addressing the concerns of the employees 
enjoying the same designations and having different pay scales in the two 
organizations. This obvious difficulty which should have been foreseen at the outset did 
not seem to have even occurred to those who worked out the merger process. The 
Committee, however, feel that as far as possible, it may be ensured that there is no loss 
of emoluments and a feeling of alienation  amongst the employees of the two 
organizations. The advisable course of action would, therefore, appear to be to merge 
the two sets of employees with reference to the scales of pay and not based on their 
designations. The final action taken in this regard  may be communicated to the 
Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is a fact that pay -scales have not been harmonized at any level or grade and 
all the employees including EDs, GMs, Dy.GMs and other categories are governed by 
their respective scales of p ay, service regulations and certified/standing orders as per 
their erstwhile companies.  The proposal for level mapping was approved by the HR 
Committee of Board of Directors and suggestions were sought from all employees 
including Unions/Associations/Guil ds.  These suggestions are being examined by a 
Committee constituted by the HR Committee. 
 
In the meanwhile, the Government of India has appointed an independent 
committee on external experts headed by Mr. Justice (Retd.) D.N.Dharmadhikari to look 
into the  merger related issues.  The terms of reference of the Committee, inter -alia, 
include the following: - 
 
i)       To examine the principles of integration across various cadres and determination 
of level and seniority; 
ii)       To examine the principles of Pay/Wage rationalisation and restructuring between 
all the employees of the erstwhile airlines; 
 
iii)       To examine the principles governing the structure of pensionary  scheme, death-
cum-retirement gratuities and other terminal benefits having financial implication; 
iv)       To examine and make recommendations with respect to the general principle 
parameters of the different Productivity Linked Schemes and bring them in  line 
with airline practices. 
 

54 
 
 
 
The Committee has already met all the Unions/representative bodies of 
employees of erstwhile airlines and  proposes to submit its report by the end of January 
2012. 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at Para No. 37 of the 
Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
Pay and Allowances of Air India and Indian Airlines 
 
The Committee have been apprised that there has been a shifting of allowances 
of NACIL (Air India) employees from salary (wage) slip to PLI slip issued to them. The 
Committee feel that at this juncture such kind of action on the part of management does 
not s eem to be proper as the merger of two sets of employees has not been fully 
effected so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend that any cut or advancement 
should be proportionate to the scale of pay as it otherwise will be against the assurance 
"No employ ee would be placed at a disadvantage at any stage" which was 
communicated to the employees before merger of the two organizations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
From the time the PLI was introduced in erstwhile NACIL - (A) in 1996, the salary 
slip and the PLI slip used to be separate and was issued / payment released on two 
different dates. Recently with the financial crisis in the Company, the PLI Slip and 
salary slip are being released almost the same time, which is at the end of the month. 
However, no allowance of the erstwhile NACIL - (A) employees has been shifted from 
the Salary Slip to PLI Slip. However, there has been a shift of allowance in erstwhile 
NACIL(I) from salary slip to PLI slip. With the Report of Justice Dharmadhikari’s 
Committee due, this aspect is likely to be considered in their Report. 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation, O.M No. H 11013/07/2010-AI dated 4th January, 2012)  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at Para No. 37 of the 
Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                   JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
29  April, 2013 Chairman, 
09  Vaisakha 1935(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I   
 
MINUTES OF THE 3rd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22 June, 2011 from 1100 hrs to 1215 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra Deo -- Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
6 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 Shri Uday Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
9 Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
10 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
11 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Ashok Sarin   Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA)  
1 Dr. Nasim Zaidi Secretary, MOCA 
2 Shri Prashant Sukul Joint Secretary, MOCA  
3 Shri Arvind Jadhav CMD, Air India Ltd. 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman elaborated on the inadequacies noticed in the action 
taken replies furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Fourth Report of the 
Committee on ‘National Aviation Company of India Limited – Merged Entity of Erstwhile 

56 
 
 
 
Air India and Indian Airlines ’. The Committee deliberated extensively on this  issue. The 
Members observed that the action taken replies as furnished by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation were vague and evasive besides being incomplete and decided to point out the 
same to the representatives of the Ministry.   
The representatives of the Ministry were then called for evidence.   
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry  and expressed 
anguish at the delay by the Ministry in submitting the complete updated action taken 
replies to the Fourth Report of the Committee .  The Members, while raising questions 
on various issues relating to the recommendations therein, conveyed their utter 
dissatisfaction with the manner in which the Committee’s recommendations have been 
dealt with by the Ministry.  The  Chairman conveyed the Committee’s rejection of the 
action taken replies already furnished by the Ministry and asked the Secretary, MOCA 
to furnish the revised and updated action taken replies by 31st July, 2011.  
4. The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(Verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.)  

57 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE 6th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th October 2011 from 1530 hrs to 1730 
hrs in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal   --   Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
3 Shri Vilas Baburao Muttemwar 
4 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
5 Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
6 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
8 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
9 Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
11 Shri N.K. Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Ashok Sarin   Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg  Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation and NACIL  
1 Dr. Nasim Zaidi Secretary, MOCA 
2 Shri Syed Nasir Ali Director, MOCA  
3 Shri Rohit Nandan CMD, Air India Ltd. 
 
 
2. The Committee met to take further evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India Limited to seek clarifications and 
elucidations on updated Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry in August 2011 

58 
 
 
 
showing implementation of recommendations/observations of the Committee contained 
in their Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on National Aviation Company of India Limited 
(now Air India Limited). 
3. At the outset, the Chairman elaborated on the inadequacies noticed in the 
updated action taken replies as furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Fourth 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee .  The Committee deliberated extensively on 
this issue.  The Members observed that the action taken replies as furnished by the  
Ministry of Civil Aviation were vague and evasive besides being incomplete and 
decided to point out the same to the representatives of the Ministry.  The Committee 
also took note of the Report of C&AG, Union Government (Civil) Performance Audit 
pertaining to the Ministry of Civil Aviation covering important aspects like Acquisition of 
Aircraft, merger of Air India Limited and Indian Air Lines into NACIL, Role of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, etc.  The Committee felt that the said Report vindicates the observ ations 
made by them in their Fourth Report particularly in respect of areas relating to fleet 
acquisition, merger and route rationalizations, etc. and decided to seek the comments 
of the Ministry on C&AG Report also. 
 The representatives of the Ministry of  Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India were 
then called in. 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry  and pointed out the 
inadequacies noticed by the Committee in the updated action taken replies furnished by 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation i n August 2011.  The Members, while raising questions on 
various issues relating to the Observations/recommendations contained in the Original 
Report, conveyed their utter dissatisfaction over the manner in which the Committee’s 
recommendations have been de alt with by the Ministry.  The  Chairman desired  the 
Secretary, MOCA to furnish the revised action taken replies encompassing the issues 
raised by the Members and the comprehensive plan being drawn to revive the 
Company besides the comments of the Ministry on the aforesaid C&AG Report by 10th 
November, 2011.  
 The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(Verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.) 
 

59 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE 10TH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday the 12 January 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1340 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal    --   Chairman 
 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Shailendra Kumar 
3. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
4. Shri Uday Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
5. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
6. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
7. Shri N.K. Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  Director 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and Air India Limited (AIL) 
 
1. Dr. Nasim Zaidi  Secretary, MoCA 
2. Shri Prashant Sukul  Joint Secretary, MoCA 
3. Shri Rohit Nandan  CMD, AIL 
 
2. The Committee met to take evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India Limited on the implementation of the observations / 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on National Aviation 
Company of India Limited (now Air India Limited) and other issues related therewith 
including observations contained in C&AG Report No. 18 of 2011 -12 on Performance 
Audit of Civil Aviation in India. 
 
3. At the outset, the Committee expressed their strong displeasure at the delay in 
furnishing the updated Action Taken Replies by the Ministry on the observations and 
recommendations contained in their Fourth Report and sought explanation for the 
same.  The delay was deeply apologised by the Secretary of the Ministry.  Thereafter, 
the Committee deliberated extensively on the updated Action Taken Rep lies and raised 
questions on Turn Around Plan envisaged by the Company and the specific steps being 
taken to improve the overall financial condition of the Company including the progress 
made by the committee of experts headed by Justice (Retd.) D.N. Dharm adhikari 

60 
 
 
 
constituted by the Government to look into the issues related with integration of 
manpower resources of the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines. 
 
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and CMD, Air India Limited replied to the 
queries put forth by the Members.  The Secretary was also asked to submit the details 
of final Financial Restructuring Plan drawn by Government for Air India as well as 
written replies on the issues which remained unanswered during the meeting. 
 
 The representatives  of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Air India Limited then 
withdrew. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 (Verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26 April, 2013 from 1000 hrs to       
1100 hrs in Chairman’s Chamber, Room No. 147, Third Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
4.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
5.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Anil Desai 
8.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
9.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
10.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
 XXXX  XXXX   XXXX 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members XXXX    XXXX    to the 
Sitting of the Committee.   

62 
 
 
 
 
3.  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
 
4.   XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
5. The Committee then took up Memorandum no. 8 pertaining to Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
on National Aviation Company of India Limited. After some deliberation, the Committee 
approved the Memorandum and adopted the draft Report subject to insertion of the 
following in the middle of para no. 20 of the draft Chapter-I of the Report:  
 
 “The Committee desire to know as to why, having engaged a consultant with 
huge cost, the road-map on  merger as visualized by them could not be 
achieved. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
matter should be probed and responsibility fixed.” 
 
6. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports on the 
basis of factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
  
7. As the Committee’s term will end on 30.04.2013, the Chairman thanked the 
members for their co -operation in smooth functioning of the Committee during the term 
and placed on record his appreciation for the valuable contribution and active 
participation of the members in the proceedings of the Committee. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
 
 
XXXX Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS 
/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON NATIONAL AVIATION  COMPANY 
OF INDIA LIMITED – MERGED ENTITY OF ERSTWHILE AIR INDIA AND INDIAN 
AIRLINES. 
 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
18 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 
12, 13, 14, 15 and 16]   
  
Percentage of total  
10 
 
 
 
56 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies [ vide Recommendation 
at Sl. No. 7 and 8] 
 
Percentage of total  
02 
 
 
 
11 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee [ vide 
Recommendations at Sl. Nos.1, 3 and 6, Para III & 11] 
 
Percentage of total.  
 
04 
 
 
 
22 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government 
is still awaited [vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 17 and 18] 
 
Percentage of total 
02 
 
 
11 
 
 