C.P.U. No. 976 
 
 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
UNAUTHORIZED WITHDRAWAL FROM THE ESCROW ACCOUNT HELD IN A 
FIDUCIARY CAPACITY ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY 
MUMBAI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PRIVATE LIMITED 
 
[Based on Para No. 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011-12] 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.02.2014 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY 2014 / MAGHA 1935 (S) 
 
30 

CONTENTS 
                      
           Page 
Composition of the Committee (2013-14) (iii) 
Composition of the Committee (2012-13) (v) 
Introduction  (vii) 
REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
Audit Paragraph 
 
 
A Unauthorized withdrawal from the Escrow Account held in a 
fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of India by Mumbai 
International Airport Private Limited 
 
 
B Internal Audit System   
C Deployment of private security   
D Procurement of Capital Items  
E Reversal of entries of unauthorized withdrawal made out of PSF 
 
 
F Mechanism  to check improper utilization of PSF (SC) funds   
   
PART II 
 
 
 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee                      
 ANNEXURES *  
I. Order dated 0 9 May, 2006 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding 
Collection of Passenger Service Fee (PSF) at Greenfield / Private 
airports  
 
 
II. Amendment order dated 20  June, 2007 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation regarding Collection of Passenger Service Fee ( PSF) at 
Greenfield / Private airports. 
 
III. SOP guidelines dated 19  January, 2009 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation regarding Accounting / Audit Procedure in respect of 
Passenger Service Fee (Security Component). 
 

IV. Amended SOP dated 08  January, 2010 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation regarding Expenditure to be met out of the Passenger 
Service Fee (Security Component) [PSF(SC)] 
 
V. Clarificatory instruction dated 16  April, 2010 of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation regarding Expenditure to be met out of t he Passenger 
Service Fee (Security Component) [PSF(SC)] 
 
VI. Directions issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 17  May, 2012 for 
reversal of entries and paying back the amount. 
 
 
 APPENDICES  
VII. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 6 December, 2012. 
 
 
VIII. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 6 February 2014.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*      Not annexed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
 Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.     Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
         Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P. C. Koul Director 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri Girdhari Lal Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-2013) 
 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
 Chairman 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Vacant  
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________  
 
*       Vice Shri Ambica Banerjee, M.P. passed away on 25 April, 2013.  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings  having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this T hirtieth Report on 
Airports Authority of India Limited  regarding unauthorised withdrawal from the Escrow 
Account held in a fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of India by Mumbai 
International Airport Private Limited based on Para No. 2.5 of the Comptroller & Auditor 
General of India Report No. 3 of 2011 -12 for the year ended March 2010, Union 
Government (Commercial). 
 
2.  The Committee on Public Undertakings (2012 -13) had selected the above said 
subject for detailed examination. Since, the examination remained inconclusive during 
their term, the present Committee again selected the subject to comp lete the unfinished 
task.  
 
3. The Committee (2012-13) took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India Ltd. on the subject at their Sitting 
held on 06 December, 2012.  
 
4. The Committee on Pub lic Undertakings considered and adopted the Report at 
their Sitting held on 6 February 2014. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India Ltd. for tendering evidence before them and 
furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with the examination of the 
subject.  
 
6. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
7. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to the ir predecessor 
Committee for their valuable contribution in examination of the subject.  
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations / Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 February 2014          Chairman  
18 Magha 1935 (S)                                Committee on Public Undertakings 

REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
Audit Paragraph 
 
1. In terms of Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules 1937, the licensee of an airport is 
entitled to collect Passenger Service Fee (PSF) from the embarking passengers at a 
rate specified by Central Government and is also liable to pay for security component to 
any security agency designated by the Central Government for providing the security 
service.  
 
2. Consequent to allowing private companies and Joint Venture Companies to own 
and operate airports in the country,  the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) issued an 
Order on 9 May 2006 which was later amended by Order dated 20 June 2007.  The 
order, inter-alia, stated that: 
 
(i) Passenger Service Fee (PSF) at Airports would be collected by the respective 
Airport Operator, which could be Airports Authority of India (AAI), a Joint Venture 
Company (JVC) or a private operator; 
 
(ii) An Escrow account would be opened and operated by the airport operator in 
fiduciary capacity. An amount of Rs. 130 of the PSF collected per passenger by 
such airport operator would be deposited in the Escrow account by the Airport 
Operator for payments to be made to Central Industrial Security Force (CISF). 
The Escrow Account would be subject to Government audit by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India (CAG). 
 
(iii) The remaining amount, if any, would be transferred to AAI by the airport operator 
through the process of mutual consultation for payment to CISF deployed for 
security purposes at other airports. 
 
3. Audit examination of Mumbai International Air port Private Limited (MIAL), which 
is the operator of the Chhatrapati Shivaji Mumbai International Airport (CSI Airport) 
w.e.f. 3 May 2006, had revealed that the operator met expenses of Rs. 14.21 crore 
relating to consultancy and other professional charge s (Rs.1.87 crore) and deployment 
of private security agencies (Rs.12.34 crore) from the PSF (SC) Escrow Account (PSF 
SC Account) during the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 which was not in accordance with 
various orders/instructions issued by the Government of I ndia regarding operation of 
PSF SC Account. MIAL had also purchased an X -ray screening machine costing Rs. 
1.01 crore in 2008-09 out of PSF SC Account for screening of export cargo. The income 
earned by MIAL by offering the use of cargo screening machine t o airlines and their 
agents was not credited to PSF SC Account. However, MoCA in their clarification 
issued in January 2010 stated that:  

 
“if expenditure for screening items including X -ray machines, multi view X -ray 
machine on inline baggage system is in cluded in the scope of expenditure to be 
met out of PSF (SC), airport operator shall not be charging any hiring fees from 
concerned agencies viz., airline cargo, etc., and if the airport operator is charging 
any hiring frees/charges for use of screening eq uipment from the airlines, cargo 
agents, etc., then the expenditure relating to the installation and use of these 
screening equipment shall not be included in the scope of expenditure to be met 
out the PSF (SC)”.   
 
4. The Audit observed that in view of th e Government of India‟s orders and 
clarifications, withdrawal of Rs. 15.22 crore from the PSF SC Account by MIAL during 
the two years 2007-08 and 2008-09 for expenses in connection with the employment of 
private security agencies, consultant fees and purch ase of cargo screening machine 
was not only in violation of the Government‟s orders prescribing the items on which 
moneys from PSF SC Account could be spent but also a loss to the Government/AAI 
since any surplus in the PSF SC Account should be ultimately transferred to the AAI by 
the airport operator. MIAL also admitted in a meeting of MoCA in April 2010 that it was 
discussed that expenses towards deployment of private security personnel were not to 
be incurred from PSF SC Account. Further, prior approval of Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MoHA) was not obtained by MIAL for engaging private agencies at Mumbai 
International Airport for Civil Airport Security.   
 
5. The Audit findings / observations and other issues relating to the subject matter 
are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report. 
 
A. Unauthorized withdrawal from the Escrow Account held in the fiduciary 
capacity on behalf of the Government of India by MIAL 
 
6. As per Audit observation, the orders of the Government regarding expenditure 
from Passenger Service Fee (Security Component) Escrow Account were violated by 
the airport operator – MIAL, resulting in loss to Government/AAI by Rs. 15.22 crore.  
 
7. In response to the Audit observation, the Airports Authority of India in its written 
reply stated that AAI has no comments to offer as it is not involved with the PSF 
administration relating to MIAL. 
 
8. When asked about the corrective action taken by AAI and /or MoCA in response 
to the Audit Observations, MoCA in their written reply stated that  MIAL has been 
directed to reverse the expenditure debited from the Escrow A/c as per the observations 
of the audit. As per the SOP provisions of Escrow A/c, MIAL is bound to reverse these 
transactions. 
 
9. In this regard, the Secretary, in the Ministry of  Civil Aviation (MoCA) during the 
course of oral evidence held on 06 December, 2012 submitted:  
 

 “On 19 January, 2009, MoCA issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
spelling out how this PSF amount is to be utilized, for what purpose it can be 
utilized, who can draw the amount and all those things.  On 08 January, 2010, a 
further amendment to the SOP was brought and it was said that from this 
amount, equipments required for anti -hijacking purposes can also be purchased.  
It was also said that if the Bur eau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) recommends, 
then the equipments related to anti -sabotage purposes can also be purchased 
out of PSF.  It was made very clear that city -side security thing would not be 
purchased out of this money.  On 16 April, 2010, it  was again clarified by the 
Ministry that for all new brown field as well as green field airport projects, capital 
expenses can be met out of PSF.  So, there was a deviation in the Ministry‟s 
clarification of 16 April, 2010.  Actually, they changed what wa s mentioned in the 
SOP of 2009 and here, it was provided that even all the security equipments can 
be purchased out of this money.” 
 
10. The witness further added: 
 
“On 17 May, 2012, the Ministry of Civil Aviation issued a direction to all the 
airport oper ators, including Mumbai, that if they have utilized this fund for 
anything other than what has been mentioned in the earlier SOP, those entries 
should now be reversed and now they should pay back that amount.” 
 
11. A copy each of the Order dated 09 May, 2006 along with amendment order dated 
20 June, 2007, SOP guidelines dated 19 January, 2009, amended SOP dated 08 
January, 2010, clarificatory instruction dated 16 April, 2010 and the directions issued by 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 17 May, 2012 for reversal of entries and paying back the 
amount are appended as Annexures-I, II, III, IV and V. 
  
12. On being asked whether any monitoring mechanism has been put in place in 
AAI/MoCA to ensure compliance of the parameters of the joint ventures between private 
airport operator and AAI as also the orders of the Government, the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation during the Oral Evidence deposed further : 
 
“We have made specific provision that this account should be audited by the 
C&AG and also by the int ernal audit. We were all the while under the impression 
that these two audit mechanisms are put in place.” 
 
 It was further added that there are two directors of AAI on the Board of MIAL. 
 
B. Internal Audit System  
 
13. As per Audit, Government money credi ted to the PSF(SC) Account was to be 
utilized by private operators in fiduciary capacity towards payments to be made to CISF 
personnel and other security related matters in accordance with the orders/instructions 
issued by MoCA from time to time. Further, as per Standard Operating Procedure 

(SOP) for Account/Audit of PSF(SC) Account for JVC/private operators,  C&AG was 
nominated as an external auditor for audit of the PSF(SC) Account. 
 
14. When asked about the mechanism established by AAI and MoCA to monitor  the 
functioning of MIAL, the  Ministry in their written reply reiterated that the PSF Escrow 
Account is governed by setting up deadlines, SOP and other orders issued on the 
subject. The account is subjected to internal audit and also to the audit by C&AG. 
 
 
 
15. The Secretary of the Ministry during the Oral Evidence held on 06 December, 
2012 stated further:  
 
“There was an internal audit system to monitor expenditure and that there are 
two officers from AAI on the Board of Directors of MIAL.” 
 
16. The Committee enquired as to whether at the time of handing over the airports to 
the private operators, any internal audit system having representatives from AAI and 
MoCA was set up to safeguard the financial interests of GOI and ensure that money 
from PSF(SC) Account is not spent by the private operators for unauthorized purpose(s) 
by resorting to distorted interpretation of the Orders/instructions issued by MoCA.  In 
response, the Ministry in a written reply answered in affirmative.  It was also stated that 
several instructions and orders have been issued to ensure that the money from PSF 
(SC) is used for the desired purpose. 
 
17. Elaborating on the matter, the Ministry in their written reply stated that the PSF 
amount, which was collected prior to handing over of the airport remained with the AAI 
and only the amounts collected from passengers after handing over of the airport were 
retained by the DIAL/MIAL, the private operators and a separate account is  being 
maintained since then. At the time of handing over, th e entire equipment to the private 
operators was listed by AAI in handing over formalities. Therefore, the audit of the PSF 
account could be undertaken after handing over of the airport to the operators in their 
books. 
 
18. To a query as to when internal au dit of PSF(SC) Account was first conducted, 
MoCA in their written reply stated that the audit was conducted in 2009.  When asked 
whether any observations on the manner of utilization of the money from PSF(SC) 
Account by MIAL were made by the internal audit team(s), the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
in their written reply stated that no significant observations were made by the internal 
auditors. 
  
19. Asked further as to whether the coordination cell envisaged under para 6.3 of the 
SOP had a mandate to conduct internal audit of PSF(SC) Account, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation in their written reply stated that as per para 6.3 of the SOP, the private operator 
has to nominate officer(s) to coordinate and deal with the PSF matters with MoCA. This 
officer has no other role in the administration and regulation of PSF account.  

20. When asked whether the two officers of AAI, who were on the Board of MIAL 
ever reported the matter to AAI or MoCA, the Ministry in their written reply stated that no 
such information is available . However, it may be indicated that the unauthorized 
withdrawal of funds out of PSF (SC) escrow account was never discussed at the Board 
meeting level.  
 
21. According to Audit, the Airports, especially International Airports, are vulnerable 
points from th e point of security. The discretion being used by a private operator in 
deploying private security personnel, instead of CISF personnel, at CSI Airport and 
posing a potential security threat may require review of the procedure by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. Dy. CAG (Commercial) 
drew attention of the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) also vide his DO letter 
dated 10 February, 2011. 
 
22. When asked whether any review has been done in this regard b y MoHA and 
MoCA after the matter was brought to the notice of Home Secretary by Audit in 
February 2011, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that the PSF is a 
levy on the passenger being done under Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules unde r the 
mandate of MoCA. MHA has no role to play. Consequent to C&AG observations, 
necessary process has been initiated in this Ministry and action is being taken. 
 
23. The Ministry further submitted that the Passenger Service Fee (PSF) was not 
under their c ontrol and was operated by the airport operator ( i.e. MIAL was authorized 
to operate the account). Regarding the year of withdrawal of the Rs. 15.22 crore, the 
Secretary, MoCA further clarified that the withdrawal of the amount took place in 2009.  
In 2006 , it was a transitory phase when the airport was handed over and detailed 
procedures etc.  were not in place at that time. They were evolved gradually. 
 
24. When asked as to how internal control system has failed to prevent the existence 
of the present cas e pointed out by C&AG, the Ministry in their written reply stated that 
the existing SOP guidelines on PSF (SC) administration provide for annual audit of the 
PSF (SC) escrow account by the C&AG. Further, each airport operator is required to get 
the books of accounts of PSF (SC) escrow account duly audited annually by Chartered 
Accountants.  
  
25. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee by the Audit that MIAL has 
also withdrawn an additional amount of Rs  7.07 crore in 2009 -10 for deployment of 
private security related expenditure out of PSF(SC) and the audit of 2010 -11 accounts 
has revealed that MIAL has deployed private people for loading/aligning and in -line 
screening facility inside the airport and has incurred an expenditure of Rs.3.17 crore on  
this account out of PSF(SC) account. 
 
26. Explaining the factual position in this regard, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated that the ineligible amount of Rs. 7.07 Cr has been pointed out by the C&AG 
against the FY 2009-10 and further the ineligib le expenditure of Rs. 3.17 Cr against the 
FY 2010 -11. These observations were reported on 09 November, 2011 & 13 August, 

2012 respectively. Taking into account the repeated adverse observations made by the 
C&AG, an internal audit by a team of officers from  the Ministry (headed by Financial 
Controller) was ordered by the Secretary of the Ministry for the first time in January, 
2012. 
 
27. When asked as to when the internal audit of PSF (SC) Account was conducted 
and the internal audit report issued, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated 
that the decision to undertake the internal audit of Private/JV airports operators was 
ordered by the Secretary of the Ministry for the first time in January, 2012. Thereafter, a 
team of officers was constitu ted under the chairmanship of Financial Controller, MoCA 
to undertake the internal audit of Private/JV airport operators. In pursuance to this, the 
internal audit of DIAL was taken up by the team in the month of February, 2012 and 
report was handed over on  23 May, 2012.Similarly, on the above lines internal audit of 
MIAL was taken up by the team in the month of July, 2012 and the report was submitted 
on 04 January, 2013. 
 
28. In this context, the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in his deposition  
before the Committee also submitted: 
 
 “We also got an internal audit done of the Mumbai Airport with regard to the PSF 
(security component) in which several other irregularities have also been brought 
out by our internal audit.” 
  
29. When asked whether any responsibility has been fixed on the officers of Internal 
Audit who failed to notice and rectify the unauthorized withdrawal despite C&AG audit 
observations on the issue, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that 
C&AG Audit obse rvation relate to the period 2006 -2011 and the first internal audit of 
MIAL was conducted in the month of July, 2012. 
  
30. When asked about the rationale of the Government behind allowing MIAL to 
operate the Escrow Account involving public funds, the Mini stry in their written reply 
stated that as per Rule 88, the licensee of an airport is entitled to collect fees to be 
called Passenger Service Fee from the embarking passenger. On the basis of advice 
received from Department of Legal Affairs, M/o Law & Just ice, it was clarified that PSF 
(SC) collected at the airport operated by JVC or  private operator will be utilized at the 
airport concerned only to meet the security related expenses of that airport. However, 
Airport Authority of India will be considered a s a single licensee in respect of its airport 
for this purpose with liberty to pool the PSF (SC) collections for such airports and use 
the same for meeting the security related expenses at any of its airport. 
 
31. When asked as to why AAI is not being allo wed to operate the Escrow Account, 
after the issue had been pointed out by C&AG and the matter coming to the notice of 
MoCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that the SOP on PSF 
utilization is being reviewed by the Ministry to addre ss anomalies pointed out by the 
C&AG. A new SOP assigning the PSF (SC) operations to AAI is under active 
consideration. 

C. Deployment of private security  
 
32. According to Audit, the MIAL Management replied in September 2010 that CISF 
had not been able to  take care of landside/city -side security due to non availability of 
adequate staff and due to this MIAL had to engage private security agencies. MIAL also 
contended that MoCA orders of June 2007 made it clear that all security related 
expenses of Airport could be met out of PSF (SC) account. In this connection, it is 
pertinent to mention that the communication dated 09 May, 2006 of MoCA stipulates 
that „CISF will be deployed as per assessment of BCAS at airports operated by JVCs or 
private operators also.‟ 
 
33. The Committee were also informed that MIAL in its letter dated 10.12.2010 to 
Audit stated that it had made several representations to MoCA to allow it to meet 
expenses out of PSF(SC) Account in engaging private security agencies till CISF was 
able to deploy full strength at the CSI Airport and produced a copy of its the then latest 
representation of 17 August 2010. 
 
34. On the contention of MIAL that adequate CISF security personnel were not 
deployed at the Mumbai Airport by the Ministry of Civil Avia tion and / or Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA), the Ministry in their written reply stated that as against the required 
strength of 2163 manpower, the CISF has nearly 2327 manpower for deployment at 
MIAL. Taking into account the future development of airport  terminals (which is under 
construction), revised survey of the CISF requirement has been sent to MHA for 
sanctioning of the additional manpower, which is yet to be sanctioned. Adequate 
manpower to take care of security has been deployed at the Airport as per the proper 
threat assessment. 
   
35. Asked about the rationale behind deploying additional security when CISF 
security was deployed in excess of the requirement, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their 
written reply stated that CISF has categorically clari fied that at no point of time since 
Mumbai Airport was handed over to MIAL, any of the tasks entrusted to CISF as per 
BCAS guidelines, were left unattended by the CISF nor were any tasks handed over to 
the private operators to be performed by their private  security guards.  Ministry have 
further stated that e ngaging private security for aviation security duties is not 
permissible under the law and not practicable to execute either. Law and order functions 
cannot be assigned to private security. 
 
36. To a qu ery as to what action was taken by MoCA on representations of MIAL, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that MIAL‟s request for deploying 
the private security guards for city side policing was examined and it was not acceded 
to. The matter has also been referred to MHA from policy perspective.  Ministry of Home 
Affairs on 6 June 2012 has intimated that the security related matters at the airport are 
dealt with in the Ministry of Civil Aviation as it is the nodal Ministry for Civil Aviat ion 
Security in the country. 
 

37. Keeping in view the fact that deployment of private security personnel at the 
airport could pose a potential security threat, the Committee sought to know as to why 
MIAL was not forbidden from doing so.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their 
written reply stated that they have properly assessed the security risk and deployed 
CISF and the question of assigning any of these functions to private security guards 
does not arise. 
  
38. The Committee enquired as to what corrective steps have been taken by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation in coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that 
the private operators like MIAL, to whom management of airports have been handed 
over by Government of India, do not po se a potential threat to the security of travellers 
by deploying private persons to operate the strategic equipment installed at the airports, 
as was done by MIAL in the present case.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in 
their written reply stat ed that the misuse of funds by deploying private security as 
objected by C&AG, relates to the period when CISF was not handed over the 
responsibility of land side security. This responsibility prior to 01 January, 2010 lied with 
the State police and in any case it was not the operator‟s responsibility. It may be stated 
that Private Airport operator cannot handle the sovereign security function which is a 
reserved subject under the State Support Agreement signed by the Government with 
the operator. As per th e observations made by C&AG, the private security deployed by 
the MIAL was meant for protection of their own buildings, parking lots and to prevent 
encroachment of their own properties. The private security was not at all deployed for 
security of travelers. The traveler security was looked after by CISF.   
 
39. The Ministry further stated that MoCA has deployed the CISF at all the important 
and strategic locations at the airports including guarding of ATC towers, oil installations 
and all other important structures on the city side apart from the main Airport and all the 
terminal buildings. No important and strategic buildings and installations are left 
unguarded. The private security engaged by the MIAL is meant for traffic management 
and providing Watch an d Ward for the construction sites and protecting their properties 
from encroachment and misappropriation of construction materials. As per the counter 
terrorism contingency plan, which is known as city side policing plan of Mumbai Airport , 
none of these t asks assigned to heavily armed CISF are left unattended by them and 
there is no scope for assigning these to any private security as these men cannot be 
armed with heavy weapons as per law.  
 
40. Since the above stated position was at variance with the MIA L communication 
dated 17 August 2010 addressed to MoCA wherein it was stated that in view of 
shortage of CISF personnel MIAL had deployed private security guards for landside 
security which was essential and unavoidable because no chance could be taken in 
security of Airport, a clarification was sought in the matter.The Ministry in their written 
reply stated that the fact that the operator had deployed private security guards owing to 
alleged shortage of CISF personnel on the city side of the airport was br ought to the 
notice of this Ministry in the OMDA Implementation Oversight Committee (OIOC) 
meetings on various occasions. However, the operator was never authorized by Ministry 
of Civil Aviation to incur the expenditure on the private security deployment f rom the 

PSF (SC) funds. Further, through their letter dated 27.06.2012 MIAL was categorically 
informed that expenditure on private security deployment cannot be allowed to be met 
out of PSF (SC) funds. It was also noticed that while MoCA involved the juris diction of 
MHA in regard to deployment of private security at airports, the MHA was of the view 
that airport security was in the domain of BCAS which is under MoCA. 
  
41. When the Ministry were asked to clarify on the existing lacunae, if any, 
concerning t he important aspect of security, they informed the Committee that the 
deployment for CTCP is 405 against a requirement of 405 personnel. 
 
D. Procurement of Capital Items 
 
42. According to Audit, MIAL had purchased an X -ray screening machine costing 
Rs. 1.01 crore in 2008 -09 out of PSF (SC) Account for screening of export cargo. The 
income earned by MIAL by offering the use of cargo screening machine to airlines and 
their agents was not credited to PSF (SC) Account.  
 
43. Asked whether MIAL sought permission  from Government on India before 
procurement of capital items from PSF(SC) funds, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their 
written reply stated that the airport operators are permitted to procure capital items 
which are mandated by BCAS from the PSF (SC) funds as per guidelines of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation issued from time to time. 
   
44. On being asked to elaborate on the specific orders before April 2010 under which 
Airport Operators are permitted to procure capital items from the PSF (SC) Account, 
Ministry o f Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that MCA‟s order dated                  
09 May, 2006 provided for the manner and mode of collection of PSF by the Airport 
Operators. This order dated 20 June, 2007 provided as under: 
 
„Security Component of PS F, in short PSF (SC) is not a regular revenue income 
of an airport -operator. PSF (SC) collected at an airport operated by a JVC or a 
private operator will be utilized at the airport concerned only to meet the security 
related expenses of that airport. Howe ver, AAI will be considered as a single 
licensee in respect of its airport for this purpose with liberty to pool the PSF (SC) 
collections from such airports and use the same for meeting the security related 
expenses at any of its airport‟.   
 
45. Further, MoCA issued SOP guidelines on utilization of PSF (SC) funds vide order 
dated 19 January, 2009. In so far as security related expenses are concerned these 
guidelines provided for payment of security related expenses to CISF as well as other 
security related  expenses in terms of aforesaid order of MoCA dated 20 June, 2007 
including any other decision of the Ministry/BCAS issued from time to time. It was 
further submitted that in order to define the phrase „Security Related Expenditure‟ and to 
discuss the scop e of expenditure which could be met out of PSF (SC) funds, a 
Committee was constituted by this Ministry and based on the recommendation of this 
Committee, clarificatory instructions dated 08 January, 2010 were issued by MoCA for 

compliance of the Airport O perators. These instructions specifically mentioned the 
various permissible expenditure which could be met out of PSF (SC) funds alongwith 
clear indication about the expenses which could not be allowed to be charged out of 
PSF (SC) account. It may be noted  that the various infrastructural capital items as also 
the security related equipment were specifically spelt out by the Ministry in these 
clarificatory instructions. 
 
46. When the Committee desired to know whether the income being earned by MIAL 
is currently being credited to PSF (SC) Account, MoCA stated that the existing Rule 88 
of Aircraft Rule, 1937 permits the collection and administration of PSF by the Airport 
operators by keeping the PSF (SC) funds in a separate Escrow Account held by the 
concerned Airport Operators in fiduciary capacity. Accordingly, MIAL also maintains a 
dedicated PSF(SC) escrow Account which is provided as per the Standard Operating 
Procedure Guidelines prescribed by the MoCA through its order dated 19 January, 
2009. 
 
47. However, on the issue of the legality or otherwise of procurement of capital 
items, the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation during the Oral Evidence held on   
06 December,2012 stated :  
 
 “The expenditure should have been capitalised and debited to the pr oject cost 
itself.  They have not done that and they have debited it to PSF and it is definitely 
a violation which I have already submitted.”   
 
48. When further asked whether airport operators are currently permitted to procure 
capital items from the PSF( SC) funds, Ministry in their written reply stated that the 
procurement of capital items out of PSF(SC) funds, as mandated by the BCAS is to be 
done by the Airport Operators in accordance with the Government procedures. The 
Capital items as mandated by BCAS are permitted to be acquired by using the PSF(SC) 
funds. Based on the C&AG observation and also considering the OMDA obligations, 
this Ministry is in the process of withdrawing the said permission to meet the cost of 
capital items (Security) from PSF(SC) funds. It is also decided to reverse the entire cost 
of capital security items already debited by the operators including AAI to PSF(SC) 
escrow account funds. This will however permit the HHMD, DFMD, X -ray Hand 
baggage Screening System, weapons of CISF/Pol ice; Radio (Walkie -talkie) to be 
acquired out of PSF(SC) funds. The cost of Capex being reversed here would be taken 
into project cost and will be considered for additional tariff fixation by AERA.  
 
49. To a query whether any mechanism has been put in pla ce by AAI and MoCA to 
ensure that the equipment(s) purchased by MIAL out of PSF(SC) Account are handed 
over to the AAI on cessation of the agreement with the private party operating the 
airport or on expiry of useful life of such equipment,  Ministry of Civ il Aviation in their 
written reply stated that as per the OMDA, there is a detailed mechanism to hand over 
the Airport along with the capital items acquired by the operator to the AAI on cessation 
of lease period. As per the PSF Escrow account, the operator has to maintain a detailed 
inventory of the fixed assets purchased by using PSF(SC) funds. 

E. Reversal of entries of unauthorized withdrawal made out of PSF  
 
50. The Secretary of the Ministry while dwelling upon the matter during the course of 
Oral Evidence on 6 December 2012 stated: 
 
“My submission to the Honorable Committee for its kind consideration is that one 
way would be that we can say that hereafter they should strictly follow what has 
been mentioned in the agreement and what has been brought out  by the C&AG, 
and whatever has happened in the past can be taken note of and the matter can 
be closed.  I am saying this because they have already incurred the expenditure 
and they have also filed their tariff claim before the Airport Economic Regulatory 
Authority and in that they have not included this expenditure because it has been 
met out of the PSF.  So, accordingly, their tariff has been fixed.  But if we have to 
reverse it, then the whole tariff order has also to be gone through afresh and that 
will create some sort of avoidable complication of accounting, etc.  But, certainly 
it can be done…… 
  
51. Asked subsequently as to how the inclusion or exclusion of expenditure on 
security incurred for PSF in the claim before the AERA affects the tariff, the M inistry of 
Civil Aviation in a written reply stated that inclusion of expenditure, already incurred out 
of PSF, in the tariff claim would require re -determination of tariff by AERA for the past 
periods. There could be accounting complications based on whic h statutory liabilities 
like Income Tax etc. are discharged. 
 
52. On this matter, the witness during the Oral Evidence also stated:  
 
“One thing is that the recovery that we have to make will be done with full interest 
and will be credited into the account .  Secondly, the Company has intimated that 
they are under some financial problem and there are some projects under 
construction.  So we will deposit the amount very soon.  Thirdly, we will issue a 
new order that we are taking all the operation of accounts in our control.  Till now, 
it was that the operation was done by individual airports.  As per the new order, 
the control of all the accounts would come directly to us.” 
 
53. He further clarified:  
 
 “They (MIAL) have gone to Delhi High Court which has not  given any stay.  We 
will ensure that this entire amount is credited back to the Government account.  
But no further debiting is taking place.  That we have ensured……………… On 
17 May 2012, the Ministry of Civil Aviation issued a direction to all the airport 
operators, including Mumbai, that if they have utilized this fund for anything other 
than what has been mentioned in the earlier SOP, those entries should now be 
reversed and now they should pay back that amount.” 
  
 

54. Enquired about the grounds on which  MIAL has gone to Delhi High Court for 
claim of the security component from the PSF, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written 
reply stated that a WP Civil No. 4242/2012 has been filed by the MIAL in the Delhi High 
Court for claiming the expenses incurre d by the private operator on deployment of 
private security guards to provide adequate security on the city side of the airport, to 
tide over the deficiency in the CISF manpower by the Government. 
 
55. To a post evidence query about calculation, if any, do ne about the amount to be 
recovered including the interest thereon, the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that MIAL 
has been directed to reverse this amount in the Escrow Account out of which an amount 
Rs. 15.21 crore for the period FY 2006 -09 has been rev ersed. Since the matter is sub -
judice no such calculations on interest has been made. 
 
56. To a query regarding whether any action has so far been taken by the MoCA to  
recover  this amount, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that rep eated 
directions were issued by the MoCA to MIAL for reversal of the ineligible expenditure 
incurred by the private operator from PSF (SC) funds, as observed by the C&AG. MIAL 
filed a Writ Petition in the Delhi High Court (i.e. WP Civil No. 4242/2012) chal lenging the 
stand of this Ministry.  However, the Hon‟ble High Court in the hearing made on 29 
January 2013 directed MIAL to reverse the ineligible expenditure, amounting to Rs. 
15.21 Cr (as pointed out by the C&AG in its observations made against FY 2006 -09) 
within a period of four weeks.  MIAL has reversed the ineligible expenses and credited 
to the Escrow Account on 25 February 2013.  The Escrow Account banker i.e. Bank of 
India has since confirmed the reversal of this amount. 
   
57. When asked to specify the time by which MoCA would get the entire outstanding 
amount deposited into the amounts by MIAL along with penal interest, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation in their written reply stated that it would be difficult to provide details on this 
account as the ext ant matter is sub -judice and is scheduled for next hearing on 2 May 
2013.  
 
58. When asked about the timeline by which the new SOP on PSF(SC) would be 
issued by the MoCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written reply stated that an 
amendment in Rule 88 and a new draft SOP has been prepared and circulated to all the 
Private/JV airports and AAI for their comments. A final view in the matter shall be taken 
after taking into consideration the views of all the stake holders and the Ministry of Law. 
 
F. Mechanism  to check improper utilization of PSF (SC) funds  
 
59. When asked what specific provisions exist in the SOP on the aspects relating to 
reversal of unauthorized expenditure, MoCA stated that Para 5 of the SOP specifically 
deals with corrective actions,  if any, required in pursuance to audit observations made 
by C&AG by way of issuing necessary directions/advise to JVC/Private Operator for 
necessary compliance by MoCA. These directions of MoCA are binding on operator. 
 

60. When asked whether the existing  provisions in the internal control mechanism 
are adequate enough to ensure that the irregularity in utilization of the PSF (SC) 
Account is prevented before it actually takes place, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated that taking this into consideration, MoCA vide their Order No. AV.1302/001/2009-
AS dated 9 November 2011 added a separate clause i.e. Para 5.5 to further check 
improper utilization of PSF (SC) funds which reads as under: 
 
“Each airport operator is required to get the books of account of  PSF (SC) 
Escrow Account, duly audited annually by chartered accountants and submit the 
audit report to the Ministry”.  
 
61. It was further stated that MoCA have started an additional audit by their Financial 
Controller also. 
  

PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Unauthorised withdrawals from Escrow Account by MIAL  
 
1. The Committee note that as per Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules 1937, the 
licencee of an airport is entitled to collect a levy called Passenger Service Fee 
(PSF) from the  embarking passengers at a rate specified by the Central 
Government.  The licencee is allowed to retain a fixed part of PSF for passenger 
facilitation.  The licencee is also liable to pay a fixed part of this Fee to a security 
agency designated by the Cent ral Government for providing security at the 
airport.  The Order issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 9 May, 2006 under 
Rule 88 clearly stipulates that PSF is required to be deposited in an Escrow 
Account which would be operated by the concerned air port operator in fiduciary 
capacity and would be utilized for payment to Central Industrial Security Force 
(CISF) deployed at the Airport.  Any balance amount is to be remitted by the 
airport operator to Airports Authority of India for being utilized for p ayment to 
CISF at other airports.  As per the said Order, the airport operator was supposed 
to charge Rs. 200 per passenger as PSF.  Out of this, an amount of Rs. 70 was to 
be retained by the airport operator and the remaining Rs. 130 was to be deposited 
in the Escrow Account for being paid to CISF. The Audit scrutiny has, however, 
revealed that Mumbai International Airport Private Limited (MIAL) which operates 
the Chhatrapati Shivaji Mumbai International Airport (CSI Airport) w.e.f. 3 May 
2006  had met exp enses of Rs.14.21 crore relating to consultancy and other 
professional charges (Rs.1.87 crore) and deployment of private security agencies 
(Rs.12.34 crore) from the PSF (SC) Escrow Account during the years 2007 -08 and 
2008-09 in violation of various orders /instructions issued by the Government of 
India regarding operation of PSF(SC) Escrow Account.  Further, MIAL also 
purchased an X -ray screening machine costing Rs. 1.01 crore in 2008 -09 out of 
PSF(SC) Escrow Account for screening of export cargo.  Moreover , the income 
earned by MIAL by offering the use of this cargo screening machine to airlines 
and their agents was again in violation of rules and regulations not credited to 
PSF(SC) Account.  Audit observed that in view of the Government of India’s 
orders and clarifications, withdrawal of the entire amount of Rs. 15.22 crore from 
the PSF(SC) Escrow Account by MIAL during the two years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 
was not only in violation of the Government’s orders prescribing the items on 
which moneys from PSF(SC) E scrow Account could be spent but also a loss to 
the Government/AAI since any surplus in the PSF(SC) Escrow  Account should 
be ultimately transferred to the AAI by the airport operator for being utilised for 
expenditure on security at other airports.  
 
2. The Committee’s examination revealed that while the airport operator is to 
be squarely blamed for these highly irregular withdrawals through deliberate 
misinterpretation of the law, rules and regulations and basic facts,  from an 
Escrow Account, which it was operating in fiduciary capacity, the Ministry of Civil 

Aviation and Airports Authority of India by remaining mute spectators for years 
together have contributed no less to these irregularities. Thus, notwithstanding 
the fact that the administration and regulation of the PSF Escrow Account held by 
the airport operator in fiduciary capacity is governed by Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) and other orders issued by the Government on the subject 
from time to time, and is also subjected to internal audit, none of these checks 
and balances was made use of by the Government to prevent unauthorized 
withdrawals from PSF (SC) Account by MIAL.  Worse, as per Operation, 
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), though AAI is empowered to 
seek such other report/ information in relation to the airport operations it failed to 
obtain information on unauthorized withdrawal of funds by MIAL and 
consequently, it did not take any action and let MIAL have a complete and 
unfettered say in the operation of PSF (SC) Account.   In so far as the 
administrative Ministry’s role is concerned, the admission of the Secretary, Civil 
Aviation during evidence before the Committee “We have made specific provision 
that this account should be audited by the C&AG and also by the internal au dit.  
We were all the while under the impression that these two audit mechanisms are 
put in place” speaks volumes about the quality and extent of oversight exercised 
by the Ministry to ensure that PSF funds were utilised in accordance with the 
extant practices and SOPs.   
 
3. The Committee find it highly intriguing that though internal audit of PSF 
(SC) Escrow Account was conducted in 2009, no significant observations were 
made by the internal auditors regarding the manner of utilization of money from 
the A ccount.  However, in a subsequent internal audit of PSF (SC) Escrow 
Account got conducted by MoCA in 2012 i.e. after the C&AG Audit, several 
irregularities reportedly came to the fore.  Mysteriously, the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation have no information avail able with them on unauthorized withdrawal of 
funds out of PSF(SC) Escrow Account.  It is also surprising that the matter was 
never discussed in the Board level meetings.  All this while the airport operator 
has used all sorts of excuses to continue with th e unauthorised withdrawals and 
justify them in contravention of all rules and regulations.  To further compound 
the illegality, it has also brazenly continued to defy the instructions, albeit, very 
belated of MoCA to reverse the withdrawals from the Escrow  Account which it 
was operating merely in a fiduciary capacity.  What is all the more galling is that 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, instead of coming down on the errant airport 
operator with a heavy hand, has given it a long rope by remaining content wit h  
advisories which have not been enforced.  The testimony of the Principal Witness 
i.e. the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation before the Committee where he 
harped upon the airport operator being in some financial problem and some of its 
projects being under construction is sufficiently indicative of how the Ministry, 
rather than ensuring the safety  of the public money, have gone ahead with 
bailing out the airport operator. Unfortunately, the Committee’s pointed and 
repeated queries as to how int ernal audit/control and oversight mechanisms 
failed to detect these blatant irregularities did not yield any specific information 
which is highly condemnable. 

 
4. The Committee also note that MIAL has continued with this patently illegal 
practice of unauthorized withdrawals in subsequent years as well.  An amount of 
Rs 7.07 crore was withdrawn in 2009-10 for deployment of private security related 
expenditure out of PSF (SC) and it has also deployed private people for loading/ 
aligning and in -line screening facility inside the airport during 2010 -11 and has 
incurred an expenditure of Rs.3.17 crore on this account.   
 
Procurement of Capital Items  from PSF(SC) Escrow Account by MIAL 
 
5. Audit pointed out that purchase of  an X -ray screening machine by MIAL 
costing Rs. 1.01 crore in 2008-09 out of PSF (SC) Account for screening of export 
cargo and non  crediting  the income earned by MIAL by offering the use of cargo 
screening machine to airlines and their agents to PSF (SC) Escrow Account was 
in clear violation of MoCA clarification issued in January 2010.  The Civil Aviation 
Secretary admitted before the Committee that  the expenditure should have been 
capitalised and debited to the project cost itself and not doing so and debiting  it 
to PSF  is definitely a vio lation. To obviate recurrence of such lapses,  the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation have stated that b ased on the C&AG observation and 
also considering the OMDA obligations, they are in the process of withdrawing 
the said permission to meet the cost of capital i tems (Security) from PSF (SC) 
funds.  The Committee desire that Government should take a final decision in the 
matter with due promptitude so that process of debiting the cost of capital 
security items in the PSF(SC) Escrow Account is discontinued forthwit h.  The 
Committee further desire that the Ministry should inquire into as to how in the 
first instance the instant instructions which were in the breach of OMDA were 
issued and share with the Committee the inquiry report and action taken thereon.  
 
Reversal of Entries of Unauthorised Withdrawals made out of PSF (SC) Escrow 
Account  
 
6. The Committee note that MoCA have also decided to reverse the entire cost 
of capital security items already debited by the operators including AAI to PSF 
(SC) Escrow Account.   The cost of Capex being reversed here would be taken 
into project cost and will be considered for additional tariff fixation by AERA.  The 
Committee, however, deprecate the marked reluctance of the Ministry about the 
changes in tariff claims of MIAL for the past period as it would supposedly 
inconvenience MIAL and lead to accounting complications based on which 
statutory liabilities like Income Tax, etc. are discharged.  They, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the airport operator should be asked to pay all its liabilities to 
various government agencies for the entire period of it indulging in unauthorised 
withdrawals from PSF(SC) Escrow Account.     
 
7. The Committee note that pursuant to the Ministry of Civil Aviation direction 
issued on 17 May 2012 to all the airport operators, including MIAL, for reversal of 
the ineligible expenditure incurred by the private operator from PSF (SC) funds in 

the Escrow Account an amount Rs. 15.21 Crore for the period FYs 2006 -09 has 
been reversed. As regards recovery of penal interest from MIAL, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation stated that since a writ petition has been filed by the MIAL in  Delhi High 
Court for claiming the expenses incurred by the private operator on deployment 
of private security guards to provide adequate s ecurity on the city side of the 
airport, it would be difficult to provide details on this account as the extant matter 
is sub-judice.  From the information placed before the Committee, it is observed 
that the High Court has not granted a stay on the Writ P etition filed by MIAL.  
They, therefore, find it inexplicable as to why the Ministry of Civil Aviation are 
reluctant even to work out the interest component on the suspicious plea that the 
matter is sub-judice.  More so, when the Ministry are liable to fil e all these details 
in the High Court in support of their claim while pleading in the said Case. The 
Committee also find it inexplicable as to why the Ministry have not ensured the 
reversal of all unauthorized withdrawals by the airport operator, post C&AG  
Audit.  While expressing their strong disapproval of this inaction by the Ministry, 
the Committee desire that needful should be done at the earliest along with all out 
efforts to expedite the legal process.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
7 February 2014          Chairman  
18 Magha 1935 (S)                                Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 13th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th December, 2012 from 1515 hrs to 1645 
hrs in Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Hansraj G. Ahir 
3 Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4 Shri Shailendra Kumar 
5 Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
6 Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
7 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
8 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
9 Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10 Shri Naresh Gujral 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Rajeev Sharma Director 
3 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1 Shri A.K Patnaik Dy. C&AG (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
2 Shri P. Sesh Kumar Director General (Commercial)-I 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION, AAI AND CISF 
 
1 Shri K.N. Srivastava Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
2 Shri S. Machendranathan AS&FA, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
3 Shri V.P Agrawal Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
4 Shri Arun Chaudhary Special DG, CISF 

 
2.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of M inistry of Civil 
Aviation (MoCA) and Airports Authority of India (AAI) in connection with examination of 
Para No. 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 (Commercial) of 2011 -12 on Airports Authority of 
India regarding unauthorized withdrawal from the Escrow Account held  in fiduciary 
capacity on behalf of the Government of India by Mumbai International Airport (P) 
Limited 
 
3.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the MoCA and AAI 
and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Spea ker relating to 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  The representatives of MoCA then 
made a brief presentation on the subject before the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Chairman and Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject a nd 
explanation/clarification on the same were given by the representatives of MoCA and 
AAI.  Information on some of the points raised by the Members was not readily available 
with the representatives of MoCA.  They were, therefore, asked to furnish the sam e to 
the Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6 th February 2014 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Room No. 147 (Chairman‟s Chamber), Parliament House (Third Floor), New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
6.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
8.  Shri Uday Singh 
9.  Shri Bhisma Shankar Alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10.  Shri Anil Desai 
11.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
12.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
13.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
3. Shri G. C. Prasad Deputy Secretary  
 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar DG (Commercial) 
2. Shri Jayant Sinha Principal Director (RC) 
3. Ms. Atreyee Das Principal Director (C) 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG to 
the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Repo rts on the following 
subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
 
(i). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX; 
(ii). Airports Authority of India Limited regarding unauthorised withdrawal from the 
Escrow Account held in fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of Ind ia 
by Mumbai International Airports Limited based on Audit Para No. 2.5 of Report 
No. 3 of 2011-12 of Comptroller and Auditor General of India; and, 
(iii). XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports on the basis 
of factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report.  