 
 
 
 
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS FOREST AND PLANTATION 
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
18 

CPU. No. 951 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS FOREST AND  
PLANTATION DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -sixth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on - The Functioning of Anda man & 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
Laid on Table of Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2013 / Phalguna 1934 (S)  
 
18 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies 
 
16 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
17 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
22 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting 25 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty - sixth Report of COPU (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘The Functioning of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Limited’ 
 
27 
 
   
(i) 

4 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2012 – 2013) 
 
Chairman 
   Shri Jagdambika Pal 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansaraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
5.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
6.  Shri Shailendra Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Shri Vilasrao Baburaoji Muttemwar 
9.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
10.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
11.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
12.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
13.  Shri Uday Singh 
14.  Dr. Prabha Kishor Taviad 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
18.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
19.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
4. Shri Sunny Goel Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
(iii) 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in  
the Thirty -sixth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “The Functioning of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Limited”. 
2. The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on  the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 25 February 2009.  Replies of the Government to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14 January 2013.  The 
draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on      
19 March 2013.   
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)  
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Thirty sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings  (2008-09) on ‘The Functioning of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited’. 
 
2. Action Take n Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:   
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II)       (NIL) 
 
(ii) Recommendations / observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III)    (NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos 1 and 4                (Total-2) 
 
(iv) Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited (Chapter V)  
Sl. Nos 2 and 3                                                                                     (Total-2) 
   
3. The Committee desire that response to the Committee’s comments in Chapter I 
of the Report should be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Revival / Restructuring of the Corporation 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee (2008-09) in their  Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
had noted that due to a ban imposed by the Supreme Court in 2001, the forestry 
operations of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development 
Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL) at both the forestry divisions at Little Andam an and North 
Andaman were completely stopped resulting in the Corporation being converted from a 
profit-making “Mini-Ratna” to a loss-making PSU.  The Committee had further noted that 
the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment and Forests had engaged the 
services of Tata Consultancy Services to submit a  plan for revival of the Corporation in 
the wake of post -ban scenario .  The agency in its Report submitted in 2004  had 
recommended downsizing of the Corporation, as an immediate measure so as to  
reduce its size to manageable proportions along with diversification of activities of the 
Corporation into new fields like tourism, etc.  Another Scientific Expert Committee set up 

7 
 
by the Government and headed by C.R. Babu had also recommended the same. T he 
Committee had also noted that inspite of sufficient expert opinion available with the 
Ministry for revival of the Corporation by restructuring, downsizing and diversifying , the 
Government, instead of finding an early viable solution ha d been dilly-dallying on the 
restructuring issue since 2005 on one pretext or the other, like non -clearance of the 
proposal by the Cabinet on several occasions.  
   
6. Since due to this gross neglect by the Government, the employees and industrial 
workers of the Corporation  had been continuously subjected to inhuman hardships and 
miseries, t he Committee  had strongly recommend ed that the Government should do 
everything possible to put the revival plan in place at the earlie st and its urgent 
implementation through restructurin g and proposed diversification activities without 
harming the basic interest of the existing employees like loss of jobs in a far flung and 
isolated area where there are hardly any means of alternate livelihood. They had further 
recommended that in the mat ter of the revival plan, the Government should take into 
confidence the employees/officers of the Corporation as well as the Andaman & Nicobar 
Administration.  They had also recommended that t ill such time the revival materialised, 
the Government should provide sufficient financial assistance to the Corporation in the 
form of waiver of loan and such other financial support as is conducive to the revival of 
the Corporation.  
 
7. In their Action Taken Note submitted on 13 May, 2011 , the Government have 
stated that to solve the issue of ANIFPDCL, a meeting was called on 28  April, 2010 in 
the Ministry under the chairmanship of Director General of Forests and Special 
Secretary (DGF&SS) and a draft Cabinet Note was prepared containing proposal of pay 
revision of the employees of the Corporation as also the closure p lan in a phased 
manner over a period of five years for  the Corporation and the same was approved by 
the Minister of Environment and Forests. After seeking approval of  the Minister, a draft 
Cabinet Note was circulated to the concerned Ministries / Departments for their 
comments. Draft Cabinet Note was further approved by the Minister after incorporating 
the comments received from the concerned Ministries. Now, the Draft Cabinet Note is 
being submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for approval. 
 
8. In the updated information on the matter submitted on 10 January, 2013, the 
Government have further clarified that to solve the long pending issues about the future 
of ANIFPDCL, Port Blair, a meeting was called on 28 April, 2010 in the Ministry under 
the chairmanship of DGF&SS and issues regarding revival/restructuring of ANIFPDCL 
were discussed with Principal Chief Co nservator of Forests and Secretary (Forests), 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration and the Managing Director, ANIFPDCL along with 
the senior officers of the Ministry. In the meeting, it was decided to put up a Cabinet 
Note containing the proposal for pay revis ion of the employees of the Corporation and 
also the closure plan for the Corporation. Accordingly, a draft Cabinet note on phased 
closure of ANIFPDCL and pay/wage revision was sent in May, 2011 to the Cabinet 
Secretariat for approval, on which  Cabinet Secretariat made some observations in July, 
2011. The M inistry of Home Affairs (MHA)/ Board for Reconstruction of Public 
Enterprises ( BRPSE) & ANIFPDCL and A&N Administration were requested to give 
their comments on these observations in July, 2011.  
 

8 
 
9. In the meantime, the Chief Secretary, Andaman & Nicobar Administration vide 
his letter dated 4 October, 2011 furnished the following views:- 
 
(i) The Administration is of the view that the Corporation in the present form 
cannot continue indefinitely as it is a drain on resources, rather than 
effecting closure, it would be better to restructure the Corporation with a 
renewed mandate to focus on its plantation activities as well as enter into 
the field of Eco-Tourism. 
 
(ii) The Administration is of view that subject to its present liabilities being 
settled, the ownership of the Corporation could be transferred to A&N 
Administration w.e5.f. 01-04-2012. 
 
10. The above view of the Chief Secretary was discussed in the Ministry and the 
Ministry ‘in principle’ agree d with the proposal of transfer of ownership of ANIFPDCL to 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration. 
 
11. Accordingly, the Cabinet Note and draft note for Committee for Non -Plan 
Expenditure (CNE) were prepared and the same were  approved by Competent 
Authority in the Ministry. After approval of the Competent Authority , the file was sent to 
Finance Division of the Ministry with a request to seek approval of the Comm ittee for 
Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) so that same may be circulated to all concerned for their 
comments. As per the comments of IFD, the draft note for CNE was revised after 
incorporating the comment received. The draft note for CNE and draft Cabinet Note was 
also forwarded to BRPSE, for their comments prior to the submission of the revised 
CNE and draft C abinet Note to the IDF for approval and subsequent circulation as 
required to concerned M inistries. The BRPSE has sent ‘N o Comments’ on the above 
draft for CNE and Cabinet Note. 
 
12. The IFD has made the following observations on the draft note for CNE:- 
 
The date of transfer the ANIFPDC Ltd. from administrative control of 
Ministry of Environment & Forests to Andaman and Nicobar Administration which 
was 01 April, 2012is already over, a fresh date may be decided for the same and 
financial implications to be reassessed due to change of date of transfer of 
administrative control of ANIFPDC Ltd.  
 
Accordingly, ANIFPDCL, Port Blair was requested to furnish the relevant 
details. The Corporation proposed two dates i.e. either 01  April, 2013 or 01 April, 
2014 for tr ansfer of ownership of the Corporation to A&N Administration. The 
Minister of Environment & Forests has kindly approved the proposal to transfer 
the ownership of the ANIFPDCL, Port Blair to A&N Administration w.e.f. 01 April, 
2014. The draft CNE and Cabine t Note will be revised accordingly and submitted 
to IFD of the Ministry. 
 
After the approval of the draft note for CNE & Cabinet Note by IFD of the 
Ministry, the same will be circulated to all concerned Ministries for their 
comments. After incorporating co mments from various Ministries, the Cabinet 

9 
 
Note will be submitted to the Cabinet with the approval of MEF and the above 
process will take some time.  Further it may also be mentioned that CNE and 
Cabinet Note includes all the points raised by the Committee on Public 
Undertakings regarding pay revision, waiver of loan and diversification of 
activities.  
 
13. The C ommittee are deeply pained by the insensitivity shown by the 
Government in the context of revival/restructuring of one of its own enterprise s.  
ANIFPDCL, a mini-ratna which had been making profit since its inception in 1977 
was rendered loss -making due to the  ban on harvesting of timber in Little 
Andamans and North Andamans.  Since forestry operations accounted for 70% of 
the turnover of the Corpo ration, its fiscal health was completely devastated by 
the ban and it started defaulting on salaries and wages, statutory payments, 
maintenance expenses, etc.  By 2004 , the Ministry of Environment and Forests , 
which is the administrative Ministry of the Co rporation, got two studies 
undertaken for working out a revival plan for the Corporation.  Both  the studies, 
the first by Tata Consultanc y Services and the second by a S cientific Expert 
Committee recommended restructuring of the Corporation as also diversi fication 
of its activities to facilitate its revival.  The restructuring proposal has been under 
consideration of the Government since 2005.  This prolonged dithering by the 
Government on a matter having a vital bearing on the livelihood of hundreds of 
workers of the Corporation and their family members has not ended even after 
the Committee (2008 -09) strongly recommended for urgent revival of the 
Corporation in their Thirty-sixth Report.  The Action Taken Note of 13 May, 2011  
of the Government,  which was r eceived two years after the Committee’s report 
showed that very little has changed.  The Action Taken Note did not go beyond 
the half-hearted and inconclusive efforts of the Government to bring the matter 
before the Cabinet.  Regrettably, the updated statu s Note obtained from the 
Ministry on 10 January, 2013, showed that the Ministry had  sent a draft Cabinet 
Note on phased closure of the Corporation and pay/wage revision to the Cabinet 
Secretariat only in May, 2011.  The Committee, however, draw solace from the fact 
that the Andaman and Nicobar Island Administration had on 4 October, 2011 
opined that rather than effecting the closure of the Corporation, it would be better 
to restructure the Corporation with a renewed mandate to focus on its plantation 

10 
 
activities as we ll as diversify into the field of  eco-tourism.  Going a step further , 
the Administration has also offered to take over the ownership of the Corporation 
w.e.f. 1 April, 2012 , provided its existing liabilities were settled.  The Committee 
note that the Ministry is, in principle, in agreement with this proposal of the A&N 
Administration.  They also note that the Ministry has initiated actions preparatory 
to placing the matter before the Cabinet and have invited comme nts on the 
proposal from various ministries/departments/agencies.  Unfortunately, in the 
process the timeline for transfer of ownership of the Corporation viz. 1 April, 2012 
has already passed.  A new date has, therefore, been sought f rom the 
Corporation alongwith a reassessment of financial implications.  The Corporation 
has proposed 1 April, 2013 and 1 April, 2014 for the purpose and the latter has 
been approved by the Government.  The Ministry even at this inordinately late 
juncture, has also stated that  the consultation process , as well as , the Cabinet 
approval will take some time.  The Committee are hugely disappointed with the 
continued procrastination of the Government over this issue of immense 
importance for not only hundreds of employees of the Cor poration but also for 
the economy of the A&N Islands.  Needless to point out that the Government have 
already wasted nearly a decade in a state of indecisiveness , causing 
unmentionable suffering and har dships to the employees of the C orporation and 
their families.  Obviously, a similar fate may have befallen on the people involved 
in activities, both upstream and downstream.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to exert themselves a bit , at least now and get the transfer of the  
Corporation formalized keeping in vie w 1 April, 2013  instead of 1 April, 2014 as 
the deadline so that the Corporation resumes its activities at the earliest and the 
employees and their families and other stakeholders are also saved the trauma 
and agony of  waiting for another long year .  The C ommittee would appreciate 
positive action on this vexed and extraordinarily prolonged issue within fifteen 
days of the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.            
 
Fate of the Industrial Workers 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
 
14. The Committee had noted that around 1200 industrial workers working in the 
ANIFPDC were drawing the scales of pay which were calculated and arrived at during 

11 
 
1994 on the basis of wage structure granted by Industrial Tribuna l/ Labour Court 
through an award.  The wage structure ha d never been revised during the last 14 years 
and no other allowance was being paid to the employees.  Adding further to their woes, 
the management had unilaterally stopped benefits like Annual Free S ea Passage, LTC, 
stagnation of Increment, in-situ promotion, etc.   
 
15. They had further noted that based on an out of court settlement worked out 
between the employees and the management , t he Corporation had submitted a 
proposal to the Ministry in November, 2008 for revising the pay -scales.  However, the 
said proposal was also stuck in view of the D epartment of Public Enterprises stipulation 
that the PSUs will have to bear the financial implication on account of the 
implementation of recommendation for grant of higher pay -scale to their employees 
from their own resources and that there shall be no budgetary support from the 
Government of India for this purpose.   
 
16. The Committee had been  surprised to also note that whereas the 
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission ha d been implemented for 
employees under the Andaman & Nicobar Administration, the Industrial Workers of the 
Corporation were, in sheer violation of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 not even getting 
the minimum wages fixed by the Government of India .  Bearing in mind, t he strategic 
location of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands from security point of view , as well as , the 
fact that very limited livelihood opportunities are available in the Island s and such 
neglect may create a sense of secessionism in the disgruntled industrial workers , the 
Committee had recommended that the Government should take all urgent steps to 
ensure that industrial workers and other employees of the Corporation are given t he 
benefits of the Sixth Central Pay Commission without any further delay.  
 
17. In their Action Taken Note of 13 May, 2011 , the Government have stated that 
they have  proposed grant of pay revision to the employees of the Corporation in 
respect of CDA pattern, IDA pattern and industrial workmen  in the draft Cabinet Note 
as per recommendation of 6 th Pay Commission, Pay Review Committee and as 
approved by Industrial Tribunal. Grant of pay revision to 1052 Industrial Workmen 
working in the Corporation for  implementation of the settlement arrived between the 
management and the representatives of the Union has been proposed in the Draft 
Cabinet Note w.e.f. 01 October, 2006. 
 
18. In the updated reply furnished more than one and a half years after the initial 
Action Taken Note, the Government have stated in this context that the draft for CNE & 
Cabinet Note includes all the points raised by the Committee on Public Undertakings 
regarding pay revision, waiver of loan and diversification of activities.  
 
19. The Committee had recommended that the Government should take all 
urgent steps to ensure that industrial workers and other employees of the 
Corporation are given the benefits of the Sixth Central Pay Commission without 
any further delay.  In their Action Taken  Note of 13 May, 2011, the Government 
had veered towards granting of revised pay scales as per the recommendation of 

12 
 
Sixth Pay Commission , Pay Review Committee and as per the proposal approved 
by the Industrial Tribunal w.e.f. 1 October, 2006.  A draft Cabinet Note for granting 
such pay revision to 1052 industrial workmen employed in the Corporation had 
also been accordingly prepared.   Unfortunately, however, the said pay revision of 
the employees still remains elusive as in the updated reply furnished to  the 
Committee more than one and a half year after the initial Action Taken Note on 10 
January, 2013 states that the Ministry is even now at the stage of drafting CNE 
and Cabinet Notes, etc. and the consideration of the said matter by the Cabinet 
still see ms to be a far cry.  The Committee strongly feel that when the A&N 
Islands Administration has already offered to take over the Corporation , the 
Government should not dither even a day further on this crucial aspect and fix 
the revised pay and wages of the employees of the Corporation immediately, after 
obtaining requi site approvals expeditiously.  The proposed takeover of the 
Corporation by t he A&N Island s Administration in fact offers a much needed 
opportunity to the Ministry  to settle all these contentious matter amicably and 
with due promptitude so that the Corporation resumes its commercial activities 
immediately.    
Conversion of Loan of the Corporation into paid up Capital 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
20. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that ANIFPDCL was earning 
profit since its inception in 1977 and because of its performance, the Corporation was 
awarded the status of “Mini -Ratna” in 1997.  The Corporation was doing good business 
in the forestry sector and earning surplus revenue from which it paid divide nd as well as 
taxes to the public sector.  It was only after the ban imposed by the Supreme Court in 
2001 the Corporation turned  into a loss-making PSU earning less than its expenses on 
wages, salaries, statutory payments and maintenance cost as the harvesting of timber 
in the Little Andaman and North Andaman Project which accounted for 70% of the total 
turnover of the Corporation  was discontinued.   The Committee had also noted that the 
liability of loan taken from the Government of India has gone up to th e tune of Rs. 65.39 
crores (2008) and the Government of India had neither released the loan promised by 
them nor considered any proposal for waiving off the loan or converting this amount into 
paid-up capital though the same was proposed by the Corporation  in its restructuring 
proposal.  In fact the Corporation was now surviving on the period interest bearing loan 
taken from the Government of India.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
the Government may consider converting the loan along with the interest thereon into 
paid-up capital  and take  urgent steps to finalize the restructuring proposal after 
obtaining expeditious clearance from the Cabinet.  
 

13 
 
21. The Government in their Action Taken  Note have stated that in draft Cabinet 
Note, it is pro posed to convert the loan sanctioned into additional paid -up capital over 
and above the initial paid up capital of Rs. 359 lakhs. It is also proposed to waive off the 
interest amount accrued on the loan amount sanctioned. 
 
22. In their updated reply, the Government have inter-alia stated that draft for CNE & 
Cabinet Note includes all the points raised by the Committee on Public Undertakings 
regarding pay revision, waiver of loan and diversification of activities.  
 
23. The Committee are glad to note that as recommended by the Committee, 
the Government have proposed to convert the loan sanctioned into additional 
paid-up capital over and above the initial paid -up capital of Rs. 359 lakh and also 
to waive-off the interest accrued on the loan sanctioned.  The Government have 
conveyed that the points raised by the Committee regarding waiver of loan have 
been included in the draft for Committee on Non -Plan Expenditure and Cabinet 
Note.  The Comm ittee desire that a decision in the matter may be solicited from 
the Cabinet without any further loss of time so that further action in terms of the 
Recommendation of the Committee about handing over the ownership of the 
Corporation to A&N Islands Administ ration by 1 April this year after attending to 
all past liabilities is taken by the stipulated timeline.    
 
Diversification of Activities of the Corporation 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
 
24. In their Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) the Committee had noted that 
the restructuring proposal of the Corporation was pending with the Government  since 
2005.  As per the proposal, the Corporation planned to enter into various diversification 
activities like development of tourism, research and consultancy, training, etc. to earn 
enough revenue required for its existence.  During the course of their oral evidence 
before the Committee , the representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests 
admitted that the Ministry had no objection, in principle, to  the Corporation diversifying 
into activities like importing timber from neighbouring countries instead of carrying out 
forestry operations, setting up a Palm Oil Refining Unit, setting up afresh water bottling 
plant or setting up any other value added projects , etc., provided the same are in 
conformity with the National Forest Policy, 1998, the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and 
the orders of Supreme Court.    In this context , the Committee had felt that the 
diversification may apart from setting up of a refinery  for Red Palm Oil and Coconut Oil 
and a bottling plant for drinking water  also include  cultivation of medicinal plants and   
species related training, etc.  along with participation in the tourism activities which may 
provide a fillip to the Corporation.  T he Committee had, keeping in view the fact that 
Government of India is the absolute owner of ANIFPDC, recommended greater 
participation of the Government in the diversification efforts of the Corporation .  The 
Committee had  further emphasized that the ori ginal mandate of the Corporation need 

14 
 
not be disturbed while trying to do the best in preserving the environment and bio -
diversity, but at the same time, sustainable development should be the motto and not 
the uncalled for hindrance to livelihood in the name of environmental protection. 
 
25. The Government in their Action Taken Note of May, 2011 stated that the draft 
Cabinet Note has been prepared for phased closure of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL), spread over a period 
of five years, therefore, question does not arise for diversification of activities. 
 
26. However in their updated reply of January, 2013, the Government have inter-alia 
stated that draft for CNE & Cabinet Note includes all the points raised by the Committee 
on Public Undertakings regarding pay revision, waiver of loan and diversification of 
activities.  
 
27. The Committee note from the Note of 13 May, 2011 of the Government that 
at that point of time, a phased closure of the Corporation spread over five years 
was being contemplated by the Government.  Therefore, diversification of 
activities of the Corporation was not being envisioned by them.  However, after 
receiving the offer of the A&N Islands Administration to take over the Corporation 
there has been a change in strategy and the draft proposal of the Ministry as per 
their reply of 10 January, 2013, now includes the concerns of the Committee with 
regard to the immediate need for diversification  of the Corporation to make it a 
viable commercial entity.  While appreciating this move of the Ministry, the 
Committee feel that since A&N Islands have offered to take over the Corporation 
and the Ministry is inclined to do so , decisions like diversification of activities of 
the Corporation ought to be left to the A&N Islands Administration which should 
have a free hand in this regard after they take over the Corporation.      

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Revival /Restructuring of the Corporation 
 
The Committee note that due to a ban imposed by the Supreme Court in 2001, 
the forestry operations of the Corporation at both the forestry divisions at Little 
Andaman and North Andaman were completely stopped resulting in the Corporation 
being converted from a profit -making “Mini-Ratna” to a loss -making PSU.  As of now, 
the future of the Corporation is uncertain and a decision on its restructuring is p ending 
with the Government.  The restructuring proposal stipulates continuation of forestry 
project, phasing out of Red Oil Palm Plantation Project, closure of Rubber Plantation 
Project at Katchal, taking up of various diversification activities and downsi zing the 
Corporation by offering VRS to about 62% of its existing employees.  In this regard, the 
Committee further note that the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment and 
Forests engaged the services of Tata Consultancy Services to submit t heir plan for 
revival of the Corporation in the wake of post-ban scenario which submitted its Report in 
2004.  The Tata Consultancy Services study recommended downsizing of the 
Corporation, as an immediate measure so as to reduce its size to manageable 
proportions along with diversification of activities of the Corporation into new fields like 
tourism etc.  Another Scientific Expert Committee set up by the Government and 
headed by C.R. Babu also recommended the same. The Committee, therefore, feel that 
there is sufficient expert opinion available with the Ministry for revival of the Corporation 
by restructuring, downsizing and diversifying, but to their utter dismay, nothing 
substantial has been done by the Government in this regard. On the contrary, the 
Committee is saddened to note that the Government instead of finding an early viable 
solution has been dilly -dallying on the restructuring issue since 2005 on one pretext or 
the other, like non-clearance of the proposal by the Cabinet on several occasions.   
 
The Committee are not happy with the lackadaisical approach of the Government 
in handling the important issue of revival and restructuring of the Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. which involves the fate of 
so ma ny employees.  In the opinion of the Committee, the casual approach of the 
Government to the whole issue is largely responsible for turning a one -time Mini-ratna 
Company to a pauper organization as on date.   As a result of gross neglect by the 
Government, the employees and industrial workers of the Corporation have been 
continuously subjected to inhuman hardships and miseries. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government shou ld do everything possible to put the 
revival plan in place at the earliest and its urgent implementation through restructuring 
and proposed diversification activities without harming the basic interest of the existing 
employees like loss of jobs in a far f lung and isolated area where there is hardly any 
means of alternate livelihood. The Committee further recommend that in the matter of 
the revival plan, the Government should take into confidence the employees/officers of 
the Corporation as well as the Anda man & Nicobar Administration.  Till such time, the 

18 
 
Government should provide sufficient financial assistance to the Corporation in the form 
of waiver of loan and such other financial support as is conducive to the revival of the 
Corporation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To solve the issue of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL), a meeting was called on 28 -4-2010 in the 
Ministry under the chairmanship of DGF&SS and a draft Cabinet Note was prepared 
containing p roposal of pay revision of the employees of the Corporation as also the 
Closure Plan in the phased manner over a period of five years for the corporation and 
the same was approved by the Hon’ble Minister (E&F). After seeking approval of MEF, 
a draft Cabine t Note circulated to the concerned Ministries / Departments for their 
comments. Draft Cabinet Note was further approved by MEF after incorporating the 
comments received from the concerned Ministries. Now, the Draft Cabinet Note is being 
submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for approval. 
 
In its subsequent updated reply, the Government stated as follows: 
 
In this regard, it is informed that to solve the long pending issues about the future 
of ANIFPDCL, Port Blair, a meeting was called on 28 th April, 2010 in the Ministry under 
the chairmanship of DGF&SS and issues regarding revival/restructuring of ANIFPDCL 
were discussed with Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Secretary (Forests), 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration and the Managing Director, ANIFPDCL al ong with 
the Senior Officers of the Ministry. In the meeting, it was decided to put up a Cabinet 
Note containing the proposal for pay revision of the employees of the Corporation and 
also the closure plan for the Corporation. Accordingly, a draft Cabinet n ote on phased 
closure of ANIFPDCL and pay/wage revision was sent in May, 2011 to the Cabinet 
Secretariat for approval, on which Cabinet Secretariat has made some observations in 
July, 2011. The MHA/BRPSE & ANIFPDCL and A&N Administration have been 
requested to give their comments on these observations in July, 2011. 
  
In the meantime, the Chief Secretary, Andaman & Nicobar Administration vide 
his letter dated 4th October, 2011 has furnished the following views:- 
 
(i) The Administration is of the view that the Corporation in the present form cannot 
continue indefinitely as it is a drain on resources, rather than effecting closure, it 
would be better to restructure the Corporation with a renewed mandate to focus 
on its plantation activities as well as enter into the field of Eco-Tourism. 
 
(ii) The Administration is of view that subject to its present liabilities being settled, 
the ownership of the Corporation could be transferred to A&N Administration 
w.e.f. 01-04-2012. 
 
The above view of the Chief Secretary w as discussed in the Ministry and the 
Ministry ‘in principle’ agrees with the proposal of transfer of ownership of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Forest & Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL) to 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration. 

19 
 
 
Accordingly, the C abinet Note and draft note for Committee for Non -Plan 
Expenditure (CNE) were prepared and same was approved by Competent Authority in 
the Ministry. After approval of the Competent Authority the file was sent to Finance 
Division of the Ministry with a reque st to seek approval of the Committee for Non -Plan 
Expenditure (CNF) so that same may be circulated to all concerned for their comments. 
As per the comments. As per the of IFD, the draft note for CNE was revised after 
incorporating the comment received. The draft note for CNE and draft Cabinet Note was 
also forwarded to Board for Reconstruction of Public Enterprises (BRPSE), for their 
comments prior to the submission of the revised CNE and draft Cabinet Note to the IDF 
for approval and subsequent circulation  as required to concerned Ministries. The 
BRPSE has sent ‘no Comments’ on the above draft for CNE and Cabinet Note:- 
 
The IFD has made the following observations on the draft note for CNE:- 
 
The date of transfer the ANIFPDC Ltd. from administrative control  of Ministry of 
Environment & Forests to Andaman and Nicobar Administration is already over which 
was 01-04-2012, a fresh date may be decided for the dame and financial implications to 
be reassessed due to change of date of transfer of adminis trative control to ANIFPDC 
Ltd. 
 
Accordingly, ANIFPDCL, Port Blair was requested to furnish the relevant details. 
The ANIFPDCL, Port Blair has accordingly proposed two dates i.e. either 01 -04-2013 or 
01-04-2014 for transfer of ownership of the Corporation to A&N Admini stration. The 
Hon’ble Minister of Environment & Forests has kindly approved the proposal to transfer 
the ownership of the ANIFPDCL, Port Blair to A&N Administration w.e.f. 01 -04-2014. 
The draft CNE and Cabinet Note will be revised accordingly and submitted  to IFD of the 
Ministry.  After the approval of the draft note for CNE & Cabinet Note by IFD of the 
Ministry, the same will be circulated to all concerned Ministries for their comments. After 
incorporating comments from various Ministries, the Cabinet Note  will be submitted to 
the Cabinet with the approval of Hon’ble MEF and the above process will take some 
time. Further, it may also be mentioned that draft for CNE & Cabinet Note includes all 
the points raised by Committee on Public Undertakings regarding p ay revision waiver of 
loan and diversification of activities. 
 
To solve the issue of Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL), a meeting was called on 28 -4-2010 in the 
Ministry under the chairmanship of DGF&SS  and a draft Cabinet Note was prepared 
containing proposal of pay revision of the employees of the Corporation as also the 
Closure Plan in the phased manner over a period of five years for the corporation and 
the same was approved by the Hon’ble Minister ( E&F). After seeking approval of MEF, 
a draft Cabinet Note circulated to the concerned Ministries / Departments for their 
comments. Draft Cabinet Note was further approved by MEF after incorporating the 
comments received from the concerned Ministries. Now, the Draft Cabinet Note is being 
submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for approval”. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 13th May 2011] 
 

20 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 8 of the Chapter 
I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Diversification of Activities 
 
  The Committee note that as per the restructuring proposal of the Corporation 
pending with the Government, the Corporation plans to enter into various diversificat ion 
activities like development of tourism, research and consultancy, training etc. to earn 
enough revenues required for its existence.  The Committee understand that for taking 
up the diversification activities, the Corporation needs to select a few viable projects and 
present a detailed project report to the Ministry of Environment and Forests and other 
concerned Ministries. In this regard, the Committee further note that during the course 
of evidence, the representatives of Ministry of Environment and Fo rests informed them 
that in principle, the Ministry has no objection in adoption of diversification activities by 
the Corporation like importing timber from neighbouring countries instead of carrying out 
forestry operations, setting up of a Palm Oil Refini ng Unit, setting up of fresh water 
bottling plant or setting up any other value added projects etc., provided the same are in 
conformity with the National Forest Policy, 1998, the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and 
the orders of Supreme Court. 
 
The Committee, while noting that the Government of India is the complete owner 
of the ANIFPDC, feel that as such, the Government itself has to come out with viable 
diversification proposals which could be taken up by the Corporation to ensure its 
continuance.  The diversification may further involve setting up of a refinery for Red 
Palm Oil and Coconut and a bottling plant for drinking water.  The cultivation of 
medicinal plants and species and training in them may also be another area, which may 
provide a fill ip to the Corporation along with participation in the tourism activities.  The 
Committee recommend greater participation of the Government in the diversification 
efforts of the Corporation and further emphasize here that the original mandate of the 
Corporation need not be disturbed while trying to do the best in preserving the 
environment and bio-diversity, but at the same time, sustainable development should be 
the motto and not the uncalled for hindrance to livelihood in the name of environmental 
protection. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
As the draft Cabinet Note has been prepared for phased closure of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Ltd. (ANIFPDCL), 
spread over a period of five years, therefore, question does not arise  for diversification 
of activities. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 13th May 2011] 
 
  

21 
 
Further replies of the Government 
 
…it may also be mentioned that draft for CNE & Cabinet Note includes all the 
points raised by t he Committee on Public Undertakings regarding pay revision, waiver 
of loan and diversification of activities. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 10th January 
2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 18 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Fate of the Industrial Workers 
 
The Committee note that there are around 1200 industrial workers working in the 
ANIFPDC who are drawing the scales of pay which were calculated and arrived at 
during 1994 on the basis of wage structure granted by Industrial Tribunal/ Labour Court 
through an award.  The wage structure has never been revised during the last 14 years 
and no other allowance is being paid to the employees.  Adding further to their woes, 
the management unilaterally stopped the benefits like Annual Free Sea Passage, LTC, 
stagnation of Increment, in-situ promotion etc.  As such the industrial workers of the 
Corporation are finding it difficult to make their ends meet with the meagre wages they 
are getting as against escalation of the cost of living over the period of time. 
 
In this regard, the Committee have been informed by the Government that an out 
of court settlement was worked out between the employees and the management. The 
Corporation submitted a proposal to the Ministry in November, 2008 for revising the 
pay-scales.  According to the Ministry, the said proposal was examined in consultation 
with the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) in the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises. The Committee feel horrified to note that on such an important issue 
the DPE has casually drawn the attention of the Ministry to an Office Memorandum 
issued by them which stipulates that the PSUs will have to bear the financial implication 
on account of the implementation of recommendation for grant of higher pay -scale to 
their employees from their own resources and that there shall be no budgetary support 
from the Government of India for this purpose. The Committee are saddened over the 
apathetic attitude of the administrative Ministry towards its own baby by simply 
conveying to it the decision of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).  
 
In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry has simply washed off their hands 
from the responsibility of safeguarding the interest of the Corporation fully owned by 
them. The Committee ar e surprised to note that whereas the recommendations of the 
Sixth Central Pay Commission have been implemented for employees under the 
Andaman & Nicobar Administration, the Industrial Workers of the Corporation are not 
getting even the minimum wages fixed by the Government of India which is a sheer 
violation of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  The Committee feel that the Government 
must take into consideration the strategic location of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
from security point of view as well as the fa ct that very limited livelihood opportunities 
are available in the Islands and such neglect may create a sense of secessionism in the 
disgruntled industrial workers. The Committee, therefore, recommend with all conviction 
that the Government should take al l urgent steps to ensure that industrial workers and 
other employees of the Corporation are given the benefits of the Sixth Central Pay 
Commission without any further delay so as to bring them succour and adequate relief 

23 
 
from their hardships and sufferings  and apprise the Committee of the action taken 
thereon.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India has proposed grant of pay revision to the employees of the 
Corporation in respect of CDA pattern, IDA pattern and industrial workmen  in the draft 
Cabinet Note as per recommendation of 6 th Pay Commission, Pay Review Committee 
and as approved by Industrial Tribunal. Grant of pay revision to 1052 Industrial 
Workmen working in the Corporation for implementation of the settlement arrived 
between the management and the representatives of the Union has been proposed in 
the Draft Cabinet Note w.e.f. 01-10-2006. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 13th May 2011] 
 
Further replies of the Government 
 
…it may also be mentioned that dr aft for CNE & Cabinet Note includes all the 
points raised by the Committee on Public Undertakings regarding pay revision, waiver 
of loan and diversification of activities. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 10th January 
2013] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 18 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Waiving of Loan 
 
The Committee note that prior to the ban imposed by the Supreme Court in 2001, 
the Corporation was earning profit since its inception in 1977 and because of its 
performance, the Corporation was awarded the status of “Mini -Ratna” in 1997.  The 
Corporation was doing good business in the forestry sector and earning surplus 
revenue from which it paid dividend as well as taxes to the public sector. After the ban, 
the harvesting of timber in the Little Andaman and North Andaman Project was totally 
stopped which otherwise yielded around 70% of the total turnover of the Corporation 
being its main  commercial activity. However, as a result of the ban, the Corporation 
from 2001 onwards converted into a loss -making PSU earning less than its expenses 
on wages, salaries, statutory payments and maintenance cost.  The Committee have 
been informed that at present, the liability of loan taken from the Government of India 
has gone up to the tune of Rs. 65.39 crores and is affecting the financial performance of 
the Corporation.  The Committee have further been informed that the Government of 
India is yet to re lease the loan promised by it which may result in acute financial crisis 
and non -payment of salaries and wages to the workers already reeling under severe 
hardship.  The Committee further note that Government ha ve not considered any 

24 
 
proposal for waiving of f the loan or converting this amount into paid -up capital though 
the same was proposed by the Corporation in its restructuring proposal.  The 
Corporation is now surviving on the period interest bearing loan taken from the 
Government of India.  
 
The Committee feel that this issue requires immediate Government attention and 
recommend that the Government may consider converting the loan along with the 
interest thereon into paid -up capital.  If that not so, the Corporation becoming viable 
after restructuring will continue to be in a state of sickness because of its loan liabilities.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that urgent steps must be taken to finalize the 
restructuring proposal after obtaining expeditious clearance from the Cabinet.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In draft Cabinet Note, it is proposed to convert the loan sanctioned into additional 
paid-up capital over and above the initial paid up capital of Rs. 359 lakhs. It is proposed 
to waive off the interest amount accrued on the loan amount sanctioned. 
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 13th May 2011] 
 
Further replies of the Government 
 
…it may also be mentioned that draft for CNE &  Cabinet Note includes all the 
points raised by the Committee on Public Undertakings regarding pay revision, waiver 
of loan and diversification of activities.  
 
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No.14-8/2008-SU(Vol. II) dated 10th January 
2013] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The comments of the Committee may kindly be seen at para no. 18 of the 
Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
20 March 2013        Chairman, 
29 Phalguna 1934(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 1 9 March, 2013 from 1 500 hrs to 
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘ E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
4.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
5.  Shri Shailendra Kumar  
6.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
7.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar 
8.  Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
9.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
10.  Dr. Prabha Kishore Taviad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
   
 
 
…2p.. 
 

26 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up Memoranda Nos. 3 to 7 containing following 
draft Reports: 
 
(i). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(ii). Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) on The Functioning of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited. 
 
(iii). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(iv). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
(v). XXXX   XXXX    XXXX. 
 
 
3. The Committee approved the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without 
any modification and authorized the Chairman to present the se Reports after getting 
them factually verified from the concerned Ministries / Departments. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings on ‘The Functioning of Andaman  and 
Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation Limited’. 
 
 
I Total number of recommendations  04 
lI  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
 
NIL 
 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies           
 
NIL 
 
   
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
[vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 and 4] 
Percentage of total 
02 
 
 
50% 
   
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
[vide recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 and 3] 
Percentage of total 
 
02 
 
 
50% 
 
 
 
 