 
 
 
C.P.U. No. 937      
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
NATIONAL AVIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LIMITED- MERGED 
ENTITY OF ERSTWHILE AIR INDIA AND INDIAN AIRLINES 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on _________  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on____________   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2010 / Phalguna 1931(S) 
 
4 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No.  
Composition of the Committee (2009-2010) (iii) 
Introduction (v) 
 Part- A  
Report 
 
1. Introduction 1 
 A.      Historical Background 1 
 B. Board of Directors 4 
2. Merger 7 
 A.  Implementation of Common Code 26 
 B. Change of Brand Name of Indian 27 
3. Financial Performance 28 
 A. Reasons for losses 31 
 B. Turn-around Plan  35 
4. Fleet Management 47 
 A. Fleet Acquisition 48 
 B. Maintenance of Aircraft 61 
 C. Phasing out of old Aircraft 63 
 D. Leasing of Aircraft 64 
5. Routes 67 
 A. Flying on Routes as a Social Obligation 82 
6. Ground Handling & MRO Services 85 
 A. Ground Handling Services-Joint Venture 86 
7. Human Resource 91 
 A. Manpower 91 
 B. Salary and Wages 93 
 C. Protection of Interest of the Employees of NACIL 100 
 D. Training of Employees 102 
 Part – B 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
 
103 
   
ANNEXURES 
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 117 
(i) 

 
 
 C O M P O S I T I O N  O F  T H E   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009 - 2010) 
 
SHRI V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO - CHAIRMAN 
Sl. No. MEMBERS,  LOK SABHA 
2. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3. Shri Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8. Shri Baijayant Panda 
9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12. Shri Ganesh Singh 
13. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15. Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 MEMBERS,  RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
18. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
21. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22. Shri Amar Singh 
 
 
 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1 Shri J.P. Sharma                   -          Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg                  -         Additional Director 
3 Shri Paolienlal Haokip                            -          Under Secretary 
4 Smt. Malvika Mehta                                -    Senior Executive  Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings (2009-10)  having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 4 th  Report on the 
National Aviation Company of India Limited - Merged Entity of Erstwhile Air India and 
Indian Airlines. 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of NACIL on 8 th 
October, 2009 and 12 th November, 2009 and further, took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation on 17th December, 2009.                    .   
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at  their sitting held on 20 th 
January, 2010.      
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
National Aviation Company of India Limited and Ministry of Civil Aviation for placing 
before them the desired material and informati on in connection with the examination of 
the subject.  The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee.  
5. For facil ity of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-B of the 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                                    V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
20th January, 2010                       Chairman, 
30 Pausa, 1931 (Saka)                            Committee on Public Undertakings  
 
(v) 
 

 
 
PART –A 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The National Aviation Company of India Ltd. (NACIL) was incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 on 30 th March, 2007, by merging Air India Ltd. and Indian Airlines 
Ltd.  The erstwhile Air India Ltd. and Indian Airlines Ltd. were the flag carriers of the 
nation plying on international and domestic routes respectively.   
1.2 With increased liberalization by the Government in the aviation sector , the two 
erstwhile entities were faced with serious competition both internationally and in the 
domestic market.  To ensure their survival in such a fiercely competitive industry, the 
Government merged the carriers with a view that the merged entity would get an 
opportunity to combine infrastructure and would be able to build a stronger and 
sustainable business.  
1.3 However, almost two years after the merger, the company is plagued by serio us 
survival issues including a huge financial loss, no real integration taking place, a 
disenchanted workforce, gross mismanagement regarding operations under different 
codes and a massive debt following an ambitious fleet acquisition plan.  The 
Committee, by opting to examine NACIL, seek to extend support to NACIL in restoring 
the past glory of the national carrier and to enable it to turn the corner.  
A. Historical Background 
1.4 The Company was asked to furnish a background note on its formation and the 
changes undergone since its formation.  The same is given as under:- 
 
“The need for amalgamation of Air India Limited (AI) and Indian Airlines Limited 
(IA) was necessitated due to the fact that both AI and IA, which were operating in 
a largely protected en vironment, were faced with fierce competition from 
domestic private and global airline companies.  Market share had declined 
substantially for both airlines. Significant increase in competitive activity had 
eroded historical advantage of both carriers as l eading international carriers had 
increased coverage and frequency to major cities in India and domestic carriers 
also significantly ramped up operations.  
 
The declining market, operating and financial performance posed a serious threat 
to future survival of the two airlines on a stand -alone basis.  It was felt that in an 
increasingly consolidating global aviation environment, where „critical mass/size‟ 
is a key success factor, combining the two state owned airlines into a single 
merged entity would better  equip them to survive and prosper amidst fierce 
global and domestic competition as it would provide an opportunity to leverage 

 
 
combined assets and capital better and build a stronger sustainable business.  It 
was also felt that the amalgamation would: 
o Enable optimal utilization of existing resources through improvement in 
load factors and yields on commonly serviced route as well as deploy 
„freed up‟ aircraft capacity on alternate routes. 
o Provide an opportunity to leverage skilled and experienced manpow er 
available with both the companies to the optimal potential. 
o Provide an integrated international/domestic footprint which would 
significantly enhance customer proposition and allow easy entry into one 
of the three global airline alliances.  
o Provide an op portunity to fully leverage strong assets, capabilities and 
infrastructure.  
o Potential to launch high growth and profitability businesses (Ground 
Handling Services, Maintenance Repair and Overhaul etc.) 
Keeping in view the above, the merger of Air India an d Indian Airlines was 
cleared by the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on 21 st February, 2007 
and thereafter by the Cabinet on 1 March, 2007. 
Incorporation 
Consequent to the Cabinet clearance National Aviation Company of India Ltd. 
(NACIL) was incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 on 30 March, 2007. 
 
Commencement of Business 
 
The Certificate for Commencement of Business was issued by the Registrar of 
Companies, National Aviation Company of India Ltd. Capital Territory of Delhi & 
Haryana on 14 Mar, 2007.  
 
Registered Office & Corporate Office 
 
The Registered Office of the Company is at Airlines House, 113 Gurudwara 
Rakabganj Road, New Delhi and Corporate Office at the Air India Building, 
Nariman Point, Mumbai.  
 
Effective date of merger 
 
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India, vide Order dated 22 
August, 2007 approved the Scheme of Amalgamation of Air India Limited and 
Indian Airlines Limited with the National Aviation Company of India Ltd.  under 
Sections 391-394 of the Companies Act and on filing the Order with the Registrar 
of Companies , New  Delhi the merger became effective from 27 August 2007, 
with an appointed date of 1 April 2007 and both the erstwhile entities viz. Air 
India Limited and Indian Airlines Limited stood dissolved without being wound up.  
 
 

 
 
Authorized Share Capital & Paid-up Share Capital 
 
Consequent to the amalgamation of the erstwhile Air India Ltd. and erstwhile 
Indian Airlines Ltd. into National Aviation Company of India Ltd ., the authorized 
share capital of the Co mpany was increased from Rs. 5 lakhs to Rs. 1500.05 
crores.  The paid -up Share Capital was increased from Rs. 5 lakhs to Rs. 145 
crores.  The entire Paid-up Capital is held by the Government of India.  
 
Brand Name 
 
Post merger, the brand name “Air India” h as been retained with “Maharaja” as its 
mascot……… 
 
  Increase in the Authorised Share Capital 
 
The total aircraft acquisition programme of NACIL is of approx. Rs. 44,000 
crores.  In addition, several other projects including inter alia setting up of MRO 
facilities for Boeing and Airbus fleet, joining star alliance, joint venture for Ground 
handling , introduction of hub & spoke at Mumbai and Delhi, setting up of 
international hub at Frankfurt and acquisition of new Passenger Reservation 
System have been undertaken by the Company.  These projects involve huge 
investments and are being funded from inte rnal accruals as well as through 
borrowings.  
 
As against the above, the paid up capital of the Company is only Rs. 145 crores.  
It is necessary that the equity base of the company should be substantial enough 
to support the capital requirements as well as  the long term working capital 
requirements.  Strengthening the equity base is also essential as leveraging of 
the debt has to be done in a manner to keep right balance between debt and 
equity since a favourable debt -equity ration is essential for the comp any to get a 
competitive rate of interest in the international markets.  
 
In view of the above and the fact that the Company cannot raise capital from the 
market, a request has been made to the Government of India for infusion of at 
least Rs. 5000 crores t owards the equity capital of the Company.  This will help 
the company to have a favourable debt -equity ratio.  For this purpose it is 
necessary to increase the Authorised Capital of the Company.  
 
The NACIL Board has approved increasing the Authorised Shar e Capital from 
the present Rs. 5 0,00,05,00,000 and the approval of the shareholders of the 
Company is being sought.” 
  

 
 
B. Board of Directors 
1.5 On being asked about the details of the present composition of the Board of 
Directors, Air India in their written replies stated as under:-  
 “The appointment of Directors on the Board of D irectors of the Company is 
made by the Government of India in terms of Articles 98, 117 & 133 of the 
Articles of Association of the Company. 
The present composition of the Board of Directors is as under: 
(1)Shri Arvind Jadhav      Chairman & MD 
(2)Shri Amod Sharma      SBU Head-Related Business  - Functional Director 
(3)Shri Anup K.Srivastava       Director (Personnel)            - Functional Director  
(4)Smt. Anita Khurana      SBU Head-Cargo                  - Functional Director 
(5)Shri Vipin K.Sharma      SBU Head-MRO (E&C)        - Functional Director 
(6)Shri K.M.Unni       SBU Head-MRO (AF)           - Functional Director 
(7)Shri S.Chandrasekhar         Director (Finance)              - Functional Director 
(8)Shri N.Vaghul                                               -Non-official Director 
(9)Shri E.K.Bharat Bhushan    Jt. Secretary & F.A.                   -Govt. Director 
(10) Shri Prashant Sukul      Jt. Secretary                    -Govt. Director 
 
1.6 When queried as to whether the composition of the present Board is in 
accordance with the proportion prescribed by DPE regarding the strength of function al 
and non -functional Directors, the Company submitted in their  written replies the 
following:-  
“The total approved strength of the Board of NACIL is 15. 
The DPE O.M.No. 18 (6)/91 -GM dated 16 March 1992, inter alia, lays down as 
under:  
 (A) Functional Directors: 
  The number of such Directors on a Board should not exceed 50% of 
 the actual strength of the Board  
 (B) Government Directors: 
  The number of Government Directors on a Board should in no case 
 exceed two 
 (C) Non-official Directors 
 The number of Non -Official Part-time Directors on a Board should be at 
least one-third of its actual strength. 
Hence, the composition of the present Board is in compliance of DPE 
guidelines.” 

 
 
1.7 When the Ministry were asked the same question, they stated in their written 
replies as follows:- 
“The DPE O. M. No. 18 (6)/91 -GM dated 16 March 1992, inter - alia, lays down as 
under: 
(A)              Functional Directors: 
  
The number of such Directors on a Board should not exceed 50% of the actual 
strength of the Board.               
 
Presently, one Functional Director on the Board of NACIL is in excess.  However, 
with the appointment of two more non-official Directors, the strength of Functional 
Directors would be in line with DPE guidelines. 
  
(B)              Government Directors: 
  
The number of Government Directors on a Board should in no case exceed two. 
 
The number of Government Directors on the Board is two, which is in line with 
DPE guidelines. 
  
(c)              Non-official Directors 
  
The number of Non -Official Part -time Dir ectors on a Board should be at least 
one-third of its actual strength. 
 
Keeping in view the DPE guidelines, two more Non -official Directors are 
required to be appointed, for which the proposal is under process.” 
1.8 The Ministry of Civil Aviation were asked whether any vacancies exist in the 
present Board of Directors of NACIL and what steps have been taken by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation to fill the same.  In their written replies, they submitted the following:- 
“As per Memorandum & Articles of Association of NACIL, the maximum 
number of Directors on the Board should not be less than 3 and not more than 
15, all of whom shall be appointed by the President of India.  The present 
strength of the Board of Directors of NACIL is 10. 
 
Keeping in view the DPE guidelines, two more Non -official Directors are required 
to be appointed, for which the proposal is under process.” 
1.9 NACIL was asked w hat steps have been taken to professionalize the Board of 
Company.  In reply, they submitted the following:- 
  

 
 
“The constitution of the Board is decided by the Government. 
As regards professionalisation of the Board, as a beginning, the Ministry has 
already appointed Shri N.Vaghul, then Chairman of ICICI Bank Ltd. 
Mr. Vaghul is on the  Board of Directors of NACIL since 18 September 2007.  
He retired from ICICI Bank Ltd. as its Chairman with effective 1 May 2009. 
Mr. Vaghul has a vast experience of finance and banking.  He was responsible 
for transforming ICICI from a small size long ter m credit bank to a large 
diversified financial conglomerate.  He was instrumental in starting an 
investment bank, a commercial bank, a venture capital company and an asset 
management company as part of the ICICI group.  He was also responsible for 
the promotion of India‟s first credit rating company CRISIL. 
He has served as the Chairman of several Committees and Task Forces 
constituted by the Government and the Reserve Bank of India.  He has handled 
several assignments for Asian Development Bank, IFC and the World Bank.”   
1.10 In this regard, during oral evidence of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the 
Secretary further stated the following:- 
“….. In fact, the hon. Member had also asked me specifically on what would be 
the Government‟s support for NACIL.  I am sorry if we were not clear enough in 
our report.   I would like to mention some of the issues that we plan to take on 
priority.  One is NACIL Board is going to be strengthened with eminent 
persons.  In fact, we expect orders very shortly because that it self will give an 
image which is not just a few Government officers but people with respect and 
dignity who would really bring a value added to the national board. ….” 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
 
CHAPTER 2. 
 MERGER 
2.1 With regard to merger of Indian Airlines with Air India, NACIL was asked as to 
what level of flexibility ha d been provided to achieve financial and capital restructuring 
through revaluation of assets.  In reply, they submitted the following:-  
“Under the Scheme of Amalgamation which has been approved by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, the assets of the erstwhile entities viz. AI and Indian have 
been valued by the valuers and the revised valuation would be incorporated in 
the books of the Company from the appointed date of the merger ie.1 st April 
2007.  Thi s would considerably improve the networth of the Company which we 
would be able to leverage for the purpose of raising long terms loans from 
Banks/Financial Institutions.  The paid up capital of the Company was already 
restructured at the time of amalgamat ion since the carry forward losses and the 
reserves were adjusted against the paid up capital of both the entities and the 
capital of the merged entity was determined at Rs.145 crores.” 
2.2 NACIL was asked to give details about the monitoring mechanism tha t had been 
put in place to oversee the ongoing merger/amalgamation of Indian Airlines with Air 
India. In their written replies, they submitted the following:- 
“With effect from 27 th August 2007, Air India Limited and Indian Airlines Limited 
stood dissolved  without being wound up in accordance with thee Scheme of 
Amalgamation and merged into National Aviation Company of India Ltd. (NACIL). 
 
A cross -functional Integration Cell has been formed under C.M.D. to monitor 
integration activities.  In order to deal w ith the merger -related gr ievance of 
various employees, a Three-Tiered Grievance Redressal m achinery has been 
put in place.” 
 
2.3 The Company was asked to give details of the timeframe within which the 
integration of Air India and Indian Airlines at all lev els was supposed to be completed .  
Details were asked for in table form of all the steps involved as part of the roadmap of 
the merger, along with the timeline for each stage and the status as of now, reasons for 
delay, if any and revised timeline therefor.  NACIL submitted the following in their written 
replies:- 
“Time-frame of manpower integration : 
 
Category of employees               Time frame 
 
Non-Technical    06 months 
Technical      12 months 
Flying Crew (Pilots & Cabin Crew) 18 months” 

 
 
2.4 The reasons for the merger of the erstwhil e Air India and Indian Airlines were 
queried from NACIL, to which they replied as under:- 
“The need for amalgamation of Air India Limited (AI) and Indian Airlines Limited 
(IA) was necessitated due to the fact that both AI and IA, which were operating 
in a largely protected environment, were faced with fierce competition from 
domestic private and  global airline companies.  Market share had declined 
substantially for both airlines.  Significant increase in competitive activity had 
eroded historical advantage of both carriers as leading international carriers 
had increased coverage and frequency to major cities in India and domestic 
carriers also significantly ramped up operations.  
 
The declining market, operating and financial performance posed a serious threat 
to future survival of the two airlines on a stand -alone basis.  It was felt that in an 
increasingly consolidating global aviation environment, where „critical mass/size‟ 
is a key success factor, combining the two state owned airlines into a single 
merged entity would better equip them to survive and prosper amidst fierce 
global and domestic c ompetition as it would provide an opportunity to leverage 
combined assets and capital better and build a stronger sustainable business.  It 
was also felt that the amalgamation would: 
     -Enable optimal utilization of existing resources through improvemen t in load 
factors and yields on commonly serviced routes as well as deploy „freed up‟ 
aircraft capacity on alternate routes.  
 -Provide an opportunity to leverage skilled and experienced manpower 
available with both the companies to the optimal potential.  
 -Provide an integrated international/domestic footprint which would significantly 
enhance customer proposition and allow easy entry into one of the three global 
airline alliances.  
 -Provide an opportunity to fully leverage strong assets,  capabilities and 
infrastructure.  
 -Potential to launch high growt h and profitability businesses (Ground Handling 
Services, Maintenance Repair and Overhaul etc).  
Keeping in view the above, the merger of Air India and Indian Airlines was 
cleared by the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on 21 February 2007 
and thereafter by the Cabinet on 1 March 2007. Consequent to the Cabinet 
clearance, National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL) was 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 on 30 March 2007. The Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, Government of India, vide Order dated 22 August 2007 
approved the Scheme of Amalgamation of Air India Limited and Indian Airlines 
Limited with the National Aviation Company of India Limited under Sections 
391-394 of the Companies Act and on filing the Order with the Registrar of 
Companies, New Delhi the merger became effective from  27 August 2007, 

 
 
with an appointed date of 1 April 20 07 and both the erstwhile entities viz. Air 
India Limited and Indian Airlines Limited stood di ssolved without being wound 
up. ……..In addition, M/s. Accenture had also highlighted that the merger also 
provides an opportunity to undertake a comprehensive transformation 
programme to improve the overall competitive and profit position. The 
transformation programme should encompass – 
 Clarity on operating model for airlines business 
 Integration and restructuring of network 
 Strategic cost reduction and productivity enhancements 
 Fleet renewal and products revamp 
 Significantly enhanced focus on service levels 
 Cash injection / liquidation of non-core assets  
 Review options of outsourcing non-core areas 
 Targetted injection of best-in-class management skills 
 Strong branding and communication campaign (at the right stage) 
 Continued Government support 
-  Regulatory support to prevent over capacity and crowding 
- Infrastructure to support growth 
- Favourable negotiations on bilateral rights.”  
 
2.5 In this regard, during oral evidence, the CMD , NACIL  stated before the 
Committee the following:- 
“The problem which is being faced in the company is this. In the last one year, 
the fuel prices had gone up to 145 dollar per barrel. That was a major killing 
factor, not only for the Ind ian Airlines, but for all the legacy carriers, what we call 
as full service carriers. A week back, for the first half, the British Airways had 
declared a loss. Singapore Airlines, just about two days back, declared, for the 
last quarter, 114 million dollar loss. Losses are being incurred by Lufthansa or by 
Air Canada or by Japan Airlines or by Thai Airways, all over the world, most of 
the airlines are now showing losses on hand.  
Two industry -specific issues have come up – one is high fuel prices and the 
second is loss of yields. That is passenger fares have dropped; capacities are in 
excess and in most of the places where the capacity has been in excess, prices 
have fallen down.  
The third aspect which has come in the last two years is that low cost carrier s 
have come; they have bought new aircrafts; they are still on the verge of getting 
their act together; they are all in shortfall; they do not operate for more than six 
hours; they operate within their own region initially; they strengthen themselves 
there and then, they expand into the neighbouring regions. They do not over-arch 
on 2-3 regions and go into other areas.  
If you look at Silk Air, it started its low cost carriers only in South East Asia, 
between Singapore, Jakarta and other areas. They killed the long carriers first; 

 
 
when they become strong, they are now entering into India. Malaysia started Air 
Asia, as a low cost carrier; they had introduced into entire South East Asia; now, 
they want 18 destinations in India. Tiger is a small low cost carrier of Cath ay 
Pacific; they dominated Hong Kong; they came and dominated Bangkok; now 
they want entry into India. On th e West side, we got Emirates, etc. They are 
introducing Fly Dubai, Air Arabia and a host of other small carriers; they are 
going to focus on India. They are looking at 18 -20 destination points in India. 
Why I am telling you all is that I felt that it is my  bounden duty to tell what I 
understand from the situation so that probably I will get a better advice from you 
on this issue. 
Madam had raised an issue on hand. It is a clear fact that Indian market and the 
Chinese market are the two key drivers for the f uture growth of civil aviation in 
the world. Everybody wants to have a share in these two markets – China and 
India. While saying so, the people who want to enter into India, are looking at 
airlines within India, which are domestically strong, with whom th ey are going to 
share or invest or partner. 
Singapore Airlines, Air India and Emirates – I would like to compare for your 
consideration. Singapore Airlines does not have any domestic market. They have 
only one airport, one country; they just cannot survive  only on their domestic 
market. The only way they can survive is on the domestic market of some other 
countries, that is South East Asia and Malaysia, Indonesia and others or India. 
Emirates is one city and one country; there is only one city; they also ca nnot 
survive without actually tapping Indian market. Air India also, in its old avatar, did 
not have a domestic network; it was also similarly placed like the Singapore 
Airlines and the Emirates; there was no difference between the two. The ability of 
Singapore Airlines and Emirates to enter into as many destinations domestically 
helped them to survive. Air India either had to enter into domestically completely 
in order to get all the feeder market into itself or find some other airlines with 
whom it is going to jointly handle. This is one perspective which I want to keep on 
line.  
That is why, when the question came up, if Air India and Indian Airlines had not 
merged, Air India would have died, in the sense that there is a strong domestic 
public sector unde rtaking which is already dominant in the Indian market. If Air 
India wants to compete with the Indian Airlines, and try to develop another 20 
destinations, Air India would not have been in a position to do so. It has only wide 
bodies; it does not have any narrow bodies to operate in the Indian market, 
whereas Indian Airlines had only narrow bodies to operate in the Indian market 
and does not have wide bodies to operate in the international market. Now today 
if you are going to look at the Jet and Kingfisher  which want to do international 
market, first they consolidated it on the domestic side and then they started 
asking for international routes. When they concentrated on the domestic side, all 
of them had narrow bodies. They do not have wide bodied aircraft s in the 
domestic market and wide bodies are required for international routes. So, when 
Jet and Kingfisher both had entered the market and wanted international routes, 

 
 
they started procuring wide bodied aircrafts. The same thing, Indian Airlines also 
did. Indian Airlines also was a predominantly narrow bodied aircrafts – Airbus 
and the earlier, 737 -200. With this narrow body, they can operate in the 
neighbouring areas, and in the domestic market. They cannot go to Paris or they 
cannot go to London; they ca nnot go to Japan or Shanghai or any other place. 
They had to buy a wide bodied aircrafts. So, Indian Airlines tried to grow from 
domestic market into a larger market. 
Actually speaking, it should have been like this – either you should have allowed 
the Indian Airlines to grow from a strong domestic base to an international base 
or you should have allowed Air India from a strong international base to come 
into domestic b ase. These were the two questions which have come up. As a 
person who is coming at a time when I was not a party to the decision of merger 
at all, I still have a little bit of what you call, looking at from outside, the way you 
have asked the question, I h ad to ask myself – whether this merger was really 
right; conceptually the merger makes sense; practically it is a different issue. 
Practical issues, I would like to point out, on hand. If you ask my personal opinion 
on the question of whether the merger co nceptually or financially – if you look at 
it financially – the merger makes sense because either Indian Airlines had to buy 
wide bodied aircrafts or the Air India would have to buy narrow bodied aircrafts. 
Now, here are two questions – in India, under a p ublic sector undertaking 
concept, would you have allowed Air India to buy narrow bodied aircrafts to 
operate in Indian conditions and would you have allowed Indian Airlines to buy 
wide bodied aircrafts, In the national interest, somebody would have said th at 
already these people have got these two aircraft types, why do you not merge 
them together. This was the question. So, it makes sense that any airline in the 
world will have a set of narrow bodies and a set of wide bodies. The question 
which comes up he re is why this entire problem is being faced right now – the 
problem of merger itself is a big issue.  
Nowhere in the world any merger has really been successfully completed. If you 
take the Delta -Northwest airlines, today if you go to the United States an d ask 
the pilot or a cabin crew he will say, “I am a Deltan.  I am a North -western‟.  
There is the North -western merger happened with the regional airline known as 
Redmond Airlines.  There also they continued to have Redmond salary structure, 
Redmond caree r progression which is part of the Northwest and Northwest is 
part of Delta.  How these synergies have to be done?  What has happened is 
though these two are public sector undertakings in Civil Aviation industry their 
internal procedures, processes, human relations, working conditions, timings and 
methods of dealing are totally different.” 
2.6 The Committee asked NACIL to give an account of the situation prevalent in the 
merged company after the merger and questioned whether t he actual integration of 
every aspect of both the companies had not yet been completed.  In reply, NACIL 
submitted the following:- 

 
 
“Over the last two years, routes have been rationalized and several overlapping 
international routes  in the Middle East and East Asia have been eliminated.  
Areas have also been identified where the airline would be able to realize 
economies of scale in the procurement of goods and services. A combined 
insurance policy was taken for covering aircraft and Non - aviation insurance to 
cover all equipments and buildings and other facilities. Similarly, annual saving of 
nearly Rs.200 crores is envisaged by procuring bulk fuel for the entire fleet 
operations including that of subsidiary companies due to “Volume Discount on 
Fuel”.  Tenders of certain In -flight service items were released on a consolidated 
requirement basis to achieve “Volume Discount”. 
Engineering facilities available at various locations have been used to leverage 
the shortfall in capacity in Mumbai resulting in saving   on transportation costs. 
Apart from this, management of working capital is also done optimally by taking 
the resources position on a combined basis.  
As per the estimates worked out by internal working groups/department at the 
time of initiating the merger an amount of Rs.996 crores h ave been projected as 
the synergy benefit spread over for a period of two years against which an 
amount of Rs.503 crores have been realized as synergy benefit in the first one 
year of the integration. The details of the estimated and actual figures of the 
synergy benefit are as follows : 
Area Estimates-
Annualised 
(Rs.in Crores) 
Actual Accrual - 
(Year 1) (Rs.in 
Crores) 
Annual accrual 
-(Year 2) 
(Rs.in Crores) 
    
Network 299 127  
Sales & Marketing 160 69  
Finance 224 223  
Material Management 91 38  
Cargo 99 17  
Ground Handling 69 11  
Engineering / MRO 10 10  
Security 26 4  
Administration 1 0.2  
Regions 17 3.7  
TOTAL 996 503  
 
It is true that the actual integration of every aspect of both the companies is yet to 
be completed. 
However, integration of both the companies have been c ompleted in the 
following areas; 
 Overall (Corporate level) 

 
 
o Finalization of CMD 
o Finalization of Board of Directors 
o Finalization of organization structure for NACIL 
o Selection of leadership team - Functional Directors, Executive 
Directors and some General Managers (holding independent charges) 
o Setup of Integration Cell 
o Setup of Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
o Setup of Communication Plan 
o Monitoring & tracking of overall synergy benefits 
 Sales & Marketing 
o Preferential SPA‟s & sale by GSA‟s – pax only 
o Common pricing on overlap markets - AI and IC 
o Implement all network  integration „quick wins‟ 
o File Summer-2008 slots at coordinated airports 
o Integrated & Standardized MIS 
o Common sales / distribution policies 
o Finalization of Integrated sales force structure 
o Common marketing, promotions advertising 
o Design commercial training procedures 
o Integrated Schedule for Summer 2008 
o Consolidated Travel Agents network & common commission / 
incentives structure 
o Filing of fares from more O&Ds – IA domestic network to / from AI 
international destinations 
o E-ticketing between AI and IA 
o 1-way Free sale:  IA  flights by AI 
o Common front-end interface for website 
 Customer Service 
o Unified face to customer (UFC) at all touch points - signages 
o Unified face to customer (UFC) at all touch points - equipment 
o Unified face to customer (UFC) at all touch points - stationary 
(boarding passes, baggage tags, etc) 
o Unified face to customer (UFC) at all touch points - in flight items 
o Through check-in & seamless transfers  
o Common / integrated  call center 
o Standardize services provided by the company to cabin crew 
(transportation, hotel, etc - excludes allowances) 
 Network 
o Decision to join Star Alliance 
o Rationalization of key overlap markets - AI and IC 
o Standardized feeder flights to / from BOM for AI‟s international flights 
o File W-2007 slots at coordinated airports 
 Finance 
o Design of Transfer Pricing principles between SBUs  
o Synergies/ quick wins in Insurance 
o Synergies/ quick wins in Fuel procurement- ATF 

 
 
o Synergies/ quick wins in number of banks & fund management  
o All aspects towards standardization of  revenue & expenditure 
accounting & processing 
o Integration of Accounting policies, legal & tax issues. 
o Integrated Financial Statements (P&L / Balance Sheet, etc) 
 IT 
o Revenue Accounting 
o Hardware upgrade (servers) 
o Network upgrade (MPLS IP VPN, Bandwidth, etc) 
o Through check-in & seamless transfers  
o E-ticketing between AI and IA 
o Common front-end interface for website 
 Ground Handling 
o AI‟s Contracts Section to deal with the new customer airlines at BOM, 
MAA,COK, TRV IA to deal with the new airlines at all other stations like 
DEL, CCU, AMD, CCJ etc 
o Common procedure for procurement of GH equipment, spare inventory 
control 
o Ramp-side activities to be taken over by GSD at select stations 
 Material Management 
o Integrated Policy 
o Synergies in Aircraft Spares Procurement and Initial provisioning 
o Synergies in Office Equipment & Hardware 
o Synergies in Catering & Up-liftment 
o Synergies in Cabin Consumables 
o Synergies in Ground catering 
o Synergies in Passenger hotel 
o Synergies in Crew & Cabin Hotels 
o Synergies in Traveling/ Transportation 
 MRO  
o Subgroups of Engine and APU will visit bases to assess the facilities 
and future growth capabilities 
o Feasibility study of existing component capability list 
o Exchange of information on Quality Procedures, MEL/CDL, etc 
o Exchange of information on inventory management procedures, 
facilities, IT systems and manpower 
o Evaluation of accessories and avionics component list and study test 
facilities of the new fleet  
o Uniform Quality Control policy for MEL Preamble  
o Common MOE manual as per CAR 145 
o Aircraft performance and Component Reliability Reporting System 
Procedure Harmonization  
o Common utilization of Fabrication Facilities, Non Destructive Testing, 
Composite Repair Shop, Machine shop, Structural shop, etc. 
 Cargo 
o Implementation of common pricing and SPA‟s in the common markets 

 
 
o Operation of first freighter with common AI Cargo branding 
o Common mail and courier operations 
o Interline message exchange to be functional between current AI and IA 
systems 
 Operations and Flight Safety 
o Common safety policy along with a joint flight safety manual (with two 
co-existing parts) for the purposes of AOP (subject to in-principle 
approval by DGCA and other authorities)  
o Formulation of a joint emergency response plan and a preparatory drill 
for the same.  
o Extension of support of flight safety sections to all stations where there 
is presence of any airline 
o Common use of VHF company frequency 
o FMC database (Central Training Establishment) – Obtain value 
discounts from Honeywell  
o Operations manual integration including Training, Flight Dispatch & 
Operations 
o IOSA certification for AI and IC 
o Requirements identification for crew scheduling & rostering software  
 Training (Operations) 
o Common e-mail id for sharing of information 
o Integration of training manual for AOP  
o Integration of other associated manuals (SOP, Emergency response 
manual etc.) 
o Integration of training manual for IOSA  
 HR – General Cadre 
o Organization Structure till DGM level 
o Seniority integration principles for general cadre - ED to DGM level 
 HR – Policies 
o Delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers 
 Public Relations  
o Initiation of brand building exercise for the merged entity  
o Initiate joint handling of media relations  
o Finalize common PR agency 
 Security 
o Prepare note on organization structure for unified security departments 
in the merged entity 
o Present draft note to the ministry on extensions of single agency 
concept to all international airports in India  
o Visit to airports to study processes and implementation of aviation 
security processes 
o Initiate common use of X-BIS and BRS systems at major international 
airports 
o Rationalization of in-flight and in-house magazines 
o Exchange data on manpower and other available resources in both 
security departments 

 
 
o Initiate use of common aviation training facilities 
o Initiate use of common manpower available 
o Initiate manpower assessment to cater to security requirements as per 
R P Singh committee 
 Admin (Corporate Affairs) 
o Appointment of RTI appellate authority 
o Finalization of legal structure & legal practices for NACIL 
o Initiate exchange of Minutes of Board / General meetings (on CD) 
o Compilation of all reports and procedures with consultation of directors 
Official Language Civil Aviation to finalize way forward 
o Preparation of RTI material on company website 
 
However, integration of both the companies are in progress in the following 
areas : 
 Sales and Marketing 
o Common agreements and rate structure with all CRS/GDS 
o Single point accountability for sales force 
o Consolidated GSA network & common commission / incentives 
structure 
o Integrated airport facilities & City Ticketing Offices 
o Implement common commercial training procedures 
o Common / integrated  internet booking engine 
o Single Revenue Management System 
o Integrated PSS / Single Code  
 Customer Services 
o Unified face to customer (UFC) at all touch points – uniforms 
o Rationalization of cabin crew deployment at BOM and DEL 
o Integrated training plan for cabin crew 
o Integrated scheduling plan for cabin crew 
o Integration of Alliance Air cabin crew into full service carrier 
 Network 
o Rationalization of key overlap markets - Full Service and Low Cost 
carriers 
o Complete “clean sheet” network planning exercise 
 Finance 
o Integrated ERP  
o Implementation of Transfer Pricing between SBUs  
o Synergies/ quick wins in finance expenses in common foreign & 
domestic stations  
 IT 
o PSS 
o Common cargo automation / IT system 
o Integrated Operations Control Center (IOCC) - hub control, flight 
dispatch, crew scheduling, etc 
o MRO solution 

 
 
o ERP - Finance / Material Management / HR 
o Email system 
 Ground Handling 
o Decision on method of handling (erstwhile AI / erstwhile IC / combined 
/ outsourced) of flights at following overlap stations- AMD,CCJ,IXE, 
ATQ, PNQ and TRZ  
o Finalize plan for outsourced activities at common stations  
o Rationalization of handling contracts at common stations for getting a 
better deal 
o Centralized control for Ground Handling at both domestic and 
international handling at MAA, CCU, TRV  Equipment to be pooled and 
operated as a single unit 
o GS workshop facility and training centers at all stations to be pooled 
o Common procedure for handling contract agreements including SLAs 
compliance & monitoring 
 Materials Management 
o Aircraft Spares Procurement - Synergies in common parts 
o Aircraft Spares - Synergies in Repairs & Logistics 
o Synergies in Outsourced Services 
o Synergies in canteen supplies 
o Synergies in Medical Items 
o Synergies in Uniforms purchase 
o Synergies in Storage Facilities 
 MRO 
o Policy decision on outsourcing Aircraft handling at Line Maintenance 
level in foreign stations, except for certification. 
o Common contract for cabin cleaning 
o Common engineering office in all Line Stations with all equipments and 
facilities 
o Feasibility study of avionics and accessories space, manpower and 
equipment at various locations 
 Cargo 
o Infrastructural synergies at some airports 
o Common cargo automation / IT system 
 Operations and Flight Safety 
o Conducting of joint Safety audits  
o FOQA harmonization  
o Implementation of Fuel Efficiency Gap Analysis (FEGA) 
recommendations 
o Technical feasibility study for sharing of DFDR Frequency data and 
Flight Scape software systems  
 Training (Operations) 
o Explore potential for an independent training profit center 
 HR – General Cadre 
o Seniority integration principles for general cadre - remaining office 
levels 

 
 
o Level mapping principles 
o Compensation harmonization principles 
o PLI harmonization 
o Organization structure harmonization below DGM level 
 HR – Other Cadres 
o Union (Staff integration) 
o Engineering integration 
o Operations integration 
o Cabin crew integration 
o Other technical cadres integration  
 HR – Policies 
o Service Regulations, Standing Orders, Passage Regulations 
o Recruitment and Promotions policy 
o Annual Performance Appraisal policy 
o Foreign posting policy 
o Training & Development policies 
o Harmonized rules for new recruits 
 Properties and Facilities 
o Rationalization of booking offices 
o Rationalization of city offices 
o Rationalization of airport facilities  
 Medical 
o Common medical policies 
o Common medical panels 
o Medical facilities harmonisation  
 Admin (Corporate Affairs) 
o Preparation of RTI material on company website 
 
However, integration of both the companies will have to be i nitiated in the 
following areas: 
 Sales and Marketing 
o Codeshare & 2-way Freesale  
 IT 
o Data warehouse and MIS 
 Ground Handling 
o Common training procedures 
o Common optimized procedure to be adopted for Ramp services and 
On-ramp aircraft servicing 
o Centralized control for both domestic / international handling at DEL 
and BOM  
o Finalize costing and cost-tracking methodology 
o Common optimized procedure to be adopted for Terminal side services 
o Automation of procedures particularly computerized system to be 
implemented 
 

 
 
 Materials Management 
o Integrated Process  
 MRO 
o Integration of IA Mumbai Engineering Training School with AI facilities . 
Faculty of non aircraft specific courses can be utilized 
o Combined Overhaul shop load planning  
o Acquisition of common aircraft scheduling tool  
o Combined Hangar planning  
o Common training for better utilization of A &C engineers license 
privileges at Line Maintenance level 
o Existing AI and IA technicians having A& C and EIR ( avionics)  to be 
trained on 737/800 and inducted in NACL and deputed as per 
requirement  
o Integration of aircraft training courses 
 Cargo 
o Common policies and procedures 
o Common training 
o Integrated training facilities 
 Operations and Flight Safety 
o Sharing of Jepson manuals to aircrafts instead of pilots  
o EDS‟ computerized flight planning software  
o Single Air Operators Permit (AOP) 
o Cross deployment of crew 
 Training (Operations) 
o Initiate sharing of ground instructor resources in common areas 
(specific aircraft type trainings will continue as separate) 
o Integrate common courses for trainee pilots 
o "Initiate common training  - Flight dispatchers at CTE- Security (BCAS 
training) - First aid training for cabin crew - Aviation medical training" 
o Sharing of printing press facilities / resources 
o Harmonization of issuance of circulars / manuals 
o Maintenance of common training records 
o Formulation of new training policy for merged entity 
o Finalization of training captains strength and ratio per fleet for merged 
entity 
o Common ground instructors ratio / placement 
o Finalize effect on pilots, cabin crew, flight dispatchers & engineer‟s 
training 
 HR – General Cadre 
o Transition to SBU model 
 HR – Other Cadres 
o Transition to SBU model 
 Properties and Facilities 
o Prepare of a common set of procedure / departmental manuals 
o Finalization of the technical and financial powers for the properties & 
facilities department  

 
 
o Standardization of tendering procedure  
o Raise cross-functional Query to HR – incorporating E&M (Electrical & 
Mechanical) engineering activities for creation of infrastructure in 
scope of civil works  
o Initiate centralized control for projects (project cost >10 lakhs) 
o Initiate deployment of projects team on visiting basis” 
 
2.7 NACIL were asked  if any sensitivity analysis was made before going in for the 
merger.  The following statement was furnished by the Company:- 
“The business case for the merger was finalized after reviewing the following 
aspects: 
1. Overall Aviation scenario globally and in India – increased competition from 
private and foreign carriers 
2. Increasingly overlapping roles of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines 
cannibalizing on each other‟s business 
3. Deteriorating operating and financial performance vis-à-vis competition 
4. Need for a flag carrier with an integrated domestic and international footprint 
5. Expected synergies from merger and costs of merger……. 
 
Both erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines made losses in 2006 -07 and since 
then losses have worsened significantly because of external factors such as 
deteriorating market conditions (falling yields, rising fuel costs). Impact of market 
conditions was so severe, that even airlines like Jet Airways which were making 
good profits at the time of AI-IA merger have made significant losses since then.  
At the time of the merger, the analysis was focused on estimating synergies 
through merger. The overall syner gy estimate was broken down into year wise 
synergy accrual targets. After the second year of the merger, NACIL‟s losses 
have increased due to above external factors such as deteriorating market 
conditions. These losses in turn have masked the benefits that  had accrued from 
the merger.  
Sensitivity analysis/ Impact of any external factor (such as ATF prices, load 
factors, yields) which have affected the financial performance of the combined 
entity, would have had an equal, if not greater effect on the standal one 
companies (had the merger not taken place).” 
2.8 The Committee asked NACIL to clarify who could be held accountable for 
ineffective implementation of the merger.  The written replies submitted by NACIL are 
as under:- 
“Overall status on integration areas is as follows:- 
 

 
 
 Completed In Progress Not initiated 
Operational 
Integration 61 28 26 
Contingent on 
management 
decisions 
20 11 1 
Contingent on IT 
readiness/ 
augmentation 
15 26 10 
Contingent on HR 
Integration 
decisions 
8 17 6 
 
Key Areas where integration has progressed well 
 Progressive integration of network/ schedules 
 Progressive cross-utilisation of aircraft fleet 
 Leveraging scale for joint procurement (fuel, insurance etc) 
 Opportunity to join Star Alliance  
 Merger Synergies at the end of Year 1 reported by Working Groups/ 
departments ahead of projections 
 
Key Areas where integration has not progressed well 
 Manpower Integration 
 Cross utilisation of resources (especially in Airport areas) 
 IT augmentation 
 Properties and Facilities integration 
 Opportunity to launch new SBUs/ subsidiaries (MRO, GHS, Cargo) 
 
2.9 In this regard, d uring oral evidence of the representatives of NACIL, Chairman, 
COPU observed:- 
 
“…. there is still one big question which remains un -answered, that is the 
intention of the merger that took place between the Indian Airlines and Air India.   
As I had mentioned last time, both the airlines were running at a loss at that time, 
both were in the red - and I do not think anywhere in the world two companies 
which were both going at a loss have been merged.” 
 
 

 
 
2.10 The Chairman, COPU further stated the following:- 
“We have also noticed that your integration of Indian Airlines and Air India has 
not been user -friendly.  It has been on paper but in practical terms there is no 
real integr ation.  If you go to any of the Air India counter which was Indian 
Airlines earlier on, the board says „Air India‟ but are they in a position to issue 
you ticket on the international route?  They say that they are not authorised to 
issue tickets.  As far a s employees and pilots are concerned, I do not know 
whether the terms are the same or not.  This has done more damage to both the 
airlines rather than having benefited anybody in any of the area.” 
2.11 The Ministry of Civil Aviation were asked what assistance and support, the 
Ministry had  provided/was providing to NACIL for completing the merger process.  In 
their written replies, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 
“A new company under the name of NACIL was incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 b y the Government on 30.3.2007.  The scheme of 
amalgamation was approved by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 22.8.2007.  
The approval of Registrar of Companies was granted on 27.8.2007 completing 
the legal formalities of merging Air India and Indian Air lines with NACIL.  
Thereafter, NACIL Board was required to execute the merger. 
 
The merger is to be completed by NACIL and Government has been assisting its 
management in all matters wherever Government approvals are required.” 
 
2.12 During oral evidence o f the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, the 
Committee commented on the above -mentioned reply by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
as under:- 
“….I went through the answers which you have given.  Let me refer to question 
No. 6 on page 15 in which it was asked categorically to state the assistance and 
support which the Ministry of Civil Aviation has provided or providing to NACIL for 
completing the merger process.  There is a two paragraph reply to that. Nowhere 
does it reflect the assistance you ha ve provided.  You will see the reply is totally 
beating around the bush.  You are not talking about what exactly you are doing 
about it. …..” 
2.13 When asked what steps were taken by the Government to strengthen the NACIL 
while mandating it to implement th e merger in view of the exponential expansion of its 
functions, the Ministry of Civil Aviation in their written replies, stated as under:-  
 
 “The NACIL‟s Board was reconstituted with Chairman & Managing Director, Joint 
 Chairman & Managing Director, 8 Fun ctional Directors, 1 Non -official Director 
 and 2 Government Directors with a view to provide professional guidance in the 
 merger process. 

 
 
States were requested to exempt the properties of NACIL from Stamp Duty.  
Some of the states have responded positively. 
Ministry of Finance was requested to amend Section 72A of the Income Tax Act 
in a manner so as to extend the benefit of carry forward of the unabsorbed 
depreciation of Air India and Indian Airlines to the new merged entity to be set off 
against its taxable profits in future. 
Government of India Guarantee was provided for acquisition of new aircraft. 
Government has approved setting up of a Joint Venture Company by NACIL with 
SATS for Ground/Cargo Handling activities at various airports.” 
2.14 The Committee commented the following on the above given answer:- 
 
“Coming to question No. 7, it was asked about the steps which have been taken 
by the Government to strengthen NACIL and the answer is as though you are a 
catalyst, you are not concerned with the fate of NACIL. ….” 
   
2.15 On the same issue, the Secretary in his oral statement  before the Committee  
submitted as given below:- 
 
“In fact, the hon. Member had also asked me specifically on what would be the 
Government‟s support for NACIL.  I am sorry if we were not clear enough in our 
report.  I would like to mention some of the issues that we plan to take on priority.  
One is NACIL Board is going to be strengthened with eminent persons.  In fact, 
we expect orders very shortly because that itself will give an image which is not 
just a few Government officers but people with respect and dignity who would 
really bring a value added to the national board.   
We are also very grateful to the Government that they have issued orders that all 
official travels will have to be by Air India.  They should get us about Rs.1500 
crore of revenue every year. 
We will ensure that the service is also bet ter.  We are looking at the Oil Ministry 
to have the sales tax on ATF come down to 4 per cent.  It is because 29 to 31 
per cent of ATF sales tax is really harming not only Air India but almost all the 
airlines.  Oil Companies have also given an additional six months credit to Air 
India.  This is also happening.  Then the Government guarantees for some of our 
loans will bring it down.   
We are also working at looking at the entire aircraft purchase programme. Our 
fleets are about 20 years old.  Unless we go in for new aircrafts, it would be very 
difficult. But given the financials, we are looking at, may be, some cancellations 
and some deferments.  We are talking to the Exim Bank on restructuring and re -
delivery of this.  We are talking to Boeing because fort unately the 787s which 
they were supposed to give us is delayed.  So, using that, we are trying to defer 
some of the purchase of the aircrafts which will give us the much -needed 
financial help.  We are also looking at some leaseback arrangements of some of  
the aircrafts.  We are talking to other airlines to take it.  All this, we feel, will bear 

 
 
fruit in the next six months to one year.  Even when we talk about the merger, we 
feel it is a little too early to say whether it is a success or a failure. I think , 
normally, any merger has taken three to four years; we are at about two years.  
Now with the kind of course corrections that we are looking at within the Board 
and within the Government for Air India, and with the present 20 per cent 
increase in passenge rs, with the loads and the yields increasing with the raising 
fares, I think our revenue stream also should improve.  This would also help us to 
tide over this with some help from the Government.  In fact the Government help 
is also not      Rs. 8000 crore as has been mentioned; they are giving us, to begin 
with, just Rs. 800 crore.  This will be closely monitored by the Group of Ministers.  
It has been made very clear to Air India that there is no free money coming; you 
will get Rs. 800 crore; you will hav e to show as to how much of cost cutting and 
revenue enhancement you will make. In fact the commitment given by the CMD 
and his officers to the GoM is about Rs. 1900 crore of cost reduction and 
revenue enhancement by April.  On the basis of that, that this Rs. 800 crore have 
been given. So, there is a tight monitoring by the Government at the GoM, and 
by the Ministry.  I think with these kinds of close monitoring that the Ministry 
would do, we hope to tide over some of these crisis. ….” 
 
2.16 On being asked  whether there was  any monitoring mechanism which has been 
developed and implemented by the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for monitoring the 
process of integration between Air India and Indian Airlines and details (in table form) of 
all the steps invol ved as part of the roadmap of the merger, along with the timeline for 
each stage, current status, reasons for delay, if any and r evised timeline therefor, the 
Ministry replied as under:- 
 
“A cross -functional Integration cell has been formed under CMD to mo nitor 
integration activities. In order to deal with the merger related grievances of 
various employees, a Three Tiered Grievance Redressal machinery has been 
put in place.   
  
In this connection please refer to the merger integration project update of 
October 2009 already submitted to COPU.” 
 
2.17 The Ministry were asked what  instructions/guidelines were issued to NACIL by 
the Government while mandating it to implement the merger inter -alia including the 
following -(i) Route dispersal, (ii) Route dispersal in non non -profitable areas, (iii) Fleet 
Management and Acquisition , (iv) Leasing of Aircraft , (v) Capacity utilisation , (vi) 
Passenger Load Factor , (vii) Wage disparities , (viii) Controlling of costs , (ix) Code 
sharing, (x) Ground Handling Services , (xi) Maintenance & Repair Overhaul Services , 
(xii) Joint Ventures, (xiii) Performance of subsidiary companies, and  (xiv) Various other 
issues relevant according to the Ministry related to the merger of Air India and Indian 
Airlines. In reply, they submitted the following:-  
 

 
 
“No specific instructions were issued.  However, as per time -frame provided in 
the consultant‟s report, NACIL was required to complete the process by 18/24 
months.” 
 
2.18 The Committee asked what in the opinion of the Ministry  had been the 
impediments in the way of the merger not taking place as per plan.  In reply, the Ministry 
submitted as under:- 
 
“There were a number of issues involved in the merger of the two erstwhile 
airlines in the areas of IT, Manpower, Sales & Marketing, Network integration, 
Finance, Materials Management etc.  
  
Merger of Air India and Indian Airlines coincided with the global recession and 
increasing fuel prices which has further complicated the matter and affected the 
pace of integration negatively. 
 
While there has been progress in the areas of route rationalization, combined 
insurance policy, sourcing of fuel, sharing of engineering facilities, management 
of working capital etc., the progress in certain areas like IT, manpower 
integration has been slow.” 
 
2.19 When asked to give details of the meetings held at the Governmental level for 
reviewing implementation of the merger since the year 2007 and the impact of such 
meetings in expeditin g the completion of the process, the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
stated in their written replies, the following:- 
 
“Apart from keeping a tab through Government Directors on the Board of 
NACIL, implementation of merger process was reviewed from time to time at 
Secretary/Minister level.” 
 
2.20 On being asked who the Ministry think is responsible for the mess in which the 
merged entity finds itself, the Ministry replied as under:- 
 
“At the time the merger was contemplated, it was anticipated that there would be 
optimal utilization of all the resources and a growth in m arket conditions and 
global commitment for travel. Subsequently, due to the recessionary conditions 
affecting the market conditions in India & abroad, there has been a continuous 
pressure on yields, passenger load factors, etc. The loss of NACIL is mainly 
attributable to these factors including the expansion of fleet, which has resulted in 
additional interest and depreciation charges. Added to this the implementation of 
the wage agreements & the spiraling ATF prices has also impacted the bottom -
line.” 
 

 
 
2.21 In this regard, the CMD, NACIL during oral evidence before the Committee 
submitted as under:- 
“….The question comes up, maybe even if you want to de -merge the two today, 
in the de-merged condition also both will not survive.  In de -merged condition Air 
India will have to behave like a domestic carrier competing with Indigo and Spice 
Jet and has to become a low cost carrier. ….” 
A.  Implementation of Common Code 
2.22 The Company were asked to define Passenger Service System. They were 
further asked to give details of the status of implementation of this system for operating 
all domestic and internal flights under a common code  and when  it was likely to be 
implemented and made fully operational, the Company replied the following:-              
“Passenger Service System is a set of applications and services that is provided 
in an automated environment for handling of passengers by an airline. This 
broadly includes airline Reservations, Fares, Inventory Management, Ticketing 
including e -Ticketing, Departure  Control System/Check -in, Boarding Pass and 
Baggage Tag Printing, Baggage Reconciliation System, Automated Boarding 
Control, Weight & Balance, Flight Tracking, Credit Card authorization, Mis -
handled Baggage Tracking etc. 
NACIL is currently in the process o f selecting a service provider for  
hosted PSS solution. 
The cut over date will be ascertained based on the selected service provider's 
tender response with respect to the implementation plan.” 
2.23 Regarding operations by both erstwhile airlines under a co mmon code, CMD,  
NACIL stated the following before the Committee:- 
“The first issue is, merger is okay.  Yes, merger is okay.  Is implementation 
proper?  Implementation is not proper.  You have asked one question that you 
cannot buy a ticket on the Indian Airlines counter.  Sir, we asked this question to 
the Indian Airlines; can you take the entire load of Air India on your computer 
system.  No, Sir.  For 16 years it has been an old computer system and they 
need to revive it.  They have floated a tender for  revival.  We asked Air India 
computer system whether they will take the entire Indian Airlines support on this.  
They also could not.  Today, we have called for a tender.  We are going in for a 
demonstration of the IT system so that we have single passeng er system.  It will 
take us at least six months to get the entire single-passenger system to come up.  
Unless that single-passenger system comes up it is difficult for us to do anything 
on the order.  Outside work we can do much better but internal work we  cannot 
do.  If this company has to really survive in the long term basis it has to have a 
single IT system and if it does not have that there is no reason for it to continue.” 
 

 
 
B. Change of Brand Name of Indian 
2.24 With regard to the change of brand name  of the erstwhile Indian Airlines, the 
Chairman, COPU during oral evidence of the representatives of NACIL stated the 
following:- 
“…..Indian Airlines and Air India were two established names, well marketed, well 
established for five decades.  When you had already thought of this scheme of 
merger for whatever reason, right or wrong it may have been, where was the 
need to introduce this business of „Indian‟ in the middle?  When you were 
thinking of merging Indian Airlines and Air India, in the interim period why did you 
have this business of „Indian‟ which meant changing your logos, making new 
letter heads and so on.  I do not know how much expenditure had gone into that. 
Apart from the expenditure it also caused a lot of confusion.  The well established 
trait name which had been marketed all along was totally disrupted during that 
period of time.”   
2.25 NACIL were asked to explain why the brand name of Indian Airlines was 
changed to „Indian‟ when the merger had already been thought of and how much 
expenditure was involved in changing the logos and all the other related activit ies for 
changing the brand name. NACIL replied the following:- 
“Indian Airlines had launched its new identity, viz. Indian, a new logo, viz. wheel 
of Konark and the livery to coincide wit h the induction of new A319 aircraft in 
their fleet effective 7 th December 2005 (the first new type of aircraft to join the 
Indian Airlines fleet after a long gap of 11 years).  
The new look of the airline was meant to communicate a bold striking 
progressive and distinctive image for the airline. The wheel of the sun temple at 
the konark which is the logo of the new brand symbolizes timeless motion, 
convergence and divergence. It also embodies the solidity and the trust that has 
stood the test of t ime. It was decided by the board of erstwhile Indian Airlines, 
that this new livery and new logo consisting of graphic inspired by the konark 
wheel, will appear on all the 43 new aircraft to be inducted by Indian Airlines, as 
approved by the Government. 
The approximate expenditure on rebranding of Indian Airlines to Indian was 
Rs.3.25 crores which was spent as a part of budgeted advertising/  
promotion/publicity expenditure. 
While the above change in the brand of Indian Airlines was effected during 
December 2005, amalgamation of Indian Airlines with NACIL was approved by 
the Board of Directors of Indian Airlines on 9 th May 2007. The Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs vide its order dated 22 nd August 2007, had approved the 
scheme of amalgamation of Indian Airlines and Air India into NACIL.” 

 
 
 CHAPTER 3.  
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
3.1 NACIL was asked to give details of profit made during the financ ial years 2007 -
08 and 2008 -09 and to state w hat percen tage out of the total turnover was  the profit 
during those years.  In their written replies, NACIL submitted the following:-  
“The details of the profits made by NACIL during the financial year 2007 -2008 
are given below: 
       (Rs. crs) 
 
 Total Revenue   15257.47 
 Total Expenses   18555.56 
 Net Profit/(Loss) before tax  (3298.09) 
 Provision for tax    (1071.93) 
 Net Profit/(Loss) after tax  (2226.16) 
 
As seen from above the company has made a loss of Rs. 2226.16  crores as 
against a revenue of Rs. 15257 crores. 
  The accounts for the year 2008-09 are yet to be finalized.” 
3.2 On being asked w hat targets had been fixed in respect of  turnover; and profit of 
the Company during the year 2009 -10, NACIL in their written submission stated the 
following:-   
“The Revenue Budget Estimates for 2009 -2010 have targeted a turnover of Rs  
12618.50 crores. 
As per the Revised budget estimates the estimated loss will be Rs. 5439.73 
crores for the year 2009 -2010 where expenditure on fuel is based on crude 
prices at USD 85 per barrel.” 
3.3 On what action had  been taken to attain the targets fix ed for the year 2009 -10, 
NACIL stated:- 
“In order to attain the targets fixed for 2009 -10, the need to increase our high 
yield traffic and gain the loyalty of our agents was critical.  With this in mind, Air 
India has taken the following initiatives in the recent past: 
Fares and Schemes: 
 Attractive cut and pay incentives offered to Travel agents on F/J fares – both 
IATA and market fares – e.g. ex India to USA/Canada/UK/ Europe, a 25% 
incentive is offered on IATA F/J fares and 10% on F/J market fares. 
 

 
 
 Companion Free Scheme offered on IATA full fares between India and 
USA/Canada/UK/Europe – valid for outbound travel till 31st March 2010. 
 
 Companion Free Scheme in F/J ex India to all international routes - valid till till 
31st March 2010. 
 
 Spouse Free Scheme available ex India to USA/ Canada/UK/Europe on the 
highest market fares (F22/J22 which are approx. 50 -60% lower than the IATA 
fares) – valid till 30th Sept.  2009. 
 
 Spouse Free Scheme available in J class on domestic sectors extended to 
include family – valid till 31st March 2010. 
 
 Special Companion Scheme implemented whereby passengers travelling on 
international routes ex India on the highest market fares in F/J will be entitled to a 
companion ticket at 50% of the same fare. 
 
 In view of poor carriage in J  class ex stations like DXB, NBO and HKG, and as 
proposed by the field, we have approved a Companion Free Scheme on market 
fares for a limited sale period. 
 
 Competitors‟ fares are monitored on a daily basis and steps are taken to 
maximize our loads and revenues.” 
 
3.4 The net profit/loss of Air India and Indian Airlines after tax, for last ten years 
before the merger and after the merger for NACIL for the year (2007 -08) is given 
below:- 
Pre merger figures are:- 
                  (Rs in crore), figures in brackets signify loss. 
Year Air India  Indian Airlines 
1997-98 (181.01) 47.27 
1998-99 (174.48) 13.12 
1999-2000 (37.63) 45.27 
2000-01 (44.40) (159.17) 
2001-02 15.44 (246.75) 
2002-03 133.86 (196.56) 
2003-04 92.33 44.17 
2004-05 96.36 65.61 
2005-06 14.94 49.50 
2006-07 (447.93) (240.29) 
 
Post merger figure for NACIL is:- 
Year 2007-08 - (Rs. 2226 crore)-loss 
 

 
 
3.5 The Company submitted the following for 2008-09:- 
“As regards 2008-09 the accounts of the Company are still under audit and would 
be submitted as soon as they are approved by the Board.” 
3.6 On being asked whether there was  any delay in finali zing auditing financial 
results/accounts for 2008 -09 like in 200 7-08, and  if so, the reasons therefor, NACIL 
replied the following:-  
 
“We have already developed a Uniform Accounting Policy for the merged entity 
in the year 2006-07 to present the accounts. Similarly a uniform chart of accounts 
was also developed during the year 06 -07 for bringing about uniformity in 
accounting for the tran sactions. ERP was introduced in NACIL (A) in all the 
stations, domestic as well as international, during the last year which required 
some time to settle due to the extensive training involved and the challenges 
posed by the system.   A Process Consultant is being appointed to extend the 
scope of ERP to NACIL (I) also. The entire ERP implementation is planned to be 
completed by March 2011. Since presently NACIL ( A) and NACIL ( I) accounts 
are being separate  they have to be consolidated and audited by three different 
firms of Auditors.  
We are trying to present the accounts of 08 -09 before end October 09, which is 
an improvement from the position last year when we presented the accounts of 
07-08 in mid December 08.  Further the accounts of a ll the subsidiary companies 
have also to be audited and presented to their respective Boards before the 
accounts of NACIL is finalized as the impact of the subsidiary company accounts 
on NACIL has to be taken into account.” 
3.7 NACIL was asked the percentage of their total expenditure spent on fuel, 
passenger amenities, salaries and interest, whether for principa l repayment or for the 
aircraft.  In reply, NACIL submitted the following:-  
“The break up of the expenditure incurred in 2007 -08 as per the audite d report 
and the break up of the provisional results for 2008 -09 which is under audit is 
given below: 
 Particulars Audited  Provisional 
2007-08 
 % 
2008-09 
% 
Fuel & Oil 33.7% 34.2% 
Staff Costs  17.4% 16.2% 
Material & Outside 9.0% 5.4% 

 
 
Repairs 
Hire of Aircraft 7.4% 7.4% 
Landing & Navigation 5.2% 4.5% 
Pax Amenities 3.2% 2.4% 
Commission 3.3% 2.1% 
Depreciation 4.1% 5.9% 
Handling 2.9% 2.6% 
Interest 3.8% 8.6% 
Other Expenses 9.9% 10.9% 
Total Expenditure 100.0% 100.0% 
 
The Interest costs include only the interest element and do not include the 
principal element.  The Interest costs are for both the working capital and aircraft 
borrowings.” 
A. Reasons for Losses 
3.8 When asked to give in detail  the reasons for losses by NACIL , the Company 
replied the following:-   
“The losses in NACIL were mainly due to the following factors: 
1) Decline in passenger load factor due to competition both on domestic and 
 international term. 
2) Decline in projected yield due to the large scale expansion of capacity by 
 low cost carriers. 
3) Increase in financing cost due to aircraft acquisition and increasing  
 working capital. 
4) Increase in depreciation expenditure and aircraft maintenance cost. 
5) Increase in wage bill and other staff cost due to implementation of various 
 agreements. 
6) Increase in aviation turbine fuel cost. 
 
The merged entity NACIL suffered a loss of Rs 2,226.16 crores in 2007 -08 an 
increase of Rs 1537.94 crores (which is around 3.23 times the combined losses 
of the erstwhile entities) 

 
 
The losses of the combined entity in 2007 -08 were analysed in detail by the 
Board and the reasons attributable for the losses were discussed and approved 
by the Board.  
The main reasons for the losses are -  
 Decline in passenger load factor due increased competition (from 65.6% to 
63.8%) 
 Decline in yields  (from Rs 3.38/Pkm to Rs 3.22/Pkm) 
 (Combined effect of the above two resulted in a decline in Passenger revenue 
by Rs 288 crores from Rs 10242 crores in 2006 -07 to Rs 9954 crores in 
2007-08) 
 Decline in Freight revenue (by Rs 74.98 crores from Rs. 747.63 crores to Rs 
672.65 crores)  
 Increase in staff costs ( Rs 495 crores from Rs 2729.91 crs to Rs 3224.50 
crores) 
 Increase in financing costs both for working capital and aircraft borrowings ( 
Rs 425 crores from 276.12 crores to Rs 701.30 crores )  
 Increase in Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF ) cost ( Rs 305 crs from Rs 5947.35 
crs to Rs 6252.51 crs) 
 Increase in depreciation expenditure (Rs 31.74 crs from Rs 729.92 crs to Rs 
761.6 crs) 
 
It may be pertinent to note that the entire Aviation industry ha s been affected 
globally due to the recessionary trends and the International Air Transport 
Association (IATA) have been forecasting huge losses for the entire industry and 
in September 2009 announced a revised global financial forecast predicting 
airline losses totaling US$11 billion in 2009 as against the previous prediction of 
US$ 9 billion. The same is primarily due to rising fuel prices and exceptionally 
weak yields. IATA also revised its loss estimates for 2008 from a loss of US$10.4 
billion to a loss of US$16.8 billion.  
As per IATA, three main factors are driving the expected losses: 
Demand: Passenger traffic is expected to decline by 4.0% and cargo by 14% for 
2009.  
Yield: Yields are expected to fall 12% for passenger and 15% for cargo. The fall 
in passenger yield is led by the 20% drop in demand for premium travel. There is 
little hope for an early recovery in yields in either the passenger or cargo 
markets. 
Fuel: Spot oil prices have been driven up sharply in anticipation of improved 
economic conditions.  
IATA expects losses to continue into 2010 with the industry expected to report a 
US$3.8 billion net loss. This is based on a limited revival of growth in traffic 

 
 
volumes of 3.2% for passenger and 5% for cargo; very little increase in yields of 
1.1% for passenger and 0.9% for cargo and oil at US$72 per barrel. 
The position of airlines in India is also similar and there is pressure both on yields 
as well as load factors as there is excess capacity in the market and demand has 
shrunk. 
Moreover all the synergy benefits expected out of the merger have not 
materialised in full as subsequent to the merger, the entire aviation landscape 
has changed significantly due to Global Recession, increase in fuel prices and 
the collapse of major finan cial institutions in USA. Any merger process is a time 
consuming exercise and quite a number of issues/components/policies need to 
be sorted out. Strategies of the erstwhile entities have to be co -related and 
discussions with Unions are one of these major exercises. A common IT system 
is required to fully realize the merger benefits and is one of the conditions for 
joining Star Alliance. The common PSS system is not yet in place.” 
 
3.9 NACIL was asked to explain why they were suffering losses even when during 
2008 and 2009, their fleet size and load factor ha d increased.  NACIL replied the 
following:- 
“The combined fleet strength of the two erstwhile entities as on 31 St March, 2007 
was 106 aircraft and the fleet size increased to 122 on 31 st March, 2008 and 
reduced to 119 aircraft as on 31st March, 2009.  
There is a mismatch in the age of the aircraft, The aircraft are either below 5 
years or are over 15 years. The breakup of the aircraft as on 31.3.09 is given 
below: 
Aircraft type  Below 5 Years 5-15 years over 15 years 
B777-200LR 5   
B777-300ER  5   
B777-200ER/A  4  
B747-400  2   4 
A310      6 
A310 Frtr      4 
A319   15   
A320    47 
A321 12   
A330   2  
B737-200   11 
747-300   1 
Beechcraft  1  
Total  37 9 73 
 

 
 
As can be seen from above the new fleet has helped reduce the average age but 
a large number of aircraft are over 15 years.  
As the new aircraft are joining the fleet NACIL is returning all the leased aircraft 
and no new leases are being finalized. The tot al number of leased aircraft 
returned during 08 -09 was 11 and 8 more are to be returned in 09 -10. The new 
fleet are being deployed on all the major trunk routes. 
The delivery of the new aircraft did result in improved performance of NACIL on 
account of sch edule integrity. However, primarily due to the fact that the new 
deliveries coincided with the global recessionary trends and huge rise in fuel 
prices, losses were suffered not only by NACIL but by the entire Aviation industry 
in India and globally.   
Most of the routes made cash losses due to fall in revenues, due low load factors 
and drop in yields, while the costs increased due to rapid increase in fuel costs 
and due to spiraling infrastructure expenditure. Financing costs also began to 
increase as inter est rates began to rise and the new fleet resulted in increased 
depreciation charge.  
In 2009, although the load factors have shown a small increase, the yields have 
dropped significantly due to increased competition especially from low cost 
carriers and excess capacity in the market. 
The details of the load factors for the last two years compared to the combined 
load factor of the erstwhile entities is given below: 
Year   Pax Load factor 
% 
Yield per PKM   (Rs) 
2006-07 AI 63.8 2.72 
 IC 68.8 4.10 
 Combined 65.6 3.25 
2007-08 NACIL 63.8 3.22 
2008-
09(prov.)     
NACIL 59.6 3.50 
2009-10          
(April- Sep)                  
NACIL 62.7 2.97 
 
  

 
 
 
3.10 On being asked how much the procurement of the new fleet was responsible for 
the present loss, NACIL replied thus:- 
 
“The following are the interest and depreciation charges on account of the new 
fleet acquisition:                           
(Rs. in Million) 
Year  
   
Interest Depreciation 
2006-07  2761.2      7093.1 
2007-08 7013.0                         7616.6 
2008-09 16658.8                       12258.9 
2009-10 25660.0 13800.0 
 
B. Turn-around plan  
 
3.11 On being asked to give salient features of any turnaround plan made by NACIL , 
including details of reliefs and concessions sought from the Government  and the 
present status of the turnaround plan, NACIL replied the following:- 
 
“The following initiatives have been taken by the Management in bringing a 
turnaround in the performance of the company: 
(A) Cost Reduction: (Target Rs.1500 crs) 
01 Rationalization of loss making routes both on the domestic and 
international sector 
02 Rationalization of meal uplifts at domestic and foreign stations. 
03 Reduction of contractual employment and outsourcing of work 
04 Rationalization of man power at Indian and Foreign Stations by closure of 
certain offline offices. 
05 Return of aircraft on lease. 
06 Study on Fuel Efficiency Gap Analysis under which IATA has been 
appointed to make an in depth study of the F uel Efficiencies at various 
levels. The recommendations made by IATA are being considered at the 
highest level by a Strategic Group and are at various stages of 
implementation. These measures include reduction of the weight of the 
aircraft, following a cos t index prescribed by IATA both on domestic and 
international routes, implementation of a computerized Flight Planning & 
Monitoring System, use of Ground Power Units instead of Auxilliary Power 
Units, optimization of reserve fuel carried on board, etc. 
07 Rationalization of wage agreements including PLI Scheme. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
(B) Revenue Enhancement – (Target Rs.1200  crs.) 
 
1. Increase in Passenger Revenue through improved marketing initiatives. 
2. Increase in Cargo Revenue through better utilization belly space on line 
flights and cargo freighters. 
3. Initiative for on board revenue 
4. Increase in excess baggage revenue. 
5. Farming out engine MRO / Line Maintenance to a separate Strategic 
Business Unit resulting in better utilization of capacity and optimum utilization 
of manpower resources. 
6. Alternate use of properties 
7. Aviation Training Services. 
 
(C)      Relief / Concession sought from the Government. 
1. One time Equity support of  Rs.10,000 crs for repayment of aircraft principal. 
2. Rs.10,000 crs interest -free, 10 year loan with 5 year moratorium to support 
working capital reduction  
a. From current 15000 to 5000 crs. 
b. Balance 5000 to be securitized and converted into a long -term 
debt. 
3. Setting up of Group of Ministers to supervise turnaround of Air India 
4. Support of Bilaterals. 
a. Freezing / roll-back, 6th freedom to be checked 
b. Review access (points/frequency) arrangements in Bilateral 
Agreements. 
5. Support for preferred slot negotiation at key international airports (timing, 
quantum) especially at Frankfurt hub. 
6. Permission to defer/cancel part of new aircraft order as well as pre -mature 
return of old leased aircraft. 
7. Ensure government support travel only Air India and are allowed to avail of 
commercial concessions / promotion offers (especially Frequent Flyer miles) 
8. Aviation Turbine Fuel as „declared goods‟. Pricing in line with international 
„basket‟ price. 
9. Amend definition of workman under IDA 1947 to exclude Pilots, Flight 
Engineers and Aircraft Maintenance Engineers from purview of the said Act. 
a. Exemption from Contract Labour (Aboiltion and Regulation) Action 
1970 to enable competitive outsourcing. 
10. Prudential norms to be applied by banking industry on loans to Civil Aviation 
Sector. 
11. Restructuring of top management team and appointment of Indep endent 
Directors (Finance, IT, Hospitality, Legal and Economic disciplines)……….. 
 
The turnaround plan has been presented to the Committee of Secretaries on 29 th 
August, 2009 wherein the action plan has been broadly divided into 0 -9 months, 

 
 
9-18 months &  18-36 months. These are broadly segregated under Operational 
efficiency, Product Improvement, Organization Building & Financial 
Restructuring.  
The ownership for implementing the targets under each of this plan has been 
given to the various Functional Dir ectors / Executive Directors / General 
Managers. 
  0-9 months 9-18 months 18-36 months 
Goal Survival (Cash 
Conservation) 
Loss Reduction Profit focus 
Operational  
Efficiency 
• Improved aircraft 
utilization 
• Route profitability 
enhancement 
• Fast-tracking FEGA / 
Fuel Council 
• Material / 
Maintenance spend 
control 
• Rationalise 
Manpower costs  
– Redeployme
nt of 
operational 
manpower 
– Rationalisati
on of offline 
stations 
– Reduced 
outsourced / 
casual / 
IBOs 
• Other fixed / 
variable overheads 
reduction 
• Non-traffic revenue 
enhancement 
• Quick Win IT 
Initiatives (ARMS, 
Website, Fare 
tracking, Flight 
Planning) 
• BPR and IT 
enablement in 
-Commercial 
-Finance/ 
MMD 
MRO/ 
Engineering 
• Initiate review of 
In-sourcing and 
outsourcing 
opportunities 
• BPR and IT 
enablement 
– Other areas 
• Implementation 
of In-sourcing 
and outsourcing 
opportunities 
Product  
improvement 
• On-time 
performance 
• Customer surveys 
• Product consistency 
• PSS 
• Star Alliance entry 
• Brand-building 
& makeover  
• New markets/ 
fleet plans 
Organisation  • Operational & 
Business integration 
• Sales & Distribution 
• Manpower 
integration 
• HR Transformation 
• HR 
Transformation 
(cont) 

 
 
Building restructuring 
• Revamp union 
agreement / 
incentives 
• New Governance 
structure (Board etc) 
• Subsidiary 
Operationalisation 
 
  
  
• Spin – off non 
core businesses  
• (JV /Alliance)  
 
Financial  
Restructuring 
• Aircraft lease / 
purchase review 
• Capitalisation & debt 
restructure 
• Credit rating 
• Enterprise Risk 
Management  
• Preparation for 
IPO 
• IPO 
 
3.12 The Commit tee asked NACIL how they could prepare their turn around plan 
without finalizing the Annual report for the year 2008-09:- 
“As the provisional un-audited figures for 2008-09 were available, the turn around 
plan was based on the estimated figures available.  
3.13 NACIL were further asked to state what the provisional projections were for the 
same. In reply they submitted the following:-  
“The provisional figures for  2008-09 which are under audit for NACIL are given 
hereunder: 
Details      Rs Crs 
Operating Revenue    13225 
 Operating Expenses   18896 
 Operating Loss    (5671) 
  
Total Revenue    13479 
 Total Expenses    19179 
 Net Loss after tax    (5700) 
 
The audit process is on and the final figures should be available by the first 
fortnight of November 2009.” 
3.14 For measures already started for revi val of the company, NACIL was asked to 
give an a ccount of progress made till the present .  The details furnished by NACIL are 
given below:-  
“Some of the measures that have already commenced and made progress are 
enumerated below: 
 

 
 
1) Manpower Cost Rationalisation – 
Cost 
 Introduction of Leave without Pay scheme – Completed, 277 applications 
received 
 50% PLI cut – Board approval obtained, Alternate PLI scheme to be finalized 
by Dec 31, 09 
 Elimination of overtime  - Orders issued, operational from July 09 
 Rationalisation of contract & casual employees – Group constituted, to submit 
report by Oct 31, 09 
 Rationalisation of manpower outsourcing – Dec 31, 2009 
 
Productivity 
 Repositioning of Operating Personnel – Nov 09 
 Redeployment of surplus staff – staff identification 15 Sep 09, initiate 
redeployment Oct 09 
 Standard staffing policy & work practices – Policy to be formulated by Oct 09 
 Increased pilot utilization - 70 hours / month  - Oct 09 
 
2) Fuel Management  
 Appointment of Fuel Council – Completed 
 Fuel consumption tracking 
 Flight-wise & pilot-wise– Initiated in Aug 09 
 Fuel Management Information System – Jan 10 
 Tracking of fuel burn guarantees – In progress 
 Implementation of flight planning system – Mar 10 
 Plan for fuel consumption audit through Quarterly audits through IATA 
 Fuel hedging (setting up of a unit) – Oct-Dec 09 
 
3) Route Profitability Enhancement 
 Focus on top 20 loss making routes - Completed 
 Categorize target routes for Yield improvement focus – Completed 
 Load factor (LF) improvement focus – Completed 
 Cancellation/ restructuring– Completed 
 Yield improvement routes - Pricing strategy & responsibilities –30-Sept 
 LF improvement routes – Sales targets –30-Sept 
 Cancellation/ Restructuring routes – Completed for Winter Schedule 
 
 
 

 
 
4) Non-traffic Revenue Enhancement 
 On-Board Revenue  
 Assessment of Buy On Board scheme.  - In progress 
 Business plan for increasing ancillary revenue from onboard products such as 
third party advertisement, in-flight advertising, co-branding of products, on 
board sale of items, packaged products like insurance, etc. – In progress 
 
 Revenue from Properties 
 Inventory of real-estate - Sep 09 
 Appointment of real-estate advisor - Oct 09 
 Finalized plan - Mar 10 
 
Further the cost control measures initiated by NACIL in August 2008 and 
December 2008 have resulted in the reduced cost as detailed below : 
Sr. No. Cost Reduction Heads Impact 
1 Contractual / Casual 
employment outsourcing 
Anticipated savings of Rs.18 crores 
p.a. 
2 Material consumption and 
outside repairs and services 
Anticipated savings of Rs.580 crores 
during last one year 
3 Return of leased aircraft 11 aircraft returned during 2008 -09 
and 8 aircraft being returned 
4 Fuel conservation / 
efficiency 
Savings of Rs.131.23 crores up to 
September 2009 
5 Pool Vehicle / fuel etc.  Expected savings of Rs.5 crores p.a. 
6 Reimbursement of Tax on 
perks / mobile 
reimbursement 
Expected savings of Rs.2 crores p.a. 
7 Hotel accommodation / 
temporary postings / foreign 
Expected savings of Rs.10 crores p.a. 
8 Abolition of PSF and 
charging of fee in SOL 
tickets 
Expected savings of Rs.10 crores p.a. 
9 Inflight catering 
(rationalisation of meal 
uplifts) 
Expected savings of Rs.103 crores 
p.a. 

 
 
10 Other measures (reduction 
in overtime, relocation of 
EDs to India from abroad, 
curtailment of foreign posts, 
curtailment of late sitting 
allowances and restriction of 
leave encashment)” 
Expected savings of Rs.85 crores p.a. 
 
3.15 The Committee asked the Company to state the basis of assumption of the price 
of crude oil as $85 per barrel while preparing the turn -around plan for seeking 
governmental support as it formed about 38% of the total cost. The reply by NACIL is 
furnished below:- 
“The Revised Estimates for 2009 -10 were finalized around 10 th September, 2009 
and the crude price prevalent around that time was USD 71 -73 per barrel. Crude 
had slowly began to rise from its lows of USD 48 -50 per barrel in April 09 to USD 
70 per barrel and the outlook was that crude would be range bound in the coming 
months around USD 80-100 per barrel.  
Since crude prices are very volatile, reaching a peak of USD 147 in July 08 by 
rapidly rising from its lows of USD 60‟s and since the upward movement in crude 
had begun in August-September 2009, fuel costs were calculated at USD 85 per 
barrel. Crude is currently trading at USD 80 per barrel.” 
 
3.16 NACIL was  asked to state what efforts were being made t o restructure their 
financial system. In their written submission, they stated as under:- 
“A number of steps have been taken in order to cut cost and increase revenue.  
These include: 
a) Rationalization of certain routes which were incurring cash losses. 
b) Return of leased aircraft.  
c) Reduction in contractual employment. 
d) Rationalization of wage structure. 
e) Induction of new fleet to reduce maintenance cost.  
f)            Fuel efficiency to be improved through implementation of various       
 measures suggested by IATA.  
g) Increase in revenue through aggressive marketing strategies.  
h) Leveraging the company‟s MRO facilities and properties for earning   
 additional revenue.  
i)  Focus on increasing cargo revenue.  
 
The Government has also been approached to induct equity in order to improve 
the debt/equity ratio, strengthen the net worth and balance sheet of the company.”  

 
 
3.17 On being asked whether the Company was asking the Government to give them 
subsidy, NACIL replied thus:-  
“The Government has been approached to induct equity into the company to 
support the acquisition plan. The Government has also been approached for 
providing a GOI guarantee for Working Capital Loans which would reduce the 
interest cost.”   
3.18 The Committee stated that it was apparent that even after taking all the 
measures, the Company would not be in a sound financial situation  and asked w hat 
they intended to do about  the same.  In their written replies NACIL stated the following:- 
“Even after taking the measures for reduction of cost and increase in revenue, 
the company would not be able to reach a breakeven situation since the 
approximate revenue-expenditure gap is of the order of Rs.400 crores per month.  
In order, therefore, to achieve this, we have identified further areas of revenue 
enhancement and cost reduction.  Fuel will play a critical role in achieving the 
targeted savings and reduction in fuel cost would assist the company in 
achieving the targets planned.  The company is also examining the possibility of 
leasing out certain aircraft which are surplus to its requirement and reducing the 
size of its fleet to the most optimal size as well as increasing the utilization of the 
Airbus and Boeing fleet.”  
3.19 On being asked why, when the market was expanding and Air India and Indian 
Airlines are merged, the airline was reducing its targets from Rs.15,000 in 2008-09 to an 
expected business of Rs.12,680 crores in 2009-10, NACIL replied the following:- 
“The reduction of the target from Rs.15,000 crore in  2008 -09 to Rs. 12,680 crore 
in 2009-10 is mainly because of  reduction in yields.  It may be  mentioned that 
due to global recession, IATA has forecasted a loss of US$ 16.8 billion in 2008 
and US$ 11 billion   in 2009.  Due to a weak economic and revenue environment, 
several carriers across the globe have reported huge losses on account of 
pressure on yields and reduction in revenue/increase in cost.  
In the light of this, the company had reduced the tar get from what was 
contemplated earlier.”  
3.20 NACIL was asked to state the reasons that have been identified for not getting 
better business even though a consultant said that NACIL‟s fares are cheaper by $150 -
$160 compared to any international player. Given below is their reply:- 
“Air India‟s fares are put into the market after analysing the perception of our 
product in the mind of a customer. Our field stations and Headquarters units are 
in regular contact with the travel trade, corporate houses and vari ous 
associations. It is a continuous process of feedback and our fares are determined 
accordingly. We have in the past had a poor track record in terms of on -time 
performance, old aircraft being operated on some routes etc. which has had an 

 
 
adverse impact on the consumer choosing Air India as a preferred airline. With 
the new aircraft in our fleet and on -time performance improving, we have 
progressively improved our image in the market.”  
3.21 With regard to the financials of Air India, CMD,  NACIL submitted the following to 
the Committee in his oral statement:- 
“Now, we have submitted to the Government of India very clearly that even if I 
am able to do my operating expenses equal to operating revenue I still cannot 
pay for my interest on Rs. 16,000 crore which I have taken out. I cannot pay the 
repayment of my instalments for the aircrafts. In these two areas I cannot do and 
if something is not given to us then the only option is that if somebody else is 
able to take over the company and pay for this parti cular thing. What we have 
submitted to the Government is that we will be able to do what we can do best, 
that is current operations. We will try to reduce our current operations. We will try 
to make our expenses less and we will try to increase our revenue  based upon 
this one. In the winter schedule this year, from October 26 th onwards we have 
started, we have done a re -jigging of the entire system. Please bear with me on 
this issue, the number of aircrafts that I have got on hand and with the number of 
hours that we have to run, last year we were using 9 hours per aircraft. Now, in 
this winter season we have increased it to 13 hours per aircraft and in the next 
year summer we are going to increase it to 16 hours. For doing that one I have to 
keep my engineering staff in some other airports also. I have to do transfers and 
get them trained to do that job. We are going to save 523 crore on the new 
network which we have done. Hon. Members are present here, there was a hue 
and cry about our flights from Kerala. People said that why certain flights were 
removed and some flights were given to Jet and all that, actually what we have 
done is that the total number of kilometres offered on that sector is higher than 
what we have given earlier. I am saving Rs. 113 crore . Somewhere you have to 
allow me to get the balance right where when I rationalise a route and save the 
money without cutting down some other costs and all that, allow me that. If you 
do not allow me that then I am not able to do this and then at the end o f the day I 
am going to have Rs. 400 to Rs. 500 crore cash deficit every month. Every last 
10 days of the month of mine are spent trying to ring up banks trying to get 
additional money. No bank is going to give and in fact this hon. Committee has 
seen 100s of public sector companies and 100 other companies, no where the 
working capital is more than 25 per cent of the total revenue. My revenue is 
going to be Rs. 12,000 crore and then my working capital should be just Rs. 
4,000 crore. Today my working capital  has shot to Rs. 16,000 crore and nobody 
is going to pay me any money. So, I have been stuck in this issue. So, first issue 
is the civil aviation losses and the second issue is the merger issue and the third 
issue is the public sector undertaking issue. We  ourselves have a legacy issue. 
We have opened up offices in every city. We have got two offices, we have got 
an Air India office and an Indian Airlines office and both rent we are paying and 
we trying to integrate that. Everywhere there is a duplication o f services. So, I 
have to find out a solution for the duplication of services. Then comes the public 
sector inefficiency per se. When I say public sector inefficiency, I am not 

 
 
mentioning public sector per se and all that but hon. Members have raised an 
issue that you are still behaving like a Government employee and not behaving 
like a corporate employee like that. We have to bring in a corporate culture 
change in the company itself if we really want to survive. Now, what has 
happened in that case is the m arketing effort in the domestic sector is not very 
strong. So, we have to find a very strong marketing sector to do this job. Our 
marketing sector thinks that sitting in the office, giving four calls is sufficient. But 
it is not like that. Our marketing people will have to go out in the field. If they have 
to go the field and all that then I have to change the conditions and push them 
around to go ahead.  
So, what we have decided is that we will be removing outsourced and contract 
employees in the airport.  We will train our own employees, who are sitting in the 
offices, and push them into airports.  So, I can cut my contract cost and 
outsourcing cost.  But I cannot terminate the outsource contract overnight.  I 
have to wait for them to finish.  Apart from t hat I will have to train my employees.  
So, there is a very serious resistance in the company even to shift from the city 
office to the airport.  I would request the Committee to kindly delve on this issue. 
Business is changing.  If you want to do good ser vice, we need to be at the 
airport. Sitting in Connaught Place, I cannot service the customers in the airport.  
45 to 50 per cent of my staff is not in airport.  They are sitting outside.  If there is 
a problem in the airport and if you make a call, the ca ll goes to somewhere 
outside in the city and some Manager will have to pick it up and he will have to 
give the solution.  Now, the solution is not made available locally there.  So, I 
need to appoint a General Manager in the airport itself to get all the i ssues 
settled.  When I tried to shift them, they are refusing to go. Business is changing 
and redeployment is a must.  Redeployment has to be done.  This is an 
indulgence I want from the Committee.  So, I tried to just briefly tell about the 
issues which are coming.  At present the depreciation cost is Rs. 1,000 crore and 
the interest is Rs. 1,600 crore.  If we remove that, the operational losses will be 
lesser.  The balance is on fuel price increase and loss of revenue.  Earlier I was 
getting Rs. 3.57 per km. Now, I am getting only Rs. 2.92 per km.  Now, there is 
no way I can increase the price.  I cannot increase the price because as the hon. 
Members know passengers have got choices today.  But if I reduce my price, my 
yield will further go down.  So, the issue is, as the Manager, can I have my cost 
less than what I am getting from the market?  Then only will I be able to survive.  
This is what Dr. Raut was mentioning.  In my book you cannot see anything 
which can give the confidence that the company will e ver make a profit in the 
next two or three years.  One may think as to what is the use of giving these Rs. 
5,000 crore to Rs. 6,000 crore to a company like NACIL.  So, what we have 
asked the Government of India is that for the next six months I have a cash  
problem because I have to pay salaries, etc.  Most of the payment will go 
towards the fuel.  If I do not make the payment, my aircraft will not run.  Now, the 
position has become so tight that I do not have money to pay for engine spares.  
In January and December, if you have another meeting on NACIL, I will have to 
submit to you shamefully saying that now the aircraft are on the ground because 
the engine spares are not available. Engine spares are not manufactures in 

 
 
India.  They are all manufactured abro ad.  They are all international companies.  
They will simply write one letter and they will stop it.  They are refusing to 
despatch current engine spares to us unless I make payment in advance.  Then, 
there is a question about lease rentals.  Why my lease has gone very high?  We, 
in the next three years, are going to make the lease rental cost zero. We want to 
remove all the rentals because we do not want to pay.” 
3.22 The Committee asked the Ministry of Civil Aviation to explain what steps along 
with the t imeframe the Ministry had  undertaken/proposing to undertake for pulling Air 
India (NACIL) out of its financial mess .  NACIL stated the following in their written 
replies:-  
 
“NACIL has already made presentations to the Committee of Secretaries on 25 th 
July, 2009 & 29 th August, 2009 in respect of its turnaround plan towards cost 
reduction & revenue enhancement (copies of these presentations were already 
submitted to COPU). 
  
The time frame has broadly been classified under 6 / 12 / 18 months to achieve 
certain specific targets. 
 
The Group of Ministers (GOM) considered the turnaround plan of NACIL in its 
meetings held on 21st October, 2009 and 12th November, 2009 and decided upon 
the financial package for the airline.  The recommendations of the GOM are 
being placed before the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).”  
 
3.23 In this regard, during the oral evidence of representatives of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, the Committee stated the following:- 
“About the tur naround plan, NACIL is in the red with a deficit of Rs. 8000 crore 
and this figure is increasing day by day. To the best of my knowledge and belief 
means, if the turnaround plan is for say five years and if it is implemented, at the 
end of the fifth year, you should be able to say confidently that you are out of 
debt and danger and now you are making profit. Nowhere does the turnaround 
plan explains or spells out the programme so that at the end of the third year, you 
are out of debt and red.  
So, then, what is your turnaround plan? As my colleague has said, if you are 
eating up the Government‟s money or the peoples‟ money and still not been able 
to make profit, then why should the Government come forward and give its kitty 
to you?  After all, t his is public money and you need to look at it.  Every time, it 
has been said, per aircraft employee ratio is worst in India. It is not so and if it is 
so, then there are reasons behind it.  I am associated with some of the unions 
and associations of the A ir India employees and, therefore, I will tell you that we 
should not compare ourselves with other nations as far as per aircraft manpower 
 

 
 
is concerned because the services that we render and the services that the other 
aircraft render are different. Our e ating habits are different and, our dining 
arrangements are different.  Therefore, it is bound to happen that this ratio will be 
more.”  
  

 
 
 CHAPTER 4.  
FLEET MANAGEMENT 
4.1 Regarding the fleet management practices of the Company , the details as 
provided by NACIL are given below:-  
“As far as Engineering Department of NACIL(A) is concerned, the aircraft are 
scheduled for operation as per the route plan and time -table decided by the 
Commercial Department.  To meet the above schedule, maintenance checks are 
carried out as per the maintenance check schedules recommended by the 
manufacturers of aircraft and approved by DGCA, India.  In addition to the above 
routine maintenance, we also rectify the snags as and when occurred on the 
aircraft. 
There are two aspects of fleet management: 
a) Planning for type and number of aircraft to buy; 
b) Purchase of the aircraft, its delivery, checking, maintenance and 
operation. 
The part a) is usually handled by a Committee of Executive Directors of Planning, 
Commercial, Finance, Engineering and Operations Departments of NACIL.  Most 
of the studies are co-ordinated by the Fleet Planning Department. 
NACIL takes a long term view of fleet and network by looking at the company‟s 
strategy, development of network, characteristics of aircraft a vailable, 
performance of aircraft in use and their phase out plans.  NACIL develops a long 
term plan for aircraft induction and deployment. 
The part b) is mainly done by the Engineering Department of NACIL with 
assistance from Finance Department during pur chase and Operations 
Department for delivery and operation. 
The fleet management practices of NACIL(I) are to ensure availability of required 
number of aircraft for schedule operations and to keep the remaining number of 
aircraft under scheduled maintenance activity at any given time.   
NACIL(I) follows a preventive maintenance programme formulated in 
consultation with the aircraft manufacturers and approved by the DGCA.  This 
programme aims at ensuring the airworthiness of aircraft at par with worldwide 
standards. 
To maintain our aircraft as per the required Quality Standards, an assessment is 
done for the available Engineering infrastructure in house or whether to send 
aircraft, engines and components abroad for repairs.  This assessment forms the 
basis of number of aircraft in our fleet to be under maintenance and number of 
aircraft which can be made available for scheduled operations. This is a 
continuous process, which ensures optimum utilization of the aircraft fleet.”   

 
 
4.2 Details regarding „groundi ng of aircraft‟ for want of engines/schedule 
maintenance and loss suffered by the Company on this account are given below:-   
“In last two years there has been no grounding of aircraft in NACIL (A) fleet due 
want of engines/ schedule maintenance and theref ore there is no loss to the 
Company on this account.  In order to ensure safety of the aircraft and 
passengers, all aircraft in NACIL(A) fleet including engines, APUs, components & 
accessories fitted on these aircraft are maintained to the highest airworth iness 
standards.  The aircraft are considered airworthy provided the maintenance is as 
per approved schedule/ programme and all mandatory modifications stipulated 
by the DGCA as well the regulatory authorities of aircraft manufacturing countries 
are incorp orated.  All the aircraft in NACIL (A)‟s fleet are maintained to the 
highest airworthiness condition and meet all the requirements of the regulatory 
authorities. 
“In NACIL (I), as on date i.e. 24 th September 2009, 4 A320 family aircraft  (3  
A320 plus 1 A319)  are undergoing major maintenance i.e. „C‟ Checks(1 at 
Hyderabad,1 at Kolkata and 2 at Delhi) and 5 A320 family aircraft(4 A320 plus 1 
A321) are undergoing „A‟ Check (1 at Mumbai and 4 at Delhi).All the A320 
aircraft  under checks require serviceable  engines for completion of the checks. 
In addition, two(2) A320 aircraft are on ground specifically due non -availability of 
serviceable engines.” 
A. Fleet Acquisition 
4.3 The Committee asked for the d etails of the plans of acquisition of aircraft for 
NACIL‟s fleet  and details regarding the number of aircraft ordered, how many have 
been inducted and details of review, if any, of acquisition . NACIL submitted the 
following:- 
“Erstwhile Air India had placed an order for acquisition of 50 Long Range Aircraft 
in three different categories (viz. 8 nos. of B777 -200LR, 15 nos. of B777 -300ER 
and 27 nos. of B787‟s.   
Erstwhile Indian Airlines had placed an order for 43, A320 family aircraft viz. 19 
nos. of  A319, 20 nos. of A321 and 4 nos. of A320s. 
Air India Charters Limited had placed an order for 18 nos. of B737-800 aircraft. 
The deliveries of these aircraft commenced from October 2006 and are being 
progressively inducted in a phased manner.  The details of the aircraft type wise 
inductions till date, and the balanc e deliveries of aircraft for NACIL are provided 
type-wise below:- 
  

 
 
Aircraft Induction pattern for NACIL*A), NACIL(I) & AIE-2009 till 2014 
(Updated based on Revised Assumptions/Actual Deliveries-As on 16 Sep 2009) 
 Acft 
ordered 
Inducted 
till date 
Future Induction Pattern  
   2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Total 
B777-
200LR 
8 8       0 
          
B777-300 
ER 
15 8 Sep Apr, 
May, 
Jul,Nov 
May,Aug    7 
          
B787-8 27 0   Apr(4), May, 
Jun(3),Jul(3),
Aug,Sep,Oct,
Nov 
Sep,Oct 2nd 
Qtr(2),3rd 
Qtr 
1st 
Qtr,2nd 
Qtr(6) 
27 
          
A319 19 14 Sep,Oct,
Nov,Dec 
Jan     5 
          
A320 4 0  Feb(2),
Mar(2) 
    4 
          
A321 20 15 Oct,Nov,
Dec 
Jan,Apr     5 
          
B737-
800(AIE) 
18 16 Sep,Dec      2 
          
Total 111 61 10 11 17 2 3 7 50 
 
Note: Number in brackets indicate more than one aircraft being delivered in that month. 
NACIL Board at its 21 st Meeting held on 20 th August, 2009 directed the 
Management to actively pursue the cancellation of the orders for the six nos. of 
B777-300ER aircraft which wer e scheduled for delivery in 2010/11 with M/s. 
Boeing.  While a proposal addressing the issue from M/s. Boeing. “ 
4.4 The strength of the fleet of both Air India and Indian Airlines separately before 
the merger is given below:-  
“The details of the fleet (owned and leased) for erstwhile Air India and erstwhile 
Indian Airlines – as on August 2007 is given below: 
Air India 
Aircraft Type Number 
B747-400 7 
B747-400 Combi 1 
B747-300 Combi 2 
B777-200ER 4 
B777-200LR 3 
A310 14 

 
 
A310 Freighter 2 
B767-300 2 
B757-200 1 
B737-800 17 
Total 53 
 
Indian Airlines 
 
Aircraft Type Number 
A300 3 
A321 3 
A320 48 
B737 11 
DO228 2 
A319 6 
ATR42 4 
Total 77 
 
4.5 NACIL was asked w hether a comparative safety and fuel economy audit was 
carried out for the Airbus and the  Boeing aircraft before placing the order for acquiring 
more fleet. If the same was carried out, details of the audit and results thereof were also 
asked for.  The replies by NACIL are given below:- 
“Aircraft selection process involved a detailed technical  study of the  of the bids 
received from the aircraft manufacturers i.e. M/s. Airbus and M/s. Boeing. The 
technical analysis includes the sectorwise fuel consumption comparison and 
payload capability between the aircraft types which are under study. The fue l 
consumption comparison are made for those routes that have been included in 
the Request For Proposal (RFP) issued by erstwhile Air India and Indian 
Airlines.”  
4.6 NACIL further stated in their written replies:- 
“The comparisons are made between the aircraft type i.e. between Airbus and 
Boeing which were the candidate aircraft for selection. With regard to the safety, 
the airplanes which have been manufactured by the Boeing and Airbus are being 
operated by the var ious airlines in the world and there is no adverse report or 
experience by any of the operator.  If any such reports are made, the same will 
be available in the public media.   
During selection, a comparison is made with regard to the fuel consumption, pay  
load capability between the candidate aircraft Airbus and Boeing keeping in view 
their proposed route for the type of aircraft. Such type of analysis will provide a 
comparison which will help in making the final selection which of course will also 
be depe ndent on the pricing and the discounts that are being offered by the 
manufacturers. 

 
 
Safety Audit 
Both Boeing and Airbus aircraft are type certified by their respective regulatory 
authorities viz. FAA and EASA.  These certificates are accepted by DGCA.  The  
type certification involves detailed study of the aircraft systems design and 
testing including flight testing under defined conditions.  DGCA and consequently 
Air India  accept the Type Certificate issued by the manufacturers regulatory 
agencies.  Hence, no separate safety audit is conducted by Air India.  However, 
Air India ensures that additional requirement, if any, specified by DGCA are 
incorporated in the aircraft fuel audit. Air India also has the choice to select 
additional optional features which could enhance the safety and comfort features.   
Fuel Audit 
Detailed ground rules including fuel policy and route data are sent to the 
manufacturers for obtaining fuel burn and other data on the proposed routes. 
Similarly, fuel burn and other aircraft perf ormance related guarantees are 
obtained under defined conditions.  
These two sets of data are co -related to verify the estimates provided by the 
manufacturers.  The performance guarantees are incorporated in the purchase 
agreement and their compliance is v erified at the time of aircraft delivery. The 
fuel burn data provided by the manufacturers form a part of comparative 
economic evaluation of the aircraft on the proposed route structure.” 
4.7 In this connection, Chairman, COPU during oral evidence  observed the 
following:- 
“….apparently….you are projecting the Boeing 787 for its fuel efficiency and 
economy but I do not whether you have purchased that at all till today.  By 
projecting 787 you are using 777 and other aircraft.  A comparative study was  
made - I do not know whether it is right or wrong, you should enlighten us - which 
says that the Airbus 340 was more efficient, fuel economy was better.  It is for 
you to choose whichever aircraft you want.  It is not my business whether you 
should buy th is or that but projecting one thing, buying one thing and then 
ultimately the entire loss has to be lumped by these airlines but these are the 
things which have added to the misery of these two airlines.” 
4.8 The CMD, NACIL further elaborated in his oral evidence to the Committee:- 
“…..So, this question has been rightly asked that when there was a fuel efficient 
aircrafts, did we buy the fuel efficient aircrafts or not. There are two issues on 
hand. Firstly, the procurement of Air India wide body was done u nder Air India 
Board and the narrow body was done by Indian Airlines Board. There are two 
Boards on hand. This question did come up. It went to the Cabinet and the 
Government did approve it for procurement of both these sets of aircrafts, both 
different companies. The Boeing 777 and 787 was supposed to be the future fuel 
efficient aircraft. I will submit the details. Hon. Member Shri Raut had asked as to 

 
 
who took the decision, where the decision was taken and whether demonstration 
was made and all that. The  internal rate of return for a 787 is around 12.6 per 
cent. The internal rate of return for 777 which we have got now is 2.6 per cent. 
The entire project is profitable only when there is one 787 to be run along with a 
777. The aircraft 787, if you ask me t oday, do you want 787? I have to say that I 
want 787. My entire losses are because I am not operating Delhi – Kualalampur 
in the manner I want to run. I am not able to run profitably now on Gulf areas 
because I am using some smaller aircrafts where I can u se a larger aircraft. I am 
not able to run between Bangkok -Shanghai, Bangkok -Tokyo and other places 
where 787 can work beautifully or equivalent. I have no problem of 787 but give 
me an aircraft which is a medium haul aircraft which I can dominate. Now I h ave 
short haul aircraft which are running inside the domestic market and I have got 
long aircraft running on that side. But in between the profitable area where I need 
to operate is known as the medium haul aircrafts which are not available to me. 
The deli veries of 787 should have been complete by now. But it got delayed 
completely and we have slapped a compensation claim of 710 million dollars. 
Obviously, they have confirmed 145 million dollars they will pay as compensation 
for the delay and so we have tried to push the entire delivery. …..” 
4.9 In this regard, the Chairman, COPU stated the following during oral evidence of 
the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation:- 
“….you had mentioned that about 34 per cent of the money is spent on fuel.  You 
see, the 777 aircraft is a fuel guzzler, as we read from the reports.  I think you are 
getting the 787 aircraft because of its fuel economy.   
You also mentioned that there were lo sses in the Delhi -London and Delhi -New 
York sectors, which are long sectors, where you need aircrafts or carriers which 
are economic as far as the fuel consumption is concerned.  So, how long are the 
787s going to take?  Does it mean that till then we will  suffer these losses as far 
as the fuel consumption is concerned?” 
4.10 In reply Secretary, Civil Aviation submitted the following:- 
“One 787 is now coming in the middle of next year but we would really have to 
look at the old things because the exercise of looking between this and looking at 
the Airbus also which are much more fuel consumption is going on both in the 
Ministry and in Air India.  I must also tell you that the Ministry has two 
representatives on the Air India Board.  They are part of most of these 
restructuring committees and the manpower committees.  So, we are very much 
hands on in trying to see that this national carrier is brought back into rail.” 
4.11 NACIL were asked whether the Airbus A340 is more fu el efficient than the 
Boeing 787.  In reply, they submitted the following:- 
“In the techno -economic evaluation of the aircraft carried out, the Airbus A340 
aircraft was evaluated under the category of Ultra Long Range (ULR) and 
Medium Capacity Long Range (MCLR -A) aircraft and the corresponding models 

 
 
considered were A340 -500 and A3 40-600 respectively. The corresponding 
Boeing aircraft models that were studied for the comparative evaluation were 
B777-200LR in the ULR category and B777 -300ER in the MCLR -A category 
respectively.  As far as the B787 aircraft is concerned, this was a can didate 
aircraft in the MCLR -B category and the corresponding Airbus candidate in this 
category was A330-200.  The fuel efficiency of the B787 aircraft was found to be 
better than its competitor aircraft A330-200 by 17%.” 
4.12 It was asked if the orders were placed for Boeing 787 even before the prototype 
of the craft was there .  It was further asked as to w ho gave the demonstration and who 
gave the expert opinion; why was there a hurry to place the orders .  In reply, NACIL 
submitted the following:- 
“In resp onse to the RFP issued to the aircraft / engine manufacturers in 
December 2004, Boeing had offered the B787 (earlier named 7E7) aircraft and 
the aircraft program schedule was advised as under :  
- B787 Launch date : April 2004  
- Entry into service :  May 2008 
 
The aircraft selection process was in line with the normal aviation industry 
practices followed wherein many of the airline customers enter into purchase 
agreements with Aircraft manufacturers like Boeing and Airbus while the aircraft 
offered are in the development stage.” 
4.13 NACIL were asked by the Committee to state which aircraft NACIL had placed 
the order for what was the original time frame and schedule for induction of the new 
fleet, how far were they lagging behind and what were the reasons for the same.  In 
reply, NACIL submitted as under:- 
“The aircraft -wise details of the Contractual and Actual delivery dates are as 
under: 
TYPE OF 
AIRCRAFT 
ORDERED RECEIVED CONTRACT-
UAL DATE 
AIRCRAFT 
REG. NO. 
DELIVERY 
DATES 
      
B777-200LR 8 8 Feb-07 VT-ALA 26-Jul-07 
      Mar-07 VT-ALB 24-Aug-07 
      Apr-07 VT-ALC 27-Jul-07 
      Dec-07 VT-ALD 31-Dec-07 
      Feb-08 VT-ALE 03-Mar-08 
      Apr-09 VT_ALF 23-Jun-09 

 
 
      May-09 VT-ALG 28-Jul-09 
      Jun-09 VT-ALH 28-Aug-09 
B777-300ER 15 9 Jun-07 VT-ALJ 10-Oct-07 
      Jul-07 VT-ALK 31-Oct-07 
      Aug-07 VT-ALL 18-Dec-07 
      Apr-08 VT-ALM 04-Jun-08 
      May-08 VT-ALN 11-Jul-08 
      Apr-09 VT-ALO 13-Jul-09 
      May-09 VT-ALP 25-Aug-09 
      Jun-09 VT-ALQ 31-Aug-09 
      Jul-09 VT-ALR 29-Sep-09 
      .Apr10 VT-ALS .Apr10 
      .May10 VT-ALT .May10 
      .Jul10 VT-ALU .Jul10 
      .Nov10 VT-ALV .Nov10 
      .May11 VT-ALW .May11 
      .Aug11 VT-ALX .Aug11 
B787-800 27 Nil Sep-08 VT-ANA .Apr11 
      Mar-09 VT-ANB .Apr11 
      Oct-08 VT-ANC .Apr11 
      Mar-09 VT-AND .Apr11 
      May-09 VT-ANE .May11 
      Nov-08 VT-ANG .Jun11 
      Dec-08 VT-ANH .Jun11 
      Jan-09 VT-ANI .Jun11 
      Aug-09 VT-ANJ .Jul11 
      Oct-09 VT-ANK .Jul11 
      Oct-09 VT-ANL .Jul11 

 
 
      Dec-09 VT-ANM .Aug11 
      Dec-09 VT-ANN .Sep11 
      Dec-09 VT-ANO .Oct11 
      Jan-10 VT-ANP .Nov11 
      Feb-10 VT-ANQ .Sep12 
      Mar-10 VT-ANR .Oct12 
      Oct-10 VT-ANS .2ndQtr13 
      Nov-10 VT-ANT .2ndQtr13 
      Dec-10 VT-ANU .3rd13Qtr 
      Jul-11 VT-ANV .1stQtr14 
      Aug-11 VT-ANW .2ndQtr14 
      Aug-11 VT-ANX .2ndQtr14 
      Sep-11 VT-ANY .2ndQtr14 
      Sep-11 VT-ANZ .2ndQtr14 
      Sep-11 VT-NAA .2ndQtr14 
      Oct-11 VT-NAC .2ndQtr14 
B737-800 18 17 Nov-06 VT-AXH 30-Nov-06 
      Dec-06 VT-AXI 19-Dec-06 
      Jan-07 VT-AXJ 09-Jan-07 
      Jan-07 VT-AXM 16-Jan-07 
      Jan-07 VT-AXN 27-Jan-07 
      Feb-07 VT-AXP 14-Feb-07 
      May-07 VT-AXQ 14-May-07 
      Jul-07 VT-AXR 13-Jul-07 
      Jul-07 VT-AXT 26-Jul-07 
      Sep-07 VT-AXU 09-Oct-07 
      Jan-08 VT-AXV 15-Jan-08 
      May-08 VT-AXW 20-Jun-08 

 
 
      Jul-08 VT-AXX 30-Jul-08 
      Oct-08 VT-AXZ 02-Feb-09 
      Jan-09 VT-AYA 23-Apr-09 
      May-09 VT-AYB 28-Jul-09 
      Jul-09 VT-AYC 29-Sep-09 
      Oct-09 VT-AYD .Dec09 
A-321 20 17 Apr-08 VT-PPA 03-Jul-07 
      May-08 VT-PPB 05-Aug-07 
      Jun-08 VT-PPD 19-Aug-07 
      Jul-08 VT-PPE 05-Dec-07 
      Aug-08 VT-PPF 15-Dec-07 
      Sep-08 VT-PPG 17-Jan-08 
      Oct-08 VT-PPH 26-Apr-08 
      Nov-08 VT-PPI 19-Jun-08 
      Dec-08 VT-PPJ 03-Jul-08 
      Jan-09 VT-PPK 24-Aug-08 
      Feb-09 VT-PPL 15-Jan-09 
      Mar-09 VT-PPM 13-Feb-09 
      Apr-09 VT-PPN 02-Jul-09 
      May-09 VT-PPO 07-Aug-09 
      Jun-09 VT-PPQ 29-Aug-09 
      Jul-09 VT-PPT 01-Nov-09 
      Aug-09 VT-PPU 29-Nov-09 
      Sep-09   .Dec09 
      Oct-09   .Jan10 
      Nov-09   .Apr10 
A-319 19 17 Sep-06 VT-SCF 19-Oct-06 
      Oct-06 VT-SCG 20-Oct-07 

 
 
      Nov-06 VT-SCH 31-Oct-07 
      Dec-06 VT-SCJ 17-Nov-07 
      Jan-07 VT-SCI 02-Dec-07 
      Feb-07 VT-SCK 20-Dec-07 
      Mar-07 VT-SCL 15-Oct-08 
      Apr-07 VT-SCM 09-Nov-08 
      May-07 VT-SCN 09-Nov-08 
      Jun-07 VT-SCO 06-Mar-08 
      Jul-07 VT-SCP 01-May-09 
      Aug-07 VT-SCQ 30-.May09 
      Sep-07 VT-SCR 01-Aug-09 
      Oct-07 VT-SCS 02-Sep-09 
      Nov-07 VT-SCT 01-Oct-09 
      Dec-07 VT-SCU 29-Oct-09 
      Jan-08 VT-SCV 29-Nov-09 
      Feb-08   .Dec09 
      Mar-08   .Jan10 
      Apr-08     
A-320 4 0 Dec-09   .Feb10 
      Jan-10   .Feb10 
      Feb-10   .Mar10 
      Mar-10   .Mar10 
 
The reasons for the delays are as under: 
B737/B777 
Initial eight B777 aircraft were delayed due to late delivery of the seats to Boeing.  
Besides, seven B777 and five B737 aircraft were delayed due to a strike in 
Boeing. 
 

 
 
B787  
As shown in the attached table, the originally scheduled deliveries of the B787 
aircraft per Purchase agreement were to commence effective September 2008. 
Boeing delayed the deliveries due various technical reasons. Now, Boeing have 
advised that the deliveries to NACIL will commence in April 2011.” 
4.14 It was queried as to whether N ACIL‟s maintenance capability was  in tune with 
their current acquisition of fleet. If not, what steps had  been taken to retain / reskil l the 
maintenance personnel.  In their written submission, NACIL stated as under:- 
“NACIL‟s maintenance capability is in tune with the current acquisition of fleet. It 
has got proper infrastructure as well as trained manpower to carry out 
maintenance of aircraft .Some new facilities  for in-house maintenance/overhaul 
of new engines and APU types as well as for some components are in the 
process of setting up based on economic study.” 
4.15 The Committee asked NACIL that a t a time when their revenues were barely 
Rs.7,000 crores and when  they had to pay an interest of nearly Rs.6,500 crores per 
annum, what prompted NACIL to go in for a new fleet costing thousands of crores of 
rupees (approximately Rs.44,000 crores). In reply, NACIL stated as under:- 
“Both the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines had ageing fleet and were unable 
to induct new fleet during the past several years, whereas the competitors had 
brand new fleet and offered a superior product. Project reports for the acquisition 
of 68 aircraft (8 B777 -200LR, 15 B777 -300ER, 27 B 787-8 and 18 B737 -800 for 
its LCC Air India Express) by the erstwhile Air India were submitted in May, 2005 
and the acquisition of 43 aircraft (19 A319, 4 A320 and 20 A321) by erstwhile 
Indian Airlines were submitted in April, 2002. 
Fleet acquisition plan by erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines were made in the 
backdrop of aviation market scenarios prevailing at that time and the prognosis of 
future market developments based on economic and industry indicators then. A 
brief description of the assumptions  which formed the basis for acquisition of 
aircraft were: 
 i) The Indian Air Market and specially outbound travel – both for business and 
for leisure – has also been growing much faster than inbound travel.  These 
trends are likely to continue.  
 ii) The d eclaration of several airports in India as international airports and 
increased operations by competitor airlines to/from interior points in India has 
resulted in the increased fragmentation of the Indian Air Market – particularly 
to/from short-haul destinations in the Gulf and South East Asia.  A fewer number 
of passengers are, therefore, willing to travel over AI‟s hubs at Mumbai and 
Delhi, necessitating  Air India to look at point -to-point operations from the 
interiors to various destinations. 

 
 
 iii)  Many foreign airlines have obtained huge increases in 3 rd/4th freedom 
markets between India and their home countries.  Moreover, they have also been 
able to gain access to interior points in India.  These airlines are using their 
excess capacity to funnel traffic between India and USA/UK/Europe through their 
respective hubs.  As a result of increased capacity deployment by competitor 
airlines, the international air market to/from India has become fiercely 
competitive. 
iv) The regulatory regime for internationa l air transport in India had also 
witnessed a significantly increased pace of liberalization. Airlines from the 
SAARC/ASEAN countries and the UK had been granted virtually unlimited 
access to the Indian air market, an Open Skies Agreement has been conclude d 
with the US, permission was granted to private domestic airlines in India to 
operate to international destinations in all countries As a result of these 
developments, a further quantum increase in the scale of competition in the 
international air transport market can be expected in the near future. 
 v) The Passenger Air Market to/from India grew at an average annual growth 
rate of around 6% during the period from 1990 to 2000 and further improvements 
were expected in the global economy and the continued b uoyancy, liberalization 
and globalization of the Indian economy was also visualized at that time. Based 
on this a long -term traffic growth rate of at least 7 to 8 % per annum was 
expected. 
An airline‟s capacity share is, inter alia, one of the primary dete rminants of its 
market share. It was then envisaged that erstwhile Air India will, therefore, have 
to increase its capacity deployment at a rate that is faster than the forecast traffic 
growth rate, in order to increase its capacity share and, therefore, i ts market 
share and thus a fleet acquisition plan of 50 new wide bodied and 18 new aircraft 
for Air India Express was made and ordered accordingly. 
Erstwhile Indian Airlines‟ plan to acquire 43 new Airbus A320 family aircraft was 
based on the backdrop of following assumptions and facts: 
i) Domestic air traffic grew at a compounded growth rate of 4.8% from 1993 -
94 to 2000 -01. As a result, working group on Civil Aviation has 
recommended annual traffic growth rate of 5% during 10 th Plan Period  
(2002-2007). 
ii) Working group on Civil Aviation after examining historical traffic growth 
rates and logistics of domestic operations had also recommended annual 
domestic cargo growth rate of 5% during 10th Plan Period. 
iii) Working group on Civil Aviation after taking into acc ount the forecast 
prepared by ICAO, IATA and aircraft manufactures had recommended an 
annual growth rate of 6% for international passenger carriage and 7.5% 
for international cargo carriage. 
iv) Complete phase out of A300 and B737 fleet in a phased manner was also 
planned while planning the acquisition of new fleet by the erstwhile Indian 
Airlines. 
 

 
 
 
Supplementary:  
The revenues of the two erstwhile entities were in the region of Rs 13,000 crore 
in 2004-05 when the project reports were finalized.  
The Total Revenue breakup was as under: 
2004-05  
        Rs crs  
Air India      7676.39  
Indian Airlines    5362.57 
Total     13038.96 
 
The average annual interest burden works out to approximately Rs 900 crores 
(Rs 650 for AI and Rs 250 for IC) and not Rs 6500 crores per annum 
In the case of Boeing Project for erstwhile Air India about 54.4% of the capacity 
was for replacement and the balance 45.6% was for growth. 
About 70% of the Airbus capacity was for replacement of the then existing fleet of 
A300 and B737 aircraft and for return of the leased aircraft and only about 30% 
the additional capacity was to cater to traffic growth.   
The fleet acquisition program was primarily an expansion cum replacement 
program.” 
4.16 During the course of oral evidence, the CMD,  NACIL st ated in this regard, as 
under:- 
“…..You had raised the issue of how can two loss making companies be merged 
together and what is the necessity for looking at the acquisition of aircraft and all 
that. The last acquisition that was done in Indian Airlines and Air India both was a 
long time back. Till the new aircrafts came, Air India more or less, 60 to 70 per 
cent of its entire routes were being run by leased aircrafts. There was no option 
for Indian Airlines and Air India at that time to either to say that we do not have 
any more aircrafts and I will run with only 20 aircrafts or lease it out. So, they 
leased out. So, what we are trying to do is that our aircrafts are old. All the 
aircrafts that are 20 years old or 29 years old we are trying to dispose them off 
and we also are returning all the leased aircrafts. One hon. Member mentioned 
as to why we are not returning all the leased aircraft at one shot. There are 
contracts in hand and when we ask them to return on one shot that means I will 
be taking out 46 aircrafts in one day or in one year. That means I will have to 
remove that many routes. We are not during that. What we are doing is if six 
aircrafts are coming in the next six months then we would like to release six 
aircrafts from this side. We would lik e to maintain something like 100 odd 
aircrafts in a two machine configuration. One in the Boeing side we have 

 
 
developed such a large infrastructure of Boeing engineering and on the other 
side we have developed a large Airbus engineering and these two are h ot today 
in the market. If I segregate this and ask for an IPO also, as an hon. Member had 
asked as to why we are not going in for bonds, nobody is going to invest money 
in Air India but everybody would like to invest money in the MRO activities. So, 
what we have decided is that we will concentrate on two machine configurations 
only and remove all the other machines, so that we have some synergies done 
on that hand and run that show on that basis. …….” 
B. Maintenance of Aircraft 
4.17 Details regarding the average operative life of an aircraft are given below:- 
“There are no norms stipulated for operative life of an aircraft beyond which 
aircraft are not considered as airworthy. 
Aircraft are considered airworthy as long as aircraft are maintained as per 
approved maintenance programme of DGCA and complying with all mandatory 
requirement stipulated by the DGCA as well as the regulatory authorities of the 
aircraft manufacturing countries.  All the aircraft in Air India‟s fleet are maintained 
in airworthy condition and meet all the requirements of the regulatory authorities. 
To maintain the aircraft in airworthiness condition, there is an elaborate system to 
check the airworthiness of aircraft. Manufacturers‟ recommendations as 
contained in Maintenance Planning Do cument (MPD) and approved by DGCA is 
scrupulously followed by Air India.  Every time an aircraft lands after operating a 
flight, it is required to undergo certain checks besides rectification of flight snags.  
Additionally, aircraft undergoes various check s at specified intervals in terms of 
flying hours/ flying cycles/ number of days. These inspections are carried out by 
qualified Aircraft Maintenance Engineers and the aircraft is certified as airworthy 
when it meets all the requirements laid-down.” 
4.18 Given below is a comparative statement of how long the aircraft are used in India 
versus international usage. 
“We had phased out our old aircraft when they were between the age of 20 to 25 
years. The reasons for phasing out the older aircraft from NACIL (A) ‟s fleet were 
due to high maintenance & operating costs.  Recently, we had phased out two 
Boeing 747-300 aircraft which were approximately 20 years of age. 
The phasing out the aircraft from the fleet depends upon the company policy of 
each operator. We und erstand that some of airlines like Singapore Airlines 
maintain their aircraft average age as 5 to 6 years, to keep the fleet younger.   
  

 
 
4.19 The details of the average cost of maintenance of aircraft, old and new  are as 
under. 
“There is no age limit of f light hour or flight cycle or calendar year   limit after 
which the aircraft in the NACIL(I) fleet should be grounded. However, it has been 
acknowledged that the maintenance of aircraft becomes more expensive with 
age.  This is because special inspections and modifications  for aging aircraft are 
undertaken and these may result in repair / replacement of structural 
components to ensure that the aircraft continue to be airworthy.  As a result, the 
operation of very old aircraft is more expensive. 
The maintenance cost of old aircraft is more than that of the new aircraft. As the 
aircraft are getting old, the inspection and the maintenance task to be performed 
on the aircraft, as stipulated by DGCA, manufacturers and other regulatory 
authorities, increases. Thi s includes Corrosion Prevention & Control Programme 
(CPCP), Structural Sampling Inspection Programme (SSIP), Mandatory 
Modifications, Service Bulletins etc. The material consumption of the old aircraft 
are also higher than that of new aircraft. 
It is seen that the maintenance material consumption of a new aircraft is low. As 
the aircraft ages, the cost of maintenance increases to a maturity level at around 
7th or 8th year of service. Thereafter, by about 12th year, the ageing affect sets 
in. As far as the A irframe is concerned, the cost of materials in the first year is 
about 40% of the mature level (8th year cost). After about 12/13th year in 
service, this cost increases at a rate of 1% per 1000 flight hours. By about 20th 
year the Airframe cost is about 25% more than the mature level. 
In case of Engine, the cost of materials is as low as 10% in the first year of 
operation. It quickly rises to about 70% in the 5th year and 100% by 8th year of 
operation. Thereafter, the ageing effect sets in and the cost incr eases to about 
22% over the maturity level in 20th year. 
In addition to the increase in cost of maintaining the aircraft, the ground time 
required for carrying out the maintenance increases dramatically in the later 
years. This is due to the corrosion, fat igue and scarcity of spares. As aircraft 
would go out of production, it becomes difficult to procure materials required for 
maintenance of the old aircraft. This increases the ground time, affecting the 
revenue earning potential of the aircraft and thereby the economics of the aircraft 
operations. Besides the operational reliability of the aircraft suffers from snags 
and defects which are more frequent in the older aircraft. 
Hence most of the airlines phase out their aircraft by 15 -20 years. Some airlines 
like Singapore Airlines, have chosen to phase out their aircraft at the age of 
about 7 years to maintain an image of young fleet. Besides, they have the 
advantage of high utilization with these aircraft on which the maintenance 
requirements are rather low in the initial years.” 
 

 
 
C. Phasing out of old Aircraft 
4.20 Details about phasing out of old aircraft are given below:-   
“The Strategic direction of NACIL is to progressively phase out older aircraft and 
induct new aircraft to replace their capacity.  New Aircraft will entail higher capital 
costs, but will have better passenger appeal, higher operating reliability and we 
will be able to achieve higher aircraft utilization levels. 
The NACIL Board has taken a decision to phase out 11 nos. of A320 inducted in  
1989 and 1990, which are not under sale and lease back.  It is our intention to 
phase out the initial 30 nos. of A320 aircraft, inducted by erstwhile Indian Airlines 
with V2500 – A1 engines and bogey type landing gears, at the earliest, with the 
availability of replacement aircraft.  Most of the A320 family regional operations, 
will be replaced with the B787, when it is received. 
Out of the eight owned A310s, four have been converted to freighters.  The 
balance four, under sale and lease back upto 2012, al so need to be phased out.  
However, these aircraft are to be replaced by the B787, whose delivery has been 
delayed by Boeing. 
 All the wet leased aircraft are also being progressively phased out.   
With the availability of 777 -300ERs, the B747 -400s are bei ng phased out of 
commercial operations.  Since these aircraft are being used for VVIP operations, 
their eventual phase out is depended on the transfers of 2 / 3 aircraft to the 
Government. 
Although phase out of older aircraft is dictated by commercial / st rategic 
constraints, phasing out of aircraft which are presently under sale and lease back 
would entail payment of penalty for premature termination of the leases.  
Therefore the final phase out decisions will be taken on a case by case basis.” 
4.21 NACIL was questioned whether instead of phasing out the old fleet over a span 
of years, is it not better to finish the process in one go .  In reply, NACIL stated the 
following:- 
“The phasing out of old fleet is done over a span of years and normally coincides 
with the induction of new fleet. The induction of new aircraft is also over a span of 
few years to ensure that no disruption to our route network is there due to non -
availability of aircraft. 
The aircraft were inducted in a phased manner over a period of t ime. Also, the 
replacement aircraft are also inducted in a phased manner. Therefore the older 
aircraft are phased in such a manner that sufficient aircraft are available to 
maintain the commercial schedule.” 
 

 
 
D. Leasing of Aircraft 
4.22 NACIL was asked to state whether the process of „leasing‟ of aircraft is 
economically feasible or viable  or whether this process has led to losses for the 
company.  NACIL submitted in their written replies the following:-  
“NACIL has been dry leasing aircraft from various lessors in the market, for lease 
periods of 3 to 7 years, as an interim measure, pending the purchase of aircraft, 
so that it can expand it‟s capacity and network at the earliest. However, it was 
always recognized that “leasing” was a stop-gap arrangement, and in due course 
the objective was to replace the dry leased aircraft with owned aircraft. 
It was seen that acquiring new aircraft will have a lead time of at least 3 years 
due selection, approvals and manufacturing time. Such lead time in adding 
capacity would have a very adverse impact on the airlines profitability and 
competitiveness. The one way out of this situation was to lease aircraft on dry 
lease basis.  
The last acquisition of owned aircraft in erstwhile AI was in 1996 (2 x B747 -
400s). Proposals for acquisition of aircraft viz. 3 x A310 -300 in 1993 - meant for 
replacement of the old 3 x A300 -B4 aircraft, 1 x B747 -400 in 1998 - meant for 
replacement of the old B747 -200 aircraft, were not approved.  There was an 
urgent need to phase -out the old A30 0-B4 and B747 -200 aircraft. Pending 
aircraft acquisition, AI inducted the A310-300 and B747-400 from 2000 onwards - 
on dry lease in view of all facilities and infrastructure available for these aircraft. 
The last fleet acquisition exercise in the erstwhile  Indian Airlines was in 1989 -90 
(induction 31 x A320s). Likewise, in view of the phase out of 11 x B737s and 4 x 
A300-B4 in 2007 and 2008 respectively, by the erstwhile Indian Airlines, there 
was a need to induct capacity in the short term, pending approva l for fleet 
acquisition, to regain lost market share. Similarly, in order to operate the 
mandatory North East routes, erstwhile Indian Airlines had to lease the ATRs, as 
it did not have a suitable aircraft in its fleet then to operate to the North East. 
Subsequently, the liberalization of the Indian economy, the enhanced 
entitlements given to foreign carriers and the interior points of call in India being 
declared as international airports - all led to an enhanced growth in the 
international air market.  In its effort to increase its capacity share of the Indian 
Air Market, Air India had submitted a Project Report for 28 aircraft (10 x A340s + 
18 B737s) in 2004.  Pending this acquisition, as an interim arrangement Air India 
was required to lease more capac ity and thereby inducted the 4 x B777 -200ER 
aircraft in 2005 -06, since suitable A310 -300 and B747 -400 aircraft were not 
available for lease 
In erstwhile Air India, in all 16 A310s, 8 B747 -400s and 4 B777 -200ERs were 
taken on dry lease during the period Dec ember 2000 to December 2005. One 
747 was taken on a short term lease (1 year) in September 2007 to overcome 
urgent requirement. The rest of A310 and 747 fleets were taken on 3 -year lease 

 
 
term. The 777s were inducted on 5 -year term. Similarly, 3 x 767 -300ERs, 1 x 
757-200ER and 1 x A310 were inducted during the period November 2006 to 
May 2007 for a lease period varying between 6 months and 1 year.   
The B777 -200ER aircraft were inducted for a five year lease term to provide 
bridge capacity while the new flee t is being inducted and the 747 lease fleet is 
being phased out. 
In erstwhile Indian Airlines, 33 aircraft consisting of 26 A -320, 5 A -319 and 2 A -
330s were also taken on initial lease period of 3 to 5 years. Since A -320 and A -
300 aircraft were being opera ted under IC coded flights, it was easier to induct 
and operate A-320 family type of aircraft. 
As can be seen from the Table here below while growth in pax carriage was 
17.6% AAG for domestic and 11% AAG for international, the capacity share of 
NACIL on th e domestic sectors declined from 51.7% in 2000/01 to 17.2% in 
2008/09. Similarly, considering the demand for capacity and the delay in delivery 
of B787s, the lease term of six A310s was extended by another term on newly 
negotiated terms and conditions. 
Had it not been for induction of capacity on lease, both the erstwhile Indian 
Airlines and Air India would have been completely marginalized.” 
4.23 NACIL has been leasing different aircraft of different make before and after the 
merger.  Spare parts of all th e different makes of aircraft are also required which are 
sometimes lent to other companies often incurring losses.  There are huge losses and 
these aircrafts are always sent abroad for maintenance.  Therefore, NACIL were asked 
to state why they wanted this lease at all.  In reply, NACIL submitted as under:-     
“Leasing of aircraft is typically short term solution and is intended for following 
reasons: 
1. to take care of expanding market when the owned fleet capacity is 
inadequate. 
2. to establish new routes or consolidate the existing markets when the 
existing fleet is not enough to meet the market requirements. 
3. to bridge the capacity gap between the present capacity and new fleet 
acquisition. 
Due to the all above, leased aircraft were inducted in the past.  
It takes six months to more than a year for a leasing company to place an aircraft 
with a lessee.  Therefore, none of the lessors were willing to accept an exit 
clause. 
In view of the global recession and its impact on NACIL, efforts were made in this 
year to terminate the existing leases prematurely.  This did not materialize due to 
the current market conditions and low demand for lease aircraft. 

 
 
Normally NACIL takes up Haj operations using additional lease capacity 
equivalent of four 747s and two A310s.  How ever, this year NACIL was able to 
avoid this extra expenditure by deploying its own fleet for Haj operations without 
disrupting the other revenue services.  This is made possible due to the 
availability of dry lease fleet with NACIL.”  
 
 
  

 
 
 CHAPTER 5. 
 ROUTES 
5.1 NACIL was asked to explain what was  the basis of route allocation for dome stic 
and international flights and who allocated  the routes to the private and government 
carriers.  NACIL submitted written replies as under:-  
“There are no restrictions  placed on the airlines with regard to introduction of 
flights on purely domestic routes. However, airport / airfield /slot constraints act 
as impediments to the introduction of services on some routes. 
As regards international routes, the airlines are req uired to submit proposal for 
operations on new routes to the Ministry / DGCA for designation of the carrier to 
undertake scheduled operations on the concerned routes and for the allocation of 
necessary bilateral entitlements. The details of the processes i nvolved in 
obtaining permission / entitlements are given below:- 
Guidelines for operation of Indian scheduled carriers on international 
routes 
1. Eligibility Criteria: 
1.1 Scheduled Carriers having continuous operations of at least 5 years in the 
domestic sector on the date of application and having a minimum fleet size of 20 
aircraft are permitted to operate on international routes.  
1.2 Scheduled Carriers should have valid Air Operators Permit (AOP), should 
be security cleared by Ministry of Civil Aviatio n of Home Affairs and have the 
approval of Aircraft Acquisition Committee.  
2. Routes Available: 
2.1 Except Air India and Indian Airlines, other Scheduled Carriers are not 
allowed to operate to UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia for a 
period of three years.  
3. Methodology of Route Allocation: 
3.1 Due considerations would be given to the operational plans of Air India 
and Indian Airlines before allocating routes to other eligible Scheduled Carriers.  
3.2 All eligible Scheduled Carriers would  be asked to submit their operational 
plan in the first and the third quarter of each year in the application form provided 
in Annexure ‟A‟.  Applications are to be filed in duplicate to DGCA (Attn: Director 
Regulation & Information) with a copy to Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
3.3 At any given point of time operational plan of up to one year would be 
considered for route/traffic right allocation.  

 
 
3.4 Allocation of traffic rights to Scheduled Carriers would depend on the 
availability of traffic rights to pa rticular countries/routes.  If the total entitlements 
fall short of the requirements projected by the eligible airlines. Inter -se allocation 
of entitlements will be in the ratio of ASKMs deployed by the Scheduled Carriers 
on domestic routes over last five years.  For this purpose ASKMs deployment of 
Scheduled Carriers in domestic sector would be determined twice in a year on 1 st 
January and on 1st July of each year.  Traffic entitlements decided on the basis of 
ASKMs deployment will be rounded off to the nearest whole number.  
3.5 Traffic rights allocated for a particular schedule, i.e. Summer or Winter 
schedule of a particular year will have to be utilized by the Scheduled Carrier 
within the same schedule period.  Failure to utilize traffic rights once gran ted 
would lead to a ban of two years on that route.  
 3.6 Scheduled Carriers are not permitted to reduce ASKMs deployment in 
domestic sector once rights are allocated on international routes. Entitlements 
given to Scheduled Carriers may be reviewed in the event any of them reduces 
domestic operations after obtaining traffic rights on international routes.  
3.7 Notwithstanding the above guidelines, Government may at its discretion 
permit or deny allocation of rights keeping in view  the preparedness of the 
airlines, viability of operations and the overall interests of the civil aviation 
sector.”  
5.2 When asked to furnish a chronology of events leading to the cession / ceding  of 
routes to private operators, NACIL replied thus:-  
“The principal reasons for AI‟s withdrawal from routes are  
1. Acute capacity constraints faced by the airline for an extended period up to 
2007-08 due to delay to the airlines‟ fleet renewal plans 
2. Loss making nature of operations on certain routes  
3. Phasing out of aircraft which were appropriate for deployment on certain 
routes 
4. Strategic decision to expand operations on certain routes in preference over 
certain others    
The chronology of routes withdrawn is given below: 
International 
Sectors dropped from AI network since 2002-03 
Sector Reason 
Bangalore-Bangkok Withdrawn from Jun 06 due to cash losses  
Jaipur-Bangkok Withdrawn from Jul 06 due to poor carriage and 
additional cost of positioning aircraft in Jaipur adding to 

 
 
the cash losses  
London - New York (JFK) 
Sector dropped as a result of Route Rationalisation in 
Sep 08. Proposed to serve this route via Codeshare with 
KU 
Paris - Newark 
EWR flights rerouted via Frankfurt scissors Hub in Apr 
09 in line with the European Hub strategy 
London - Chicago 
Chicago flights rerouted via Frankfurt scissors Hub in 
Apr 09 in line with the European Hub strategy 
Guwahati – Bangkok 
Route withdrawn in Jun 08 due to poor route 
economics 
Kolkata – Bangkok Flights now operated by Air India express 
Chennai / Trichy / Calicut 
– Fujairah / Ras Al 
Khaimah 
Fujairah / Ras Al Khaimah were technical halts. These 
halts were removed along with Trichy from Nov 07 due 
to very poor carriage to / from these stations 
Bangkok – Tokyo 
Bangkok transit on Tokyo flight dropped in Nov 07 to 
achieve synergy between AI and IC networks 
Singapore – Jakarta 
Sector dropped in Dec 07 to save costs and improve 
route profitability 
Pune-Hyderabad - 
Singapore Sector dropped in Dec 07 due to deficit on the route 
Goa-Sharjah 
Withdrawn from Apr 08 and replaced with Goa-Dubai 
which is currently served daily 
Coimbatore-Sharjah 
Sector dropped in Apr 08 due to very poor carriage on 
the route 
Hyderabad-Nagpur-
Bangkok 
These services that were introduced in 2005-06 were 
withdrawn in Jul 08 due to continuous cash losses 
Bangalore-Sharjah  
4/wk services replaced with daily Bangalore-Dubai from 
Aug 08  
Nairobi - Dar-e-Salaam 
Sector dropped as a result of Route Rationalisation in 
Sep 08 
Delhi-Kuala-Lumpur & 
Bangkok-Kuala Lumpur 
These links were withdrawn due to poor carriage and 
part of restructuring exercise on the Delhi-Bangkok-
Kuala Lumpur services 
Hyderabad – Riyadh 
Route now served over Mumbai with Hub and Spoke 

 
 
connections from Hyderabad 
Ahmedabad-Sharjah 
Replaced with Ahmedabad-Dubai services by Air India 
Express from Oct 08 
Chennai-Bangkok Sector dropped in Jan 09 due to deficit on the route 
Bangkok-Singapore 
This link was a positioning leg on the Delhi-Bangkok-
Singapore route to provide Delhi-Singapore link. 
Withdrawn from Feb 09 as AI introduced stand alone 
services on Delhi-Singapore route 
Pune-Dubai Route now served by Air India Express 
Cochin - Al Ain Route now served by Air India Express 
Calicut - Al Ain Route now served by Air India Express 
Cochin - Abu Dhabi Route now served by Air India Express 
Calicut - Abu Dhabi Route now served by Air India Express 
Trivandrum - Abu Dhabi Route now served by Air India Express 
Trivandrum - Muscat Route now served by Air India Express 
Cochin - Doha - Bahrain Route now served by Air India Express 
Mumbai - Doha - Bahrain Route now served by Air India Express 
Cochin - Dubai Route now served by Air India Express 
Trivandrum - Kuwait Route now served by Air India Express 
Trivandrum - Dubai Route now served by Air India Express 
Cochin - Kuwait Route now served by Air India Express 
 
Domestic  
1. Mumbai-Puttaparthy 
This link was operated by erstwhile Indian Airlines during Jul to Mar every year. 
However, due to very poor carriage on these services, these services were not 
operated since Feb 2004. 
2. Mumbai-Pune 
This link was discontinued from Dec 05 due to very poor carriage on the route. 
3. Ranchi-Patna 
This link was a positioning leg on the Mumbai -Delhi-Ranchi-Patna services to 
operate the link between Delhi -Patna route. Since the carriage betwee n Patna 

 
 
and Ranchi / Mumbai was very poor and since AI increased in the number of 
services on Delhi -Patna route, AI withdrew the extension Ranchi -Patna in order 
to save costs effective Jun 08. 
4. Bangalore-Bhubaneshwar 
This link was withdrawn effective Apr -08 due to poor carriage and resultant cash 
losses. 
5. Bangalore-Pune & Pune-Goa 
These links were withdrawn effective Jun 08 due to poor carriage and resultant 
cash losses. 
6. Bangalore-Cochin 
This link was withdrawn effective Jun 08 due to poor carriage and result ant cash 
losses. 
7. Calicut-Cochin, Chennai -Coimbatore, Cochin -Coimbatore, Goa -Calicut, 
cochin-Goa, Calicut-Trichy 
These links have been the positioning legs on AI‟s international services on 
Chennai-Coimbatore-Cochin-Sharjah, Bahrain -Doha-Calicut-Cochin, Mum bai-
Calicut-Cochin-Sharjah and Mumbai -Goa-Calicut-Sharjah services. With 
introduction of standalone services by AI on the international city pairs and also 
part of route rationalisation exercise, the Cochin -Goa & Calicut-Trichy links were 
withdrawn from Nov 07, the links Chennai-Coimbatore, Cochin-Coimbatore, Goa-
Calicut were withdrawn from Apr 08 and Calicut -Cochin from Apr 09. However 
the Calicut-Cochin link is served by AI Express.” 
5.3 The Committee asked NACIL to explain on the issue of how, without a plan to 
expand their area of operation, d id they  want to make a turn around plan by cutting 
down and closing down operations in different areas .  In reply, NACIL submitted the 
following:- 
“During the past one and half years beginning from about Jun 08 the airline 
industry has been hit hard by abnormal increase in ATF costs which was then 
followed by global economic slowdown that has impacted the carriage & 
revenues of the industry world over. As per IATA, the airline industry‟s yields 
world over have been e roded by about 20% even while the ATF prices rose by 
about 30% in 2007 -08 and a further 80% during the period Jun -Aug 08. By the 
time, the ATF prices started softening in the 3rd quarter of 2008 -09, the 
economic slowdown had set in firmly. The traffic to /  from / within India suffered a 
further blow on account of the 26/11 incident at Mumbai which saw a steep 
decline in tourist arrivals into India to the extent of 20 to 25% in the peak months.  
In this context, expanding areas of operation was not considered as a viable 
strategy for turnaround in the short term. As a result of the economic slowdown, 
demand continues to be weak even while average fares are about 25% lower 
than the previous year. T he domestic market has seen some growth but this has 

 
 
come at fares that do not give rise to commensurate benefits by way of 
revenues. 
In order to tide over the situation, the airlines the world over inclusive of Indian 
carriers have resorted to capacity cu ts to contain the losses incurred. As per 
IATA, the industry capacity during Jan -Sep 09 has been lower by about 3.4 % 
and the passengers carriage measured in terms of RPK has been lower by 5.3% 
compared to the same period a year ago. The aviation industry environment has 
been further vitiated by high ATF prices on the supply side. As against the above, 
AI has reduced its capacity on international and domestic routes by only about 
1% during the period Apr -Sep09. The strategy adopted by AI is not only 
supported by the global trends but also by the actions taken by some of the 
foreign / Indian carriers on their operations on routes to / from India. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.4 Regarding reduction of routes being operated upon by NACIL, the Chairman, 
COPU stated as under:- 
”…you are reducing both domestic and international routes.  On the one hand 
you get new fleet of aircraft and on the other hand you keep surrendering routes.  
Many of these routes were considered commercially very -very viable and 
lucrative.  For example the Mumb ai-Dubai route.  How many flights did the Air 
India four or five years ago have and how many do you have now?  Same is the 
case with the commercially viable routes within the country also.  Purchasing 
Airline Route withdrawn During past 1 to 2 
years 
Jet Airways Mumbai - Shanghai - San Francisco 
Jet Airways Amritsar - London 
Kingfisher Bangalore – London  
British Airways Kolkata - London 
Virgin Atlantic Mumbai - London 
Air France Chennai - Paris 
Royal Dutch KLM Hyderabad - Amsterdam 
Austrian Mumbai - Vienna 
Aeroflot Mumbai - Moscow 
Singapore Airlines Amritsar - Singapore 
Delta Mumbai - Atlanta  

 
 
aircraft on the one hand and then surrendering or barte ring away routes which 
have been doing well do not correlate or collaborate to each other.”  
5.5 NACIL was asked to clarify their position in the matter of complaints that in the 
domestic segment the remunerative routes are being surrendered by NACIL to th e 
private airlines. In their written replies, they stated the following:- 
“The withdrawal of services by erstwhile IA / AI in the domestic market has been 
on account of non -availability of suitable / sufficient aircraft to sustain certain 
operations and the loss making nature of these operations on certain routes. 
The Government of India pursued open sky policy for the domestic air services 
from about the year 2003 -04. During the period starting from 2003 -04, while the 
new and the existing private airlines continuously added capacity, erstwhile 
Indian Airlines was faced with acute capacity constraints arising from the 
following. 
1. Inordinate delay to the airline‟s fleet renewal plan 
2. Reduction in the operating fleet of A320 from about the second half of 2005 -
06 due to maintenance / engine constraints 
3. Operating crew shortage for B737 fleet which had by then been transferred to 
Alliance Air (its subsidiary) starting from about Jan 2005 
4. Eventual  phase out of B737 aircraft in 2007 and A300 aircraft by March 08 
5. The strategic need to replace the feeder wide body services with narrow body 
aircraft in order to reduce cost of operations and to replace some of the 
international wide body routes with narrow body aircraft due to reduction in 
wide body capacity on account of phase out and lease return.   
[ 
As such, while erstwhile Indian Airlines was in no position to increase its 
domestic capacities, the private airlines increased their capacities in successive 
years by between 12 and 44% during the 4 year period commencing from Apr 
04. Consequently, erstwh ile Indian Airlines‟ operations on some of the domestic 
routes got marginalized by increased frequencies / capacities offered by the 
competitors on these routes. As a result, losses began to be accumulated on 
some of the domestic routes which the airline w as compelled to withdraw in its 
short term interests.   
It is also pertinent to observe that with the entry of low cost carriers, there has 
been a distinct shift in demand from full service carriers to those of the low cost 
(low fare) carriers. In a bid to  hold on to its market share, AI was also compelled 
to drop its fares on the domestic routes. The reduction in fares has also been 
partially responsible for increasing the losses suffered by erstwhile IA / AI leading 
to the discontinuance of operations on some of the routes.  In a market where 
there are several players, withdrawal of services by one player inevitably 
strengthens the field for its competitors.  

 
 
The details of domestic city pair links from which erstwhile IA / AI have withdrawn 
operations pos t liberalization of the aviation sector and not restored thereafter 
are as under. 
City pairs discontinued by erstwhile Indian Airlines 
1. Agatti-Goa (due to poor loads – about 5 passengers on an average per flight) 
2. Bangalore-Bhubaneswar (now served with conve nient connections in both 
directions over Chennai)  
3. Coimbatore-Cochin (domestic leg of international flight operating on the 
Chennai-Coimbatore-Cochin-Sharjah route thrice weekly – restructured as 
Cochin-Sharjah to cut costs to the extent of Rs. 12 Cr per annum) 
4. Chennai-Coimbatore (domestic leg of international flight operating on the 
Chennai-Coimbatore-Cochin-Sharjah route thrice weekly – restructured as 
Cochin-Sharjah to cut costs to the extent of Rs. 12 Cr per annum) 
5. Chennai-Trichy (domestic leg of inter national flight operating on the Chennai -
Trichy-Trivandrum-Sharjah route daily – restructured as Trivandrum -Sharjah 
to cut costs to the tune of about Rs. 33 Cr per annum resulting in estimated 
net benefit of Rs. 10 Cr per annum. The Chennai -Trichy city pai r is being 
served by IX) 
6. Hyderabad-Nagpur (domestic leg of international flight operating on the 
Hyderabad-Nagpur-Bangkok. Flight was dropped due to poor loads and 
losses – Rs. 2 Cr during the three month period Apr-Jun 08) 
7. Mumbai-Khajuraho (de-linked due to poor carriage – average of less than 5 
passengers per flight) 
8. Mumbai-Patna (de -linked due to poor carriage – average of about 12 
passengers per flight. Convenient onward connections in both directions have 
been made available over Delhi  ) 
9. Mumbai-Pune (dropped due to poor loads – about 30 passengers per flight) 
10. Pune-Goa (a unidirectional link on the triangular flight on the Bangalore-Pune-
Goa-Bangalore route which was discontinued due to losses – Rs. 4 Cr during 
three month period Apr -Jun 08. The Bangalo re-Pune v.v. & Bangalore -Goa 
links have been restored) 
11. Trichy-Trivandrum (domestic leg of international flight operating on the 
Chennai-Trichy-Trivandrum-Sharjah route – restructured as Trivandrum -
Sharjah) 
12. Bhubaneswar-Kolkata (Was part of the daily service  on the Chennai -
Bhubaneswar-Kolkata route. The service was withdrawn due to capacity 
constraints / poor loads – 40 passengers per flight on the CCU -BBI sector & 
losses – Rs. 4 Cr during 2 month period Apr -May 08. The link between 
Chennai and Bhubaneswar has since been restored) 

 
 
13. Mumbai-Vadodara (due to poor loads of about 30/flight and losses -Rs. 2.5 Cr 
during 6 month period Apr-Sep09) 
 
Details of city pairs which were served by B737 aircraft that have been taken 
over by erstwhile IA/ AI on A320 family aircraft are as under: 
1. Agartala-Kolkata 
2. Aizawl-Imphal 
3. Aizawl-Kolkata 
4. Bagdogra-Guwahati 
5. Bagdogra-Kolkata 
6. Bangalore-Chennai 
7. Khajuraho-Varanasi 
8. Bhopal-Delhi 
9. Bhopal-Indore 
10. Bhopal-Mumbai 
11. Bhubaneswar-Chennai 
12. Chennai-Port Blair 
13. Delhi-Bagdogra  
14. Delhi-Guwahati 
15. Delhi-Indore 
16. Delhi-Jodhpur 
17. Delhi-Khajuraho 
18. Delhi-Leh 
19. Delhi-Patna 
20. Delhi-Udaipur  
21. Delhi-Varanasi 
22. Hyderabad-Vizag 
23. Imphal-Kolkata 
24. Jodhpur-Udaipur 
25. Kolkata-Dibrugarh 
26. Kolkata-Port Blair 
27. Leh-Jammu 
28. Leh-Srinagar 
29. Mumbai-Indore 
30. Mumbai-Jamnagar 
31. Mumbai-Jodhpur 
32. Mumbai-Mangalore 
33. Mumbai-Nagpur 
34. Mumbai-Rajkot 
35. Mumbai-Udaipur 

 
 
36. Mumbai-Vizag 
 
Details of city pairs that were discontinued by Alliance Air due to withdrawal of 
B737s which could not be taken over by erstwhile IA / AI due to capacity 
constraints on A320 family fleet are as follows:   
1. Agra-Varanasi 
2. Agra-Khajuraho 
3. Agra-Delhi 
4. Ranchi-Bhubaneswar (directional) 
5. Bhavnagar-Mumbai 
6. Bhubaneshwar-Hyderabad 
7. Bhubaneshwar-Vizag  
8. Chandigarh-Leh 
9. Chennai-Nagpur 
10. Kolkata-Nagpur 
11. Kolkata-Vizag 
12. Raipur-Vizag” 
 
5.6 The Ministry of Civil Aviation was asked whether they had issued orders on the 
basis of which the profitable routes ha d been / were  being surrendered to the private 
airlines.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted in their written replies:- 
“The guidelines for operation on international routes by the Indian private carriers 
are provided in the Aeronautical Information Circular no. 2/2005 dated 21 
January 2005, modified vide File No.5/251/2008 -IR dated 17 July 2009, under 
which it is clearly specified tha t due consideration shall be given to the 
operational plans submitted by National Aviation Company of India (NACIL) 
before allocation of the traffic rights to other eligible applicants.” 
 
5.7 In this regard, the Committee during oral evidence of representa tives of NACIL 
stated the following:- 
“…..what we are seeing in the papers is that the NACIL is conceptualising its 
turn-around by cutting its area of operation.  Will it not decimate your entire 
operation?  As a operational company, how can you conceive of doing that by 
cutting down your area of operation?  Can you even dream of making a revival in 
a competitive scenario? I do not understand its logic at all.  The details which you 
have given, do not give any clear picture.  From Kolkata to Mumbai, Jet is 
operating seven flights, King Fisher is operating four flights and Indian operates 
two. You know that Kolkata -Mumbai route is always full.  Similarly, in Kolkata -
Hyderabad route, Jet operates eleven flights; King Fisher operates one and 
Indian none.  I think very recently they have started operating one.  There are 
many other examples.  If you see the routes between the metropolis and major 

 
 
cities and if you make a comparative study between Jet, King Fisher and Indian, 
it will clearly show that you have given all these to them on a platter.”   
5.8 NACIL was asked if they felt that the entire social responsibility to operate in non-
remunerative routes had  been thrust on NACIL as a result of which they had not been 
able to make profits.  They submitted in their written replies as under:- 
“Currently, AI & its subsidiaries operate to 62 Indian destinations including 11 
destinations in 6 North -East States besides 33 international destinations outside 
India.  
Besides the Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) of the DGCA, the Government 
policy does not thrust any express obligations on NACIL in the development of its 
network. However, being a Government owned airline, NACIL does receive many 
suggestions / references from the various agencies such as Government, 
Hon‟ble MPs, Trade & Industry, Social, Cultural associations, etc which go to 
influence NACIL‟s route network perhaps to a grea ter extent than that of its 
competitors. For instance, NACIL‟s operations in the North -East are determined 
in consultation with the North-East Council (NEC) not only for the ATR operations 
in that Region (which is covered by a Commercial Agreement with the  NEC) but 
also operations with other aircraft types on the NACIL fleet. Similarly, NACIL 
restored the link between Cochin and Agatti on the directive of the Ministry 
despite these operations being loss making. NACIL is also required to respond to 
National requirements such as operation of charter flights, relief flights, Haj 
charters, etc which compel the airline to divert capacity from scheduled services 
thereby disrupting these schedules. In a broader light, maintaining connectivity to 
remote and underser ved markets is woven into NACIL‟s network planning 
systems whereas private airlines develop their network based solely on 
profitability / network synergies.  For instance, AI deploys almost double the 
capacity on the Category II & IIA routes to / from Nort h-East, J & K, Port Blair & 
Lakshadweep Islands than the minimum stipulated by the DGCA under the RDG. 
5.9 It was queried as to who decides the routes to be operated upon by airlines – the 
Ministry or whether  NACIL is surrendering routes and taking up new ones. Further, it 
was asked what are the considerations while allocating routes and Whether viability and 
profitability of routes is taken into consideratio n prior to allocation of routes. In reply, 
NACIL stated as under:- 
“NACIL decides the routes that it  will operate. NACIL has not withdrawn services 
from any of the routes that have been profitable to the airline.  
The routes operated by NACIL are broadly determined by the following factors. 
1. Market requirement as reflected in the market size as gathered f rom 
sources available to the airline including feedback from NACIL‟s own officials in 
the field 
2. Medium / long term strategic considerations of the route  

 
 
3. The propensity of the route to generate feeder traffic / revenues on the 
other routes in the NACIL network & to support the airline‟s alliance plans 
4. Estimated passenger carriage / revenue based on market dynamics 
5. The estimated profitability from the identified route weighed against 
available alternatives 
6. Feasibility of operations based on availability o f necessary resources in 
terms of suitable aircraft, crew and Engineering support for the operations 
 
The concerned airline normally carries out independent economic evaluation of 
the profitability of the routes while taking a decision in this regard. 
Subsequent to this decision, the concerned airline requests the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation for allocation of traffic rights to operationalize its plans.  The details of 
the procedures to be followed are given in AIC dated 17 July 2009 and are 
summarized below: 
i) All eligible airlines (airlines with a minimum of 5 years continuous 
operation in domestic sector and a fleet of 20 aircraft) are required to request for 
allocation of traffic rights in a defined format which also gives details regarding 
fleet, availab ility of slots at the airport to which traffic rights are sought, 
pilots/engineers, etc. 
ii) Traffic rights are initially allocated for a period of one year only to be 
reviewed later. 
iii) Allocation of traffic rights depend upon the availability of such r ights under 
respective bilateral Air Services Agreement.  In case traffic rights are not 
sufficient to cover the requirements of all the eligible Indian carriers, the 
allocation to various eligible carriers shall be made in the ratio of available seat 
kilometers (ASKMs) deployed by the various carriers on domestic scheduled 
services during the last 5 years. 
iv) Due consideration shall be given to operation plans submitted by NACIL 
before allocation of traffic rights to other eligible carriers. 
v) The Ministry of Civil Aviation may at its discretion grant or deny allocation 
of traffic rights to any carrier if it is not satisfied with the preparedness of the 
carrier to undertake such operations and also about the viability of operations on 
a particular route.” 
5.10 The CMD, NACIL during oral evidence before the Committee further elaborated 
on the issue of route dispersal, the following:- 
„….The issue of route dispersal guidelines which you had mentioned, we were 
monopoly people.  We have got open sky and competition has come.  It is 
extremely difficult for us to withdraw a route which was established earlier.  Now 
if I have to withdraw a rout e from let us say Kolkata -Imphal or Kolkata -Aizawl, 

 
 
there may be no pressure on me and the Ministry may not say anything.  But I 
cannot withdraw that.  That was introduced long time back.  It is very difficult for 
me to get away from the non -metro cities.  I have got limited aircraft on my hand.  
I have to decide how much of those have to be operated on the metro and how 
much I have to still retain in the non -metro cities.  Therefore, what has happened 
is that when you look at NACIL‟s network in the categor y II and IIA, we are more 
or less double the capacity required by the route dispersal guideline.  Now I 
would like to withdraw that.  But whether I should really withdraw it or not is an 
issue.  Sir, I will be submitting a detailed note to you about telling you exactly that 
in which areas why I am not withdrawing and what are my losses. Normally we 
do not look at the fixed overhead costs.  We only look at cash loss – how much 
petrol, how much variable cost and how many allowances, etc.  Based on that if 
we are able to recover that, then we work it out.  That is the economics which is 
worked out in that area.  I will be submitting a detailed note on this issue.  In fact, 
all these issues which you have raised, I will be submitting a detailed report to 
you but  I am just explaining certain issues.  Delhi -Agatti link which was the 
directive of the Ministry, I have myself personally written a letter on that saying 
that we would like to discontinue it because we are losing money on that.  We 
would not be able to ru n that particular route unless the Government of India is 
going to give us an annual subsidy there.  Now the demand from North -East 
Council and eight States is that the aircraft which we are plying is 40 seater and 
they say that they want a 20 seater.  So,  there is a gap on that issue.  We are 
struggling with that whether we can run the 40 seater or a 20 seater there.   Now 
these are demands which are coming.  Sir, you will agree with me that if NACIL 
play a role as a national carrier, it will be extremely difficult for a national public 
sector undertaking under the Government of India control and under the august 
body of Parliament here just to deny a State somewhere that we will not run a 
route to you just because if we do not run somebody else would also not run 
because they want to it only in a profitable situation.   
What the private airlines will do is that they will try to find out when Imphal 
Calcutta becomes profitable. The day Imphal Calcutta route becomes profitable 
they will run a flight on that r oute and till that time they have to depend on 
somebody else. …...” 
5.11 The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation with regard to route rationalization stated 
the following:- 
“…..This is also being considered by the CMD to ensure that we look at the 
revenue enhancement, the route enhancement things and here also the 
Members had pointed about the route rationalisation as to why there are so many 
difficulties.  
Here we entirely agree that there has been a fair amount of adhocism.   So, what 
has been done in t he last two -three months is that we have appointed an 
independent international consultant on these route issues.  They have actually 
come up with a lot of suggestions and we have really gone into this winter 

 
 
schedule.  We have just issued a winter schedule where we have the kind of loss 
making routes.  In fact, there are 29 international routes which give us a loss of 
about Rs.2,000 crore and we are re -examining some of these things.  For your 
information, I would like to submit that the Mumbai -New York and the Delhi-New 
York flights, which are our prestigious and premium flights, last year made a loss 
of Rs.750 crore.  So, this is a matter of great concern and it should not happen.  
We are finding out what are the marketing issues, what are the branding is sues 
so that these flights do start earning revenues. 
On route rationalisation, we have come up with a plan and as the hon. Member 
has said, we will give a comparative statement on this winter schedule so that the 
entire thing is openly available and we do  not stop routes which are making good 
money.  So, this is something that is very much top of our priority and we will 
ensure that this is done. ….”  
5.12 He further added the following:- 
“Coming back to the routes thing, now that  we have  an independent Consultant 
and a complete report, I assure you that we will give you the entire thing because 
from this winter schedule we have a very transparent kind of thing  on the routes, 
which we do not want to keep changing because one of the banes of the Air India 
has been that we have been keeping on changing routes when we have got a 
good market.  So, this time we have got an independent Consultant and 
evaluation, and that I will submit as early as possible.” 
5.13 NACIL was asked to explain the basis on which the timings of various flights is 
decided upon.  The reply is given below:- 
“The timings of various flights are planned based mainly on the timings that are 
preferred by the target passengers, the airline‟s goal to provide conven ient 
connections to / from other major destinations on AI‟s and its partner airlines‟ 
networks and the timings adopted by the major competitors on the route. The 
actual timings are however, determined as per the availability of internal 
resources and slots at the concerned airports.” 
5.14 In the new a viation open sky policy, there has been  an emphasis on bilateral 
routes between various countries and permission to give Indian carriers to operate on 
more international routes including Gulf. In this regard,  NACIL was asked to state 
whether more profitable routes have been given to private ai rlines as compared to Air 
India and in this bilateral exchange, which routes has Air India got.  The reply furnished 
by NACIL is produced below:- 
“It is incorrect to say th at more profitable routes have been given to private 
airlines as compared to Air India.  As a policy, due consideration is given to the 
operational plans submitted by National Aviation Company of India Limited 
(NACIL) before allocation of the traffic rights to the other eligible applicants.  Only 
on exercise of the first right of refusal by Air India for operations on particular 

 
 
International routes, such rights are considered for giving to other Indian private 
scheduled operators. 
Currently, Air India and its subsidiary, Air India Express together operate 
international services to 33 foreign destinations (34 from 0 1 December 2009) in 
24 counties.” 
5.15 On how many destinations were not served by NACIL, prior to opening  up of the 
international market, NACIL replied thus:- 
“Erstwhile AI / IA were serving these stations even prior to the introduction of the 
liberalized Civil Aviation policy of the Government of India in Jan 05 with the sole 
exception of Washington, to which destination the airline plans to commence 
operations effective from 1st Dec 09.” 
5.16 NACIL was asked to explain how they would be able to improve their commercial 
viability if they reduced their r outes.  NACIL in their written replies explained the 
following:- 
“The current international long haul operations of NACIL are giving rise to cash 
deficits. In other words, if additional capacity were to be deployed by NACIL at 
this stage such additional capacity would only give rise to greater cash losses in 
the short term than any improvement in  the profitability of the airline. This 
situation has come about in the wake of intense competition and adverse 
developments in the airline‟s operating environment. NACIL‟s competitors on the 
international routes including Jet Airways with the notable exce ption of Gulf 
carriers have all deferred plans to increase operations and in some cases even 
reduced operations on routes to / from India.  
The details of withdrawal of operations by other carriers on routes to / from India 
in the recent past are given in the table below: 
 
     Airline Route withdrawn During past 1 to 2 years 
Jet Airways Mumbai - Shanghai - San Francisco 
Jet Airways Amritsar - London 
Kingfisher Bangalore – London  
British Airways Kolkata - London 
Virgin Atlantic Mumbai - London 
Air France Chennai - Paris 

 
 
Royal Dutch KLM Hyderabad - Amsterdam 
Austrian Mumbai - Vienna 
Aeroflot Mumbai - Moscow 
Singapore Airlines Amritsar - Singapore 
Delta Mumbai - Atlanta  
 
In the economic front, during the past one and half years beginning from about 
Jun 08 the airline industry has been hit hard by abnormal increase in ATF costs 
which was then followed by global economic slowdown that has impacted the 
carriage & revenues of the industry world over. As per IATA, the airline industry‟s 
yields world  over have been eroded by about 20% even while the ATF prices 
rose by about 30% in 2007 -08 and a further 80% during the period Jun -Aug 08. 
By the time, the ATF prices started softening in the 3 rd quarter of 2008 -09, the 
economic slowdown had set in firmly. The traffic to / from / within India suffered a 
further blow on account of the 26/11 incident at Mumbai which saw a steep 
decline in tourist arrivals into India to the extent of 20 to 25% in the peak months.  
In this context, expanding areas of operation is not considered as a viable 
strategy for turnaround in the short term. As a result of the economic slowdown, 
demand continues to be weak even while average fares are about 25% lower 
than the previous year. The domestic market has seen growth but this has  come 
at fares that do not give rise to commensurate benefits by way of revenues. 
In order to tide over the situation, the airlines the world over inclusive of Indian 
carriers have resorted to capacity cuts to contain the losses incurred. As per 
IATA, the industry capacity during Jan -Sep 09 has been lower by about 3.4 % 
and the passengers carriage measured in terms of RPK has been lower by 5.3% 
compared to the same period a year ago. The aviation industry environment has 
been further vitiated by high ATF prices on the supply side. As against the above, 
AI has reduced its capacity on international and domestic routes by only about 
1% during the period Apr-Sep09.” 
A. Flying on Routes as a Social Obligation 
5.17 It was asked if the entire bur den of social responsibility had  been thrust on 
NACIL by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  NACIL replied as under:- 
“Apart from the mandatory requirement as stipulated by the DGCA as detailed in 
answer to Question 10 above, NACIL has in the past undertaken special 
operations as a social obligation to evacuate Indians in crisis situations for e.g. 
special flights were operated to evacuate Indians during the Gulf war etc. 

 
 
Currently, NACIL & its subsidiaries operate to 62 Indian destinations including 11 
destinations in 6 North-East States besides 33 international foreign destinations 
outside India (34 from 1st Dec 09).  
Besides the Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDG) of the DGCA, the Government 
policy does not place any obligations on NACIL in the development of its 
network. However, being a Government owned airline, NACIL does receive many 
suggestions / references from the various agencies such as Government, 
Hon‟ble MPs, Trade & Industry, Social, Cultural associations, etc which go to 
influence NACIL‟s route network perhaps to a greater extent than that of its 
competitors. For instance, NACIL‟s operations in the North -East are determined 
in consultation with the North-East Council (NEC) not only for the ATR operations 
in that Region (which is covered by a Commercial Agreement  with the NEC) but 
also operations with other aircraft types on the NACIL fleet.  
NACIL is also required to respond to National emergencies / requirements such 
as operation of charter flights, relief flights, Haj charters, etc which require the 
airline to divert capacity from scheduled services thereby impacting  schedules.  
As NACIL(I) (erstwhile Indian Airlines) was the sole domestic operator for many 
decades, the airline‟s domestic network has evolved over time and the network 
continues to provide connec tivity to remote and underserved markets. For 
instance, AI deploys almost double the capacity on the Category 2 & 2A routes to 
/ from North -East, J & K, Port Blair & Lakshadweep Islands than the minimum 
stipulated by the DGCA under the RDG.” 
5.18 The Commi ttee asked i f certain decisions ha d been thrust on NACIL by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and if so, whether  NACIL or the erstwhile Indian Airlines or Air 
India ever made any representation to the Ministry asking them to compensate for these 
losses.  In reply, NACIL stated the following:- 
“The NACIL had written to the Ministry of Civil Aviation that its operations on the 
Cochin-Agatti sector would need to be subsidised by the Government to the 
extent of the anticipated cash losses. The matter was examined in the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation and NACIL has been advised to make out a comprehensive 
proposal for seeking subsidy from Government for operating on Cochin -Agatti 
route and other such routes, which are not being operated on commercial 
considerations.  NACIL‟s ATR operations on the North-East routes are supported 
by a grant of Rs. 38.50 crores annually from the NE Council.” 
5.19 In this regard, the Chairman, COPU stated the following:- 
“…..You also refer to what you had mentioned on broader light that priv ate 
airlines develop the network based solely on profitability/networking, which 
means, the entire burden of social responsibility has been thrust on you by the 
Ministry as I see it whereas the private airlines have been allowed to function 
only on certain criteria such as profitability and networking.  It is not your fault. If it 
is being done by the Ministry, we should be aware of it, we should know that in 

 
 
specific terms. If this is the practical position which has taken place, in my 
opinion, it is total ly wrong and I think, the Ministry will have to answer these 
questions and pay for it because after all, all of us have been very proud of our 
national carriers, both Air India and Indian Airlines. We are here to assist you 
make the turn around as quickly as possible, to make a profit; we are not here to 
help you to assist in switching on the red right and shutting this entire thing. ….” 
5.20 The Committed asked NACIL , if in their opinion,  the private airlines need to 
shoulder this social responsibility.  In reply, NACIL submitted as under:- 
“As per the RDG, the private airlines are required to deploy certain portion of 
their capacities on the Category 2, 2A and 3 routes.” 
5.21 NACIL was asked to give details of routes they were not withdrawing their aircraft 
from, the reasons for the same and the losses being incurred.  In their written replies, 
NACIL stated the following:- 
“Due to the high cost of inputs for the past one and half years beginning from 
about Jun 08 on account of abnormal increase in ATF costs , followed by global 
economic slowdown coupled with the excess capacity situation in the industry 
resulting in poor load factors & yields, NACIL‟s services on most of the routes 
have been incurring cash losses. Many of these routes are of strategic nature 
with long term potential and as such, NACIL is not in favour of withdrawing these 
operations. Notwithstanding the above, NACIL has taken efforts at restructuring 
& re-fleeting in order to improve the operating economics through cost reductions 
and revenue enhancement resulting from deployment of newer and more fuel 
efficient aircraft and greater network synergies.” 
 
 
  

 
 
 CHAPTER 6.  
GROUND HANDLING & MRO SERVICES 
6.1 When asked what steps have been taken by the Company to tap the potential of 
high growth and  profitable businesses such as Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
(MRO) facilities, ground handling services, etc., NACIL replied as under:-  
“NACIL (A) is providing Technical Assistance to various Foreign and Domestic 
operators at various airports in India where our manpower is positioned.  We are 
also providing certification to some of these operators.  Our Engineering and 
Engine Overhaul facilities are providing Engineering services to various Foreign 
& Indian parties including foreign/ domestic airlines. This includes providing 
Hangar facilities, undertaking maintenance checks on aircraft, Repair /overhaul 
/testing of Engines, APU(Auxiliary Power Units), Components & Accessories 
fitted on the aircraft.   
In addition, following steps are being taken by NACIL(A) to tap market potential 
for Engineering / Engine Overhaul facilities. 
1.  Attempts have been made to contact various operators in India to send their       
components and engines to our MRO facility.  
2.   We have participated in the tenders/ bids published by private airlines in India  
like Spice jet for performing “C” check and engine overhaul.  
3.  Attempts have been made to contact various well known aviation experts for       
marketing engine overhaul facility in the world.  
4.  Attempts have been made to appoint Messrs. Star Aviation as exclusive      
representative to market engine overhaul facility in the Middle East Region 
NACIL I and European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS), signed 
a Joint Venture Agreement on 16 October 2008, for creation of an Aircraft 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Centre. This new MRO centre after it 
receives the approval of the Government will start its operations at the earliest at 
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi.  It would become a Memb er of the 
Airbus MRO Network.   
As per the Agreement, the Joint Venture will undertake airframe maintenance 
and repair of Airbus aircraft of NACIL to begin with.  Later, it will extend the 
facility to other types of aircraft (e.g. ATR) and aircraft of othe r airlines as also to 
aircraft other than the Airbus family.  NACIL is a major operator of Airbus aircraft 
and is currently inducting 43 new A320 Family aircraft into its fleet.  The induction 
programme started with effect from mid 2007 and would continue till early 2010.  
Currently, it operates 35 A320s, 18 A319s, 13 A321s and two A330s of Airbus 
family aircraft.   

 
 
The facility would also cater to the markets in South Asia Regio n and 
neighbouring countries.  By 2013, over one hundred single aisle aircraft and 
around ten wide body aircraft per year would be maintained and the centre would 
employ 250 to 300 Indian technical personnel.  Other Indian as well as foreign 
operators / airlines would also benefit from its services soon.  
Both NACIL and EADS are initially 50 -50 equity partners in the Joint Venture. A 
third Airbus network partner and local affiliate EADS company would be inducted 
soon.  The total project cost has been estimated at US $ 40 million spread over 5 
years which includes new wide body aircraft hangars, equipment etc.   
After the induction of Airbus Network Partner is inducted into the JVC, NACIL 
and (EADS and IAV) would divest equal proportions of their shareholding in JVC  
Lock-in period of EADS France shareholding in the JVC would  be minimum of 
four (4) years from the closing date.” 
 
A. Ground Handling Services-Joint Venture 
6.2 On being asked whether the Company has entered into or proposed to enter into 
any Joint Venture Agreement with any other Government Company or private agency or 
international organization, NACIL stated as under:-  
“Yes, NACIL has entered into Joint Venture with Singapore Air Terminal Services 
(SATS) at BLR & HYD for providing Ground Handling Services.  Besides NACIL 
is in the process of discussion with SATS to undertake ground handling services 
at other Metro Airports other than BLR & HYD.” 
6.3 NACIL was asked to state the reasons for entering into a Joint Venture with 
Singapore Air Terminal Services for provision of ground handling s ervices.  The replies 
furnished are as under:- 
“NACIL has entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Singapore Airport 
Terminal Services for Ground Handling at Bangalore International Airport and 
Rajiv Gandhi International Airport at Hyderabad. 
One of the various selection criteria stipulated by BIAL for awarding Ground 
Handling at the new Bangalore International Airport, was "International 
experience and network of Ground Handling Services at best inter national 
standards and competitive prices at airports similar to the size and set up of the 
new Bangalore International Airport (25%)". 
With regard to the above selection criteria, NACIL decided to enter into a JV with 
an international experienced Ground H andling Agent.  Out of the Foreign 
Handling Agents shortlisted by BIAL, only Swiss port and SATS had submitted 
the tender as independent unit, whereas other global players had joined hands 
with Indian partners.  M/s Swiss port had declined the offer for a Joint Venture 

 
 
partnership with NACIL for Cargo and hence there was no other independent 
international operator other than SATS shortlisted by BIAL.  As such it was felt 
appropriate to join hands with SATS for submission of tender for Ground 
Handling at BIA L.  This was particularly in view of the fact that Air India had 
agreed to go jointly with SATS for submission of tender for Cargo. 
At Hyderabad, a pre -condition to qualify in the tender procedure was to form a 
consortium with third party ground handling s ervice provider or the ground 
handling subsidiary of a foreign airline or parent company of an airline offering 
ground handling service. 
GHIAL had shortlisted 10 International Ground Handling Agencies apart from Air 
India and Indian Airlines operating thro ugh Hyderabad Airport, to whom the 
tender was sent.  Out of these 10 parties, only M/s SATS from Singapore and 
M/s DNATA from Dubai had shown interest to join NACIL as JV partner.  
Therefore, Security Clearance for SATS and DNATA was asked for, from the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India, on the direction of AI Board.  
Ministry of Civil Aviation informed Air India that Security Clearance has been 
accorded by Government for AI/IC to have M/s SATS as the JV Partner. 
Further, the Civil Aviation Po licy vide Sl.No. 7/2007 dated 28th September 2007 
para 2 (A) (i) confirms that Subsidiary Company of NACIL or its Joint Venture is 
eligible to undertake Ground Handling Services at all Metro Airports in addition to 
the Handling Agencies appointed by Airport Operator. 
In view of the above, NACIL after getting concurrence from MOCA, entered into a 
Joint Venture with SATS, at BLR and HYD.” 
6.4 The projected financial implications of the joint-venture as provided by NACIL are 
given below:-  
“The JV with SATS ha s been approved for implementation at all metro airports. 
As a result of the Joint Venture the revenues from the Ground Handling business 
would accrue to the Joint Venture Company and NACIL and SATS would have 
an equity participation of 50:50 in the Joint Venture Company. The Business Plan 
for the metro airports (other than BLR & HYD) is still in the process of being 
finalized.” 
6.5 On being asked to state whether there are plans to review or extend the Joint 
Venture, NACIL replied as under:- 
 “Yes.  There are plans to review the Joint Venture.” 
6.6 The Committee asked NACIL to explain why on one hand NACIL opted for a 
Joint Venture for ground handling services when on the other hand they say that they 
have a large number of staff who can provide ground hand ling services to all the 
carriers in the country. NACIL replied thus:- 

 
 
“NACIL has entered into a consortium  at Bangalore and Hyderabad airports with 
SATS. This consortium was necessitated due to precondition of Tender 
requirements of BLR and HYD airports i n which to qualify international 
experience was one of its major pre-requirements to bid.  
For other airports, NACIL is in the process of discussions with SATS. While the 
government has accorded approval to NACIL to enter into a joint venture, SATS 
has pro posed that this joint venture be formed with its subsidiary, SATS 
Investment Private Limited.  The due diligence process is under progress and 
NACIL has sought details of ownership which are yet to be sorted out.  
As per Ground handling policy, NACIL can u ndertake providing Ground Handling 
services either through joint venture or through its own subsidiary.  To take 
advantage of this government policy NACIL is considering to carry out the ground 
handling through its subsidiary, Air India Air Transport Servi ces Limited to enable 
provide ground handling to all carriers in the Country.” 
6.7 The Secretary, Civil Aviation stated the following in the above matter:- 
“The SATS is a joint venture for ground handling not for the MRO.  For the 
ground handling, actually, this has not been yet formed; it is under discussion.  It 
is because, as you have rightly pointed out, Air India has got grandfather rights in 
all these airports.  We are very clear that we do not want to surrender or negate 
any of this.  In fact, even t his morning, I had a discussion with the CMD.  So, 
discussions are going on.  I can assure you that we will not do anything where 
these rights are compromised in any way.” 
6.8 In this connection, the Committee during oral evidence of the representatives of  
NACIL made the following observations:- 
“…..The entire engineering contingent you are having can serve all the airlines 
operating in our country. Similarly, in the matter of ground handling also. Why are 
you allowing ground handling?  You are not allowing  but somebody else is 
allowing. Why a position should not be taken to the effect that ground handling of 
the entire country should remain with you completely?  The Committee may take 
a view that the engineering services which is related to the safety shoul d also be 
centralised and the service has to be taken by all concerned.  That way, it would 
give a much better avenue in making better use of the skilled manpower.” 
6.9 In this regard, the CMD, NACIL further elaborated as under:- 
“….When nobody was doing ground handling, it was Air India and NACIL staff 
which was doing ground handling on behalf of the airport operators.  Today, with 
open sky policy which is a new policy, they have allowed the airport operators to 
identify and appoint their own ground handling agent.  Therefore, what is 
happening is that in Bangalore, Hyderabad, Cochin and now followed by Delhi 
and Mumbai, the airport operator being a private operator, he is being given the 
authority under the concession to appoint their own ground handling agents to do 

 
 
this work.  In Bangalore and Hyderabad where when they called for tenders, Air 
India or Indian Airlines were not eligible to participate in the ground handling.  We 
had to join one more international ground handling agenc y to just qualify.  It is a 
joint venture in the sense that it is a consortium.  We both agreed to spend our 
own money.  We handle our own work and the operator handles this one.  So, if 
you go to Bangalore and Hyderabad, if you fly a private airline or yo u fly any 
international airline, the ground handling will be under an organisation know as 
Air India SAT but actually only when you fly on Indian Airlines and Air India, you 
will find Indian Airlines staff doing the job.  Internally it is segregated.   Now under 
these circumstances, at NACIL in the management we have taken a stand that 
the ground handling which is doing business for 19 airlines all over the country, 
this should be floated into a separate subsidiary. For the entire 8000 employees 
there, give them the full freedom; let them service not only Indian Airlines and Air 
India but also everybody else on the same pricing.  This is what we had 
submitted to the Standing Committee also.  The hon. Committee had agreed to 
our suggestion saying that yes, NA CIL will have to go in for a subsidiary, 
segregate the engineering completely, allow them to have a Rs.3000 crore 
business, segregate the ground handling and allow to have something like 
Rs.1000 to Rs.2000 crore business, segregate your cargo and segregate  your 
training. ….” 
6.10 On whether NACIL have made any proposal to the Government requesting for 
vesting of the whole ground handling services for all airlines with them, NACIL 
submitted in their written replies as under:- 
“Ground Handling Services at the  airports are governed by the Government's 
Ground Handling Policy issued from time to time .  
In order to improve the Ground Handling Services, Government of India has 
come out with the policy to increase competition and allow other Ground 
Handling Service  Providers to provide Ground Handling Services at Metro 
Airports. 
NACIL has been permitted by the Government of India to provide Ground 
Handling either through its subsidiary or by a joint venture partner.  However 
obtaining business will depend upon the m arket conditions/ competition 
prevailing. 
NACIL has not projected any proposal to Government of India for vesting of 
whole Ground Handling 
Services for all airlines with NACIL.” 
6.11 The Secretary, during oral evidence stated the following regarding creation of 
strategic Business Units (SBUs) for ground handling and MRO services:- 
 

 
 
“One point that the hon. Member had made was about using the kind of talent 
and the schemes that are available in Air India. I would be very happy to inform 
you that we are now in the process of setting up the SBUs, the Special Business 
Units for ground handling and for MRO. This will be spun off as a separate unit 
for everything so that the additional employees can be absorbed into this 
because from about 30,000, we can com e down to about 20,000. This is very 
much in consideration and we hope to operationalise this soon. Absolutely, it will 
be completely a company of NACIL. There is no joint venture or anything. This is 
called SBU. In fact, this was also one of the recommend ations of the Consultant. 
Actually, in my view, this should have been done first so that the employee kind 
of problem would not have come. If we had got into SBU, this would have been 
hived off. They would have been happy and they would have played a role.  So, 
this is also being done.” 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER 7. 
HUMAN RESOURCE 
A. Manpower 
7.1 Details regarding the total staff strength in NACIL (both sanctioned and in 
position) at present , any surplus manpower in the Company and the breakup of staff 
strength as on 31.08.2009 in NACIL are as follows:- 
 
“NACIL (A) - 13739 
NACIL (I) - 16778 
TOTAL FOR NACIL- 30517   
 
As for the sanctioned strength, the Company has done away with the concept of 
sanctioned strength and the existing strength is taken as operating strength.” 
7.2 On the issue of poaching of NACIL‟s skilled manpower by private operators and 
steps taken to prevent these activities, NACIL replied as under:-  
“NACIL-I has just sufficient pilots to meet the schedule requirem ent of 
Operations.  After the advent of open sky policy of the Government of India in the 
early 90s, there was mushrooming growth of private airlines and air taxi 
operators and erstwhile Indian Airlines experienced exodus of pilots. 
With the passage of tim e, keeping in view the development of aviation in the 
Indian scenario, necessary amendments  have been  made by NACIL -I through 
the service regulations that stipulate six months notice period for tendering 
resignation from the services of NACIL -I.  Similarly, the DGCA through issuance 
of a CAR made it mandatory on part of a pilot to serve a notice of six months 
before joining any other operator from the serving employer. 
In addition, it is the endeavor of NACIL -I to select, train and release pilots on 
routes as per the schedule requirements of the airline.  As per the industry 
practice and as per the industrial dispute act the company encourages collective 
bargaining and recognized line pilots association negotiate with the management 
of NACIL-I  on all matt ers concerning the service regulations, working conditions 
and conditions of labor which is a successful democratic practice adopted by all 
companies.  The pilots are offered reasonable career progression opportunities 
for professional development as well as to administratively / hierarchically  
develop  in the company.  The pilots are offered early command training, 
reasonable pay package and other associated security packages making the 
working conditions impressive. 
The above factors act as a restraint a gainst poaching of pilots of NACIL -I.  Only 
13 resignations of Pilots and 02 resignations of Engineers have been accepted 
since the year 2002 in NACIL-I and there are negligible number of resignations in 

 
 
NACIL-A. (Pilot 1, Engineer -5). Further, 12 Flight D espatchers have submitted 
resignations in 2008. The same have, however, not been accepted.  
NACIL is, however, resorting to recruitment of technical manpower like Pilots, 
Engineers, Technicians/Cabin Crew on a regular basis.  During the last five 
years, 752 Pilots (473 in NACIL -I and 279 in NACIL -A), 299 Engineers (243 in 
NACIL-I and 56 in NACIL -A), 633 Technicians (201 in NACIL -I and 432 in 
NACIL-A) and 1748 Cabin Crew (763 in NACIL-I and 985 in NACIL-A) have been 
inducted.” 
7.3 Details about manpower per aircraft and comparison with private airlines and 
international standards as furnished by NACIL are given below:-   
“The employees per Aircraft Ratio as on 31.05.2009 for the airline is as under :- 
 NACIL (A)  : 1 : 286 
 NACIL (I) : 1 : 177 
 NACIL   : 1 : 214 
 
There is no international benchmarking for an ideal aircraft to employee ratio. 
Aircraft to employee ratio varies from airline to airline depending upon the nature 
and extent of functions performed in house as most of the airlines have 
outsourced majority of its functions which are still being performed in -house by 
the Company. Concluding therefore,  that  aircraft/employee ratio of  NACIL  is  
extremely  high or misleading, may not be correct as foreign airlines invariably do 
not perform the functions  such as Aircraft Major Maintenance Activities, Ground 
Handling activities, Vigilance, Transport, Medical, Civil Engineering, Ministry 
references/Parliament questions etc. nor do they have to maintain departments 
such as Rajbhasha, Internal Audit etc. Comparison, therefore, cannot be drawn. 
This compares with any other world-class airline as illustrated below: 
Aircraft Employee Ratio of other Airlines 
Name of the Airlines  Aircraft/Employee ratio 
British Airways   178 
Air Lanka    434 
Air France    245 
Egypt Air    568 
PIA     380 
KLM     220 
Thai Airways    321 
Singapore Airlines   161 
Malaysian Airlines   230 
Virgin Atlantic   282 
 

 
 
(Source: IATA WORLD TRANSPORT STATISTICS 45th Edition published in 
2001)” 
B. Salary and Wages 
7.4 NACIL was asked to state whether there is any parity between the terms and 
conditions and the salary and wages that are paid to pilots who were with Air India or 
Indian Airlines earlier and who have now been amalgamated as Air India Pilots .  It was 
also asked if a fter the merger,  whether the terms and conditions are same for all .  
NACIL replied the following:- 
“There is no parity between the terms and conditions of Salary, PLI and Flying 
Related Allowances since the employees of NACIL, including Pilots are paid 
salary, PLI and Fly ing Related Allowances in terms of the 
Settlement/Agreements/Understandings signed with the respective 
Union/Associations/Guild of erstwhile Indian Airlines and Air India. 
Subsequent to merger the integration and harmonization of Salary, PLI and 
Flying Rel ated Allowances have not yet been completed in respect of all 
employees including Pilots of the erstwhile Airlines and they continue to be paid 
as per the existing Settlements signed with their respective 
Union/Associations/Guild.” 
7.5 Regarding disparity between the two erstwhile airlines, the CMD, NACIL,during 
oral evidence, stated the following before the Committee:- 
“….What has happened is though these two are public sector undertakings in 
Civil Aviation industry their internal procedures, processes, hu man relations, 
working conditions, timings and methods of dealing are totally different.  For 
example, I readily agree with you when you asked why there is disparity between 
the two companies.  I will just present it to you, Sir. 
In Air India when a pilot is taken on we give him an advance in dollars in the 
beginning of the month.  He takes six months to reconcile the account and give it 
back.  In Indian Airlines we do not give.  We ask him to spend and then he is 
reimbursed the amount.  These two are two c onditions which are there.  Pilots 
are asking parity with Air India.  The point, Sir, is the pilots in Indian Airlines who 
are flying wide body can ask for parity with Air India but pilots who are flying only 
narrow body cannot ask for parity with wide bod y.  In best of the best airlines 
wide body are different.  Secondly, Indian Airlines pilots operate on single time 
zone or the maximum two time zones.  Air India pilots and cabin crew have to 
operate on three or four time zones.  If they leave their destin ations they are 
away for 15 to 20 days.  If Indian Airlines pilots have to leave their destination at 
the maximum within 48 hours they are back home.  So, the conditions are totally 
different in terms of operation.  This is more complicated by the fact tha t the 
DGCA has very clearly laid down the safety rules saying under what conditions 
you are going to use the pilots and how are they going to be used.  Therefore, 

 
 
what has happened is that Indian Airlines has bases in Chennai, Kolkata, Delhi, 
Mumbai and al so some bases in Kerala.  Indian Airlines people move their 
resources to wherever the operations are.  Within Air India they do not do that.  
All the resources of Air India are based predominantly in Mumbai itself.  To shift 
them to Delhi also becomes a li ttle difficult task.  What happens is, we take the 
resources out of Mumbai, bring them to Amritsar and Delhi and then make them 
fly the international flight and come back.  They come back to Mumbai.  So, we 
have to pay for the positioning flight whereas we  do not have to pay for the 
positioning flights in the Indian Airlines concept.  There are some discrepancies 
in that, there are problems on that but we need to sort them out. 
Now, with regard to the working conditions, Air India employee have five days a 
week.  He sits next to an Indian Airlines employee who has six days week.  Air 
India‟s employee lunch hour is specific.  He goes out for his lunch and comes 
back.  Indian Airlines the lunch hour is specific but it is rotated.  So, even in lunch 
hour if you go to the Indian Airlines counter you may get the ticket but if you go to 
the Air India they will say it is lunch hour you may come back after the lunch 
hour.  Both are sitting in the same room.  Problem came up in Kolkata when a 
customer asked could he c ome to their office to buy a ticket.  They did not 
answer the question properly and asked him to come.  When he came, he 
wanted to buy an international ticket, he was told to come at 3.00 o‟ clock 
because lunch hours were there.  We have got 38 hours, 44 h ours and 48 hours 
week.  To rationalise this means I have to sit down with all the employees and 
change the conditions.  No two employees are willing to change the condition.  
They are asking should they work on a 48 hours or 38 hours week.  Everybody 
agrees to a 38 hours week.  Today, conditions have changed.  Everybody is 
moving to more or less 45 to 48 hours per week.  These are issues which are 
coming in. 
There is also an issue about the caps given to Indian Airlines pilots are different 
from the Air In dia pilots.  Discrepancies are such that quite a number of these 
issues are embedded in the agreement with the Union itself.  I have 14 Unions 
representing.  Some of them are recognised and some are not.  Each one has an 
issue on hand and each one has got the capacity to incapacitate the company.  
Each one has its own issue. ….”  
7.6 The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation further added while deposing before the 
Committee on this issue:- 
“The manpower integration, I am sorry to say, has not happened.  There are, as 
hon. Members have correctly pointed out, a lot of anomalies between the Indian 
Airlines and the Air India workers at different levels.  This is causing tremendous 
heartburn and I feel that we really have to address this.  Though there were 
grievance redressal committees, they have not really been very functional.  This 
is a top priority because unless there is a merger in the hearts of the employees, 
this will not happen.  This is something that is of great concern to us. 

 
 
What we have now done  is that we have set up a Cross -functional Integration 
Cell headed by the CMD and a three -tier grievance redressal mechanism where 
we are looking at the entire wage pattern and the anomalies.  I am quite sure that 
this will result in a wage agreement becau se this is giving a lot of motivational 
problems for an organisation which is already ventilating. This point of the 
Members on the manpower anomalies is also being taken and this is a cause for 
a lot of integration problems, along with the IT integration,  as you have said, 
ticket booking and all that.   That has now reached the final stage and very 
shortly, I think, the IT integrator will be in place so that both IC and Air India thing 
could be taken up.  So, these two -three issues have been really causing  a lot of 
problems.   
Though it may not be possible to de -merge things, what we are now looking at is 
that let us have a kind of pause mode to see that we get out of this financial crisis 
by having the Air India and Indian Airlines run as separate streams within the 
merger and not cause too much of difficulties because of all this. ….” 
7.7 The Committee further asked Secretary, Civil Aviation, the following:- 
“As you have said, the merger took a very long process. You have appointed 
consultant and then screening was done.  It was screened at the level of the 
Cabinet Secretary.  I would like to know whether your consultant has suggested 
to you about the problems of anomalies, the problems of the employees in 
respect of the merger.  I would like to know whether the consultant has 
suggested these to you; and if he has suggested these, then whether you 
considered them or not.   
Secondly, you have accepted that many a nomalies are still persisting.  Do you 
think that full preparation was not done before taking a decision on the merger?  I 
would also like to know as to what steps were taken at the level of the Ministry 
about the anomalies which are still persisting.  Do you think that full preparation 
was not done before the merger decision was taken? 
7.8 To the query put forth, the Secretary replied:- 
“Sir, regarding the anomalies, it was mentioned in the Report of the consultant 
also that this would be one issue and pai n point that we really have to consider.  
It was suggested at that time itself that there would be grievance redressal 
machinery in the Ministry to look into this with the Additional Secretary and FA 
but in operationalizing, the problem was much larger tha n was really thought of.  
So, that is why we have now set up this very important coordination cell with the 
CMD and a three -tier machinery.  This has happened two or three months back  
…..Before the merger, actually the only step was that there was grievanc e 
redressal machinery set up in the Ministry under the FA to look into all these 
things. It was set up.  There were some meetings but that was, very frankly to 
admit, not enough definitely.” 
 

 
 
7.9 The Committee further stated the following:-  
“There is a difference between grievance redressal committee and the anomalies 
committee.  Redressal means if something is left out, then the employees would 
come for its redressal..  But not taking any decision about the employees is not 
redressal.  You should have t aken a decision as to what will happen to the Air 
India staff, to the Airlines staff.  There are several categories of employees such 
as crew members, ground staff and pilots.  Anomaly redressal and grievance 
redressal are two different things.  If somebody is getting Rs. 10,000, then he can 
say that he wants Rs. 500 more.  That should come under grievance.  But it is a 
total anarchy.  No decision about the employees was taken before the merger.  
Do you agree with it?” 
7.10 The Secretary, Civil Aviation adm itted that much more had to be done and that 
there were anomalies. He stated as under:-  
“Yes.  Definitely much more had to be done in terms of this.  It was a grievance 
as well as an anomaly which was causing the grievance.  So, this was something 
that was really not taken care of.  I do admit that there was an anomaly.” 
7.11 On the issue of how much money being saved in percentage and in quantum, by 
reduction in salaries, NACIL replied the following:- 
“The company has not effected any reduction in the salaries of the employees of 
NACIL.  As such, the question of saving does not arise.”  
7.12 NACIL was asked to elucidate how any reduction in salary would bridge the gap 
in the deficit faced by the airline.  NACIL replied as under:- 
“Considering the mounting financial losses of the Company and the requirements 
of the Government in order to consider support to the Company, the Board of 
Directors of NACIL directed the Management to work out an alternate scheme to 
the Performance Linked i ncentive which should be related to the actual revenue 
performance, profitability, on time performance of the Company in terms of bench 
mark fixed and in respect of flying crew also the flying hours flown.  
The Board directed the Management to effect a 50%  reduction in the PLI 
payments (including flying related allowances paid to crew) to all categories of 
employees including flying crew.  
The recommendations of the 5 Member Committee was discussed in the 22nd 
Meeting of the Board of Directors held on 10th September 2009 followed by 
detailed discussions in the 23rd Meeting of the Board held on 23 September 
2009. It was decided that the reduction in PLI and flying related allowances 
would be immediately given effect in respect of Executives of all streams and  
officers of NACIL. i.e. From the level of Officers in erstwhile Indian Airlines in the 
pay scale of Rs.9000 -14300 and above and Assistant Manager (Grade 25) in 
erstwhile Air India in the pay scale of Rs.8550 – 13600 and above.   

 
 
Accordingly an Office Orde r was issued on 24th September 2009 by the 
Management.  
Slabs (Rs.) 
 
Percentage Amount at the top of the Grades 
Upto 10000         25% Rs.2500 
10001-25000 35% Rs.2500+35% of 15000 
25001-50000 40% Rs.7750+40% of 25000 
50001-200000 45% Rs.17750+45% of 150000 
Above 200000 
 
50% 
 
Rs.85250+50% excess over 
200000 
 
 
In addition to the above, the following allowances will stand abolished /modified 
as under: 
1.   Executive Pilots of erstwhile Air India/India Airlines: 
     Entertainment Allowance while on flying duty at outstation away from       
       base. 
2.  Executive Pilots of erstwhile Indian Airlines: 
    a.  Executive flying allowance. 
      b.  25% above the applicable flying allowance for undertaking training on  
           simulator. 
      c.  50% additional over the applicable flying allowance for undertaking hub  
          and spoke flights. 
     d.  Payment for carrying out observation flights. 
However, the said Order was kept in abey ance and a Board Sub Commit tee was 
constituted to examine all related issues and submit its recommendations to the 
Board. Further, a separate Order has also been issued by the Operations 
Department whereby it was decided that as far as issues concerning Executive 
Pilots, a Committee would be constituted of Executive Pilots to discuss the issue.  
The recommendations of the Board sub-Committee are awaited.”  
7.13 With regard to rationalizing the manpower cost, the Committee observed the 
following:- 
“….firstly you have given an elaborat e structure of the cost in the whole 
programme.  I think, more than extra emphasis has been given in rationalising 
the manpower cost.  Your cost structure shows that around 34 per cent of your 
cost is from fuel and the manpower cost, in fact, gone down ove r the previous 
year to around 16.2 per cent.  So, by rationalising on manpower cost just having 
16.2 per cent share in your total cost structure, how much you can maximum 
optimise when in an operational company like NACIL where manpower is a 
crucial element in keep your flights, flying.  So, I think this needs to be given a 
serious look because whatever statement we see in the newspapers even in the 
last couple of weeks everywhere it is hinging on manpower cost.  I think that is 
creating a kind of situation which is also demoralising your work force banking on 
whom you have to make turn around or you have to revive.  I think on this 

 
 
whether there is any scope of drawing a balance in your public statements and if 
you can kindly inspire your Minister also to b ecome rational in public statements 
because everywhere manpower is being made the villain.  It is being told that you 
have a basic pay of Rs.70,000 and APL payment of Rs.6 lakh.  After all they 
have not given it to themselves.  It is a system which has giv en it to them.  So, 
instead of putting a blame at the right point, if you go on just doing it, that will 
have a demoralising affect.  So, on that issue a serious rethink is required.”   
7.14 Details regarding number of foreign pilots and Indian pilots are given below:- 
“The total strength of Indian / foreign Pilots in NACIL as on 12.11.2009 is as 
under: 
SI No. Details 
 
NACIL (A) NACIL (I) TOTAL 
1. 
 
Indian Pilots 
 
633 
 
834 
 
1467 
 
2 
 
Foreign Pilots 
 
151 
 
- 151 
 
 
In NACIL (I) no foreign pilots are recruited as a matter of policy.” 
7.15 The details of respective flying hours, the respective package and the share of 
foreign pilots‟ remuneration in the to tal pilots remuneration package are given below by 
NACIL:- 
“In NACIL (I) no foreign pilots are recruited as a matter of policy.  
Average Flying Hours of Pilots as per Oct 2009 
  
 
 
 
Note: There is no difference in average flying hours of Indian pilots versus foreign 
pilots.  
Pay package comparison of Pilots of NACIL (A) 
 
Indian Pilots: 
First officers: Regular salary as per their grade and scale plus flying allowance 
varies between 
 CMDR   FO 
 
777 66.58 63.34 
744 39.84 35.44 
310 24.75 20.51 
737 68.10 59.62 

 
 
 $ 1005 to 6117 from 0 - 10 years 
Commanders: Regular Salary as per their grade and scale plus flying allowance 
varies between 
 $ 8121 to 13783 from 0 - 10 years and beyond 
Overtime allowance as applicable if their utilization goes beyond 80 Hrs per 
month or 480 hours in 6 months. 
Foreign pilots: 
B777  Commander - $ 12,700 per month 
B737  Commander - $ 10,000       " 
A310  Commander - $   8,750       " 
B747  Commander - $   8,750       " 
B777  First Officer - $   6,700        " 
 
In addition to the above following bonus is also paid: 
First year        -  $ 12,000 
Second year   -  $ 12,000 
Third Year       -  $ 15,000 
Forth Year      -  $  15,000 
 
Time off: 7 days off each calendar month or 14 days in each 2 calendar month 
period. 
Travel to Home: 1 round ticket from their place of residence to base of operation 
once in a month. 
Overtime allowance as applicable if their utilization goes beyond 80 Hrs per 
month.” 
7.16 On this issue, the CMD, NACIL clarified the following- 
“…..There was a question about expat pilots.  I want to tell you that all the expat 
pilots who are there, they are not in Indian Airlines.  All of them are in 777 and 
737-800.  777 and 737 -800 have come into India in the last two years.  The 
simulators were not in India.  The simulators are from outside.  The commanders 
require minimum training. The DGCA says that if you want to be a commander 
on 777, you should have a minimum of 500 hours of flying experience.  Whereas 
it is not necessary in the USA.  In USA i f you are doing lesser number of hours, 
you will get a certificate.  Now, I have to run the flight.  Expat pilots are 
commanders. We have not taken any expat pilots for copilots. All the copilots are 
Indians. With our 777 simulators coming to India, our ch ances of getting 
commanders in India will be higher because the simulation will be done in India 
and they will continue to do a lot of simulation training in Mumbai itself.  Once 
that happens, we do not require the expat pilots.  Expat pilots are all 

 
 
commanders.  The impression given is that as if the copilots are also expats.  
That is not so.  We have got about 170 expat pilots.  Half of them are employed 
in Air India Express on 737 -800 and half of them are in the 777, which is under 
Air India. I have no p roblem.  I will remove them.  The moment I remove them I 
do not have commanders.  If I do not have commanders I will not be able to run 
the airlines.  I am put in this situation.  The media and the employees who are 
trying to tell us about this one is that  basically why do you not touch the 
commanders on hand.  I would like to touch the commanders and replace them 
with the Indian commanders.  But I require time to replace them.  The DGCA has 
asked us to give a time frame under which we want to do it.  Becau se of the 777 
simulator available with us, we should be able to do it.  Another grouse is this.  
The commanders in 777 are being converted from pilots of 777 Air India.  Indian 
Airlines pilots are not getting chance to become commander on the 777 because 
Indian Airlines pilots are all getting trained and becoming commanders on Airbus.  
Now, the DGCA will not allow me to shift the pilots overnight who are trained in 
airbus to 777.  It has a wide body.  The conditions are different and the demands 
are different.  The DGCA conditions are different.  So, even if I merge and bring 
one pilot cadre, still I will have what is known as Airbus cadre and 777 cadre.” 
7.17 The Committee stated that NACIL‟s cost structu re shows that around 34% of 
their cost is from fuel a nd the manpower cost has gone down over the previous year to 
around 16.2%.  As manpo wer is a crucial element in NACIL‟s  operations, whether a 
serious rethink is required on the issue of reduction of manp ower.  Their reply is as 
under:- 
“With the merger of two airlines, certain activities which were hitherto being 
performed separately in the two organizations have been clubbed and thus 
manpower shortages are being overcome to some extent.  
There is no freeze in recruitment on operational manpower like Pilots , Engineers, 
Service Engineers and Cabin Crew and proposals put up by the user department 
are examined and based on the requirements of the Company, the manpower is 
augmented through external recruitment and internal redeployment.  
However, in order to tid e over the present financial crisis being faced by the 
Company, all recruitment actions have been kept in abeyance for the present.” 
C. Protection of Interest of the Employees of NACIL 
 
7.18 Ministry of Civil Aviation were asked to state what steps were taken to protect the 
interests of the employees of the Indian Airlines and Air India during th e merger process 
in respect of f ixing of common seniority , fixation of pay scales , pay protection and no 
adverse effect on various incentives being drawn by them.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation 
furnished their written replies as under:- 
 

 
 
 “The Scheme of Amalgamation inter alia provides that with effect from appointed 
date and upon the scheme becoming effective, any and all employees employ in 
connection with a working of the transferor companies as on the effective date 
shall become the empl oyees of the transferee company employed without any 
breach or any interruption of service and subject to the provisions of the scheme, 
on terms and conditions not less favourable than those applicable to them as on 
effective date.    
  
The Scheme of Amalgamation inter alia further provides that the transferee 
company undertakes to continue to abide by any agreements/settlements enter 
into with any recognized labour unions/employees and also applicable Awards of 
Tribunal/Arbitrator by the transferor companies.   
               
Further also, the Scheme of Amalgamation provides that the Officers or other 
employees who have retired before the appointed date from the services of the 
transferor companies and are entitled to any benefits, rights  or privileges, shall 
be entitled to receive the similar benefits, rights or privileges from the transferee 
company.  
 
The merger is proposed to be achieved in a phased manner.   The issues 
regarding determination of inter -se seniority, compensation, etc. w ould be 
addressed by taking due consideration of the le gitimate employee interests.   A 
well structured grievance redressal machinery has also be put in place to 
address the employee grievances, be they of individual nature or of a nature 
relating to a group/class of employees.” 
 
7.19 With regard to HR integration, CMD, NACIL stated the following:- 
 
“….The issue about the integration not user -friendly in practical terms and no 
integration has been done, I agree with you on that.  There are a lot of issues. 
HR issue is a big issue which is going to come up.  But let me submit that Air 
India and Indian Airlines scales and designations also do not match; even if the 
designations match, the working conditions do not match; if the working 
conditions match, non -wage related allowances do not match; even if the non -
wage related allowances match, the attitude of the two people do not match; and 
even if the attitude matches, in a same pay scale, everything matches etc., the 
age difference is there. There are officers in either organisations who say that I 
recruited him, I was in the interview to recruit him and he and I am also on the 
same scale, same work etc.  So, the list is endless.  I am just submitting to you 
that we are trying to make sure that similarly placed employees in that particular 
category will work in a similar work environment.  That means, if the Trivandrum 
Airport is to be run by the Indian Airlines staff, it would be fully Indian Airlines 
staff. The Cochin Airport is going to be fully run by Air Ind ia staff so that there is 
no disharmony between the two sorts of things.  At least they will run on their 
own till we are able to get harmonization done……"   
 
 

 
 
 
7.20 The Ministry of Civil Aviation were asked w hether promotions of officials which 
were due on 1.4.2007 in Air India and Indian Airlines were given before fixation of their 
common seniority and details thereof.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation stated the 
following:- 
 
“Promotions of officials of both erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines were carried 
out as per the erstwhile promotion policy and guidelines after 
01.04.2007.  However, in terms of the instructions from the Ministry regarding 
interim governance in view of the merger of Air India Ltd. and Indian Airlines to 
form National Aviation C o. of India Ltd., promotions to the grade of General 
Manager and Executive Directors were not carried out until a merged seniority 
was worked out.  Accordingly promotions to the grade of Executive Director were 
carried out in August 2008 on merged seniorit y.  Similarly, promotions to the 
grade of General Managers were carried out in March 2009 on merged seniority 
for all departments except cadres of Engineering, Operations and Ground 
Support.      
                        
Promotions to the post of Dy. Genera l Manager, a Notification No. 03 of 2009 
dated 25.03.09 was issued to carry out promotions in the merged 
entity.  However, the promotion process is yet to be completed. 
 
Further, promotions in different grades below the grade of Dy. General Manager 
in both erstwhile Air India Ltd and Indian Airlines have been carried out before 
the fixation of their common seniority till July 2009.” 
  
D. Training of Employees 
7.21 With regard to training of the employees of NACIL, CMD,  NACIL during oral 
evidence before the committee, made the following observations:- 
 
“…. I would like to submit to the hon. Committee that we have simulators for 
Boeing 777 and we have simulators in Hyderabad also.  These simulators are 
capable of not only training Indian Airline pilots in NACI L but also capable of 
training others.  Therefore, if it is a part of Indian Airlines when we try to do 
business under the departmental situation, it does not happen.   So, what we are 
saying is that just like the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) which 
has set up its own training institute like PMI, - they would have submitted all 
those papers – we are trying to follow that model where a totally full -fledged 
independent training system is there.  To inform you about the attitude of the 
employees and all that, for the last two -three years no employee has undergone 
any training.  This is a hospitality sector where every employee will have to go for 
more than one training in six months.  Unless this training is done, it will not be 
possible.  So, we have tried to join hand with hospitality sector like Tata Group of 
companies who are willing to offer a free training facility in Aurangabad for our 
crew and others.  It is a regular process.  You would ask a question why was it 

 
 
not done earlier.  I will not  be able to answer that question why it was not done 
earlier but I would like to say that we are sensitive to this. ….” 
  

 
 
PART-B 
Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
 At the very outset, the Committee would like to emphasise that the primary 
endeavour of the Committee is to address the root causes of malaises afflicting 
the Public Sector Undertaking(s) being examined and  to propose ways and 
means for revival and effective functioning of s uch PSU(s).  It is with this 
approach that the Committee have proceeded with the comprehensive 
examination of NACIL. 
 The Committee would now like to dwell upon the issues in the order of their 
emergence.  The root cause of the malaises afflicting NACIL is  the very „merger‟ 
which brought this entity into being.  Hence, the issues relating to merger of 
erstwhile Indian airlines and Air India form the fulcrum of the Committee‟s 
deliberations.  
I. Merger of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines  
The Committee n ote that National Aviation Company of India (NACIL), the 
merged entity of the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines, formed ostensibly to 
bring the two individual carriers out of their losses by drawing synergies out of 
the merger, is today fast slipping  further into an abyss.  A consequential fallout, 
therefore, is emergence of a volley of questions and a crying need for their 
answers. The COPU, whose primary concern is to see that each of the Central 
Public Enterprises flourish es, feel that there is an urgent need to discern the 
problems being faced by the Public airline company and facilitate its revival into a 
financially viable and profitable enterprise. 
The Committee find it pertinent to note that in the pre -merged scenario, Indian 
Airlines had regis tered profits between 2003 and 2006 and  so had Air India 
between 2001 and 2006. In 2006 -07, the losses incurred by both companies 
totalled Rs. 688.22 Crore (Rs. 447.93  crore-AI + Rs. 240.29  crore-IA). In 2007 -08, 
the merged airline suffered losses totaling Rs. 2226 Crore, Rs. 5488 Crore in 2008-
09, while the projections for the losses in 2009 -10 are even higher. The 

 
 
multiplication of losses suggested that something is radically wrong either with 
the projections of the benefits of the merger or with the impl ementation of the 
merger.  
The Committee are of the considered opinion that the merger was flawed at 
its very inception and it never really took off, as is well evident from various 
documents on record. 
A critical fact to be noted is that prior to the merger, Air India and Indian 
Airlines were distinct entities having wide variances in critical areas such as 
operations, fleet requirement, requisite expertise, service conditions to a good 
measure, conditio ns of recruitment, pay structures, IT requirements and 
functioning. The post -merger scenario clearly vindicates lack of proper 
examination/scrutiny of these critical issues and an undue haste by the 
Government and the NACIL. The so -called merger is nothing  but a kind of 
marriage between two incompatible individuals with hardly any meeting ground. 
The Committee note with concern that the merger of the erstwhile Indian 
Airlines and Air India was an ill -conceived and erroneous decision neither arrived 
at by the two Airlines on their own accord nor mutually considered by them to be 
in their best interests.  On the contrary, in the years preceding the merger, the 
two Airlines had finalized grandiloquent plans for acquisition of new fleet and had 
even placed order s in their efforts to revive their respective businesses which 
were at that point of time grappling with the changed market scenario brought 
about by the increasing private competition ushered in by the Open Sky Policy.  
At this juncture, Indian Airlines, which had established unparalleled Brand recall 
value across the country, was rebranded and „Indian‟ suddenly appeared in the 
skies without any convincing rationale drawing humongous costs from the public 
exchequer. As all would well appreciate , the importance of brand equity which is 
phenomenal both in terms of goodwill and performance was frittered away with 
this whimsical decision. The Committee also observe with bafflement that while 
the merger of these two airlines had extensively been deliberated upon  since the 
early 1970s, and the refrain all through had been to tread cautiously, it was 

 
 
abruptly done in 2006-07, throwing all caution to the wind. The Committee could 
find no justifiable explanation for this abrupt haste. The Committee are distraught 
to note that millions have been spent to appoint consultants to advise on various 
matters starting with the revival roadmaps, followed by merger and turn around 
plans, which have gone in vain due to non -implementation of the expert inputs in 
their entirety.  Besides, the Committee feel that the two Airlines, despite being in 
the public sector, apparently did not receive the required support of the 
Government in the decades preceding and immediately following the introduction 
of the Open Sky Policy.  The Commit tee would like to be apprised of the 
agencies/individuals responsible for taking such a whimsical decision and urge 
suitable action so that such decision leading to intangible loss to a PSU does not 
recur in future. 
 The Committee are disconcerted to note that having imposed the merger of 
the two carriers, the Ministry has shown little initiative in monitoring the progress 
of the charted merger plan.  Taking note of the fact that the CMD s of NACIL were 
frequently changed during the crucial two years period from the date of approval 
of merger by the Cabinet in March 2007, the Committee strongly deprecate the 
failure of the government for not ensuring the continuity of leadership in the 
nascent stages of the merger. The utter lack of sincerity on the part of t he 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee feel, is manifest in their failure to ensure 
some continuity of leadership to the Company during its nascent stages of 
merger.   
 The Committee also note with great dissatisfaction that whereas the initial 
projections for the merger schedule showed June 2009 as the time by which 
synergies of the merger would be realized in all areas, the Company is still 
struggling with the bulk of the integration processes as on date.  Most 
importantly, the failure to resolve is sues pertaining to the integration of human 
resources, the Committee feel, not only reflects poorly on the performance of the 
managers of the merger process, but also adversely affects the morale of the 
work force, which in turn affects the Company‟s performance on all fronts. 

 
 
 The Committee take strong objection to the Ministry and NACIL 
camouflaging all their failures on the pretext of the rising fuel prices and the 
world recession.  The Committee, therefore, reject any attempts to - shield the 
failure for executing the merger plan by the Company‟s management as initially 
scheduled, and the Ministry‟s attitude of shying away from responsibility in 
effectively monitoring the same and ensuring its timely execution by rendering 
timely support. 
 Considering the fact that the merger cannot be undone now, and in view of 
the huge stakes to the public exchequer in the event of the Company sliding into 
deeper financial mess, the Committee feel that certain urgent and firm steps need 
to be taken to redeem the remnants of the public carriers of lore. 
Recommendation No. 1 
  The Committee feel that there is a need for consistency in plans and 
policies of the company for the merger to consolidate and for this purpose there 
is a need f or some credible  leadership at the t op. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that the leadership of NACIL should be put on a mission mode with a 
mandate spelt out  in unequivocal terms to turn around the Company within a 
specified period.  The postings in the top slot of the Company should inv ariably 
be governed on the basis of performance and accountability.   
Recommendation No. 2 
 Closely linked with the aspect of leadership is its structure.  The Committee 
note that prior to the merger, both Air India and Indian Airlines had in place a 
fairly well placed infrastructural base.  The Committee , therefore, feel  that it is 
quite logical to take benefits from the respective positive aspects of the 
subsidiaries (viz. Air India and Indian Airline s) of the merged entity.   The 
Committee, therefore, re commend that the making  of NACIL into a holding 
company under which two separate wings, NACIL -Indian Airlines  with its 
Headquarters at Delhi and NACIL-Air India with its Headquarters at Mumbai, each 
headed by a Managing Director who shall report to Chairma n, NACIL, needs to be 

 
 
seriously considered.  In the opinion of the Committee, this arrangement alone 
would substantially redress the problems faced by the Company in the various 
integration processes, especially of manpower which is presently debilitated b y 
differences in working conditions and work culture between employees of the two 
erstwhile separate companies. 
Recommendation No. 3 
  The Committee note that irrespective of the merits of the merger plan, the 
present gravity of spiraling losses could have been averted had the 
implementation of the merger plan been strictly adhered to within the stipulated 
timeframe. The Committee, theref ore, recommend that a fresh, realistic and 
definite timeline for completion of pending processes of merger, such as 
establishing a uniform code – a pre-condition for joining the Star Alliance, setting 
up Strategic Business Units (SBUs), cross utilization o f resources, IT 
augmentation, customer services, sales and marketing, finance, ground handling, 
MRO, operations and flight safety, training, cargo, etc., may be worked out and 
put in place immediately.  The Committee further recommend that reasons behind 
the undue haste in merger and lack of monitoring after the merger should be 
probed to fix the responsibility for the same  and that the government must set up 
an effective monitoring mechanism to review the progress made on the revised 
merger schedule every quarter.  The Committee also recommend that all the loss 
attributable to merger of IA and AI should be recouped by the Government as the 
decision of merger was a policy decision spearheaded by the Ministry-in-charge. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee not e that a mechanism for ensuring accountability in the 
implementation of the entire merger process is conspicuous by its absence. The 
position of CMD, designated as the Merger Champion, was turned into a musical 
chair of sorts during such a crucial phase in  the consolidation of the merged 
entity, absolving the occupants of any liability to face the accountability.  This in 
turn gave scope for literally „passing the buck‟.    The Committee recommend that 

 
 
responsibilities for managers put in charge of these pe nding matters should be 
properly defined and stringent accountability procedures put in place to ensure 
timely execution of defined tasks.  
Recommendation 5 
 The Committee note that as per various newspaper reports , huge amounts 
of money were made availabl e through financial institutions for facilitating the 
merger.  The documents on record, however, do not reveal as whether these 
funds had been expended  / disbursed judiciously or not . The Committee desire 
that this matter might be looked into by the appropriate authority. 
  
II. Route Rationalization and Route Allocation 
 The Committee note that route rationalization implies deploying maximum 
number of aircraft on maximum possible flights on commercially profitable 
routes.  The Committee  further note that under the guidelines, routes are 
allocated by the Ministry on the petition of airlines. The Committee also note that 
a national carrier has a social obligation to ply certain air routes.  However, the 
Committee cannot ignore reports appearing in National Newspapers about the 
public carriers being disadvantaged by the allocation of prime commercial routes 
to private airlines  such as Jet Airways, Kingfisher Airlines and the Emirates  and 
also the allocation of time -slots on common routes in such a wa y that the private 
carriers would get the bulk of passengers on such routes.  The Committee are of 
the firm view that it is imperative that NACIL should have lucrative air routes as 
these are required for its profitability and, in a way, for its very sustenance. 
Recommendation No. 6 
 The Committee feel that it is in the public interest for the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation to dispel any misgivings over transparency of route and time -slot 
allocations raised by allegations of favors being shown to private operators for 
some consideration or  the other. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 

 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should conduct a transparent review of the entire route 
and slot allocations, both in the domestic and international sectors, and effect 
necessary changes to ensure that NA CIL is neither put at any disadvantage nor 
appear to be placed in any disadvantageous position.  
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that NACIL is operating 18.4% of its flights on social 
sector routes like Category II, IIA and III routes whereas the D GCA‟s Route 
Dispersal Guidelines prescribe only 10% as mandatory requirement for such 
sectors. Thus, there is an 8.4% excess deployment by NACIL on social sector 
routes. At a time when the entire airline industry is struggling with their financial 
margins, the Committee are perturbed by the lack of transparency in the 
enforcement of Route Dispersal Guidelines under which all Scheduled operators 
are required to operate a fixed percentage of their flights in the so -called social 
sectors. The Committee particu larly desire that no additional burden is forced 
upon NACIL by virtue of it being a public carrier. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that necessary amendments should be carried out in the Route 
Dispersal Guidelines of the DGCA, alternatively ensuring, (a) strict compliance by 
all scheduled airlines to operate the mandatory 10% of their scheduled flights in 
Cat II/IIA/III routes, i.e. social or non -commercial sectors, or, (b) compensation to 
airlines operating such flights in excess of the mandatory perce ntage by those 
airlines that are either willfully not complying, or are, for some reason, unable to 
fulfill the required percentage of social sector flights out of their total scheduled 
flights, the full extent of losses plus a certain margin which shall b e punitive in 
nature.  
 The Committee also recommend that a mechanism may be evolved to make 
the said guidelines mandatory for all private airlines and for punitive action 
against the violators. 
  

 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee regret to note that though fuel price is a major component of 
loss, as claimed by the management of NACIL, there is no serious effort to 
improve the fuel consumption norm for aircraft in use.  This becomes clear as the 
NACIL or the Ministry did not even possibly refer to the huge fuel loss incurred 
on account of idle flying hours before landing and on account of long stretch of 
taxying after landing- all due to air -traffic congestion in airports.  The Committee 
recommend a mandatory energy audit by an external energy auditor to assess the 
avoidable fuel-losses and fix fuel consumption norm for aircraft in use.  
 
III. Fleet Acquisition and Management 
 The Committee are skeptical of NACIL‟s request for Rs. 10,000 Crore 
capital in- fusion from the government towards fleet acquisition.  The Company, 
as well as the Government, have not presented any details of project financial 
closure for the acquisition projects of the erstwhile Indian and Air India, which 
were finalized before merger of the two airlines was even mooted.  The 
Committee feel that the lack of continuity of policies as is manifest in the failure 
of concerned entities to adhere to plans (made by predecessors in positions of 
authority) regarding the revenue sources for financing the acquisition projects 
reveal an underlying l ack of sense of ownership and public responsibility. The 
Committee are also concerned about the delay in the delivery of the more fuel 
efficient Boeing 787 and Airbus A-320/321/319 aircraft.  
 The Committee note that in one of the aspects of fleet manageme nt relating 
to the maintenance of airworthiness of aircrafts, the Company is having 
unutilized manpower capacity. The Committee note that the engineering force in 
the company is capable of effectively running maintenance operations for 300 
aircraft, while the company itself has only some 100 aircraft. However, on the 
other aspect, there are disparaging reports in the media about a lot of aircraft 
capacity lying idle due to the grounding of certain types of aircraft for one reason 

 
 
or the other.  The Committee note that utilization of aircraft in the company is at a 
low of 9 hours per day while the benchmark is at 16 hours per day.   The 
Committee recommend optimal utilization of the available manpower who 
otherwise have necessary skill and experience to mainta in airworthiness of 
aircraft. 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee have taken note of the prolonged neglect of aircraft 
acquisition in the pre -merged Air India and Indian Airlines and the need to 
enhance the fleet strength of the NACIL to have a critical mas s of capacity to give 
it a shot at regaining its lost market share. The Committee are concerned to note 
that the project financial closure of the pre -merged entities have been allowed to 
be swept away by the confusion reigning in the much eulogized merger. 
Considering the irreversibility of the mess that has been created by the sloppy 
handling of the merger process and the need to look to the future, the Committee 
feel that capital infusion into the ailing public airline to make the company credit 
worthy for its operational credit requirements has become imperative to salvage 
the remnants of the legendary airlines.  However, the Committee desire that strict 
compliance to de fined performance benchmarks should be made a precondition 
to a phased capital infusion.   
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee see hope in the new line of planning whereby the 
Engineering strength of the company is proposed to be channelized into forming 
a separate business unit of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) as a 
subsidiary. The Committee strongly recommend that NACIL should be 
encouraged to develop MRO as a separate and professional business unit 
catering to the aviation industry as a whole.  The Committee also recommend that 
the processes involved towards this enterprise be expedited  in consultation with 
the employees  and that the Government extend all necessary support to the 
Company in this regard.  

 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee note th at a lot of idle capacity is  being allowed to exist in 
the Company despite ambitious acquisition orders. The Committee hope that the 
initiatives taken to cut down such idle capacity taken by the present management 
would realize tangible benefits. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the 
steps necessary to increase the utilization of aircrafts should be expedited 
without delay to bring up the average utilization to 16 hours per day per aircraft.  
The Committee enjoin the Ministry of Civil Aviation that t he company be fully 
protected from any kind of extraneous pressure to retain commercially unviable 
routes or to operate unprofitable new routes.  
 
IV. Ground Handling 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee note that the pre -merged entities, IA & AI had a monopoly  
of ground handling activities within India prior to the Open Sky Policy of 1994, 
and that the privat e airport operators, who also ca me into the scene in the wake 
of this policy had been given the authority, under the new policy, to assign 
ground handling activity to entities of their choice in the airports operated by 
them.  However, when these operators, notably at Bangalore and Hyderabad, 
notified their invitations for expressions of interest, the national carriers were 
disqualified by a requirement to h ave international experience.  The Committee 
further note that this has resulted in idle manpower capacity to the National 
Carrier, cutting into its operational margins. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that NACIL whose two subsidiaries have decades of expertise and 
experienced workforce with respec t to international operations  should be 
assigned the ground handling activity exclusively and other avenues may be 
sought only when NACIL is not in a position to carry out the job.  
 

 
 
V. Corporate Work Culture 
Recommendation No. 13 
The Committee note that during the evidence, the CMD had admitted the 
lack of Corporate Work Culture in the Company.  In this regard, the Committee 
have taken note of the plans now made to redress the same by a proposed 
introduction of a new staff training  plan requiring the staff to undergo training in 
hospitality and other areas of work every six months.  The Committee 
recommend that the management of NACIL should effectively carry out their 
training plan so as to cultivate attitudinal changes amongst the  employees to 
enable them to compete with the corporate competitors.  
 
VI. Training 
Recommendation No.14 
The Committee note that both pre -merged companies, IA & AI, have 
adequate training facilities devoted to the training of their own personnel which 
have now  been inherited by NACIL.  The Committee also note that in the 
emerging market reality of stiff competition and falling margins, especially in the 
airline industry, it is no longer financially sustainable to have devoted training 
facilities.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the training infrastructure and 
manpower inherited by NACIL from its pre -merged entities be galvanized into an 
independent subsidiary of NACIL with improved capacities to cater to such of the 
professional trainings as required by the airline industry in general, and to be 
operated as a separate unit of business capable of competing internationally. 
  

 
 
VII. Protection of Interests of Employees 
Recommendation No. 15 
The Committee note that there had been a large number of reports and 
representations from the employees and the staff of both the companies.  As is 
evident, there is a high level of disenchantment and discontent ment with the 
process of merger.  Employees of any organization and their welfare are the key 
to the success of an y organization.  Customers can be served well if the 
employees are well trained and motivated. Lamentably, employees of the merged 
entity are unduly discriminated.  The Committee are concerned to note that this 
manner of riding roughshod over its employees has become a general perception 
rather than the general regret of the Company. 
The Committee also observe that with a view to check attrition, PLI 
(Productivity Linked Incentive Scheme) was introduced with the advent of Open 
Sky Policy.  At that point of time, employees of Indian Airlines and Air India were 
not allowed to go to private airlines on higher pay scales.  While appreciating the 
perhaps „laudable objective‟ to safeguard interests of the now merged entities, 
the question/issue that arises is the fairness of treatment for employees who had 
been loyal and stayed on and are now being forced to accept cuts. 
The Committee feel that basic incentives for employees need to be reviewed. 
A maxim to be borne in mind is that governance, both of countries and of 
organizations, is an art and one that respects the human factor. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that steps should be taken to protect the interests of the 
employees who have then been held back from getting better packages in the 
private sector on the one hand, while on the other, they  should be required to 
perform to their optimum potential that justifies such incentives by giving them 
advance training in their respective area of work and introducing a corporate 
regimen.  The Committee further rec ommend that on issues relating to service 
matters, no unilateral decision should be forced upon and a consensual approach 
should prevail when discussion with employees‟ representatives becomes a part 
of corporate culture.  

 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
In this con nection, the Committee also note that promotions in the officers 
cadres of both NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines) are vacancy based 
and are carried out through a process of selection. 
The Committee, however, understand that promotions in officers grade both in 
NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines) have been made in a subjective 
manner prior to the date of commencement of merger as well as after the merger 
exercise.  This, the Committee understands, has been the case in respect of 
vacancies in higher grades as also in cases of resultant vacancies in some 
cadres.  Thus , a situation has arisen where officers in some cadres have had 
smooth advancement in their careers whereas officers in other cadres, though 
eligible for promotions against th e vacancies available in their cadres, have been 
denied their due advancement in career.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that NACIL should have a relook into all such cases and ensure that the genuine 
aspirations of the officers in each cadre are judi ciously addressed and promotion 
exercises which have already become due should be first completed before 
merging the cadres on the basis of seniority.  
Recommendation No. 17 
The Committee further observe that the designation and the pay 
scales/emoluments drawn in the two organizations are not at par as the persons 
holding the same designation in NACIL (Air India) and NACIL (Indian Airlines) are 
getting different emoluments/scales of pay.  
The Committee note the difficulties in addressing the concerns of the  
employees enjoying the same designations and having different pay scales in the 
two organizations.  This obvious difficulty which should have been foreseen at 
the outset did not seem to have even occurred to those who worked out the 
merger process. The Co mmittee, however, feel that as far as possible, it may be 
ensured that there is no loss of emoluments and a feeling of alienation amongst 
the employees of the two organizations.  The advisable course of action would, 

 
 
therefore, appear to be to merge the tw o sets of employees with reference to the 
scales of pay and not based on their designations. The final action taken in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
Recommendation No. 18 
The Committee ha ve been apprised that there has been a shifting o f 
allowances of NACIL (Air India) employees from salary (wage) slip to PLI slip 
issued to them.  The Committee feel that at this juncture such kind of action on 
the part of management does not seem to be proper as the merger of two sets of 
employees has not been fully effected so far.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that any cut or advancement should be 
proportionate to the scale of pay as it otherwise will be against the assurance “No 
employee would be placed at a disadvantage at any stage” which was 
communicated to the employees before merger of the two organizations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:                                                                    V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
20th January, 2010                                     Chairman, 
30 Pausa, 1931 (Saka)                                           Committee on Public Undertakings  
 
 
  

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE 5th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 8TH OCTOBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1230 hrs to 1345 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hedge 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
10 Shr Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
12 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
13 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
14 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
15 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
16 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of NACIL 
1. Shri Arvind Jadhav CMD 
2. Shri S. Venkat Company Secretary & ED (Finance) 
3. Shri V. Srikrishnan ED (Hqrs.) 
4. Shri Prashant Sukul JS (MCA) 
 

 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of National Aviation 
Company of India Limited (NACIL)-the merged entity of Air-India and Indian Airlines- for 
the purpose of its comprehensive examination. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed 
the rep resentatives of National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL) and also 
drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence 
before Parliamentary Committees.  The Chairman then informed the members that the 
CMD, NACIL, had requested him earlier for deferment of the extant hearing because of 
the ongoing crisis in Air India due to pilots‟ strike and obtained their concurrence to take 
another detailed evidence.  Thereafter, the representatives of NACIL made a brief 
power point presentation on the subject following which, the Members raised queries on 
various aspects pertaining to the Company.  The Chairman asked the CMD, NACIL to 
note down the points raised by the members and to furnish detailed written notes on the 
same to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest. The Committee also desired that the 
next meeting to take oral evidence of the representatives of NACIL be held to see how 
well NACIL keeps up to their commitments as submitted in their presentation earlier.  
3. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of NACIL for appearing before 
the Committee and presenting their views on the subject. 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept on record separately.  
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
******* 
  

 
 
MINUTES OF THE 8th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 12TH NOVEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1230 hrs to 1450 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
6 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
7 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
8 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
9 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
10 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
11 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
12 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy  
13 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
Officials of National Aviation Company of India Limited 
1 Shri Arvind Jadhav CMD 
2 Shri K.M. Unni SBU Head MRO (Fir Frame) 
3 Shri Vipin K. Sharma SBU Head MRO (E&C) 
4 Shri S. Chandrasekhar Director (Finance) 
5 Shri S. Venkat CS & ED (Finance) 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives National Aviation 
Company of India Limited (NACIL) and drew their attention to direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  
Thereafter, the Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject 
and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the representatives of 
NACIL.  Information on some of the point s raised by the Committee was not readily 
available with the representatives of NACIL.  They were therefore asked to furnish the 
same to the Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible. 
 
3. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of NACIL f or providing all 
the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept on record separately.  
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
MINUTES OF THE 10th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 17TH DECEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1645 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Bais 
3 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
4 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5 Shri Ganesh Singh 
6 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
7 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
8 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
9 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
10 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
11 Shri Amar Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
 
Officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar Secretary 
2 Shri Prashant Sukul Joint Secretary 
3 Smt. Abha Shukla Director  
 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker relating 
to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  Then, the Members raised queries 
on various aspects pertaining to the subject and the explanations/clarifications on the 
same were given by the representatives of Ministry.  Information on some of the points 
raised by the Committee was not readily available with the representative s of Ministry.  
They were therefore asked to furnish the same to the Committee Secretariat at the 
earliest possible. 
 
3. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry for providing all 
the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
4. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept on record separately.  
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
6. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE 13th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 20th JANUARY, 2010. 
 The Committee sat from 1615 hrs to 1650 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
6. Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
7. Ms. Mabel Rebello 
8. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella - Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar  - Additional Director 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report on National Aviation 
Company of India Ltd-Merged Entity of Erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines with minor 
changes/ suggested additions and authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report for 
presentation. 
 
3. The Committee then adjourned.  
 