1 
 
 
C.P.U. NO. 934 
 
 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2009 - 2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IN IMPLEMENTATION OF ROAD PROJECTS BY 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA IN RESPECT OF 
DELHI - GURGAON PROJECT 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT 
 
 
[BASED ON C&AG REPORT NO. PA 16 OF 2008 (PERFORMANCE AUDIT)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2009 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
1 

2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
Composition of the Committee (2009-10)   (iii) 
Introduction (v) 
 PART - I  
 REPORT 
  
 Overview 5 
Chapter-I Mode of Execution of the Project 7 
Chapter-II Delay in Execution of the Project 18 
Chapter-III Detailed Project Report 23 
Chapter-IV Fixation of Concession Period and Toll Collection 28 
Chapter-V Role of Independent Consultant 34 
Chapter-VI Project Financing and Escrow Accounts 35 
Chapter-VII Non-Appointment of Independent Auditors 37 
Chapter-VIII Faulty Issuance of Completion Certificate Pending 
Non-Execution of Punch List Items and Penalty Clause 
 
39 
Chapter-IX Road Safety Audit 43 
Chapter-X Monitoring Role of Government 48 
 PART - II  
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
51 
ANNEXURES 
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee 77 
  
 
 
 
 
- (ii) - 
 
 
 

3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2009-2010) 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri L. Rajagopal 
10 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
12 Shri Ganesh Singh 
13 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
14 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
15 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
17 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
18 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
19 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
20 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani  
21 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen  
22 Shri Amar Singh  
 
Secretariat  
1 Shri J.P. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2 Shri Ajay Kumar Garg Additional Director 
3 Smt. K. Rangamani Narasimhan Executive Officer 
 
 
 
- (iii) - 
 

4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this First Report on 
National Highways Authority of India. 
 
2. The Committee‟s examination of the subject was based on the Audit Report No. 
PA 16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) Public Private Partnership in implementation 
of Road Projects by National Highways Authority of India--Delhi-Gurgaon Sector. 
 
3. The Committee on Pu blic Undertakings (2009 -10) took evidence of the 
representatives of NHAI on 09.09.2009  and evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Department of Road 
Transport and Highways on 08.10.2009.   
 
4. The Committee c onsidered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 9th 
December, 2009. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways, Department of Road Transport and Highways and 
National Highways Authority of  India for placing before them the material and 
information they wanted in connection with examination of the subject.  They also 
wish to thank in particular the representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways, Department of Road T ransport and Highways and 
National Highways Authority of India who gave evidence and placed their 
considered views before the Committee. 
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered by the officials of Comptroller & Au ditor General of India. They would 
also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenie nce, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi            V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
9th December, 2009       Chairman  
18 Agrahayana, 1931 (S)                              Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
- (v) – 
  

5 
 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
OVERVIEW 
 
The National Highways Authority of India (Authority) was constituted with a 
mandate to upgrade the existing two -lane roads into four/six -lane high density corridors 
under National High ways Development Programme (NHDP), in phases. In Phase -I, 
6359 Km. of existing roads were to be upgraded by June 2004 at an estimated cost of 
Rs.30,300 crore. To leverage scarce budgetary resources, the Government opted for 
private sector participation in execution of the projects through Build, Operate and 
Transfer (BOT) mode. Accordingly, 17 projects were opened for private sector 
participation between  March 1998 and April 2003. Although time and cost were key 
factors for successful implementation of NHDP, the Authority did not prepare a 
corporate or strategic plan to monitor the same. This coupled with delays in award of 
work and in acquisition of land , and issue of change of scope orders during execution 
led to delay in completion of the projects.  The Authority could complete only five of the 
17 BOT projects within the time schedule prescribed. The Authority did not have any 
written criteria on the ba sis of which to assign a particular project for execution under 
BOT-Toll or BOT-Annuity arrangement. 
 
The Audit observations mentioned in this Performance Audit Report pertain to 
construction of roadways in Delhi-Gurgaon Sector  The main deficiencies pointed out by 
the Audit are as under: 
 
Delhi-Gurgaon 
 The completion of this project was delayed by 42 months beyond the scheduled 
completion date of June 2004 due to change in mode of execution from Special 
Purpose Vehicle to BOT -Toll, subsequent delay in  award of concession and the 
delay in issuing change of scope orders valuing Rs.146.62 crore. 
 
 The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of this project was deficient on many counts 
which resulted in execution of these items under change of scope orders for 
Rs.146.62 crore constituting 21 per cent of the project cost. 
 
 The Authority did not have a system to compute the reasonable concession period. 
This resulted in fixation of a longer concession period of 20 years against a 
reasonable concession period of 14 years . During the extended concession period 
of six years, the Concessionaire would gain Rs.187.77 crore. 
 
 The delay of 26 months in issuing orders for change of scope of work by the 
Authority delayed completion of the project. 
 
 The condition of the road surfac e was good and no distresses were found. The 
combined thickness of wet mix macadam and granular sub -base layers did not 
comply with the specifications in three out of six pits test-checked. 

6 
 
 
The issues related with the above mentioned observations contained in the Audit 
Report have been dealt with in the succeeding chapters of the Report.  
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
MODE OF EXECUTION OF THE DELHI-GURGAON PROJECT 
 
1.1 The National Highways Authority of India  was constituted with a mandate to 
upgrade the existing two lane roads into four/six lane under National Highways 
Development Programme (NHDP), in phases. To leverage scarce budgetary resources, 
the Government opted for Private sector participation in exec ution of the projects 
through Build, operate and Transfer (BOT) mode. Accordingly 17 projects were opened 
for private sector participation between March, 1998 and April, 2003.  
 
1.2 In case of Delhi -Gurgaon project executed under BOT -Toll mode, the Audit in 
Para 2.1.2 has made the following findings: - 
(i) That there were no  internal guidelines or directions from the Government 
for determining the mode of execution of projects.  Such guidelines were 
1st issued in March, 2006. 
 
(ii) The Delhi -Gurgaon projects were or iginally proposed to be executed 
through EPC or SPV mode but subsequently opened for BOT-Toll mode. 
 
(iii) No comparative evaluation of the financial implications of executing the 
projects through BOT-Toll was undertaken. 
 
(iv) In Delhi-Gurgaon project initially no traffic study was done. 
 
1.3 The details of the queries made by the Committee and the explanations given by 
NHAI/Ministry are detailed below: 
 
(i) No Internal Guidelines for deciding Mode of Execution 
 
The Audit in Para 2.1.2 of the Report have observed that there were no internal 
guidelines or directions from the Government for determining the mode of execution of 
the projects when NHDP Phase -I was started. Such guidelines were first issued in 
March 2006. While seeking in -principle approval for NHDP Phas e-I from the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Ministry), the Authority indicated the mode in 
which each road project was to be executed i.e. BOT -Toll or BOT -Annuity or EPC.  
Audit, however, observed that in all the 17 projects selected fo r PPP, the Authority did 
not assign any basis for proposing execution of a particular project under PPP 
arrangement. For instance, Delhi -Gurgaon project was originally proposed to be 
executed either through EPC or through SPV.  This project  was, however, subsequently 
opened for BOT-Toll. 
 
1.4 During the evidence before the Committee on 9 th September, 2009, attention of 
NHAI was drawn to the above-mentioned Audit observations and the NHAI were asked 
to give their comments.  The Authority replied as under: 

8 
 
 
“Under PPP arrangement, there are two modes of execution used in NHAI, viz 
BOT (Toll) and BOT (Annuity). While in the former, the investor recoups their 
investment through toll collection during the operation period and in case of BOT 
(Annuity), the investors recoup their investment through a series of annuities paid 
by NHAI during the operation period. The criteria for award of any project under 
PPP mode is based on commercial viability of the project as established by the 
feasibility report/financial mode ling.  In BOT(Toll), as per current Central 
Government policy, up to  a maximum of 40% equity grant can be given, if 
necessary, to improve the viability of the project to induce private investment. 
 
1.5 Regarding the inordinate delay in issuance of interna l guidelines which were 
issued only in March, 2006, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in their written 
reply submitted as under: 
 
“CCEA in its meeting held on 12.12.2000 had approved undertaking of 40 sub 
projects for a length of 4659 km during 2000-2002 at a cost of Rs 30,300 crore. It 
was also mentioned that during 2001 -2002 the contracts should be awarded to 
the extent possible on BOT/Annuity method due to inherent advantage in that 
system. It was envisaged that out of Rs 30,300 crore, fund to the tune of Rs 3592 
crore shall be share of private sector in BOT/SPV projects. Similarly, while 
approving NHDP Phase -II in December 2003, some projects were identified for 
taking up on BOT Toll/Annuity. Subsequent to that all Phases i.e. Phase -III, 
Phase-IV, Phase-V, Phase-VI & Phase-VII have been approved to be taken upon 
BOT mode only. Internal guidelines were issued by the NHAI in March, 2006 
based on the lesson learnt on the projects being implemented during the period 
March, 1998 to April, 2003. Gove rnment had issued guidelines in May 2006 that 
the all projects should be first tried on BOT Toll. If there is inadequate response, 
than the project could be taken on BOT Annuity with the approval of CCEA and if 
there is inadequate response to Annuity mode then the project could to taken up 
on EPC with the approval of CCEA.” 
 
 1.6 When asked as to why the guidelines were not framed before the award of the 
project, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“While approving NHDP Programme in December 2000 and December  2003, 
some projects were identified to be taken up on BOT. It was also desired to take 
up more projects on BOT mode to the extent possible. Subsequently all works 
under NHDP Phase-III onwards were to be taken up on BOT Toll mode only.” 
 
(ii) SPV mode to BOT mode 
 
1.7 The Audit observed that there was a change in the execution of the Delhi -
Gurgaon project from SPV mode to BOT mode.  In this context, the Authority were 
asked to state the following: - 

9 
 
(i) The reasons for changing the mode of execution from SPV mo de to BOT 
mode. 
(ii) Whether any prior analysis was done in deciding the mode of execution. 
(iii) The financial implication, if any, had the project being executed in SPV 
mode etc.  
1.8 In Reply, the NHAI stated as follows:- 
 
“The project was initially approved for e xecution by NHAI through SPV from Km. 
15.400 to Km. 36.630. In the SPV mode of execution, Government has to 
promote Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) with equity participation from NHAI and 
the other partners to the SPV and through Debt, which will be raised f rom the 
financial institutions or bonds. However, at the time of approval it was envisaged 
to increase Private Sector Participation in road project.   M/s. SBI Capital Markets 
Limited (A subsidiary of State Bank of India), the financial consultant advised that 
the project is unviable on BOT. However, because of successful award of Tada -
Nellore and Neelamangla -Tumkur section of NH on BOT, financial consultant 
was advised to re -evaluate the financial viability of the project. M/s SBI Capital 
Markets Limited co nsidered different scenarios using various capital structures 
with different mix of debt, equity and grant. The SBI Cap has suggested to 
include the project up to km 42.00 and to start from km. 14.300 instead of km. 
15.400. NHAI, subsequently asked M/s SBI  Capital Markets Limited to evaluate 
the financial viability of the project based on BOT basis by considering additional 
two aspects: 
 
(a) Taking into account the additional tolling rights up to km. 61 (where NHAI 
is setting up its toll plaza) beyond 8 -lane project reach, the revenue of 
which will accrue to the Concessionaire. 
(b) Also the facility being an 8 -lane Access Controlled Highway, a  higher toll 
rate may be considered, as compared to normal 4-lane highway project. 
 
However, by the change in mode of execution from SPV to BOT project, 
NHAI saved the Government investment in project and also received negative 
grant. In the EPC mode of execution the entire financial implication would have to 
be borne by the Government. In SPV mode of execution the Government has to 
borne partial financial implication depending upon the equity of the Government.” 
 
1.9 When asked whether it was a policy de cision to change the mode of execution, 
the CMD submitted as under: 
  
“It is a policy decision.   The Government has power to give me policy directives.  
In fact, it has no powers to direct me except on matters of policy.  The Minister 
took a policy decision on moving from SPV mode where we were putting in 
equity and where our exposure to the project was much larger in financial 
terms, he wanted it to move to the BOT mode.  The NHAI Act provides that 
the Government‟s decision on what is or what is not a poli cy decision is 
final. He further stated that t he Government has every right to interfere 

10 
 
because my funding comes from a cess. The Government has every right 
to say that the cess money which they are providing is spent in ways the 
Government lays down.” 
 
1.10 As to the financial  implications had the project been executed on SPV mode or 
BOT mode, the Authority submitted as under: - 
 
“If the project had been executed under SPV mode, NHAI would not only have 
been required to invest in the project their equity, but also would have been 
required to take over the additional cost , risk and time overrun involved in the 
project. It may be me ntioned that the cost of completion of project, as per the 
Chartered Accountant balance sheet of the Concessionaire is Rs 1170.26 crores, 
which had not been taken in to cognizance by NHAI, as additional cost on 
account of cost overrun which is now to be bo rne by the Concessionaire. Similar 
has been the position of the time overrun of 30 months. Further, mechanism of 
decision making in two different modes is not comparable. It is an accepted fact 
that decision making in BOT project is faster than the decisio n making in project 
having share of the Government due to various procedures and the delegation. 
As such, possibility of having worse position than the present position can also 
not be ruled out.” 
 
1.11 On this issue when asked w hether the approval of the Ministry was taken in 
changing the mode of execution from SPV to BOT-Toll mode and subsequent change of 
scope orders for Rs. 146.62 crore and the justification in the decision taken by the 
Minister of Road Transport and Highways to convert the SPV mode to BoT mode, the 
Ministry stated as under:  
“The Financial Consultant, M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited has submitted 
various financial modules prior to the bidding process and during various 
discussions and presentations to the then Hon‟ble Minister, RTH on 30.09.2001, 
it was decided that worst -case scenario may be considered for the project 
viability. Accordingly the toll rates for the worst -case scenario was finalized and 
included in the bidding document. The toll rates were recommended to give a 
reasonable return to the potential investors and generate sufficient bidding 
interest in the project. Therefore it was decided to implement the project on BOT 
(Toll) basis as suggested by M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited. 
 
In view of the above, with the approval of C hairman, bids were invited for 
this project on BOT basis from Km 14.300 to km 42.000.  The bids resulted into 
negative grant of Rs. 61.06 crore to the Government. The proposal to award the 
project to the successful bidder who had offered highest negative g rant  was put 
up to the 44 th  NHAI Board meeting held on 30.01.2002 and the project was 
approved by the authority. The Concession Agreement was signed on 18 th April, 
2002 and appointed date was 12 th January, 2003, from which construction period 
of 30 months started. Therefore target date of completion of this project was 12 th 
July, 2005 and not the June, 2004 as mentioned by Audit. The entire process 

11 
 
took some time resulting delay in award of the project. However, by the change 
in mode of execution from SPV  to BOT project, NHAI saved the Government 
investment in project and also received negative grant. In the EPC mode of 
execution the entire financial implication would have to be borne by the 
Government. In SPV mode of execution the Government has to bear p artial 
financial implication depending upon the equity of the Government.” 
 
1.12 On the issue , the submission of the Secretary  during evidence held on 8 th 
October, 2009 were as under:- 
 
“Implementation of the project through the Government owned SPV is very easy. 
That is nothing, but the Government money is given.  They implement it.  An SPV 
sometimes borrows money but that is also on Government account.  We have 
several SPVs to implement projects on the ports, which are the port connectivity 
projects. They are implemented by the SPV, which is owned by the NHAI and the 
Port Trust.  Performance of those SPVs and those projects is very poor 
excepting one or two, which have done reasonable okay.  But there also, it is 
entirely the commitment of the NHAI, whi ch means, the commitment of the 
Government.  They have not raised any bank finance; they have not done 
anything substantial; there have been usual delays; and in some cases, the 
contracts have been terminated.  I am just giving this background to enable th e 
Committee to appreciate the difference between what is mentioned in the CAG 
Audit Para‟s SPV and BOT.  So, this is what the CAG kept mentioned keeping in 
mind the SPV. 
 
Now, coming to the BOT, that is the first priority today.  Even when this 
project was taken up, the Government was not very sure whether there would be 
a good response from the bidders for BOT toll projects.  This project also was 
initially found to be not viable.  I think  that information has been made available.  
The SBI Capital conducte d the survey.  They gave three -four scenarios.  With 
great difficulty, finally it was decided that let us try this BOT. This is one of the 
projects specifically mentioned in the Phase-I.  It has also been raised as to what 
is the policy of the Government t oday and what was the policy that time.  Today, 
of course, the policy is very clear.  But that time also, the Government was very 
keen that we should award as many projects on BOT toll as could possibly be 
awarded within that 40 per cent VGF.  The 40 per c ent VGF was introduced as a 
policy much prior to the year 2000. I think, that was sometimes in 1997 when the 
Cabinet decided that yes the private sector should be involved for the 
development of the roads.  They, they came out with a policy of providing VG F to 
the extent of 40 per cent.  They tried to find out the projects, which could be 
viable.  So, this project is one of the projects, which considered to be viable if bid 
out on the BOT toll with 40 per cent being the viability gap.” 
 
(iii) No Traffic Study 
 
1.13 The Audit in Para 2.1.2 has observed that in  Delhi-Gurgaon project, initially the 
financial consultant did not find the possibility of executing the project on BOT -toll basis 

12 
 
viable. However, based on the Authority‟s direction of reworking the financial model 
based on increased toll charges, the viability was established but the financial 
consultant had still recommended preparation of revised cost estimates and traffic 
survey for a more realistic model. The Authority, however, decided to execut e the 
project under BOT mode without undertaking any such activity. Under such uncertain 
conditions, it was imperative that some broad principles should have been laid down for 
deciding the mode of execution of Phase -I projects. In fact, as per the guideli nes issued 
by the Ministry in March 2006, it has prioritized execution of projects through BOT -Toll 
over BOT-Annuity.  Further, the Financial Consultant (SBI-Capital Market) appointed by 
the authority advised them to carry out a fresh study of the traffic volume before inviting 
bids for the project.  However, the authority did not carry out any fresh study of traffic 
merely on the ground that a study for the same was done a year back.   
 
1.14 On the above observation of the Audit, the Authority were asked to state whether 
any fresh study of traffic was taken as advised by the financial consultant and whether 
the scientific/logical traffic assessment would h ave resulted in any change of mode of 
execution, the Authority in their written reply submitted as under: - 
 
“The Financial Consultant, M/s. SBI Caps had suggested to carry out fresh study 
of traffic volume.  The traffic volume given to the SBI Caps pertai ns to the year 
2000 which was only one year old.  Taking note of the existing traffic volume and 
time elapsed it was not considered necessary to carry out fresh traffic counts. It 
may be mentioned that for project of this magnitude, one year old traffic da ta is 
considered quite recent and reasonable for traffic projections. Moreover the 
process of awarding of the project would have got further delayed.   
 
Any financial analysis is supported by sensitivity analysis. In the sensitivity 
analysis, the viability  of the project is tested against increase in the cost and/or 
decrease in the revenue.  In the instant case, conscious decision was taken in 
the NHAI/Ministry to adopt the worst scenario. Worst scenario, envisaged that 
other roads providing connectivity be tween Delhi & Gurgaon will also be 
developed. When other facilities without toll were expected to be available, 
assumption that local traffic will not use this project highway is but natural. Traffic 
projections are always with certain assumption, which ma y vary, later on. It has 
also been the international practice. The method adopted in the instant case was 
quite logical and scientific. 
 
Concession Agreement provides for sharing of revenue by NHAI once 
traffic exceeds the threshold level. This dispels the  apprehension about windfall  
profit to the Concessionaire.” 
  
1.15 Regarding the mechanism available with the NHAI to assess the actual figure of 
the traffic crossing the expressway, during evidence of NHAI, the Chairman, NHAI 
submitted as under:- 
 
“Sir, I would like to point out that this toll plaza has got an automatic boom 
barrier, that is, any vehicle, which is going though, it is captured on the computer 

13 
 
software whether he pays a toll or not.  But the barrier has to go up and down.  
There is an automatic traffic counter.  So, to that extent, if there is to be any 
deception or some underreporting, it has to be done at the computer level. But 
mechanically the traffic is counted.  We also have a system by which I think, we 
have access to CCTV camera  from our own headquarters, and we can keep 
watching what is going on there.  That is one issue.  Therefore, the scope for any 
underreporting, over reporting of traffic or fudging the figures is somewhat 
limited.   
 
In cases, where we have large errors – we will not deny that such cases 
are there –we do take action.  I have myself terminated the concessions. But 
typically we find that these are not in the cases of BOT projects.  Those kinds  of 
large errors or large concealments or deceptions have not occur red in these 
types of projects where there is automatic traffic counting.  They have occurred in 
projects where we have not had any automatic systems and there are carbon 
paper receipts where the scope for deceptions has  been much more, and those 
have been the projects where I have appointed some ex -military man or retired 
man.”   
 
(iv). No Comparative Study of two modes 
 
1.16 According to Audit  in Para 2.1.2 , no comparative evaluation of the financial 
implications of executing the projects being opened to  PPP through BOT -Toll or BOT -
Annuity was undertaken.  However, NHAI in their written reply stated as under: - 
 
“Regarding comparative study to ascertain the financial viability of two modes of 
execution, as brought out in background a project on BOT mode w ill always be 
viable when compared with SPV mode, therefore question of comparative study 
does not arise. BOT being the preferred mode of execution has also been 
adopted in this case. To sum-up, mode of execution was selected on the basis of 
financial viab ility after carrying out due -diligence and with extensive financial 
analysis with the help of financial experts like M/s SBI Caps. Moreover, due to 
successful award of earlier two BOT Projects it was decided to take up this 
project on BOT basis in order to  minimize Govt. investment and risk in the 
project.” 
 
1.17 During evidence of the representatives of NHAI, the Committee desired to know 
in details the reasons for change of mode from SPV to BOT -Toll, concept of SPV mode, 
reasons for not doing any prior analysis in deciding the mode of execution and a 
comparative analysis of the BOT-TOLL mode-vs-BOT Annuity mode in respect of Delhi-
Gurgaon project.  The NHAI in their subsequent post evidence reply, submitted as 
under:- 
 
“With regard to the above clarification, specific attention is drawn to the 
presentation made by  NHAI to the committee .  In order to explain the point of 
view of NHAI, it is necessary to explain the background of ev olution of BOT 

14 
 
mode including its derivatives for execution of Road projects in India. In this 
regard following submissions are made;  
a) Earlier the road projects were being executed by the Government through the 
budgetary resources  alone. This mode of execution is known as Engineering 
Procurement Contracts (EPC). As name suggests, in this mode of execution the 
responsibility of project prepa ration, financing, implementation and maintenance 
including Quality Control rests with the Government. For execution , works are 
awarded to the Contractor with whom Contract agreement is signed  by NHAI . 
Contractor executes the works as per the provisions ma de in the Contract. 
Execution as per the specifications is as sured by the Engineer (Supervision 
Consultant) who also prepares the bill and process for payment. Payments are 
made through the budgetary resources. Contract document generally have 
restriction on sub-contracting. 
 
b) It was established in various studies that due to poor conditions of the roads , 
society is loosing heavily in terms of vehicle operating cost and time savings.   
However, funds required for improvement were huge and with the limited 
availability of resources through the budget route, it was not possible to take up 
this mammoth task.  
 
c) In this background , concept of Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) was 
introduced for implementation of road project  under the Public Private 
Partnership pol icy of the Government . In the BOT mode of execution, it is the 
responsibility of the Concessionaire to build the road, operate it, maintain it for a 
fixed period and recover expenditure involved in building, operating and 
maintaining including interest and  profit by way of collection of toll, at pre 
determined toll rate fixed by the Government, from the vehicles using the project 
highway. Toll rates  are updated based on W hole sale price index (W PI). On 
completion of the concession period, project highway is handed over back to the 
Government at no cost . Thus the risk of cost of construction, maintenance, 
operation and revenue generation is entirely, borne b y the Concessionaire  
himself.  
 
d) In the BOT mode, outcome of the project is defined in the scope of the 
project. Government‟s role is restricted to project preparation and pre -
construction activities  thereafter it is for the concessionaire to implement it. In 
brief, in BOT mode Government only indicates what to do? and How to do? is to 
be decided by the Conc essionaire. Cost overrun and time overrun if any in BOT 
projects is the risk and responsibility of the Concessionaire, unless resulted due 
to any act of the Government.  As such in BOT projects decision making is faster 
than compared with EPC/SPV mode of execution.  
 
e) BOT system provides incentives to the concessionaires to ensure quality of 
construction in order to minimize O&M Expenses later  since the concessionaire 
is also held responsible for maintenance during the concession period . This 
leads to use of a technology which reduces life cycle cost, timely completion, 
financing risk with concessionaire and reduce the cost of project maintenance. 

15 
 
Moreover to ensure that the concessionaire is duly adhering to the provisions of 
the concession Agreement, NHAI ap points an Independent Consultant to 
supervise the day to day activities. 
 
f) There are other modes of BOT . Two such modes are SPV and BOT Annuity.  
In the BOT annuity mode Concessionaire builds the road, and maintain it for a 
fixed period. However instead of allowing him to collect the toll, Government pays 
fixed sum to the concessionaire every six month to make him recover his 
investments. Toll if any, collected would contributes to  the revenue of the 
Government but in the event of shortfalls, the government s hall be required to 
bear the risk/deficiency. In this mode the risk of revenue generation i.e. traffic is 
taken by the Government  and c oncessionaire is assured of fixed returns. This 
mode of execution is adopted mainly in areas, where the development is 
necessary but the private investors are not having any interest to take up the 
traffic risk.  
 
g) In the SPV i.e. Special Purpose Vehicle mode of execution Government 
forms a company as a fully owned subsidiary of NHAI as per the Company‟s Act 
1956, puts its share in the form of equity and raises balance as debt. Thus in 
SPV mode Government takes the  risk on account of expenditure as well as 
revenue. Further the entire responsibility for managing the SPV, raising debts, 
construction, maintenance etc falls on N HAI. It may be mentioned that this mode 
of execution was in vogue during the period when BOT projects were in nascent 
stage and norms and market response on big projects was not tested. i.e. when 
people were apprehensive of success of BOT projects. SPV giv es confidence to 
the investors due to involvement of the Government at various stages of project. 
However, due to involvement of Government funding due to procedures and 
delegation, decision making is not as fast as in case of BOT (toll) projects. 
Because of involvement of the Government  in taking over of the risk , this mode 
of execution is preferred only when BOT (toll) mode of execution is not feasible.  
 
h) NHAI has been mandated to act on business principles. As per the present 
policy of the Government, to the extent possible the contract should be awarded 
on BOT(Toll). When project is not viable on BOT(toll), BOT(Annuity) system to be 
tried followed by EPC. 
 
While changing the mode of execution from SPV to BOT mode, the 
Financial Consultant M/s SBI Capital developed the Financial Model considering 
different scenario and had made presentation to NHAI /Ministry.  Initially the 
project viability on BOT was considered for the stretch from km. 15.4 to 36.63 but 
was found unviable.  Further NHAI asked the Financial Consultant to re -evaluate 
the financial viability considering differen t scenarios using various capital 
structures with different mix of debt, equity and grant. Based on recommendation 
of Financial Consultant the project was considered from Km. 14.3 to Km 42 
instead of earlier from Km. 15.4 to Km 36.63.  NHAI further asked the Financial 
Consultant to evaluate the financial viability on BOT (Toll) basis by c onsidering 
additional two aspects viz. additional tolling rights upto Km 61 and higher toll 

16 
 
rates for 8/6 lane Access Controlled Highway as compared to normal 4 -lane 
highway project.  M/s SBI Caps presented the different financial scenarios of the 
project. There were four financial scenarios depending upon the various 
considerations like four lanning of old NH-8, construction of Western Corridor etc. 
The worst scenario when all these surrounding happenings were proposed to 
take place was considered and it w as decided that toll rate s should be finalized 
on worst case scenario so that there is no ambiguity, legal confusion for the 
bidders at any later stage.  Therefore, it is not correct to say that no comparative 
study was carried out to ascertain the financi al viability of two modes. Regarding 
comparative study to ascertain the financial viab ility of two modes of execution, 
as brought out in background a project on BOT mode will always be viable when 
compared with  SPV mode, therefore question of comparative study does not 
arise. BOT being the preferred mode of execution has also been adopted in this 
case. To sum -up, mode of execution was selected on the basis of financial 
viability after carrying out due-diligence and with extensive financial analysis with 
the help of financial experts like M/s SBI Caps. Moreover, due to successful 
award of earlier two BOT Projects it was decided to take up this project on BOT 
basis in order to minimize Govt. investment and risk in the project.  
 
 It is difficult to envisage t he scenario at this point of time. It may however 
be mentioned that NHAI included a Clause on sharing of revenue once the traffic 
exceeds the threshold value. Thus NHAI is entitled for revenue without investing 
anything. This clause was to take care of inc rease in revenue for the 
concessionaire since then he was to share this increase with NHAI. The decision 
taken to implement with requisite safeguard appears to be the best decision in 
the prevailing environment. Since due care had been taken while drafting  the 
concessionaire Agreement and fixing the toll rates so as to incorporate all the 
said eventualities. Further, if the project had been executed under SPV mode, 
NHAI would not only  have been required to i nvest in the project their  equity, but 
also would have been required to take over  the additional cost , risk and time 
overrun involved in the project. It may be mentioned that the cost of completion 
of project, as per the Chartered Accountant balance sheet of the Concessionaire 
is Rs 1170.26 crores, which ha d not been taken in to cognizance by NHAI, as 
additional cost on account of cost overrun which is now to be borne by the 
Concessionaire. Similar has been the position of the time overrun of 30 months. 
Further, mechanism of decision making in two different modes is not comparable. 
It is an Concession Agreement provides for sharing of revenue  by NHAI once 
traffic exceeds the threshold level . This dispels the apprehension about windfall 
profit to the concessionaire.  accepted fact that decision making in BOT project is 
faster than the decision making in project having share of the Government due to 
various procedures and  the delegation. As such, p ossibility of having worse 
position than the present position can also not be ruled out.  
 
Concession Agreement provides for sharing of revenue  by NHAI once 
traffic exceeds the threshold level . This dispels the apprehension about windfall  
profit to the concessionaire. “ 

17 
 
1.18 As regards comparative analysis of BOT Toll mode vis -à-vis BOT Annuity mode, 
the Authority submitted as under:- 
 
“In BOT Toll mode, the investment of Govt. is nil and the risk of costs, cost & time 
overrun, traffic projection etc. rest with the concessionaire.  In the BOT Annuity 
mode, the risk of toll collection is passed on to the  NHAI. The Project is 
considered for BOT (annuity) , when it is established that the private investors 
would not be having any interest to take the risk of the project.  As the financial 
consultant based on traffic density, concession period, construction co st and 
grant component recommended the project viability on BOT (Toll) basis , NHAI 
had not considered this project on BOT (Annuity).  
 
As aforesaid, Concession Agreement duly provides for Clause related to 
sharing of revenue  by NHAI . This Clause takes care  off apprehension about 
windfall profit to the concessionaire.” 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
DELAY IN EXECUTION 
 
(i). Change of Mode 
 
2.1 The Audit in para 2.4.2 of the Report have stated that the completion of this 
project was delayed by 42 months beyond the scheduled  completion date of June 2004 
due to change in mode of execution from Special  Purpose Vehicle to BOT -Toll, 
subsequent delay in award of concession and the delay  in issuing change of scope 
orders valuing Rs.146.62 crore .  According to them, the Authority cha nged the mode of 
execution from SPV to BOT -Toll mode in May 2001 despite the fact that the target 
month for award of contract was March 2001.  This led to a delay of 12 months in award 
of concession.  Further failure to provide land to the Concessionaire in time and delay of 
26 months in finalization of change of scope orders for Rs. 146.62 crore by the Authority 
contributed to delay in completion of the project. 
 
In reply, the Authority in this regard stated as under: - 
 
“The Financial Consultant, M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited has submitted 
various financial modules prior to the bidding process and during various 
discussions and presentations to the then Hon‟ble Minister, RTH, it was decided 
that worst-case scenario may be considered for the project viabi lity. Accordingly 
the toll rates for the worst-case scenario was finalized and included in the bidding 
document. The toll rates were recommended to give a reasonable return to the 
potential investors and generate sufficient bidding interest in the project.  
Therefore it was decided to implement the project on BOT (Toll) basis as 
suggested by M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited.  
 
In view of the above, with the approval of Chairman, bids were invited for 
this project on BOT basis from Km 14.300 to km 42.000.  The  bids resulted into 
negative grant of Rs. 61.06 crore to the Government. The proposal to award the 
project to the successful bidder who had offered highest negative grant  was put 
up to the 44th NHAI Board meeting held on 30.01.2002 and the project was 
approved by the authority. The Concession Agreement was signed on 18th April, 
2002 and appointed date was 12th January, 2003, from which construction 
period of 30 months started. The target date of completion of this project was 
12th July, 2005. However, by the change in mode of execution from SPV to BOT 
project, NHAI saved the Government investment in project and also received 
negative grant. In the EPC mode of execution the entire financial implication 
would have to be borne by the Government. In SPV mode of  execution the 
Government has to borne partial financial implication depending upon the equity 
of the Government.  As far as financial implication is concern, it is submitted that 
in BOT projects, the entire obligation lies with the Concessionaire including 
design, engineering, financing, procurement, construction, operation and 
maintenance of the project except the cost of making the site encumbrance free. 
Therefore, in BOT mode, the financial implication on part of the Govt. is bare 

19 
 
minimum in comparison to EPC, SPV model as such BOT(Toll) adopted in 
present case.” 
 
2.2 On the issue of delay, the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
during evidence before the Committee expressed his views as under:- 
 
“The delay has been at two points. One is in award of the project.  So, 
what the CAG perhaps has taken is what was to be done as per the details 
of the programme approved by the Government, namely, sometimes, 
2000-01  that  if you take the target, one may have the impression that 
projects should h ave been completed by 2 003-04, and then it would not 
have happened what they have happened. But actually, what needs to be 
appreciated is that the Cabinet approved in general.  Thereafter, the detail 
working and bidding take time.  The bidding in this case  took place 
sometimes in 2002, and the Concessiona ire Agreement was signed on 
18th April, 2002.  So, that is the date from which one has to reckon the 
delay.  That is how I look at it when it comes to the role of the 
concessionaire, NHAI in implementation of the project. 
 
Though Government would have definitely wished them to be 
awarded as per the original plan, the project could be awarded only on 
18.4.2002. Under the agreement, he was given six months time for 
financial closure. But he could not achieve t he financial closure. As a 
result, the concessionaire agreement could be signed only after the 
appointed date, which is usually six months afterwards. That appointed 
date would have been 17.10.2002 and he would have got the COD in time 
after that. But what  happened is that since financial closure was not 
achieved, there was a delay and the appointed date became 12.1.2003. 
Thereafter, the third delay, which has been mentioned and very rightly so, 
occurred because of which the COD was awarded only on 21.1.200 8 and 
not on 12.7.2005 which was the scheduled date. Under the scheme of 
things, the concessionaire is given three years for completing the project 
including the period required for financial closure which is six months. But 
what happens is that in excepti onal situations when there is delay in the 
financial closure, banks have to assess the viability. So, NHAI extended 
the date for financial closure and the appointed date got shifted by a few 
months and as per the agreement, they have collected the fine. Th ey 
charge the concessionaire a fine and they collected that money. After this 
appointed date, normally he was required to complete it within two and a 
half years, but because of the scope change and other things, he has done 
it with a delay of about 30 mon ths. As against 12.7.2005, the COD was 
given on 23.1.2008. This delay is attributable to change in scope and on 
account of the problems of the concessionaire which are internal to him.”  

20 
 
2.3 On being asked as to why the factors leading to the delay were not resolved by 
the NHAI prior to inviting bids, the NHAI in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The delay caused is due to reasons which can not be resolved before inviting 
bids like delay in financial closure by the concessionaire, delay in signings of the 
state support Agreement , Additional Scope of Works i.e. value additions on the 
request of Delhi and Haryana Governments ,  Delay in transfer of additional land 
from various Govt. Departments like AAI, Army, Air Force, Haryana Tourism for 
additional scope of works which leads to de lay in handling over of the 
encumbrance free site to the concessionaire.” 
 
2.4 On the impact on public because of delay in execution of the project, the 
Secretary of the Ministry during evidence submitted as under: - 
 
“The most important point from the Gov ernment‟s point of view and from the 
NHAI point of view is what is the impact of this delay. I would submit that the 
impact of this delay is two -fold; firstly, the public convenience which was 
supposed to have been created has been postponed and secondly t he 
Concessionaire, who would have started collecting the toll from 12.7.2005 had he 
completed the project on time, lost toll for about 30 months because of the delay. 
Unless EPC Contract where if you delay, it costs more to the Government in 
terms of escalation and things like that, here, he lost toll. We do not pay anything 
to him and his concession period, which in this case is 20 years, which would 
have been 20 – 3 = 17 years for toll collection, got reduced by 30 months. 
Instead of 17 years, he got a pe riod of 17 – 2.5 years, that is, 14.5 years. His 
period of toll collection got reduced. But NHAI does not pay anything. Of course, 
at the cost of repetition I would say that he should have completed it on time and 
the public would have got the convenience.  That is how I would like to put the 
thing in perspective as far as the policy goes.” 
 
(ii). Change of Scope of Work 
 
2.5 According to Chairman, NHAI Rs. 146 crores were spent due to change of scope 
of work/extra work.  The NHAI were asked to state the nature of cause of work which 
led to increase in extra expenditure.  In reply, NHAI stated as under:- 
 
“Due to rapid development in the vicinity and overall economic growth of the 
area, the requirement of additional structures / facilities were demanded by  the 
Delhi/Haryana Government during construction stage of the project. The   
changes made are in respect of RTR -Palam Flyover, IGI Ramp and increase in 
height of underpasses etc.  The increase in scope of work leads to value addition 
to the project as demanded by various authorities post the award.” 
 
 As regards change of scope of work, the Ministry submitted as under: - 
 
“Another major issue, which has been raised is about the change of scope. About 
Rs. 146 crore was given to the Concessionaire by the NHAI.  Since the facilities, 

21 
 
which were added to the project had to be done outside the scope of the project, 
and they were considered essential to improve the usefulness of the project.  So, 
this was decided that we would have those additional facilities.” 
 
(iii). Delay in Acquisition of Land 
 
2.6 According to Audit, failure to provide land to the Concessionaire in time and 
delay of 26 months in finalization of change of scope orders for Rs.146.62 crore by the 
Authority contributed to the delay in completion of the project.  In this connection, in 
reply, NHAI stated as under:- 
 
“The land acquisition activities are beyond control of NHAI. Further it is submitted 
that it is not only Land Acquisition but there are other factors also which 
influenced the completion like delay in financial closure, signing of state support 
agreement, shifting of utilities by various utilities owning agencies  like High 
tension line by BSES Rajdhani Power ltd., HVPNL etc. The cost of change of 
scope as projected by the Concessionaire has been brought down from Rs. 
257.50 crore to Rs 146.62 cro re in May, 2006 by undertaking several rounds of 
discussions. And since the work was already progressing as per instruction of 
NHAI vide letter dated 06.07.2005 therefore there was no delay in progress of 
work due to late finalization of cost of change of scope of works.” 
 
2.7 According to Audit  in para 2.4.3 of their report  in respect of Delhi - Gurgaon, 
though the ownership of the land was not transferred, the Ministry of Defence and 
Airport Authority of India gave working permission to the Authority during July 2003 to 
April 2005 but the Concessionaire commenced the change of  scope works only in July 
2005 because of non-finalization of rates for change of scope items by the Authority. 
 
2.8 When asked whether there has been any cost overrun due to the delayed 
execution of project, the Authority stated that:  
 
“Most of the projects were completed with marginal time overrun and the delay in 
award of some projects was due to delayed DPR re -bidding problem in land 
acquisition etc.  The land acquisition activities are beyond control of NHAI. 
Further it is submitted that it is not onl y Land Acquisition but there are other 
factors also which influenced the completion like delay in financial closure, 
signing of state support agreement, shifting of utilities by various utilities owning 
agencies  like High tension line by BSES Rajdhani Pow er ltd., HVPNL etc. The 
cost of change of scope as projected by the Concessionaire has been brought 
down from Rs. 257.50 crore to Rs 146.62 crore in May, 2006 by undertaking 
several rounds of discussions. And since the work was already progressing as 
per instruction of NHAI vide letter dated 06.07.2005 therefore there was no delay 
in progress of work due to late finalization of cost of change of scope of works.” 
 
2.9 When asked whether it is a fact that service lanes are not completed due to land 
acquisition problems and if so, the remedies to deal with such a situation, the Authority 
stated that the service road is left incomplete due to non handing over of the land by the 

22 
 
Airport Authority of India. The  matter is being pursued for handing over of the land so 
that service road would be completed.   The Ministry also endorsed the above reply in 
this regard.  
 
2.10 On the perception of the Committee that the delay of 42  months in the 
completion of the projec t may not be a loss to NHAI in financial terms but a loss to 
national development, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as under:- 
 
“As the project was of public interest and also related with the developm ent of 
nation thus all out efforts had been made for providing the best possible outcome 
in every respect and for the welfare of the state.  The desired land was to be 
acquired from the public/government agencies etc.  As t he coordinate s of the 
stretch are entirely in the urban area that too in  Delhi and NCR , so e ven after 
making all out efforts as defined and enumerated in the National Highways Act 
1956, it proved to be very time consuming activity to acquire the land from 
various private parties/individual/government agencies on time as c onceived in 
the work programme.” 
2.11  On this issue, the Comments of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping Road 
Transport and Highways were as under:- 
 
“About the loss or any delay, I mentioned myself, it means depriving the 
public of the convenience and it means development loss and all other 
losses; they are very, very huge losses. Only there may not be any direct 
financial outgo from the Government to the NHAI or the concessionaire, 
but the fact remains that delays cost the nation heavily. That goes withou t 
saying, and I definitely will be second to none in holding that view.” 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
DETAILED PROJECT REPORT 
 
Change of Scope 
 
3.1 Audit in Para 2.2 of the Report have observed that p reparation of accurate and 
realistic Detailed Project Reports (DPR) for any highway project is the foremost critical 
activity.  The DPR of Delhi -Gurgaon project was deficient on many counts which 
resulted in execution of their items under change of scope o rders for Rs. 146.62 crore.  
Delhi-Gurgaon projects had the following deficiencies:  
 
3.2 In Delhi -Gurgaon project, DPR envisaged construction of eight -lane highway 
from Km. 14.3 to Km. 36.63 and thereafter six -lanes up to Km. 42 in Gurgaon. In the 
course of detailed designing and execution of the project, the Authority issued change 
of scope notices between April 2003 and May 2004 for certain additional works. 
Accordingly, IC finalized and issued to the Concessionaire (June 2006) the change of 
scope order valuing Rs.146.62 crore constituting 21 per cent of the project cost. The 
change in scope of work included change in the height of underpasses from 3.5 metre 
to 5.5 metre, construction of elevated stretch from Rao Tula Ram Marg to Palam and 
additional underpasses at two locations, critical items that should have been foreseen at 
the time of preparation of DPR itself. Further, no responsibility was fixed on the DPR 
consultant for their failure to take into account the Indian Road Congress (IRC) 
specifications on the minimum vertical height of 5.5 metre for underpasses. 
 
3.3 In this regard, the comments of the Ministry/NHAI as contained in the Action 
Taken Note submitted by them to the C&AG are as under:- 
 
„A feasibility report from km 15.4 to 36.630 was assig ned to M/s RITES in June, 
1997 to assess the technical feasibility and financial viability and feasibility report 
completed in June, 2000.  The final feasibility report for the reach from km 14.300 
to 42.00 was approved in October, 2001.  In view of rapid development which 
had taken place in Delhi & Haryana areas falling on the project Highway, Delhi 
and Haryana administrative authorities insisted some improvements which were 
considered essential.  The Change of Scope order was issued first in April, 2003 
and second on 22.9.2003 to the Concessionaire after due deliberations at length 
in various meetings with officers of AAI, Haryana Government and Delhi 
Government.  The project highway was inspected by the then Hon‟ble Minister of 
Road Transport and Highways  along with Secretary, RT&H on 29.11.2003 when 
it was directed to further optimize the design and provide some more value 
additions.  Secretary, RTH directed CRRI to undertake a study and suggest 
optimization of Design and that was approved on 8.4.2004 by the then Hon. 
Minister of Road Transport and Highways and letter was issued on 29.4.2004.  
Proposal of change of scope costing Rs. 224.48 crore as assessed by the IC as 
against Concessionaire cost of Rs. 257.50 crore was put up in the 55 th meeting 
of the A uthority held on 15.7.2005 and approved cost of Rs. 224.48 crore.  
However, NHAI on 6.7.2005 already gave notice to the concessionaire to 

24 
 
proceed with the works under the COS, pending the final issue of cost.  Further 
to ensure that no undue advantage is t aken by the Concessionaire.  NHAI 
referred the matter to a third agency i.e. Engineer‟s India Ltd (EIL), a Public 
Sector Undertaking to ascertain the reasonableness of the cost.  EIL in 
consultation with NHAI brought down the cost to Rs. 218.51 crore as ag ainst Rs. 
224.48 crore assessed by IC.  In the mean time two civil works in Haryana and 
Delhi on NH-1 near Delhi awarded under North-South Corridor (NS-17 & NS-18).  
Keeping in view Clause 17.2(b)(ii) of the concession agreement the cost of 
Change of Scope of work was finalised by Independent Consultant to Rs. 244.01 
crore adopting average rates of theses two packages based on the similar items 
available in the adjoining packages awarded through the open tender.  The 
increase in cost from Rs. 224.48 cr to R s. 244.01 crore is due to further changes 
on account of provision of RE walls, noise barrier, service roads etc.  However 
based on several round of discussions the proposal of change of scope works 
was reviewed by the IC and submitted estimated cost of Rs.  175.18 crores on 
10.5.2006 deleting certain structures at Kapshera and Hero Honda Chowk and 
other items.  The IC‟s recommendation was examined in NHAI and modified to 
Rs. 155.25 crore (with net financial implication of Rs. 146.62 crore to NHAI) after 
deleting noise barriers, contingencies and underpass at AWWA and landscaping.  
The relevant clause 17.2(b)(ii) may be referred to substantiate the above.  
However, since the element of Change of Scope of work is also an integral part 
of ongoing project, theref ore it was practically not feasible to engage another 
agency as it may lead to contractual complications by putting two different 
agencies in the same structure for similar kind of activity as change of scope 
works were inter -related and inter -linked with main scope of works like increase 
in height/length of viaduct or width of the structures. 
 
 The cost as projected by the Concessionaire has been brought down from 
Rs. 257.50 crore to Rs. 146.62 crore in May, 2006 over a period of time by 
undertaking severa l round of discussion and since the work was already 
progressing as per instruction of NHAI vide letter dated 6.7.2005 therefore there 
is no delay in progress of work due to late finalization of cost of COS works.  
However, it is clear from the above that entrustment of execution of change of 
scope work to the concessionaire is in accordance with the concession 
agreement Clause 17.1 therefore the above Para may please be dropped. 
 
 It is re -iterated that the height of underpass of 3.5m had been initially 
envisaged for crossing of light Vehicle only.  However due to rapid development 
of the surrounding areas, the Haryana Government/HUDA has insisted upon to 
provide underpass of height 5.5m instead of 3.5m for facilitating crossing of 
heavy vehicle/fire tender s and other heavy vehicle due to lot of commercial and 
residential activities that took place on both side of the project road.  It may be 
stated that the entire section of Delhi -Gurgaon project is not an urban area some 
portions were still falls under rur al areas and underpass was initially planned for 
the rural areas as per IRC code.  However due to subsequent rapid industrial/ 
commercial development of the area due to proximity with the nearest town of 
Gurgaon and to facilitate crossing of heavy commerci al vehicles the height of 

25 
 
under pass was to be increased due to demand of Government of Haryana as 
per actual requirement.  As regard change of scope valuing Rs. 146.62 crores, 
the same is towards additional facilities made available on highway and may not  
linked to the negative grant.” 
 
3.4 In the above context, when asked whether any study has been made about the 
actual traffic which has been moving on the Delhi -Gurgaon stretch vis -à-vis the 
estimated traffic and the reasons for variations, the Authority stated as under: - 
 
“Yes. NHAI had engaged Chartered Accountant firm for 15 days traffic validation 
at Km 24 Toll Plaza and as per report the Traffic during the counting period from 
26.8.2009 to 09.09.2008 was 1,60,500 PCU/day. The estimated traffic by RIT ES 
in the year 2008 was 1,85,587 PCU/day based on traffic growth rates as 
mentioned in above para. As regards to measures deployed by NHAI, there is a 
provision in concession agreement under Schedule „P‟ for verification of the 
actual traffic on the projec t highway. The Concessionaire has procured the 
Automatic Traffic Count –cum-classifier system & Independent Consultant is in 
the process of carrying out the test for independent verification. The estimated 
traffic is based on certain assumptions like growt h rate of vehicle and economy 
which may or may not realize in actual as per estimate.” 
3.5 Elaborating the reasons for heavy local traffic on the expressway, the Chairman, 
NHAI stated:- 
 
“It was felt that Gurgaon traffic will be averse to paying a toll; people will prefer to 
take the free road on which there is no toll, and these roads will be developed by 
the local authorities so that the Mehrauli -Gurgaon Road and the Old Gurgaon 
Road will also be developed so that the traffic would be distributed.   
In fact, the regional scheme of things as it is there, is that the local traffic will take 
the toll free roads and they will not prefer to pay the toll. So, this is the  basic 
concept to the project.” 
Height of Underpasses 
 
3.6 When asked why the Authority has not fixed any responsibility on the DPR 
Consultant for the deficiencies observed in the DPR including their failure to take into 
account the Indian Road Congress (I RC) specifications on the minimum vertical  height 
of 5.5m for underpasses, the reply of the Authority was: -  
 
“In view of rapid development, which had taken place in Delhi & Haryana areas 
falling on the project Highway, Delhi and Haryana administrative au thorities 
insisted some improvements which were considered essential during execution , 
therefore Change of Scope orders were issued to the Concessionaire in 
accordance with the Concession Agreement. The height of underpass of 3.5m 
had been initially envis aged for crossing of light Vehicle only. However due to 
rapid development of the surrounding areas, the Haryana Govt/HUDA  has 
insisted upon to provide underpass of height  5.5 m instead of 3.5 m for 
facilitating crossing of heavy vehicle/ fire tenders and other heavy vehicles due to 

26 
 
lot of commercial and residential activities that took place on both side of the 
project road. It may be stated that the entire section of Delhi -Gurgaon project is 
not an urban area, some portions were still falls under rural a reas and underpass 
was initially planned for the rural areas as per IRC code. However due to 
subsequent rapid industrial/commercial development of the area due to proximity 
with the nearest town of Gurgaon and to facilitate crossing of heavy commercial 
vehicles, the height of under pass was to be increased. Therefore there is no 
deficiency on part of DPR consultant on this account.” 
 
3.7 When asked to state whether has any estimate been made to actually determine 
the return that has accrued to the operator?   If so, are there any plans to make such 
arrangement in future  and their own mechanism to assess the traff ic actually using the 
toll road, the Authority in their Post Evidence reply submitted as under: - 
 
“In BOT mode the project, internal rate of return and equity internal rate of return 
(EIRR) is considered while working out the financial viability of the project. In 
BOT mode all types of risk including traffic is to be borne by the Concessionaire 
and is decided before invitation of bids.  There is no sc ope for change in decision 
after award of Concession as regard to actual revenue being less or more as 
compared to anticipated at the time of assessing the viability of the project. In 
case if actual traffic proved beneficial to the Concessionaire, there is no policy to 
buy back the project since there is no such provision in the Concession 
Agreement. Similarly when actual traffic is less, NHAI does not compensate the 
loss to the Concessionaire. Mechanism does exist to independently check the 
actual traffic using the highway.  However as already stated earlier in the instant 
case there is provision related to sharing of revenue once the traffic exceeds the 
threshold value.” 
 
3.8 On being asked about the reasons for not conducting a fresh traffic study as 
advised by the Financial Consultant, it was submitted in the written reply of NHAI that:- 
 
“The Financial Consultant, M/s. SBI Caps had suggested to carry out fresh study 
of traffic volume.  The traffic volume given to the SBI Caps pertains to the year 
2000 which was only one year old.  Taking note of the existing traffic volume and 
time elapsed it was not considered necessary to carry out fresh traffic counts. It 
may be mentioned that for project of this magnitude, one year old traffic data is 
considered q uite recent and reaso nable for traffic projections. Moreover the 
process of awarding of the project would have got further delayed. 
 
Any financial analysis is supported by sensitivity analysis. In the sensitivity 
analysis, the viability of the project is t ested against increase in the cost and/or 
decrease in the revenue.  In the instant case, conscious decision was taken in 
the NHAI/Ministry to adopt the worst scenario. Worst scenario, envisaged that 
other roads providing connectivity between Delhi & Gurgao n will also be 
developed. When other facilities without toll were expected to be available, 
assumption that local traffic will not use this project highway is but natural. Traffic 

27 
 
projections are always with certain assumption, which may vary, later on. It  has 
also been the international practice. The method adopted in the instant case was 
quite logical and scientific. 
 
This statement is further supported by the comparison of the projected 
traffic with the actual traffic which is more or less similar and ha s been given in 
the earlier submission.” 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
FIXATION OF CONCESSION PERIOD AND TOLL COLLECTION 
 
4.1 Audit in Para 2.3 of the Report had observed that the Authority, before calling for 
the bids in respect of BOT projects, fixed the concession peri od up to a maximum of 30 
years. However, before fixing the concession period, the Authority had not 
systematically developed financial models to indicate the benchmark Internal Rate of 
Return (IRR) which would determine the optimum concession period within  which the 
Concessionaire would recover the capital cost of the project and other project  related 
expenditure besides earning a reasonable return. In the absence of such a system, 
Audit calculated the IRR of four BOT -Toll projects selected for audit based on 
discounted post tax cash inflows and outflows based on the projections made in the 
DPRs/concession agreements and found that the IRR of Delhi-Gurgaon projects was 24 
per cent. 
 
4.2 Based on the reasonable IRR, the concession period that should have been 
allowed to the Concessionaire for Delhi -Gurgaon projects worked out to 14 years, 
whereas a concession period of 20 years was fixed for this project.  Consequently, 
based on the projec ted tariff collection and reasonable concession period, the 
Concessionaire would gain Rs.187.77 crore, (after discounting at a rate of 20 per cent) 
during the extended concession period.  By uniformly fixing the concession period at 20 
years for all the pr ojects, the Authority has lost the opportunity of either collecting toll 
revenue by itself or allowing the road users to use the project road by paying lesser or 
no toll during the same period.  In this regard, the Authority were asked to state the total 
cost of construction of the Delhi -Gurgaon Project and what has been the expected 
revenue likely to be generated during the period of 20 years based on the actual figure 
available till date taking into account the growth of traffic during the 20 years.   
 
4.3 On the above mentioned Audit observation, the NHAI furnished their comments 
as under:- 
 
The system of preparing financial model was in place. The Financial analysis of  
project was got done by M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited based on estimation of  
civil construction cost,  traffic growth, toll income, Debt, Grant, Equity etc. The 
financial consultant M/s SBI Capital Market Ltd ( A subsidiary of State Bank of 
India), on 15th May and 30 th May 2001  recommended implementing the project 
on BOT basis consider ing 20 years concession period including construction 
period of 30 months.  The concession period was fixed based on the 
recommendation of the financial consultant M/s SBI Capital Market Limited 
based on the financial viability of the project as the project  was to float on BOT 
basis. NHAI Board made investment decision on the basis of these 
recommendations and bids were accordingly accepted. In financial modeling 
variables are traffic growth, civil construction cost, and VGF and concession 
period. All the ot her variables being held constant, an increase in concession 
period will result in reduced demand for VGF and vice versa. The revenue 
sharing concept was introduced in project to take care of excess revenue 

29 
 
generated if any by the concessionaire over and above the projections made. 
Accordingly the concessionaire of Project has to share equally with NHAI the 
revenue beyond level of 1, 30,000 PCUs /Day at any toll plaza. The relevant 
clause is placed as Annexure-III. It may be noted that under the revenue sharing 
clause the concessionaire shared and paid to NHAI about Rs. 4.0 crores in 2008-
09. This share of NHAI is likely to increase every year depending upon Traffic 
and Toll rates to be revised every year w.e. f. 1st April based on Whole Sale Price 
Index (WPI).  NHAI is not aware of the assumptions made by the Audit while 
indicating gain of Rs. 187.77 crore to the concessionaire. Therefore, NHAI have 
no comments to offer except that international bids were invite d based on open 
and transparent procedure. However, it is further submitted that as on date the 
effective concession period is approx 15 years due to delay in achieving financial 
closure as well as delay in completion of work.    
 
4.4 On being asked about the total cost of construction of Delhi -Gurgaon project and 
what revenue was likely to be generated during the 20 years concession period, the 
Authority in their written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The Total cost of the project is Rs. 710.25 crore includi ng Change of scope of 
Rs. 155.25 crore at the cost of NHAI and partly shared by Haryana Govt.). The 
Total Project Cost as per Concession Agreement is Rs 555 crore. The detailed 
financial model was prepared by SBI Capital Markets Limited ( A subsidiary of 
State Bank of India) based on major assumptions like concession period of 20 
years including construction period of 30 months, EPC cost, equity IRR, Project 
IRR and Debt Service Coverage ratio ( DSCR), Leakages of traffic, Toll rates etc. 
Therefore financially viable model was worked out  to implement the project on 
BOT (Toll) so as to attract private investment in road sector. As regards to actual 
revenue likely to be generated during the 20 years based on actual traffic, NHAI 
has not undertaken any such st udy. However in the vicinity there are various 
developments/facilities are in progress/under considerations like DMRC line, 
Dwarka-Gurgaon connectivity or other developmental activity which may affect 
the volume of traffic in future and accordingly affect the revenue.” 
  
4.5 When asked i n how much time the Authority thinks that the Concessionaire 
would be able to recover the capital cost of the project and reasonable return.  The 
Authority in their Post Evidence reply submitted as under: - 
 
“BOT (Toll) model is not based on recovery of capital cost and reasonable return 
only as traffic and other risks have been taken by the bidder for a period of 
Concession. The Financial Consultant, M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited has 
submitted various financ ial modules prior to the bidding process and during 
various discussions and presentations to the then Hon‟ble Minister, RTH, it was 
decided that worst -case scenario may be considered for the project viability. 
Accordingly the toll rates for the worst -case scenario was finalized and included 
in the bidding document. The toll rates were recommended to give a reasonable 
return to the potential investors and generate sufficient bidding interest in the 
project. Therefore concession period was decided based on th e fact that the 

30 
 
investment as well as reasonable returns will be recovered by the 
Concessionaire within the period of his concession.”   
  
4.6 When asked w hether any legal or other mechanisms is now available with the 
Authority for either collecting toll revenue by itself for the excessive years awarded to 
Concessionaire or allowing the road users to use the project road by paying lesser or no 
toll during the same period.  The Authority replied as under: - 
 
“There is no provision available in Concession Agreement and also there is no 
Government policy in this regard.  However it is to clarify that there is no 
excessive years awarded to the Concessionaire as the concession period was 
pre-determined based on recommended financial model by the financial 
consultant before inviting competitive bids. Beside there is a provision in the 
agreement for sharing revenue for traffic in excess of 1, 30,000 PCU/day at a ny 
Toll Plazas.” 
   
4.7 On being asked about the financial model followed while pre -fixing the 
concession period of 20 years before inviting bids for the project, the NHAI in their post 
evidence written reply stated as under: 
 
“Financing of project on Publ ic-Private Partnership mode depends upon 
parameters which include cost of construction, maintenance & operation, traffic & 
toll rates, concession period and grant component. To provide a common 
platform to facilitate comparison of bids and to select the most suited bidder, after 
considering the recommendation of the consultant,  all the parameters are fixed 
except one which the bidder is expected to quote. In the instant case except 
grant component, which was the bidding parameter, other parameters includin g 
concession period and toll rates were fixed prior to invitation of competitive bids  
on the basis of the recommendations of SBI caps.”  
 
4.8 In view of the problems being faced by the road users in crossing the toll plaza 
due to huge traffic pile up every day, the Authority was asked to state whether it has 
issued any advice to the Concessionaire or otherwise thought of any remedial steps to 
minimize the inconvenience to the road users.  In reply, the Authority stated as under: -  
 
“It may be clarified that the tag is an electronic device (OBU), introduced for the 
benefit of the road users. This device can be charged on advance payment to the 
Concessionaire. It facilitates deduction of toll amount on each crossing of toll 
plaza and thus opens the toll gate automatically. Thus it is a form of prepaid card 
which avoid manual payment and thus saves time. It is optional for the 
commuters to have the card and not compulsory. “ 
 
NHAI is aware of the fact that traffic queue take place during morning and 
evening peak hours at toll plaza at km 24. NHAI from time to time issued 
instructions through the Independent Consultant to the Concessionaire to 
undertake sufficient measures like deployment of Marshalls, channelization of 

31 
 
traffic to avoid long queues. However, Concessionaire in order to further improve 
the efficiency is planning to add more lanes at Toll plaza. Moreover it is 
submitted that the present processing rate in the Tag la nes as well as in cash 
lanes are much higher than stipulated in the Concession Agreement.  There is no 
exemption/tag lane for certain privilege class of people. However dedicated Tag 
lanes exist for tag users.   Tag lanes can be used by any person using motorized 
vehicle and having the Tag while crossing the toll gate.   Further, it has been 
observed that non Tag holders are entering the Tag only lanes and creating 
congestion for Tag users despite proper signage at Toll plaza. Due to this the 
commuters are not opting for using TAG, which is a must for handling such large 
traffic volume during peak hours. The traffic indiscipline is also a major reason for 
congestion at Toll plazas. However, NHAI has taken up the matter with 
Commissioner of Police, Gurgaon t o deploy Police Force in sufficient number to 
penalize the erring commuters at Toll Plaza despite installation of clear signages.  
As per concession Agreement/state support agreement, state Government has 
certain obligations for regulation of smooth flow o f traffic on project highway. The 
matter of levying penalty on errant commuters has also been explored but there 
is no specific provision in the Concession Agreement / NHAI Act which 
empowers the Concessionaire/ NHAI to levy penalty. 
 
The complaints have b een received regarding misbehavior by the ticket 
collector/guards at the toll plaza.  This has been viewed very seriously and 
Concessionaire has been strictly advised to instruct the guards to behave 
courteously.  In certain occasion the Concessionaire has taken the action by way 
of terminating the services of these misbehaving guards.” 
 
4.9 When asked why the independent auditor was not appointed earlier to ensure 
correctness of accounts m aintained by the Concessionaire, the Authority stated as 
under: - 
 
“It is to clarify that as per Concession agreement clause 28.4, NHAI shall have 
the right but not the obligation to appoint at its cost another firm of Chartered 
Accountants. However NHAI decided to audit and verify all matters which the 
Statutory Auditors  of the Concessionaire are required to certify pursuant to 
Concession Agreement.  M/s Arora & Chaudhary Associates audited the 
transactions of the Concessionaire for the year from 2002 -03 to 2007 -08 (six 
years) and submitted their report in March, 2009. Th e matter has been taken up 
with the Independent Consultant for comments by the Concessionaire. It may be 
seen that the work assigned to the auditor was to examine the account for the 
entire period.” 
 
4.10 As per the information furnished in NHAI regarding huge amount of toll collection 
by the Concessionaire, it was noted that a s per the Revenue Sharing Agreement, the 
revenue from toll collection after the threshold limit is to be shared.  When asked how 
can it be ensured that Concessionaire has accounted fo r and remitted the authority‟s 
share accurately, the Authority stated as under: - 

32 
 
 
“The Independent Consultant regularly monitors the toll collection and checks the 
correctness of calculations done by the Concessionaire for the share of revenue 
of NHAI. An y shortfall observed is intimated to the Concessionaire for 
compliance. However the concession agreement allows the Independent 
consultant under Schedule „P‟ of the Concession Agreement  to undertake traffic 
sampling for the purpose of determination   and /  or verification of the actual 
traffic on the project highway. This shall be done through Automatic Traffic Count 
cum classifier. NHAI can also take independent sampling. NHAI has done one 
such sampling with the assistance of M/s Lodha and company an empan elled 
chartered Accountant firm by NHAI for traffic validation. Report of M/s Lodha and 
Company has been received and is under examination. Accordingly the 
concession agreement has sufficient provisions and processes to ensure that the 
Concessionaire has accounted for and remitted the authority‟s share correctly.” 
 
4.11 When asked whether any corrective action has been taken by the 
Concessionaire so that such irregularities do not recur in the future, the Authority stated 
as under: - 
 
“The report has been sent to the Independent consultant for ensuring 
compliances by the Concessionaire and taking further necessary action in 
accordance with the Concession Agreement.” 
 
4.12 When asked whether any video recordings are also maintained with regard to the 
traffic movement at the toll gates  and for how long these records are preserved,  the 
Authority stated as under: - 
 
“The Concession Agreement provides for the retention period of traffic count 
(including video recording at toll gates) for each  day, and record of daily toll 
collection at each toll plaza is to be maintained till hand -over to NHAI at 
termination of the Concession.” 
 
4.13 When asked about the financial implications of the huge toll collection by the 
Concessionaire vis-à-vis the projected toll collection indicated in the DPR while 
awarding a concession period of 20 years, the NHAI stated as under: 
 
“There is a provision in the concession agreement for equal sharing of toll 
revenue for vehicles in excess of 1, 30,000  PCU/day at any Toll Plaza.  The fee 
to be shared is to be paid to NHAI by the Concessionaire on a monthly basis. 
However, at present the toll sharing is for Toll Plaza at Km 24 only 
(Delhi/Haryana border) where traffic is in excess of 1, 30,000 PCU/day. NHAI is 
sharing the toll revenue since beginning of toll collection i.e. January, 2008 for 
Toll Plaza at Km 24.” 

33 
 
4.14 On being asked about the future plan of NHAI for decongestion of the highway 
due to increase in traffic, the Authority stated:- 
 
“NHAI at present do not have any plan to decongest the highway. However, need 
may arise in future to develop alternate highway / roads due to growing demand 
of increased traffic between Delhi and Gurgaon.” 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
ROLE OF INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT 
 
5.1 According to para 3.2 of Audit Report, the Authority was required to appoint an 
Independent Consultant prior to the commencement of work by the Concessionaire to 
supervise the work executed by the Concessionaire; ensure compliance with quality 
specifications and time schedules; approve any pr oposals for change of scope and 
issue completion certificates. 
5.2 In this regard, the Authority were asked to state w hether the y remained fully 
satisfied with the performance of Independent Consultant in performance of the tasks 
assigned to him or some ki nd of advise/penalty etc. were ever necessitated.  In reply, 
the NHAI stated as under: -.  
 
“The Independent Consultant had discharged his obligation in accordance with 
the provisions of the Consultancy Agreement and up to the satisfaction of NHAI.” 
 
5.3 When asked as to who is responsible for monitoring whether all the structures 
and the Highways which have been constructed are meeting all the safety requirements 
and whether any defects have ever been pointed out, alongwith outstanding defects if 
any to be corrected, the NHAI/Ministry stated as under: - 
 
“The Independent Consultant appointed by the NHAI in consultation with the 
Concessionaire is responsible for undertaking and performing the duties, work, 
services and activities of the Concessionaire during design, engineering, 
procurement, construction, operation and maintenance of the project highway. 
Independent Consultant is responsible for ensuring that the construction work is 
accomplished in accordance with the technical specifications and issu e 
completion certificate after checking the results of prescribed tests.” 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
PROJECT FINANCING AND ESCROW ACCOUNTS  
 
6.1 According to Audit, the Authority should have an effective monitoring mechanism 
to ensure that the funds released for a particular project have actually been utilised for 
that project. This is achieved through the operation of escrow account by the 
Concessionaire.  Further, as per the concession agreements for BOT -Toll projects, the 
Concessionaires were required to open an escrow account (EA) with a bank and all 
receipts and payments in respect of the project were to be routed through this account. 
The Concessionaires were required to forward monthly EA report within five days of the 
end of each month to the Authority. The terms and conditions of operation of the EA 
also required the bank to forward a copy of the account each to the Concessionaire, the 
Authority and the lenders.   The Audit has pointed out that in the case of Delhi -Gurgaon 
project, copies of Escrow Accounts were neither forwarded by the Concessionaire nor 
did the Authority demand the same.   
 
6.2 On the above audit observation, the comments of  NHAI as furnished by them to 
the Audit in their Action Taken Note were as under:- 
 
“It is admitted that the equity was not routed through the Escrow account.  The 
matter was discussed at that point of time and it was informed by the 
Concessionaire that th e Escrow account was established after expiry of almost 
more than one and half year after signing of the agreement.  Since the project 
was awarded on the basis of negative grant, no payment from NHAI was 
involved for original scope of work, therefore inter est of NHAI does seem to be 
hampered because of above deficiencies.  However, Concessionaire has already 
been directed to maintain Escrow account in accordance with Concession 
Agreement throughout the concession period.  Matter is again being pursued 
appropriately in accordance with the Concession agreement.  The audited 
accounts has also been submitted by the Concessionaire vide their letter no. 
JDSC/1.03/2007/628 dated 26.10.2007.  NHAI has appointed additional auditor 
and got the account of the concessionaire audited for last six years. 
 
 It may be submitted that at the initial stages of implementation of the BOT 
projects, the Escrow accounts were not maintained by the concessionaire as per 
concession agreement as also pointed out by Audit.  However, in s ubsequent 
projects operation of Escrow Account in line with the concession agreement is 
being strictly enforced.” 
 
6.3 In this context, the Authority were asked to state their opinion on the importance 
of maintaining an escrow account since a s per the concession agreements for BoT -Toll 
Projects, the Concessionaires were required to open an escrow Account with a bank 
and all receipts and payments in respect of the project were to be routed through this 
account and further to s tate (i) whether the Concessionaire is maintaining an Escrow 
Account with the bank;  (ii) if so, whether the Concessionaire is forwarding monthly EA 
Report within 5 days of end of each month to the Authority as per the terms & 

36 
 
conditions; (iii) the circumstances under which the Authority did not insist upon the 
copies of EAs from the Concessionaire and whether any responsibility has been fixed 
on anyone for their failure in this r egard; (iv) w hether the Authorities have ever come 
across a situation where the Concessionaire has not followed the system; and if so, 
what action has been taken by the Authority against the Concessionaire? 
 
In reply, the NHAI stated as under: 
 
“Escrow Account is required to be opened and maintained by the Concessionaire 
through which all inflows and outflows of the cash on account of capital and 
revenue receipts and expenditure shall be routed in accordance with the 
provision of the Concession Agreement. 
 
  As per the concession agreement, the Concessionaire is maintaining 
escrow Account with a bank. Further, as per the terms & conditions of the 
agreement Concessionaire is suppose to forward monthly EA Report within 5 
days of end of each month to the Authority.  Initially i.e. during the construction 
phase, t he Concessionaire was irregular in submission of the EA report. The 
authority had taken up the matter with the Concessionaire time and again in 
writings as well as during progress review meetings and thereafter the copies of 
the statement of the Escrow Acc ount were being received regularly. This error 
was got rectified much prior to the start of collection of toll process.” 
 
6.4 On being asked as to whether  the Authority has since been undertaken any 
steps to strengthen the monitoring mechanism, the NHAI in their written reply stated:- 
“In BOT projects, there is a provision in the concession agreement to appoint 
Statutory Auditors, a firm of Chartered Accountants by the Concessionaire out of 
list of firm sent by NHAI. In order to strengthen the monitoring me chanism for 
project financing, there is also a provision in the Concession Agreement to 
appoint Additional Auditors at the cost of NHAI to audit and verify all those 
matters, expense, costs, realizations and things which the Statutory Auditors of 
the Conce ssionaire, are required to do, undertake or certify pursua nt to the 
concession agreement.” 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
NON-APPOINTMENT OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS 
 
7.1 As per clause 28.4 of the concession agreement, the Authority had the right but 
not the obligation to appoint at its cost another firm of Chartered Accountants 
(independent auditor) to audit and verify all those matters, expense, costs, realizations 
and other assurances which the statutory auditors of the Concessionaire, are required 
to do, undertake or certify.  However, in respect of none of the projects covered in this 
review, did the Authority appoint independent auditors. Though the appointment of such  
independent auditors was not mandatory, it had become desirable in the case of the 
Satara-Kagal project to safeguard the Authority‟s financial interests.  
 
7.2 As per information provided by Audit, the Authority appointed a firm of Chartered 
Accountants on 5 August, 2008 to audit the transactions of the Concessionaire for 
Delhi-Gurgaon project for the period from 2002-03 to 2007-08.  The independent auditor 
submitted Report for the year 2007 -08 on 18 March, 2009.  The Report contains 
following comments: 
 
7.3 The independent auditory observed differences on the basis of amount entered 
in the financial records and that of software generated reports both in cash collec tion as 
well as OBU collection.  There was excess in financial books by Rs. 2.16 crore in „Cash 
Collection‟ as compared to „software generated reports‟.  Further in respect of On Board 
Unit users, deficit in booking books was Rs. 66.35 lakh.  
 
7.4 In view of above, the auditor has observed that „in this regard the question on the 
accuracy of traffic report also arises, due to which it was not possible to comment upon 
as to whether the revenue sharing was done properly or not.‟ 
 
7.5 According to Authority it  would exercise the option of appointing independent 
auditors on need or case-to-case basis. 
 
7.6 During the evidence of NHAI , it was pointed out that t here have been an 
inordinate delay in the appointment of independent auditors.   
7.7 When asked as to why the Authority did not appoint any firm of Chartered 
Accountants as Independent Auditor to audit and verify the project finance, the Authority 
stated that NHAI has appointed additional auditor and got the account of the 
Concessionaire audited for last six years. The report has been received on 18th March, 
2009 and is under examination. 
 
7.8 When asked whether the Authority has since undertaken any steps to strengthen 
the monitoring mechanism for project financing, the reply of the Authority was as under: 
 
“In BOT projects, there is a provision in the concession agreement to appoint 
Statutory Auditors, a firm of Chartered Accountants by the Concessionaire out of 
list of firm sent by NHAI. In order to strengthen the monitoring mechanism for 

38 
 
project financing, there is also a provision in the Concession Agreement to 
appoint Additional Auditors at the cost of NHAI to audit and verify all those 
matters, expense, costs, realizations and things which the Statutory Auditors of 
the Concessionaire, are required to do, undertake or certify pursua nt to the 
concession agreement.” 
 
  
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
 
ISSUANCE OF COMPLETION CERTIFICATE PENDING NON -EXECUTION OF 
PUNCH LIST ITEMS AND PENALTY CLAUSE 
 
8.1 As per the Audit observations contained in Chapter III of the Audit Report, the 
Authority also appoints Independent Consultant (IC) to supervise the work  executed by 
the Concessionaire; ensure compliance with quality specifica tions and time  schedules; 
approve any proposals for change of scope and issue completion certificates.  The 
concession agreements stipulate that the Concessionaire could commence work on an  
appointed date being the date on which the financial closure was ac hieved and 
commence commercial operations on obtaining a completion or provisional completion 
certificate from the IC. After the issue of provisional completion certificate, a punch -list 
of items was  required to be prepared which includes certain minor items of work to be 
completed even though the road was opened to traffic. The Concessionaire was bound 
to complete the punchlist  items within a stipulated period and obtain final completion 
certificate.  Further, as per the terms of agreement in respect of  Delhi-Gurgaon project, 
the Concessionaire was required to construct road facility according to the approved 
designs in conformity with Government specifications. As per the reports of IC 
(November 2006), 87 quality related and 19 traffic and safety/enviro nmental related 
Non-Conformity Reports  (NCRs) were pending for want of remedial action by the 
Concessionaire. The Concessionaire‟s quality team was not fully functional and was 
found under -staffed (November 2006). Even after 38 months of commencement of 
construction, the Concessionaire had not appointed a qualified/experienced team leader 
to ensure operational efficiency in the execution of project.  
 
8.2 The Authority stated that the rectifiable NCRs pending as on the date of 
provisional completion certifi cate (January 2008) have been included in the punch -list 
items which have to be complied with within 120 days as per the concession 
agreement. But the fact remained that these NCRs were pending since November 2006 
indicating deficient performance by the Concessionaire. 
 
8.3 From the chronology of events furnished by the NHAI, it was noticed that the 
provisional Completion Certificate was issued by the Independent Consultant on 23 rd 
January, 2008 subject to the completion of punch -list items attached therewi th with the 
stipulation of their completion with 120 days.  Further, the final Completion Certificate 
was issued to the Concessionaire on 22nd April, 2009.   
 
8.4 The comments of NHAI on the above Audit observation as contained in their 
Action Taken Note furnished to C&AG are as under: - 
 
“It is submitted that against 106 pending Non Conformity Reports (NCR), 37 
NCRs have been closed and there is 69 outstanding as intimated by IC.  
Remaining NCRs are being complied as there is a mechanism envisaged in the 
Concession Agreement to deal with such NCRs.  The rectifiable NCR‟s related to 
quality is included in Punch list issued with provision completion certificate on 

40 
 
23.1.2008 which has to be complied within 120 days as per Concession 
agreement.  In case the same is not complied the same will be  dealt as per 
Agreement.  As regards, to non -rectifiable NCR‟s, Concessionaire has given an 
undertaking that they will be fully responsible for the quality of work and they 
undertake to repair/reconstruct any defects at their own risk and cost during 
entire concession period and financial penalty, if any, imposed by NHAI on the 
recommendation of IC, will be paid by them.  As regards audit observation 
relating to deficient performance by the Concessionaire, it is stated that all 
pending rectifiable NCRs have  already been complied with by the 
Concessionaire.” 
 
8.5 In the above context, the information on the following points were elicited from 
NHAI:- 
 
i) To explain in detail the punch-listed items.  
 
ii) Whether any list of items were pending with the Concessionaire?  If so, 
what were they and by when were they likely to be completed?  What is 
the latest position? 
iii) Whether any action has been taken either to get the items completed or to 
recover the penalty from the Concessionaire as per the provisions o f the 
Concession Agreement? 
 
  In this regard, the Authority stated as under: 
 
“(i) The punch-list appended with Provisional Completion Certificate issued by 
Independent consultant (M/s RITES -SHELADIA (JV) on 23.1.2008 is enclosed 
herewith as Annexure II. (Appended as Annexure I to the Report) 
 
(ii) There are certain items like cement paint on structures, landscaping in 
increased area between RTR -Palam junction which was disputed by the 
Concessionaire on the pretext of not covered under original Scope of Work. This 
was referred to a Committee who recommended de -linking such items from the 
punch list for further examination by the Independent Consultant. The items are 
being examined by the Independent C onsultant for Change of Scope of Work. 
However, due to forthcoming Commonwealth Games 2010 the Concessionaire 
has been instructed to carry out landscaping between RTR – Palam junction by 
January, 2010 pending examination of claim of Change of Scope.  
 
iii) The issue of penalty due to delay in completion of Punch -list item beyond 
limit as specified in the Concession agreement is being examined by the 
Independent Consultant and necessary recovery would be ensured by NHAI.” 
 
 
8.6 During evidence of NHAI, it was stated that there is no system to charge the 
actual loss and that a maximum limit of penalty imposable to a contract amounts  to Rs. 

41 
 
2 lakhs for every week of delay.  When asked to state as to how this maximum limit has 
been arrived at since this seems to be a  very meager amount , the Authority stated as 
under:- 
 
“The maximum limit for non -completion of punch-list items is Rs. 2 lac per week 
as mentioned in Concession Agreement. Penalty is towards delay in completion 
of the work and no way relieves the Concessionaire for actually completing the 
work. Therefore penalty is not kept to the level to recover the entire amount 
rather it is a deterrent for the Concessionaire.” 
 
8.7 During evidence of NHAI, clarification was sought on the issuance of completion 
certification before completion of punch list items .  In this regard, the CMD, NHAI and 
Member (Project) submitted as under: 
 
“The penalties are being worked out.  the provisional certificate was issued by 
M/s. RITES and Shelagia Consultant on 23 rd January, 2008. As per the contract, 
the independent consultant is authorised to issue a provisional completion 
certificate if the project highway is legally safe and reliably placed for commercial 
operation.  So, the then consultant M/s. RITES & Sheladia had issued a 
provisional completion certificate on 23/01/2008. Thereafter, it listed out all the 
non-conformities that were required to be completed, and these were to be 
completed within a specific time as per the contract.  
 
The concessionaire came up wi th a claim that some of the non -
conformities are not in the project scope of work, and that they are falling as an 
additional scope of work. He had also taken up some of the NCRs, and 
completed them also. The matter was referred by IC to NHAI, and NHAI had  
engaged a Committee of three Chief General Managers. They have worked out 
as to what is as per the original contract and what is not as per the original 
contract. So, whatever was there in the original contract was left in the punch list, 
and the remaining items were taken away from the punch list.  
 
The clarifications of the CGM Committee were informed to the 
concessionaire or rather to the independent consultant. It was said that you 
please work out the revised punch list based on the CGM Committee 
recommendation, and ensure that all these NCRs are completed before issue of 
the final COD. It is the IC, which has to carry out these things. So, he had issued 
the final COD on 22 August 2009 based on the compliance of the 
concessionaire. 
 
As regards pena lty, the Chairman has said that we have already asked 
the independent consultant to work out as to what penalty is leviable, and we are 
going to take that amount from the concessionaire.”  
 
8.8 On being asked about the mechanism available with the NHAI to ensure that 
prior to issuance of the Completion Certificate, all the items in the Punch List had been 

42 
 
complied with by the Concessionaire, the Authority in their written reply submitted as 
under:- 
 
“It may be noted that in terms of the concession agreement , it is the Independent 
Consultant who decided as to whether the concessionaire has duly complied with 
all the provisions or not prior to issuance of completion certificate. Thus after due 
verification that concessionaire has completed the punch list; the independent 
consultant had issued the completion certificate. Only items in para 14(ii) above, 
where change of scope is to be examined were pending.” 
 
8.9 During evidence of the representatives of Ministry, on the issue of completion of 
Punch-List items within a fixed time frame, the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways submitted:- 
 
“What we will do is that we will review the project thoroughly and we will fix 
the time limit for each of the pending things. We will report back to the 
Committee.” 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER-IX 
 
ROAD SAFETY AUDIT 
 
9.1 According to audit, the Central Road Research Institute carried out a road safety 
audit for the Delhi -Gurgaon project for June, 2008 and the CRRI had observed that no 
road safety was carried out earlier at the planning stage or at the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) stage.  This is due to not appropriately addressing the issues relevant for 
non-motorising transport users. In the absence of adequate number of foot over 
bridges, the needs of the pedestrians have been largely ignored resulting in number of 
deaths since February, 2007.  In this regard, the Authority were asked to explain the 
following queries: - 
(i). The number of recommendations given by the CRRI on various issues  which 
have been accepted by the Authority and the recommendations which have not 
been accepted and the reasons for not accepting the same; 
 
(ii). The number of deficiencies in respect of which  the Concessionaire was required 
to take action as per concessio n agreement but failed to do so and the  action 
taken against the Concessionaire; 
 
(iii). The mechanism available with Authority to monitor that Concessionaire takes 
remedial action in response to recommendations of CRRI; 
 
(iv). The number of deficiencies that have been removed in response to 
recommendations of CRRI by the Concessionaire/Authority and the number of 
recommendations where action is still pending as on date; 
 
(v). The steps taken by the Authority to get the safety audit done before construction 
stage on ongoing projects as well as ensuing projects; 
 
(vi). Whether pedestrian crossings had been construct ed at places where these are 
actually needed; 
 
(vii). Whether solar power blinkers as also Impact Energy Absorption Device which 
serve the purpose of shock absorbers, have been installed at the entry and exit 
points?  Whether it is proposed to install the same and by when this work is likely 
to be completed? 
 
(viii). There are no service lanes at certain stretche s of the highway which are  
necessary to have the same on both sides of the road to take care of the 
pedestrians, two-wheelers and three-wheelers?  What steps have  been taken to 
prevent water-logging and maintenance of the service lanes? Was this the fault 
of DPR or otherwise? 
 
(ix). Whether the Concessionaire has got permanent electricity connection for lighting 
the highway at night?  If not, whether proper back-up system is there to take care 

44 
 
of the situation?  Are there provisions for safety of night time commuters on the 
highways, such as patrolling of the vehicles to avoid road side threats, provision 
of ambulance in case of emergency etc.   
 
(x). Whether any land -scaping has been done which apart from distressing the 
drivers may take care of pollution emitted by the increasing number of vehicles? 
 
In reply, the NHAI stated as under: - 
 
“i) to iv) The audit report submitted by CRRI has been sent to the Concessionaire 
for compliance.  The Independent consultant has also been directed to ensure 
compliance of the various issues raised by CRRI in its report.    
 
To f urther enhance/reinforce the safety measures, the NHAI has 
undertaken the various measures like construction of five more foot over bridges 
in Haryana portion since the same were not the obligations of the Concessionaire 
under the Concession agreement. Out  of the five Foot Over Bridges, two FOBs 
have been completed and operational between Udyog vihar and IFFCO Chowk 
and work on one FOB is in progress and for balance two, Land Acquisition is 
being done. All the above 5 FOBs are proposed to be provided with E scalators. 
Besides above, the two meter high fencing in central verge has also been 
erected and almost completed throughout the stretch to curb the crossover 
movement of the pedestrians. NHAI has also engaged a consultant for providing 
5 vehicular underpas ses between Rajiv Chowk and end of project.  The 
consultant has submitted the Feasibility Report which is being examined. In 
addition to above there is also a provision of Construction of underpass and 
partial clover leaf at Hero Honda Chowk for which Cons ultant has submitted the 
Preliminary Project Report. The Comments of Haryana Govt. is awaited on Draft 
report. 
 
vi) NHAI had taken up safety audit of projects at following stages; 
 
a) Project preparation stage 
b) Implementation stage 
c) Commissioning stage 
 
vii) &viii) As brought out in para v) above, four Pedestrian Crossings by way of 
foot-over-bridge and four pedestrian underpass have been constructed 
based on demand by the local authorities like Air Force and District 
Administration of Gurgaon.  The additional three  foot-over bridges and 
proposed five vehicular underpass is also as per the local demand by the 
public/ District Administration. 
 
ix)   The solar power blinkers have been installed and the impact energy 
absorption devices have been installed at 2 locations  which are 
considered as Accident Prone. 

45 
 
 
x)     Service lanes have been provided wherever land is available. In certain 
stretches land has not been made available by the Airport Authority of 
India therefore service road could not be provided. The matter h as been 
taken up with Airport Authority and after hand -over of the land the balance 
service road will be got completed. It is to mention that even in the 
stretches where service road are in full length on both sides, two/three 
wheelers are not using the se rvice roads despite signage installed at all 
such locations. Traffic Police, Delhi and Gurgaon have also conducted 
checking and challan the two/three wheelers using the main carriageway. 
Traffic indiscipline like entering the Tag lane by cash users, High s peed 
driving, entry of two/three wheelers etc. is the source of concern for 
smooth operation of project highway for which the police and state 
authorities have been requested for imposing penalties/fines on the traffic 
violators.  
 
The water logging on the  service road near Hero Honda Chowk is 
due to blockage of natural drains (Khandsa drain)  restricting free flow of 
water.  Further the water logging is because of pumping sewage by the 
local villagers into the storm water drain constructed between main 
carriageway and service road , which overflows near Hero Honda Chowk.  
The matter has been taken up with Govt. of Haryana for clearing blockage 
of natural drains but the matter is still to be resolved at their level. The 
Concessionaire has provided sufficient  number of sludge pumps to clear 
the same. 
 
xi)    The Concessionaire has permanent electricity connection. However, the 
Concessionaire has also installed DG Sets as a power back -up system at 
his own cost. The Concessionaire as a part of emergency response  
protocol (ERP) has provided patrolling vehicles, Ambulances round the 
clock for the safety of the commuters. 
xii) The landscaping has been done as per the provision of the concession 
agreement which also take care of pollution. Concessionaire has also 
been instructed to carry out landscaping between RTR – Palam junction 
by January, 2010 pending examination of claim of Change of Scope.” 
9.2 When asked whether NHAI has analysed the reasons which have been the 
cause for accidents on the Highways  and if so, the findings thereof indicating year-wise 
percentage of occurrences since inception of each highway constructed under the aegis 
of NHAI, the Authority in their written reply submitted as under: 
 
“NHAI has analysed the reasons which has been the cause of accidents on 
National Highways which are over speeding, exponential vehicle growth, no lane 
discipline – mixed traffic, no proper data collection and analysis, Wrong side 
Movement (contra flow), una uthorized median openings, parking, drunken 
driving, dangerous Public Transport (obsolete vehicles, overcrowding, wrong 

46 
 
parking), untrained driver, fatigue of driver, lack of inter -departmental 
coordination.  The accident data on monthly basis is being col lected from the 
month of May, 2009 onwards. Therefore year wise percentage of accident 
occurrence since inception of each highway constructed under the aegis of NHAI 
is not available.  However, the data on accidents is being compiled by the 
Transport Research Division under the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways.” 
9.3 In this regard, the Ministry were asked about the remedial measures if any being 
taken by the Government either by direct intervention or by way of directions to NHAI in 
respect of the above-mentioned Road-safety Audit carried out by the CRRI as this issue 
of grave importance affects the lives of the innocent pedestrians.  Further, in view of the 
problems being faced by the road users in crossing the toll plaza due to huge traffic pile 
up everyday, whether the Government has issued any direction or advise to the NHAI to 
rectify the situation or has simply preferred to wash off its hands of the  issue.  In this 
regard, the Ministry endorsed the above reply of the NHAI. 
 During the evidence of Ministry, the Secretary submitted that: 
“The safety related issues have been considered while designing the project. At 
the same time, what is to be appreciated is that this was one of the very first 
projects and everybody lacked experience. So, I would s ubmit before the 
Committee that NHAI deserves that much of the margin. When it came to safety 
related issue, the Governments of Haryana and Delhi raised certain issues after 
implementation of the project commenced and those things had to be built in. 
Even after COD had been granted certain safety related issues have been raised 
because quite a few deaths on the road occurred because people ignorantly or 
because of their own thinking crossed the road, which is not expected to be 
done. It is an expressway, ac cess controlled, nobody should enter the road and 
nobody should cross the road. That has been one of the main reasons for the 
accidents, besides other reasons. Now the NHAI has fenced the road throughout. 
With the result, I am told the rate of accidents has considerably come down.” 
 
9.4 When asked has the Concessionaire provided patrolling vehicles and 
Ambulances on the Highways in terms of its obligations under the Concessionaire 
Agreement, the reply of the NHAI is as follows: - 
 
“The Concessionaire as part of his obligations set forth in Emergency Response 
Protocol (ERP) has provided patrolling vehicles and Ambulances on the project 
highway.” 
 
9.5 When asked whether in order to ensure proper safety and policing on Highways, 
the Government is contemplating National Highway Policy on the pattern of Railway 
Protection Force, the Ministry stated as under: - 
 
 “There is no proposal at present to provide the National Highway Policing on the 
pattern of Railway Protection Force. However, in completed highway sectio ns 
provision exists for highway patrolling and ambulances by  Concessionaire under 

47 
 
O&M contract so that accident victims could be provided fi rst aid and taken to 
hospitals.” 
 
9.6 On being asked about the provision in the concession agreement to fix 
responsibility of Concessionaire with respect of providing Pedestrian Crossing/  
Underpasses/Subways and whether the Concessionaire have complied with its 
obligations also stating the reasons for delay in providing sufficient number of 
Pedestrian Crossing/Underpasses/ Subways, the reply of the Ministry was as under: - 
 
“The Concessionaire was responsible for construction of two pedestrian/cattle 
underpasses as per provisions of concession agreement, which have been 
provided by him as part of original scope o f works. Further 2 nos of cycle cum 
foot over bridges at Subroto Park and Shankar Vihar and Pedestrian cum cycle 
subway at Kendriya Vidhyalaya 3 were provided as part of change of scope. 
However, due to increased average speed of travel on the highway cert ain 
additional works mainly for safety of traffic/pedestrian were felt necessary. It was, 
therefore, decided to provide 5 more foot over bridges on the stretch. 
Subsequently based on request of Delhi police one foot over bridge at Dhaula 
kuan has been adde d. Bids were invited for construction of six foot over bridges 
in June, 2007 and only one bid was received, therefore being single bid, it was 
decided to go for rebidding. Second time bidding resulted in to non responsive 
bids and therefore bids were again re invited third time on January, 2008 and this 
time also it resulted in to single bid with very high rates, therefore it was decided 
to hand over the work of Construction of five foot over bridges in Haryana portion 
to Haryana PWD as deposit work in Febr uary, 2008. Out of these two numbers 
have been completed and one number is in progress. Balance two numbers 
involved land acquisition which is being pursued. Further, NHAI has planned to 
provide 5 vehicular underpasses between Rajiv Chowk and Kherki Daula,  for 
which the DPR is in progress.” 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER-X 
 
MONITORING ROLE OF GOVERNMENT 
 
10.1 The Audit Report has pointed out many deficiencies in the project such as delay 
in completion of project by 42 months beyond the scheduled completion date of June 
2004 due to change in mode of execution from Special Purpose Vehicle to BOT -Toll, 
subsequent delay in award of concession and the delay in issuing change of scope 
orders; deficiency in the Detailed Project Report resulting in execution of these items 
under change of scope orders for Rs.146.62 crore; non -availability of a system to 
compute the reasonable concession period resulting in fixation of the longer concession 
period of 20 years against a reasonable concession period of 14 years; delay of 26 
months in issuing orders for change of scope of work leading to delayed completion of 
the project; non-compliance of specifications regarding thickness of road surface etc.  In 
this connection, the Ministry were asked to state as to what kind of monitoring role the 
Government has assigned to itself in ensuring that its role and experiences in the 
execution of Roadways ambitious NHDP programme is implemented efficiently without 
ignoring the sound business principles and prudent commercial practices.  
 
10.2 In reply , the Secretary of the Ministry during evidence before the Committee 
stated as under: 
 
“The NHAI has been created under an Act of Parliament and the Act gives it very 
high level of autonomy.  In fact, the Act says that the Government can issue 
direction only in respect of policy related issues and by and large the 
implementation has been left to the NHAI.  Particularly, around that time, when 
this particular project in question was conceived and implemented, even the 
powers of the Government like those, which relate to financial scrutiny, I am sure 
the Committee, is aware that we have the EFC, PIB s and CCA.  All these were 
also to a large extent were delegated to the Committee.  As you are kindly 
aware, this project was taken up as part of the Phase -I of NHDP sometime in the 
year 2000.  That time, the Government was very keen about the Golden 
Quadrilateral, which was identified after elaborate exercise involving the Prime 
Minister and the Committee headed by the then Deputy -Chairman, Planning 
Commission.  After the kind of detailed exercise, the Phase -I the NHDP was 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.  As part of that, certain 
projects were identified for implementation as BOT proj ects. So, this is the 
background.” 
 
  xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
As far as the Government is concerned, there is a proper monitoring 
system. Monitoring in Go vernment is done primarily by the NHAI Board which 
has three sitting Secretaries to the Government. The Cabinet decided to 
empower the NHAI with the Board of PIB, EFC and all these high powered 
bodies within the Government. They also decided that three ser ving Secretaries 
will sit on the Board. Normally, in public sector undertakings, Secretaries are not 

49 
 
on the Board. It is normally Joint Secretaries and Additional Secretaries. But it is 
a Cabinet order that three Secretaries, namely, the Expenditure Secret ary, the 
Planning Secretary and myself, will sit on the Board and will exercise all checks 
and will see that the Government‟s interests are properly protected and there is 
proper monitoring, there is proper appraisal and proper review. That is what is 
expected of the Board. Besides, of course, there is the Chairman who is also a 
Secretary level officer. We get monthly report from the NHAI in respect of each of 
the project in a detailed format and that report is given in addition to the Ministry, 
to the Plan ning Commission also because I think perhaps the Department of 
Programme Implementation monitors all the projects costing above Rs.100 crore. 
With this format the Government regularly monitors. Within the Ministry we have 
a Project Implementation Cell head ed by the Chief Engineer Shri Patankar and 
the DG is responsible for monitoring. In any case, I take at least two to three 
meetings on an average and review all the aspects of NHAI programmes. 
Besides, the Minister also reviews. That way, there is a well l aid down 
mechanism for monitoring in the Government. In spite of this, we regret that 
delays take place and there is particularly delay in the award of projects which is 
now happening. 
 
  xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx 
 
“......that Government has power, as I mentioned, to give directions on policy 
issues. Generally, what it meant to be that excepting involving in day to day 
affairs and involving questions of bidding, tendering process and things like that, 
everything else which has particularly implications on the social obligations of the 
Government and convenience of the public, Government has inherent right to 
give direction. After all, NHAI is a creation of law, and is accountable to the 
Parliament through the Government. So, Gove rnment is fully accountable to 
Parliament and when it comes to questions of, say, public importance, we 
definitely have a right to intervene and we have a right to give a direction. I think 
that should clarify, as far as the Government‟s powers and other t hings are 
concerned.  
 
The Act very clearly says that NHAI accounts, annual report and 
everything else will be laid on the Table of the House through the Government. 
So, it goes without saying that though the Government‟s role is limited to policy 
direction, but policy direction includes anything which has implications for the 
public, excepting their day to day or individual case, we of course cannot 
interfere, but in other things, we have every right, and we do. In that, definitely, 
monitoring of the proje cts and making NHAI accountable to complete them on 
time is definitely one of the areas where Government is seriously concerned and 
we are addressing that problem to the best of our ability.” 
 
10.3 During evidence of the Ministry, certain clarifications were sought with regard to 
the extent of intervention of Government in the road projects and as to where a line can 
be drawn between policy matters to be decided by the Government vis-à-vis the matters 
which govern the day -to-day administration concerning NHAI in the context of 

50 
 
implementation of NHDP projects in general and Delhi -Gurgaon project in particular.  In 
this regard, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The National Highways  Authority of India (NHAI) has been constituted under 
Parliament Act known as NHAI Act, 1988.  As per this Act the NHAI is 
responsible for the development, maintenance and management of National 
Highways and for matters connected therewith.  Investment decisions on all the 
projects as also other policy issues i ncluding day-to-day administration etc. are 
considered and approved by NHAI Board which has as its part time Members, 
Secretary (Planning Commission), Secretary (Expenditure), Secretary (Road 
Transport and Highways) and Director General (Road Development) and Special 
Secretary.  Further NHAI brings out on monthly basis report bringing out 
progress of all projects under implementation.  The status of works is also 
reviewed by Secretary ( Road Transport &  Highways), Hon‟ble Minister of State 
and Hon‟ble Minister of Road Transport & Highways on a regular basis to ensure 
the proper and timely execution of various projects.  The progress of the various 
schemes/works is also monitored by the Planning Commissio n, Ministry of 
Programme Implementation and Cabinet Secretariat from time to time.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

51 
 
PART – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
Sl. No. 1 
At the very outset the Committee would wish to state that even though the matter 
under consideration is with regard to examination of the C&AG‟s Audit Report No. PA 
16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) regarding Public Private Partnership in implementation 
of Road Proj ects by NHAI in respect of Delhi Gurgaon Sector, certain other crucial 
factors which are inextricably interwined with issues under examination came to fore.  
Going by the spirit of the remit of the Committee per se, the Committee proceeded to 
examine issues that arose with a holistic perspective. 
 Before proceeding further the Committee are constrained to comment upon an 
aspect of conduct of Chairman, NHAI during his evidence before the Committee.  
During his deposition, while referring to certain basic con cepts of BOT mode, which he 
covered in his presentation he remarked “perhaps, (they) are too novel or the hon’ble 
members have not been able to grasp them.…” 
 The tone and tenor as also the very contents of these remarks tend to 
question the caliber and co mprehension capabilities of the members which in 
turn could be construed as casting reflections on the members of the Committee.  
In this context, the Committee also find it worthwhile to mention that Chairman 
during his deposition also inter alia  remarked “in the audit report I sensed the 
C&AG himself is not perhaps familiar or completely familiar with the way the BOT 
projects works”.  These remarks too could be construed as casting reflections on 
officers of a constitutional body.  The Chairman, NHAI should certainly have been 
conscious of the basic norms of etiquette and discretion which a witness 

52 
 
appearing before a Parliamentary Committee should bear in mind.  Evidently, the 
CMD unmindful of the said norms exceeded his brief.  The Committee take  
objection to his indiscretion and condescending attitude. 
  

53 
 
Absence of Guidelines for Determining the Mode of Execution (Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that there were no internal guidelines or directions 
from Government for determining the mode of executi on of project when NHDP 
Phase-I was started in the year 2000.  Such guidelines were issued only in March 
2006.  In this regard, the Committee note that initially, the mode of execution of 
Delhi-Gurgaon project was through Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) mode  but was 
subsequently changed to BOT -Toll mode despite the fact that the Financial 
Consultant did not initially find the BOT-Toll mode as viable.  
 The Government ’s position is that the change of mode was done to 
increase the private sector participation in the road projects so as to leverage the 
scarce budgetary resources.  In SPV mode the Government has to bear the cost 
of the project and by shifting to BOT mode the Government has saved its 
investments besides receiving an amount of Rs. 61 crore from the  
Concessionaire as negative grant.  In BOT-mode the procedural delays as well as 
the risks of cost over -run are also avoided as the entire obligation lies with the 
Concessionaire. Therefore in BOT -mode the financial implication on Government 
is bare-minimum as compared to EPC and SPV model.   
 The Committee are constrained to observe that fixing of one mode then 
switching over to the other mode, absence of any comparative study of BOT -Toll 
vis-à-vis BOT -Annuity, not doing any fresh traffic assessment inspite of a 
recommendation to this effect by the financial consultant, absence of any internal 
guidelines for determining the mode of execution, apparent delays caused on 
account of deficient DPR etc. gives an indication that there has been a deliberate 
certain kind of indecisiveness which has clouded the entire process.   

54 
 
 The Committee note that in the BOT -Toll mode, the Concessionaire builds 
the road, maintains it for a fixed period and also collects the toll during that 
period. In the BOT -Annuity mode, the o nly difference is that the Government 
collects the toll and the Concessionaire is paid fixed sums every six months to 
make him recover his investments.  The Committee while observing that no 
comparative study of BOT -Toll vis -à-vis BOT Annuity mode was carr ied out by 
the NHAI, find it inconceivable as to how a high traffic density stretch like Delhi -
Gurgaon could not have been opted for execution on BOT -Annuity mode was not 
opted despite the fact that on this mode the toll collection is of the order of 
Rs.208 crore just in 20 months of the opening of the project for toll.   
The Committee find the argument put forth by the Government/NHAI that  
BOT-Toll mode is preferable to BOT -Annuity mode as in the l atter the risk of toll 
collection is passed on to NHAI  as unconvincing.  In this regard, the Committee 
find it pertinent to drive home the point that as a welfare state, Government has a 
social responsibility to provide good roads to its citizens.  Even taking into 
consideration the fact that the Government opted  for private sector participation 
to leverage its budgetary resources, it can not be justified that the Government is 
not prepared to take a minimal risk of a lower toll collection if BOT Annuity mode 
was opted for Delhi -Gurgaon project. The whole scenario  gives an impression 
that the Government was more interested in fulfilling the commercial interest of 
the Concessionaire instead of serving the public interest.  The Committee on a 
fair analysis of the arguments put forth by the Government for switching ov er in 
favour of BOT -Toll mode are of the view that had the Government carried out a 
comparative study of the toll and annuity mode, the unjustified enrichment of the 

55 
 
Concessionaire by way of large toll collection and change of scope of work could 
have been  well avoided.  Further, in BOT -Toll mode, the NHAI has managed to 
evade its accountability on various lacunae brought out in the C&AG Report as it 
has left everything related to the execution of the project entirely in the hands of 
the Independent Consultant and the Concessionaire.  The plea of the Government 
that performance of projects implemented by NHAI on SPV mode has been very 
poor clearly tantamounts to admission of the inefficiencies of the Government 
machinery. 
The Committee, therefore, find that there are serious lacunae in the present 
policy of the Government which provides that all the projects should first be 
considered for BOT -Toll failing which on BOT -Annuity failing which SPV or EPC 
mode. The Committee therefore recommend that the Government  need to review 
their guidelines so that the mode of execution should be based on case -to-case 
basis instead of a common guideline for all projects and the Authority be 
invariably made accountable in respect of project related deficiencies irrespective 
of the mode of execution.  
  

56 
 
Deficient Detailed Project Report (Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Delhi -
Gurgaon project prepared by M/s RITES and finally approved in October 2001, 
suffered from many deficiencies as many critical items which should have been 
foreseen at the time of preparation of DPR were omitted. This resulted in 
execution of these items under change of scope of works orders for Rs. 146.62 
crore constituting 21 per cent of the total project cost. The change of scope of 
work included change in the height of underpasses from 3.5 metre to 5.5 metre, 
construction of an elevated stretch from Rao Tula Ram Marg to Palam and 
additional underpasses at two locations etc.  The Committee further note that the 
DPR did not make any provisions for sufficient number of pedestrian crossings 
by way of overhead foot bridges or underpasses at appropriate places. 
 The NHAI has tried to justify the above -mentioned deficiencies in the DPR 
by stating that the areas around the project highway located in Delhi -Haryana had 
witnessed rapid development and change of scope orders were issued to 
accommodate the requests of Delhi and Haryana Governments.  Further, 
underpass height of 3.5 metres was initially envisaged for crossing of light 
vehicles only. However, due to rapid development of the surroundings, the 
Haryana Government insisted for provision of  5.5 metres underpass height to 
facilitate movement of heavy veh icles /fire tenders as lot of commercial and 
residential activities had taken place subsequently.  According to the Ministry the 
project highway was inspected by the then Hon’ble Minister of Road Transport 
and Highways in November,  2003 and it was directed  to further optimize the 

57 
 
design with some more value additions. Accordingly change of scope orders of 
Rs.146.62 crore were issued.   
 The Committee find the justification furnished by the Ministry as nothing 
but lame excuses.  The Committee observe that the pace of growth in the area did 
not pick up suddenly between April 2003 and May 2004 as claimed by the 
government/ NHAI but was known even before the award of the project. This is 
well evident in the traffic assessment report submitted by M/s RITES during  the 
year 2000. The Ministry has infact submitted that the actual traffic volume at 
present is less than what was projected by RITES.  This negates the claim of the 
government of sudden rapid developments in the areas around the expressway .  
Lamentably t hese deficiencies have cost the exchequer a whooping sum of 
Rs.146 crore that had to be paid by the Government , thus nullifying the factor of 
negative grant of Rs.61 crore received from the Concessionaire. The Committee 
while observing that the entire area a round the project lies in an urban stretch 
and International Road Congress (IRC) specifications clearly stipulates height of 
underpasses as 5.5. metre for such areas, find by the plea of the Government that 
the height of the underpass was raised to 5.5 met re instead of 3.5 metre only on 
the insistence of Haryana government for facilitating crossing of heavy 
vehicles/fire tenders  to be simply untenable and incomprehensible .  This only 
reflects the lack of professional competence on the part of NHAI in handli ng the 
project and points to a defective system of assessment prevailing in the 
organization.  
The Committee appreciate that the fact that the Governments of Haryana 
and Delhi have highlighted  the major deficiencies in the DPR which NHAI had 

58 
 
missed in the DPR ignoring the exponential growth of Gurgaon and the existence 
of an international airport in the close proximity.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
the serious deficiencies in the DPR camaflouged in the name of change of scope 
of work at the insistence of the Delhi and Haryana Governments.  The Committee 
therefore recommend that responsibility must be fixed on the DPR consultant for 
their failure to take into account the Indian Road Congress (IRC) specifications on 
the minimum vertical height of 5.5 metre for underpasses.  The Committee further 
recommend that Authority should evolve procedures and stipulate 
accountabilities to ensure that DPRs should be prepared after extensive 
consultation with the State Government concerned as well as taki ng into 
consideration the needs of the locals. 
  

59 
 
Improper Fixation of Concession Period (Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee note that according to Audit, the NHAI had not 
systematically developed financial models to indicate the benchmark Internal 
Rate of Return (IR R) which would determine the optimum concession period 
within which the Concessionaire would recover the capital cost of the project and 
other project related expenditure besides earning a reasonable return. Based on 
traffic projections in the DPR of Delhi -Gurgaon project and discounted post tax 
cash inflows and outflows, Audit found that the IRR of this project worked out as 
24 per cent.  Assuming reasonable IRR of 20 per cent, the concession period that 
should have been allowed to this project worked out to be 14 years whereas a 
concession period of 20 years has been allowed. A logical fall out of this scenario 
would be that the Concessionaire of this project would gain Rs.187.77 crore (after 
discounting at a rate of 20 per cent) during the extended concession period. 
 The NHAI has taken the stand that t he Financial Consultants M/s SBI 
Capital Market Ltd recommended implementing the project on BOT basis 
considering 20 years concession period. It has further been stated that care was 
taken to include revenue  sharing clause in the agreement which stipulates that 
the Concessionaire has to share equally with NHAI the revenue beyond level of 
1,30,000 PCUs per day. 
 The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Authority. Firstly, 
the NHAI did not conduct any fresh traffic study as advised by the financial 
consultant before inviting bids for the project.  Secondly, though this project was 
expected to be a very high traffic density corridor, but strangely the toll rates 
were fixed on the basis of worst -case scenario situation in the bidding document 

60 
 
on the pretext of generating sufficient bidding interest in the project.  The 
Committee feel that by inviting bids based on worst case scenario  situation, the 
NHAI had lost the opportunity of getting a higher negative grant from the bidders.  
The Committee further note that the total project cost as per the 
concession agreement is Rs.555 crores and the concessionaire has already 
collected a toll revenue of Rs. 208 crores in 20 months since commencement of 
the toll collection from January, 2008.  Taking note that NHAI did not undertake 
any study to assess the actual revenue likely to be generated during the entire 
concession period i.e. upto the year 2023 and the expected traffic growth in the 
coming years, the Commi ttee are convinced that no home work was done by the 
Authority to assess the correctness of the 20 years concession period worked 
out by the Financial Consultant, which indicates nothing but deliberate oversight 
on the part of NHAI.   On the issue of revenu e sharing agreement which requires 
the Concessionaire to share equally with NHAI the toll collection beyond a 
threshold limit, the Committee are constrained to note that such agreement gives 
no respite to the commuters but only promotes the commercial interest of the 
NHAI and Concessionaire.  Now, after the signing of the concession agreement, 
the Authority has no means to reduce the concession period.  In this way, t he 
authority has lost the opportunity of either collecting toll revenue by itself for the 
remaining years or allowing the road users to use the project road by paying 
lesser or no toll during that excess period.  The Committee, therefore, squarely 
put the blame on the NHAI for its failure to protect the interest of the hapless 
commuters.   
 

61 
 
There is no gainsaying the fact that very idea behind conceptualizing Delhi -
Gurgaon expressway was to ensure speedy and effective means of commuting 
between Delhi -Gurgaon-Delhi.  In this context, Committee find it pertinent to 
observe that the avoidable confusion and chaos at Toll Plazas and undue traffic 
holdups there, tend to negate the very purpose for which the expressway was 
constructed.  Under these circumstances on e can’t help but rueing that 
commuters did not get adequate facilities in terms of speedy and hasslefree 
commuting commensurate with the humongous expenditure incurred on the 
expressway. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should find 
some ways and means for provision of some relief to the hapless commuters 
either by sharing the toll or making it toll free once the Concessionaire has 
recovered his investment.  The Committee  also deprecate the methodology 
followed by the NHAI and strongly re commend that suitable guidelines/criteria be 
evolved for computing the concession period based on sound financial 
evaluations.  
The Committee further recommend that NHAI should have a mechanism to 
monitor the toll plazas with a view to obviate putting the users to unnecessary 
harassment by way of illegal and unscrupulous methods of toll collection.  The 
Committee understand that the Monthly Tags issued by the Concessionaire are 
required to be renewed in a manner which is disadvantageous to the tag users.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that these tags should be 
converted into smart cards forthwith on the pattern of the cards issued by the 
DMRC which can be renewed after exhausting of the charged amount. 

62 
 
Delay in Execution of Project (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that the completion of the Delhi -Gurgaon project was 
delayed by 42 months beyond the scheduled completion date of June 2004 due to 
reasons like failure to provide land to the concessionaire in time, change in mode 
of execution from Spec ial Purpose Vehicle to BOT -Toll, subsequent delay in 
award of work to the Concessionaire and the delay of 26 months in finalization of 
change of scope orders valuing Rs.146.62 crore.   
Regarding delay caused due to change of scope of works, the Committee 
feel that all those issues which came up subsequently on the insistence of Delhi 
& Haryana Government necessitating the issuance of change of scope of work 
orders should have been and co uld very well have been foreseen during the 
planning and preparation of Detailed Project Report.   
The Committee are conscious of the fact that throughout the country, the 
land acquisition is one of the major bottlenecks owing to factors like lack of land 
records, resistance from farmers and non -cooperation from State Governments, 
etc. which come in the way of timely completion of all types of projects and feel 
that this issue needs to be addressed properly and some effective mechanism 
has to be evolved inv olving the representatives of State Governments and other 
concerned functionaries.   
  

63 
 
Pre-Mature Issuance of Completion Certificate (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that Independent Consultant, appointed by the NHAI 
for supervision of work executed by the Concessionaire, were responsible for 
issue of the completion and provisional completion certificates to the 
Concessionaire who can commence commercial operations only thereafter.  As 
per the prescribe procedure, after issue of the provisional completion ce rtificate, 
a punch-list of items is prepared by the Independent Consultant which generally 
includes certain minor items of works to be completed and the final completion 
certificate can be issued only after execution of the Punch -List items.  In the case 
of Delhi Gurgaon Project, the Committee note that the provisional completion 
certificate was issued on 23 rd January, 2008, the date of start of commercial 
operations (Toll collection) was 25 th January, 2008 and the final completion 
certificate was issued on  22nd August, 2009.  The audit has pointed out that a 
number of rectifiable Non Conformity Reports (NCRs) included as Punch -List 
items in the provisional completion certificate which were required to be 
completed by the Concessionaire within 120 days, remained in pendency which is 
indicative of a deficient performance by the Concessionaire. 
 The Committee note from the information furnished to them that the 
Independent Consultant for the Project M/s RITES – SHELADIA (JV) attached a 
list of 24 Punch-List items with the provisional certificate issued by them with the 
stipulation that the said Punch -List items shall be completed by the 
Concessionaire within 120 days of the date of issue of the provisional certificate 
of completion i.e. by 24 th May, 2008.  Accor ding to the NHAI the Concessionaire 
had disputed certain items on the pretext of non coverage under the original 

64 
 
scope of work and the issue was referred to a Committee of CGM which had 
recommend delinking such items from Punch -List for further examination  by 
Independent Consultant and the same are presently being examined by him.  
Besides this, the issue of imposing penalty due to delay in completion of Punch 
List items is being examined by NHAI.  Regarding issuance of Completion of 
Certificate pending the  Punch-List items, the NHAI has simply washed off its 
hands of all its responsibilities by submitting that it was the Independent 
Consultant who was to decide as to whether the Concessionaire has duly 
complied with all the provisions or not pertaining to i ssuance the of final 
Completion Certificate.   
The Committee are not happy at all with the way the whole matter relating 
to issue of completion certificate has been handled.  In fact, the Committee gather 
an impression that undue haste has been shown in gi ving the completion 
certificate to the Concessionaire.  This is evident from the fact that after issuance 
of provisional certificate in January, 2008 with the stipulated time period of 120 
days for completion of pending Punch -List items i.e. by May, 2008 t he same have 
not yet been fully completed as on October, 2009.  Apparently, after start of Toll 
collection, the whole pressure lifted off the Concessionaire.  He has managed to 
get away with his obligation by giving an undertaking that he would be fully 
responsible for any bad quality of work mentioned in the NCRs and to repair / 
reconstruct the same at its risks and cost during the entire concession period.  
The Committee do not find such kind of undertaking by the Concessionaire as an 
appropriate substitu te for the prescribed norms of the work as per the 
concession agreement.  The justification that Completion Certificate was issued 

65 
 
not by the NHAI but by the Independent Consultant clearly indicates that the 
Authority has shirked off its responsibilities b y leaving everything of this project 
of national importance into the hands of Independent Consultant.  Even the issue 
of levy of penalty @ Rs. 2 lac per week for delayed completion of work has also 
been left for the Independent Consultant to examine and decide. 
The Committee express their strong reservation s over the manner in which 
the Completion Certificate  was issued  by the Independent Consultant without 
completing / exhausting the items of works contained in the Punch -List.  On the 
other hand, the Independent Consultant has issued the Completion Certificate 
after merely taking an undertaking from the Concessionaire f or completion of the 
same.  Taking a strong exception, the Committee are of the firm view  that the 
whole issue of Completion Certificate may be revisited by NHAI and those found 
guilty should be punished and penalty provisions be invoked on the 
Concessionaire for not completing the P unch-List items in time.  The Committee 
further feel that NHAI needs to categorically explain this blatant lapse which came 
to passé. 
  

66 
 
Non Compliance of Escrow Account Norms (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that according to the audit report, the Authority should 
have an effective monitoring mechanism for ensuring that the funds released for 
a particular project have actually been utilized for that project. This is achieved 
through operation of Escrow Account (EA) by the Concessio naire who is to 
forward monthly EA report within five days of the end of each month to the 
Authority. The Committee are, however, constrained to note that in the case of 
Delhi-Gurgaon project, the copies of the EAs were neither forwarded by the 
Concessionaire nor the Authority demanded the same. The Authority while 
admitting the lapse on their part has submitted that it had directed the 
Concessionaire of Delhi -Gurgaon project to maintain EA in line with the 
concession agreement. 
Taking a serious note of the lapse on the part of NHAI in respect of the core 
issue of monitoring of the project funding and its utilization through the EA 
statements which is an important instrument of monitoring timely flow of funds 
from different sources and their utilisation for the project activities, the 
Committee recommend that the Authority must ensure that agreement clauses 
relating to opening and periodical submission of escrow account are complied 
with in all future projects. 
  

67 
 
Delay in Appointment of Independent Auditors (Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee note that as per the concession agreement, the Authority 
had the right but not the obligation to appoint at its cost another firm of chartered 
accountants as Independent Auditors to audit and verify all those matters, 
expense, c osts, realizations and other assurances which the auditors of the 
Concessionaire were required to do.  The Committee are, however, constrained to 
note that this right was not timely exercised by the Authority.   
 In this regard, the Committee note that the  Independent Auditors appointed 
subsequently by NHAI on 5 th August, 2008 to audit the transactions of the 
Concessionaire from the years 2002 to 2008 in their report submitted in March, 
2009 had observed differences in the amounts to the tune of Rs. 2.16 crore in the 
financial records and the software generated rep orts both in cash collection as 
well as OBU collection.  According to Independent Auditors, this has raised a 
question mark on the accuracy of the traffic report and whether the revenue 
sharing had been done properly or not.   
The Committee take a serious note of the failure on the part of the NHAI for 
not having exercised its right of appointing Independent Auditors in time though 
it was in its own interest.  Though it was not mandatory on the part of the NHAI, 
the Committee feel that the principles of goo d governance have not been 
followed in this case.  The Authority has not given any reasons for delayed 
appointment of Independent Auditors but had taken the stand that it was not 
mandatory on their part.   
 The Committee feel that the report of the Indepen dent Auditors revealing 
inaccuracy in the financial records of the Concessionaire suggest that 

68 
 
appointment of Independent Auditors should be made a mandatory provision in 
the internal working manual of the NHAI so as to avoid any scope of 
lopsidedness in t he accuracy of the records maintained by the concessionaire.  
The Committee further desire that this matter may be properly inquired into and 
all necessary action may be taken against the Concessionaire in case some 
mischief is detected and penalty may be imposed accordingly. 
  

69 
 
Failure to Conduct any Road Safety Audit (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note from a report submitted by the Central Road Research 
Institute (CRRI) in the Year 2008 that no road safety audit was carried out in 
respect of Delhi -Gurgaon project either at the planning stage or at the Detailed 
Project Reports stage.  This has resulted in complete neglect of the interests of 
non motorized traffic and pedestrians.  This is evident as only four sub ways 
(Eight Km to Twelve Km apart) and only two f oot over -bridges have been 
provided on the entire corridor which are quite inadequate by any standard 
besides being user unfriendly.  This has caused a number of avoidable f atal 
accidents and deaths on the express-way since February, 2007. 
The Authority has failed to give any specific reason as to why the interests 
of the pedestrians were not taken into account during the planning stage.  
Regarding the remedial measures which the Authority proposed to take, the 
Authority submitted that the CRRI Report on Ro ad Safety has been sent to the 
Concessionaire for compliance with instructions to Independent Consultant for 
submitting compliance Report.  Further, the NHAI has now undertaken 
construction of five more Foot-Over Bridges at its own expense as the same were  
not provided under agreement with the concessionaires.   From the compliance 
Report dated 22 nd September, 2009  submitted by the Independent Consultant in 
respect of  the CRRI Safety Audit Report,  the Committee note that on many 
aspects like provision fo r Road warning signs where High Tension Power Lines 
are crossing the Express - Way, removal of trees on the medians,  removal of 
rings over drainage covers, deployment of marshals to direct buses to stop at 
designated bus stops, absence of service roads due  to non acquisition of land, 

70 
 
removal of encroachments on service roads, maintenance of  height of Metallic 
Beam Crash Barriers (MBCBs), training and deployment of marshals at the entry 
points for restricting the entry of two wheelers, provisions for road m arking at the 
entry and exits points etc. the action is yet to be taken by the Concessionaire.   
The Committee feel that all such important issues should have been taken 
into account when DPR was prepared for the Project.   Noting the land use pattern 
of heavy industrial areas and commercial establishments all along the Express -
Way and heavy pedestrian traffic generated, a fact well known in advance, the 
Committee feel that no justification is justified enough that can explain this 
blatant act of ignorance o n the part of the Authority.  As a result, no provision 
could be made in the concessionaire agreement for Foot -Over Bridges and Sub -
Ways.  Its two fold impact is that on one hand so many people have lost their 
lives, on the other, the Authority has now to spend from its own pocket for 
construction of the same.     
The Committee express their profound anguish over the scant regard that 
has been given to human life  and strongly deprecate the act of NHAI in 
completely ignoring the safety of pedestrians in designing the expressway 
ignoring the local needs of the people living on both the sides of the highway.  As 
a result of this ignorance or rather indifference, subways,  foot overbridges and 
pedestrian crossings were not conceptualized.  Considering the fact that the 
highway cuts a large city like Gurgaon in two parts, the Committee find it hard to 
fathom as to why RITES, the design consultant for the project could not fo rsee 
this basic need of the people.  The Committee hold NHAI as well as the Ministry 
accountable for this mess  which could have been avoided .  The Committee 

71 
 
strongly urge that the adequate number of foot overbridges and subway be 
constructed taking into co nsiderations the local needs of the people living on 
both the sides of the highway no matter at what cost and within strict time limits 
to be mentioned by NHAI.  The Committee wish to emphasise categorically that 
no venture, whatever be its utility or comm ercial viability, should ever 
compromise with human safety.  Why are roads, for that matter expressways, are 
conceptualized and eventually constructed?  Certainly for provision of better and 
safer commuting means/facilities to the denizens of a State.  If such 
infrastructural facilities tend to become instruments of death, where would be the 
creditability of the State or the concerned authority?  It is simply appalling to say 
the least, that more than 100 lives were lost on this expressway in a relatively 
short perio d, primarily due to inadequate  safety norms; and lamentably utter 
callousness on the part of the concerned authorities.  The Committee strongly 
feel that there has been a criminal negligence in this regard.  Under these 
circumstances, the very ef ficacy of the concerned Concessionaire in particular 
and NHAI in general become questionable.  We cannot bring back to life the 
helpless victims who perished in the accidents.  However, their deaths should not 
go in vain.  Painful it might be the Committee  would like to take it as a wake up 
call. 
In view of the foregoing the Committee strongly recommend that 
accountability must be fixed on the concerned officials responsible for lapses 
which apparently have placed human lives at grave danger and strict puni tive 
action be taken against the guilty. 

72 
 
The Committee also find it pertinent to recommend that it is perhaps 
hightime that Government gives serious consideration for setting up Highway 
Police Force for monitoring and safeguarding all National Highways.   
  

73 
 
Inadequate Road Facilities (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee note that though the Delhi -Gurgaon expressway had 
started functioning since January, 2008, it is still lacking many basic facilities like 
parking space, telephone booths, toilets, exit points, refres hment rooms, fuel 
stations, etc. which are expected to be there as apart of road side civic amenities.  
Further, the discipline enforcing agencies deployed on the expressway are 
inadequate.  As a result, two wheelers, three wheelers which are not supposed to 
be on the expressway are entering it resulting in many fatal accidents and other 
kind of inconveniences.  Though claimed by the Concessionaire that marshals 
have been deployed, the same are barely visible.  The service roads are 
waterlogged and congeste d due to unauthorized parking of vehicles and 
encroachments.  There is no proper maintenance of service roads.  In fact, one 
portion of the service road from Palam to Rajokari, a stretch of about 6 kms is yet 
to be built for want of land acquisition.  This  is causing a lot of inconvenience to 
the road users.  Though the NHAI has claimed that Concessionaire had provided 
patrolling vehicles and ambulances on the highway, the same  are conspicuous 
by their absence.  The fact that should not lost sight of is tha t patrolling vehicles 
and ambulances are essential for safety of commuters and absence or 
inadequacy of same are indicative of callousness. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that all these issues must be taken 
up by NHAI with the Concessionaire for bein g attended to urgently.  The 
Committee further recommend that the Ministry may take up the issue of land 
acquisition with the Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as AAI so that the remaining 
service road on this section can be built without any further loss of time.  

74 
 
Monitoring Role of the Ministry and NHAI (Sl. No. 11) 
 The Committee note that the Delhi -Gurgaon project suffered from many 
deficiencies right from beginning.  First of all, the project was initially planned to 
be executed on SPV mode but at the  last moment, its mode of execution was 
changed to BOT-Toll mode.  Thereafter, the Financial Consultant submitted that it 
was unviable on BOT mode but at the insistence of NHAI, made revised 
assessment for viability on BOT -Toll mode.  Thereafter, though a 
recommendation was made by the Financial Consultant for conducting a fresh 
traffic study, the same was not undertaken by the Authority.  Thereafter, the 
change of scope of works was to be introduced in the project due to many 
deficiencies in the Detailed P roject Report (DPR).  All these factors led to an 
inordinate delay in the completion of the project.  Subsequently, completion 
certificate was issued to the Concessionaire without completion of all the Punch -
List items.  There was delay on the part of the Authority in appointment of 
Independent Auditors to cross check the data furnished by the Concessionaire  
the eventual, chaos at toll plazas due to huge traffic congestion, absence of any 
road safety audit either at planning or DPR stage.  In such a scenari o the 
Committee are appalled to note that in response to a query raised by the 
Committee about the future plans of NHAI to decongest the increase in traffic, the 
reply given by Authority is “NHAI at present do not have any plan to decongest 
the highway”.  Further, a section of service road is yet to be constructed due to 
non-acquisition of land from AAI.  Both the NHAI as well as the Ministry have 
failed to give any convincing reply to the Committee as to why this land could not 
be acquired so far or what e fforts are being made to acquire the same.  No 

75 
 
explanation has been given as to why no provisions were made in the DPR for 
adequate number of pedestrian crossings/foot over bridges on the expressway 
and who is to be held responsible for the number of death s witnessed on the 
expressway because of inadequate safety infrastructure.  The Committee gather 
an impression that all aspects of monitoring and supervision of the works were 
left in the hands of the Independent Consultants.  The Committee feel that all 
these issues tend to question the very effectiveness of monitoring role of the 
NHAI as well as its administrative Ministry. 
 The NHAI has washed off its hands of its responsibilities by submitting that 
monitoring and supervision is the responsibility of the  Independent Consultants.  
Thereafter, the Government has washed off its hands by submitting that it is for 
the NHAI to enforce the provisions of the concession agreement and has to give 
directions only if something is brought to their notice.  Keeping in view the fact 
that three Government Secretaries are on the Board of NHAI and the Ministry also 
conduct frequent meetings to ascertain the progress of NHDP, the Committee 
wonder as to how all the shortcomings observed in the Delhi -Gurgaon project 
escaped the notice of the Ministry.  
 The admitted position of the Government is that NHAI is a creation of law 
and is accountable to Parliament through the Government and the Government 
has inherent right to issue directions to NHAI on matters of public importance.   
The Committee however feel that the Government has failed to exercise this right 
as it has preferred to remain a mute spectator on all those issues mentioned 
above.  Though the Committee would not like the autonomy granted to NHAI 
under the Act may be in fringed in any manner, the buck should stop somewhere!  

76 
 
Needless to state the Committee would except the Government to be alive to  the 
issues involving public utility services including the road safety aspects.  It was 
the bounden duty of the Government to  issue appropriate directions to NHAI for 
taking the necessary corrective measures from time to time. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government as 
well as NHAI may undertake a thorough review of the Delhi -Gurgaon project and 
analyze the reasons for the shortcomings and deficiencies observed therein to 
strengthen the supervision mecha nism.  The results of the said analysis may be 
utilized in all the ongoing and future projects to avoid recurrence of such lapses 
in the future.  
 At this juncture the Committee cannot contain themselves from 
commenting that it is imperative that above rec ommendations be heeded for the 
safety of all the prospective road users on the roads/expressways being handled 
or proposed to be handled by NHAI.   
In the light of all the irregularities/deficiencies pointed out by the C&AG 
and observed by the Committee in  their foregoing conclusions, the Committee 
recommend that the whole issue needs to be investigated by an independent 
investigating agency and action taken thereon may be apprised.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            V. KISHORE CHANDRA S. DEO 
9th December, 2009       Chairman  
18 Agrahayana, 1931 (S)                              Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

77 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE 2nd SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 9TH SEPTEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hrs to 1410 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
9 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
10 Shri Ganesh Singh 
11 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
12 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
13 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
14 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
15 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
16 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri A.N. Chatterjee   Dy. C&AG (Comm.) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri P.K. Mishra   Principal Director 
 

78 
 
Officials of National Highways Authority Of India 
 
1. Shri Brijeshwar Singh Chairman 
2. Shri S.I. Patel  Member (Project) 
3. Shri R.K. Pandey  Chief General Manager (Technical) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the Members to Rule 255 of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha regarding a Member taking 
objection to the inclusion of some other Member in a Committee on the ground that the 
Member has a personal, pecuniary or direct interest in any matter to be considered by 
the Committee. The Chairman requested the Members that if such is the case with any 
Member, he may not participate in the Com mittee deliberations so as to avoid any such 
situation. The Chairman also drew the attention of the Members to Direction 52A of the 
Directions by Speaker regarding personal, pecuniary or direct interest in any matter to 
be considered by the Committee matte rs and Directions 97 and 97 A regarding 
Association of Members with Committees appointed by Government and requested the 
members to fill in the Proforma circulated to them earlier by the Committee Secretariat 
at the earliest. 
 
3. The Chairman Audit Board ( Deputy C&AG) briefed the Committee on the Audit 
Report No. PA 16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) Public Private Partnership in 
Implementation of Road Projects by National Highways Authority of India--Delhi-
Gurgaon Sector.  
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed  the representatives of National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) and drew their attention to direction 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary Committees.  The 
representatives of NHAI made a brief power point pr esentation on the subject.  The 
Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the subject and the 
explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the representatives of NHAI.  
Information on some of the points raised by the Committee was no t readily available 
with the representatives of NHAI.  They were therefore asked to furnish the same to the 
Committee Secretariat at the earliest possible. 
 
5. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of NHAI for providing all 
the information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
6. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned. 
 
8. A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record separately. 
 
 
  

79 
 
MINUTES OF THE 4th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 8TH OCTOBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1045 hrs to 1230 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Hemanand Biswal 
5 Shri Anant Kumar Hedge 
6 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7 Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
8 Shri Baijayant Panda 
9 Shri N. Dharam Singh 
10 Shr Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
11 Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
12 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
13 Ms. Mabel Rebello 
14 Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
15 Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani 
16 Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri Sunil Verma    Dy. C&AG (Comm.) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri K.P. Sasidharan  Director General(Commercial)    
3. Shri P.K. Mishra   Principal Director 
4. Shri Birendra Kumar   Principal Director and Ex-officio MAB-I 
 

80 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways 
 
1. Shri Brahm Dutt Secretary (RT&H) 
2. Shri Nirmaljeet Singh DG (RD) & SS 
3. Shri P.K. Tripathi JS (H) 
4. Shri S.K. Dash JS (T&A) 
    5.    Shri V.L. Patankar          CE(PIC)  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways and also drew their attention to direction 58 of 
the Directions by the Speaker relating to evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committees.  Then, the Members raised queries on various aspects pertaining to the 
subject and the explanations/clarifications on the same were given by the 
representatives of Ministry.  Information on some of the points raised by the Committee 
was not readily available with the representatives of Ministry.  The Committee directed 
them to furnish the same to the Secretariat within two weeks time. 
 
3. The Chairman then thanked the repres entatives of Ministry for providing all the 
information on the subject matter as desired by the Committee. 
 
4. Verbatim record of evidence was kept.  
 
5. The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

81 
 
MINUTES OF THE 9th SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2009-10) HELD ON 9TH DECEMBER 2009 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs to 1545 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Chairman 
 
Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2 Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
3 Shri Ramesh Bais 
4 Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri L. Rajagopal 
6 Chaudhary Lal Singh 
7 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
8 Shri Bharatkumar Raut  
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri J.P. Sharma   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   Director 
3. Shri Ravindra Garimella  Additional Director 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar   Additional Director 
5. Shri Paolienlal Haokip  Under Secretary 
 
Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
 
1. Shri K.P. Sashidharan Director General (Commercial) & Member Audit Board 
2. Shri Y.N. Thakre  Principal Director (Commercial) & Member Security  
    Audit Board 
 
2. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report based on Audit Report 
No. PA 16 of 2008 (Performance Audit) - Public Private Partnership in implementation 
of Road Projects by Nati onal Highways Authority of India in respect of Delhi Gurgaon 
Project with some modifications. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report for 
presentation. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 