CPU. No. 978 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2013-2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
(Action taken by the Gov ernment on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the  Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings on Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2014 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2014 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY 2014 / MAGHA 1935 (S)  
 
32 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I  Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  and which require 
reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting held on 17 February 2014. 
 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / R ecommendations contained 
in the Twenty-fourth Report of Committee on 
Public Undertakings on ‘ Bharat Sanchar Nigam 
Limited’ 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-2014) 
 
Chairman  
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.   Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
4. Shri Yogendra Singh Executive Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty -second Report 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2012-13) on Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited. 
 
2. The Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April 2013.  The Action Taken Replies to all 
the 15 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report were received from 
the Government on 27 December  2013.  The Committee on Public Undertakings 
considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 17 February 2014. 
 
3. An analysis of the action tak en by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report is given in Annexure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
17 February 2014 Chairman 
28 Magha 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
  
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observation / Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2012 -13) on Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on            30 
April, 2013. 
 
2. The action Taken Replies to all the 15 Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Government on 27 December, 2013. 
These replies have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,6,8,9,10,12,13,14 and 15                 (Total 11) 
       
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire t o 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III) 
                                                                                                          (NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 5,7 and 11               (Total 03) 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V) 
Sl. No. 2               (Total 01) 
 
3. The Committee desire that final reply on the 
Observation/Recommendation to which interim reply has been furnished and 
also response to their comments in Chapter-I of the Report should be furnished 
to them expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 1 
 
5. The Committee in their Twenty -fourth Report had noted the steady decline in 
BSNL’s market share of wireline connections from 82.75% as on 31 March, 2007 to 
69.73 % as on 31 September, 2012 and its capacity utilization in landline segment 
had also fallen from 61.8% as on 30 September, 2009 to 52.66% as on 30 
September, 2012.   Not satisfied with the BSNL’s explanation that substitution of 
landline phones by mobile phones/surrender of extra wireline telephones had caused 
the fall in landline market shares and noting that the wireline market share of private 

 
 
players had gone up from 8.13% to 20.16% during the same period, the Committee 
had felt that the fall in BSNL’s market share had something to do with its quality of 
service which has been way below compared to that of private operators and had, 
therefore, recommended the management of BSNL to take urgent steps to improve its 
customer service and regain the confidence of customers through efficient service to 
ensure full utilization of its landline capacity. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply , the Government have stated that the constraints 
faced by BSNL in providing quality of service in wire line services are as under:  
 
(a) Large scale damage to underground cables by NHAI, PWD and local 
authorities due to massive road expansion and repair works and obstacles in 
digging of roads for repairs and relaying of underground cables.  
(b) Poor availability of co mmercial electric power supply in rural telecom 
installations particularly in the States of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, 
Maharashtra etc. 
 
7. It has been further submitted that to improve the Quality of Service in Wireline 
Network, following steps are being taken / planned:  
 
(i) Rehabilitation and up gradation of external plant. 
(ii) Close monitoring of Quality of service parameters to adhere to the 
benchmarks  stipulated by TRAI  
(iii) Introduction of effective network management system. 
(iv) Coordination with local bodies to minimise cable damages due to road 
works. 
(v) Replacement of faulty telephones whenever required. 
(vi) AMC of the telecom equipment and instruments has been done. 
(vii) Continuous improvement in customer care is being done through Project 
Smile. Around 4000 new Custom er Service Centres (CSCs) are being 
upgraded with single window clearance concept and Information 
Technology enabled change business processes. 
(viii) Battery sets at number of places have been planned for replacement. 
 
8. BSNL has taken the following steps for i mproving the wireline services and for 
optimizing the utilization of its wireline capacity.   
 
(a) BSNL has planned to make the entire wireline exchanges, IP enabled in next 
five years starting from FY 2013-14. With the migration to/ replacement by Next 
Generation Network (NGN), it will be possible to provide value added services 
to our wireline customers. 
(b) The migration process is planned to be implemented through following 
projects:-  
 
(i) Replacement of Digital Telephone Exchanges by NGN (Next Generation 
Network) equipment: it is planned to deploy NGN gradually and replace the 

 
 
entire Digital Telephone Exchanges (OCB, EWSD, AXE and 5ESS TDM 
types). The tender for 4 Million Ports has been finalized, and order placed for 
first phase. 
(ii) Migration of C -DOT TDM Switches t o NGN C -5 (C-DoT MAX NG): BSNL has 
signed a MOU with C -DoT on 19 Dec, 2012 as part of encouraging indigenous 
development of technology. BSNL has planned migrating   C -DOT TDM 
technology exchanges with NGN solution. In the next one year 100, existing C -
DOT exchanges shall be upgraded to NGN i.e. 50 C -DoT MAX sites in North 
and East Zones each. The migration shall result in reduction of operational cost 
along with ease of induction of new value added services to the landline 
customers.  
 
(c)  Re-deployment of  RSUs/RLUs: BSNL has issued instructions to optimize the 
capacity utilization by making rearrangement of deployed exchanges and re -
deploy the spare RLUs/ RSUs to new developed / developing area.   
(d) Providing Value Added services- With the migration to NGN network, BSNL will 
be able to offer following value added services to its wireline customers.  
 
o Games on Demand (GoD), Music on demand (MoD) and Video surveillance to 
BB customers. 
o Voice & Video over Broadband (VVoBB) services for BB customers. 
o Personalized Ring Back Tone (PRBT) as well as Multimedia Ring Back Tone 
(MRBT), an advanced version of Colour Ring Back Tone (CRBT) to PSTN 
subscribers. 
o Wide Area IP Centrex- IP Centrex allows small and medium size enterprises to 
deploy PABX/ CUG service without r eally installing system physically in their 
premises.  
o Multimedia video conferencing service will be available across the country. 
o The Prepaid solution will be provided with all functionalities to provide voice, 
video and data pre-paid services including roaming.  
o Fixed Mobile convergence (FMC) services by using the NGN -IMS core along 
with the PSTN Access network and already deployed Mobile network.   
 
(e)  BSNL is in process to start Hotspot broadband services for broadband 
customers.  
 
9. The Committee take note of the various measures taken/initiated by the 
Government for improving the quality of service in wireline services, network 
and optimum utilization of wireline capacity of BSNL.  All these initiatives have 
the potential of changing the fortunes of the Company if implemented earnestly 
and with promptitude.  However, the Committee are constrained to observe that 
there is no mention in the Reply as to whether the measures taken had resulted 
in any tangible benefits in terms of arresting the trend of s urrender of wireline 
telephone by subscribers and addition of new customers for landline services. 
Further, there is nothing in the Reply to indicate whether any steps have been 
taken to gauge the satisfaction level and to regain the confidence of customer s. 

 
 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to conduct immediately an 
impact assessment study of the various measures taken by BSNL for improving 
its wireline network/services at ground level in terms of increase in subscriber 
base of landline service , its overall market share and the level of customer 
satisfaction and share the outcome with the Committee at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 2 
 
10. Not satisfied with the BSNL’s explanation that substitution of landline phones 
by mobile phones/s urrender of extra wireline telephones was the cause of the fall in 
its landline market shares and also noting that wireline market share of private players 
went up from 8.13% to 20.16% during the same period, the Committee had felt that 
the fall in BSNL’s market share had something to do with its quality of service which 
has been way below compared to that of private operators .  They had, therefore, 
recommended that management of BSNL should take urgent steps to improve its 
customer service and regain the c onfidence of customers through efficient service to 
ensure full utilization of its landline capacity. 
 
11. In their Action Taken Reply  the Government have stated that the constraints 
faced by BSNL in providing quality of service in wire line services are given below:  
 
(a) Large scale damages to underground cables by NHAI, PWD and local 
authorities due to massive road expansion and repair works and obstacles in 
digging of roads for repairs and relaying of underground cables.  
(b) Poor availability of commer cial electric power supply in rural telecom 
installations particularly in the states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, 
Maharashtra etc. 
 
12. To improve the Quality of Service in Wireline Network, following steps are 
being taken / planned:  
 
(i) Rehabilitation and up gradation of external plant. 
(ii) Close monitoring of Quality of service parameters to adhere to the benchmarks  
stipulated by TRAI  
(iii) Introduction of effective network management system. 
(iv) Coordination with local bodies to minimise cable damages due to road works. 
(v) Replacement of faulty telephones whenever required. 
(vi) AMC of the telecom equipment and instruments has been done. 
(vii) Continuous improvement in customer care is being done through Project 
Smile. Around 4000 new Customer Service Centres (CSCs) are being 
upgraded with single window clearance concept and Information Technology 
enabled change business processes. 
(viii) Battery sets at number of places have been planned for replacement. 
 
 

 
 
13. BSNL has taken the following steps for improving the wireline services and f or 
optimizing the utilization of its wireline capacity.   
 
(a) BSNL has planned to make the entire wireline exchanges, IP enabled in next 
five years starting from FY 2013-14. With the migration to/ replacement by Next 
Generation Network (NGN), it will be p ossible to provide value added services 
to our wireline customers.  
(b) The migration process is planned to be implemented through following 
projects:-  
 
(i) Replacement of Digital Telephone Exchanges by NGN (Next Generation 
Network) equipment: it is plann ed to deploy NGN gradually and replace the 
entire Digital Telephone Exchanges (OCB, EWSD, AXE and 5ESS TDM 
types). The tender for 4 Million Ports has been finalized, and order placed 
for first phase. 
(ii) Migration of C -DOT TDM Switches to NGN C -5 (C-DoT M AX NG): BSNL 
has signed a MOU with C -DoT on 19th Dec, 2012 as part of encouraging 
indigenous development of technology. BSNL has planned migrating   C -
DOT TDM technology exchanges with NGN solution. In the next one year 
100, existing C -DOT exchanges shall be upgraded to NGN i.e. 50 C -DoT 
MAX sites in North and East Zones each. The migration shall result in 
reduction of operational cost along with ease of induction of new value 
added services to the landline customers.  
 
(c) Re-deployment of RSUs/RLUs: BSNL has issued instructions to optimize the 
capacity utilization by making rearrangement of deployed exchanges and re -
deploy the spare RLUs/ RSUs to new developed / developing area.   
(d) Providing Value Added services- With the migration to NGN network, BSNL will 
be able to offer following value added services to its wireline customers.  
 
o Games on Demand (GoD), Music on demand (MoD) and Video surveillance 
to BB customers. 
o Voice & Video over Broadband (VVoBB) services for BB customers. 
o Personalized Ring Back To ne (PRBT) as well as Multimedia Ring Back 
Tone (MRBT), an advanced version of Colour Ring Back Tone (CRBT) to 
PSTN subscribers. 
o Wide Area IP Centrex - IP Centrex allows small and medium size 
enterprises to deploy PABX/ CUG service without really installing system 
physically in their premises.  
o Multimedia video conferencing service will be available across the country. 
o The Prepaid solution will be provided with all functionalities to provide voice, 
video and data pre-paid services including roaming.  
o Fixed Mo bile convergence (FMC) services by using the NGN -IMS core 
along with the PSTN Access network and already deployed Mobile network.   
 
(e) BSNL is in process to start Hot spot broadband services for broadband 
customers.  

 
 
 
14. The Committee note with satisfac tion the various steps undertaken by 
BSNL in order to usher in improvement in quality of service, customer 
satisfaction in its landline operations.  They, however, find that most of the 
measures are at proposal stage or in preparatory stage.  Since time is  of 
essence in all these endeavours , the Committee desire BSNL to undertake and 
complete action on all these measures at the earliest so that not only the 
decline in its market share is arrested but its turnaround is also ensured.   
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 3 
 
15. Noting that the main reasons for fall in BSNL’s market share in wireless 
segment from 18.66% as on 31 March, 2007 to 10.99% as on 31 September, 2012 
was due to impediments in augmenting its capacity of mobile network and consequent 
congestion in various pockets as BSNL , due to reasons beyond its control, could not 
procure any equipment for GSM network during the last five years due to repeated 
cancellation of tenders for procurement of 93 million lines in the year 2008 , t he 
Committee while deprec ating the fact that the repeated cancellation of tenders and 
consequent undue long delay in this regard was either due to Government’s 
procedural requirement or due to Government’s security guidelines or due to vendor’s 
complaints/litigation, had asked  D epartment of Telecommunications  to look into the 
matter afresh and streamline the system in such a way that BSNL is able to procure 
its much needed equipment within a time frame comparable to its competitors.  They 
had further recommended that alternatively  BSNL should be compensated for the 
losses it suffers on adhering to Government prescribed procedural requirements.  
 
16.  The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Reply  have  
informed that  a committee comprising of officers from BSNL an d MTNL has been 
constituted which will review the existing procurement manual of both the PSUs and 
the limitations, if any, of the procedures/guidelines and submit its recommendations to 
the Department. Procurement thorough e -tendering had been implemented  in BSNL. 
In the e-procurement, the detailed NIT & tender documents are uploaded on e -portal. 
The vendor is required to submit his bids electronically, which are downloaded. The e-
tendering system also prepares a comparative statement. It is also possible to have e-
reverse auction for better price.  
 
17. The Committee note that in pursuance of their Recommendation a 
committee comprising of Officers from BSNL and MTNL has been constituted 
by DoT to review the existing procurement manual of BSNL/MTNL.  Given the 
fact that BSNL has already suffered incalculably for no fault of the Company, 
the Committee expect the DoT to not only ensure that the said Committee 
finalises its Report and submit the same to them at earliest but further action on 
the part of DoT is also taken on highest priority in the interest of the Company. 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 4 
 
18. In their Twenty-fourth Report the Committee had desired that the procurement 
process of new tender finalized recently be completed expeditiously and ensure 
speedy capacity augmentation and network expansion under intimation to the 
Committee.  
 
19. In their Action Taken Reply  the Government have stated that BSNL has 
concluded the tendering process of 14.37 million lines for augmentation of GSM 
capacity in North Zone, South Zone & East Zone. Work order had been issued to the 
finalized vendor and the roll out of the same is under process. For West Zone the 
capacity was reserved for M/s ITI, a CPSE. Since, M/s ITI expressed its inability to 
accept the reservation q uota order, therefore tenders for expansion of GSM network 
by 0.63 Million lines have been invited. 
 
20. The Committee note with appreciation that the Government have taken 
prompt action on their instant Recommendation and work order has been 
issued to the finalized vendor for 14.37 million lines and the roll out of the same 
is under process.  They are, however, perturbed to find that for West Zone , ITI 
has expressed its inability to accept the capacity reserved for it.  Consequently, 
tenders for expansion of GSM network by 0.63 million lines had to be invited 
afresh.  While exhorting BSNL to expedite the tender process and other 
requisite formalities for these 0.63 million lines to facilitate fast roll out , the 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the re asons which led ITI to back out 
and why BSNL could not anticipate this eventuality in advance.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 5 
 
21. The Committee having noted that one of the factors adversely affecting BSNL’s 
performance related to services provided by it, which are uneconomical but socially 
desirable for which the Company was being compensated subsequently. Further 
noting that although TRAI had recommended the subsidy for two years from July 
2011 – Rs. 1500 Crore for the first year and Rs. 1250 Crore for th e second year, the 
payment for only first year had been cleared by the Government, the Committee had 
recommended that with a view to ensure a level playing field for BSNL and private 
operators. BSNL should not be put to any disadvantage because of operatio n of 
uneconomical services mandated by the Government and should continue to be 
compensated for this purpose. 
 
22. The Government in their Action Taken Reply  have stated that  the subsidy 
payment of Rs. 1500 crore recommended by TRAI towards settlement of subsidy 
claim under USO for sustenance of wireline network installed prior to 01.04.2002, for 
one year (period from 18.07.2011 to 17.07.2012) has been received by BSNL on 
11.07.2013. In respect of subsidy for 2 nd year, of Rs. 1250 Crore, Telecom 
Commission has decided to carry out an assessment study of the current status of 
this infrastructure by USOF. The task has been assigned to NICF(National Institute for 
Communication Finance) by USOF and information is being collected. 

 
 
 
23. The Committee find it high ly regrettable that even eight months after the 
presentation of their Twenty-fourth Report, the Government have not disbursed 
the 2 nd installment of subsidy to BSNL.  In their view , an assessment study 
would further delay the rightful claim of BSNL for los ses incurred in carrying 
out uneconomical services as a social obligation on behalf of the Government.  
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to complete the requisite 
study expeditiously so that subsidy is released to BSNL without any further  
delay.  They also desire that a permanent mechanism should be devised , 
whereunder, the BSNL should be automatically compensated for carrying out 
uneconomical but socially desirable services.  
 
                               Recommendation at SI. No. 7 
24. Taking note of Sam Pitroda Committee’s recommendation to follow  ‘managed 
capacity’ model for procurement and ‘managed service model’ for giving operatio n 
and maintenance to the vendor,  the Committee  had hoped that necessary steps 
would be taken to implement the recommendations of Sam Pitroda Committee at the 
earliest.  
25. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Reply have 
informed that BSNL has attempted to prepare a RFP (Request For Proposal) for 
procurement of GSM equipment based on m anaged capacity model prescribed by 
Sam Pitroda committee. There were various challenges in RFP like the procedures to 
be followed in the Government set up as well as the governance model for the 
managed capacity model. In  the managed capacity model, it is  imperative the vendor 
undertakes operation and maintenance of the equipment commissioned by him. Thus, 
the vendor as investor expects payments of at least operational cost incurred by him 
from BSNL from the day the equipment is operational irrespective of the traffic carried.  
Thus, BSNL management is finding it difficult to accept anticipated loss to BSNL as it 
will start incurring expenses without income (zero traffic)  in case   of insufficient 
traffic. 
 
26. The Committee had recommended implementation of managed capacity 
model at the earliest as recommended by Sam Pitroda Committee, subject to 
doing away with surplus manpower. The Committee desire that their 
recommendation should be kept in view for implementation at congenial time 
which should be strived to be achieved at the earliest. 
 
                             Recommendation at Sl. No. 8 
 
27. Observing the huge potential for BSNL in broadband service segment in rural 
areas as 1,69,201 villages out of the 5,93,601 inhabited ones only had been covered 
with broadband connectivity as on 30 September, 2012, the Committee had desired 
that BSNL should evolve suitable tariff rates and marketing strategies to exploit the 
full potential of broadband segment. Further o pining that if BSNL utilized its rural 
infrastructure and capitalized on its strengths, the revenue so generated would help 

 
 
its turnaround, the Committee had stressed that problems such as irregular 
functioning of mobile towers, incidents of thefts, and modernization of telephone 
exchanges in rura l areas need to be dealt with on priority basis in order to improve 
telephone service connectivity in rural areas. 
 
28. The Government in their Action Taken Reply  have informed that BSNL had 
planned optimal utilization of rural wireline infrastructure by;  
 
o Provisioning of IP enabled NGN technology for enhanced Broadband 
penetration in rural areas:  BSNL has planned to make the entire wireline 
exchanges, IP enabled in next five years starting from FY 2013 -14. With the 
migration to/ replacement by Next Generation Network (NGN), it will be possible 
to provide value added services to our wireline customers.  
 
o Tariff Plans: New attractive tariff plans are being launched time to time as per 
the market demands. Recently, BSNL has introduced flexi and unlimited plan s 
to grab more customer base and enhance the revenue.  
 
o Flexi combo plan- BSNL has launched various flexi combo plans from plan 500 
to plan 1500.  In these plans, there is virtually no rent and customer may avail 
unlimited on-net free calls within SDCA/Circ le/country without paying any extra 
charge. 
 
o Un-limited plan - MOU based plan wherein unlimited number of calls to BSNL 
landline/mobile were allowed against fixed plan charges. 
 
29. As per the information furnished by the BSNL, as on 31 August, 2013, the 
Company has provided broadband facility in rural areas and has covered 1,71,033 
villages through broadband services. To exploit the full potential of broadband 
segment in rural areas, BSNL has taken following steps:- 
 
(a) Launched lowest and attractive broadband  plan to its rural customers with 
minimum plan of Rs, 99/-. 
(b) Provided Personal Computers to its rural subscriber on subsidy basis.. 
(c) Providing broadband connectivity to Customer Care Centres in collaboration 
with DIT. 
(d) As on 31 August, 2013, BSNL has covered 87,064 Customer Care Centres 
(CSCs) through various technologies of broadband i.e. ADSL2+, WiMAX and 
3G mobile services. 
  
30. In addition, wireless solution like 3G/4G are expected to provide a 
complementary broadband solution to wireline broadband to ena ble 100% rural 
coverage. Out of 2642 SDCAs , 2614 SDCAs are covered by WLL. As on 31 August, 
2013, total 8,314 numbers of Rural BTS are commissioned and 4,79,355 villages are 
covered by WLL. Out of 2.5 lakhs village Panchayats, 78,501 village panchayats have 
been given coverage by WiMAX as on 31 August, 2013.  

 
 
 
31. The Committee take note of the various steps taken by BSNL for optimal 
utilization of its rural wireline infrastructure and for exploiting the broadband 
potential of rural telecom markets. Howeve r, the Committee note from the Reply 
of the Department that the pace of expansion of broadband services in rural 
areas has been rather slow as during the period between 30  September, 2012 
and 31  August, 2013, only 1832 villages could be provided with broad band 
facility. The Committee recommend that BSNL should speed up the process of 
expansion of broadband services in rural areas, so that all the villages are 
covered with broadband connectivity within a definite time period. The 
Committee regret to note tha t the Reply of the Department is conspicuously 
silent over the action taken to rectify irregular functioning of towers and 
preventing thefts. The Committee reiterate that the Government should address 
these issues with due promptitude in order to ensure qu ality telecom services in 
rural areas.  
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.  11 
 
32.   Noting the steps taken by BSNL for upgrading the skills of its employees 
through training programs and corporate restructuring initiatives, the Committee in 
their Twenty -fourth R eport had emphasized on the need to have more such 
programmes at frequent intervals so as to reorient and upgrade the skills of legacy 
manpower in view of the demand of modern telecom market.  Further, having felt that 
there was an urgent need to induct fr esh and professional talent in the organization to 
meet the need of the rapidly changing telecom market in view of the Company having 
entered 3G market, the Committee had recommended that the Company should 
expeditiously fill up the vacant posts meant for the skilled staff so as to have a pool of 
employees who can deliver as per the requirements of the Company in a highly 
competitive telecom market. They had also desired that until the recruitment process 
for required skilled staff is completed the Company should evolve a plan for rational 
deployment of its manpower in accordance with the various operational needs so as 
to deal with the shortage of skilled manpower.  
 
33.  In their Action Taken Reply , the Government stated that BSNL has evolved the 
following plans to upgrade the skills of the employees through training programme 
and re-deploy them suitably:-  
 
(a) 3 APEX level training centres viz ALTTC Ghaziabad, BRBRAITT, Jabalpur and  
NATFM, Hyderabad, 15 RTTCs, 11CTTCs and 6 DTTCs caters to the training 
need of BSNL staff (executives and non-executives) country wide.   
 
(b) As per the MOU target for financial year 2012 -13, 10% executives will be 
trained through Executives Development programmes.  
 
(c) This training is carried out through various modes i.e. Class Room Training, 
Field Training programmes, Webinars / Workshops, etc. 

 
 
 
(d) Executives at various level, are required to undertake training courses to  get 
themselves updated through successful completion of learning, as per 
provisions of executives promotion policy at the time of their respective 
financial up gradation.  
 
34. From the Reply of the Department of Telecom, the Committee are 
constrained to observe that there is no mention about actions taken for rational 
deployment of manpower by BSNL in accordance with its various operational 
needs so as to deal with the shortage of skilled manpower. Likewise, the Reply 
is also silent about the action taken by the Company regarding filling up of 
vacant posts meant for the skilled staff. The Committee therefore, reiterate  their 
earlier Recommendation that Government should undertake a recruitment drive 
for expeditiously filling up the vacant skilled posts and also induct fresh talent 
who can deliver/fulfill the requirements of organization in the face of challenges 
of rapidly changing telecom sector and the highly competitive telecom market. 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.13 
 
35. Noting that based on the recommendations of BCG, BSNL had reportedly 
restructured itself into four business verticals viz Consumer Mobility, Consumer Fixed 
Access, Enterprise and New Business, the Committee while hoping that the 
restructuring of the Company would give a professional orientation to its functioning 
and help the company in improving its performance to desired level had desired that 
they be apprised of the impact of the restructuring on the overall performance of the 
Company. 
 
36. The Government in their Action Taken Reply  have stated that i n view of the 
changes in the telecom operating environment, BSNL had undertaken a systematic 
exercise t o develop an overall strategy and transformation agenda. Changes have 
been implemented in BSNL's organization structure with the objective of effectively 
implementing the overall business strategy. The exercise is aimed at providing 
adequate end -to-end focus on key growth segments, clearly defined accountability 
for different business and functions and significantly higher thrust on marketing, 
sales & distribution and customer activities. 
 
37. Restructuring exercise has resulted in: 
 
 Building of BSNL's own sales team for CFA products to actively sell broadband 
and wireline services to the customer. 
 Increasing product reach, extraction and improving channel management for 
mobile products especially through franchisee channel. 
 Strengthening of sales focus on e nterprise customers through creating 
dedicated account management teams, viz National Account Managers for 
Platinum customers, Key Account Managers for Gold customers and Channel 
Partners for Silver enterprise customers. 
 

 
 
38. The Committee note with satisf action the various measures undertaken 
by the Government for restructuring of BSNL. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the impact the restructuring has had in quantitative terms on the 
top line growth of the Company in terms of increase in subscrib er base across 
all the business segments viz. wireline, wireless (GSM) and broadband, etc.  at 
the earliest. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.1 
 
The Committee are unhappy about the dismal performance of BSNL during the 
last few years, partly due to managerial deficiencies and partly due to factors beyond 
the control of BSNL management. The Company which earned a net profit of as much 
as Rs. 10183 Cr. in 2004 -05 started incurr ing huge losses from the year 2009 -10 
onwards. The Company’s loss was Rs. 1823 cr. in 2009 -10 which jumped to 6384 Cr. 
in 2010 -11 and further increased to Rs. 8851 Cr. in 2011 -12. The deteriorating 
performance of BSNL is observed to be mainly on account of  steady decline in the 
Company’s income from Rs.38053 Cr. in 2007 -08 to Rs. 27934 Cr. in 2011 -12, 
attributable to steep decline in land line revenue and other factors. The Company’s 
expenditure also went up from Rs. 33636 Cr in 2007 -08 to Rs. 36586 Cr in 2 011-12 
consequent upon pay revision, reduction in financial support from the Government, 
etc. Delay in capacity expansion due to cancellation of tenders relating to the 
procurement of essential equipments also impacted the Company’s performance 
considerably. The Committee received an impression that interests of BSNL were 
neglected by the Government for long. It is only now, steps are being taken to 
augment BSNL’s revenue through Government projects, exploiting the potential in 
broadband services, exploitin g idle assets and through other measures. Telecom 
Secretary was hopeful when he appeared before the Committee that over the next 
three to four years BSNL’s turnaround will be possible. The Committee require the 
DoT and BSNL to implement all the proposed me asures of turnaround strategy in 
right earnest and ensure that BSNL achieves breakeven at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited ( BSNL) has taken  up the following steps to 
increase its revenue:  
 
a) In the Global system for mobil e communications (GSM) Segment, BSNL has 
issued work order for Supply, Installation, Testing & Commissioning (SITC) for 
14.37 million lines for augmentation of GSM capacity in North Zone, South 
Zone & East Zone. The roll out of the same is under process. F or West Zone 
the capacity required for expansion of GSM network was kept under 
reservation quota for M/s ITI. Since M/s ITI had expressed its inability to accept 
the reserved quantity order, BSNL has invited tender for SITC of 0.63 Million 
lines of GSM equ ipment and one bid have been received, which is under 
Technical evaluation. 
 
b) In the Wireline Segment following actions are taken /being taken : 

 
 
 
 State of art calling line identifiation presentation (CLIP) handsets are procured 
& provided to BSNL customers for enhanced customer satisfaction. 
 
 Underground PIJF cable(Polythene Insulated Jelly Filled) had been procured to 
meet the requirement of the field. 
 
 In next five years starting from FY 2013 -14, BSNL has planned to make the 
entire wireline exchanges IP en abled. With the migration to Next Generation 
Network (NGN), it will be possible to provide value added services to our 
wireline customers.          
 
c) In the Broadband Segment, BSNL continues to lead the Broadband market & 
its share is more than 65%. The revenue of BSNL is increasing in this segment 
year on year. BSNL has taken following actions in this segment :   
 
 Value added services have been introduced like IPTV, Games on Demand, 
Music & video on demand, entertainment, Broadband over VPN, Video 
conferencing and VVoBB. 
 
 BSNL is also providing broadband connections in bulk to Universities and 
Colleges under the National Mission for Education Project of Ministry of HRD. 
Till date, BSNL has provided 1,83,252 VPNoBB connections to 20,159 colleges 
and has provided 1GB connectivity to 386 Universities under this project. 
 
 BSNL is also exploring the following projects: 
(i) Wi-Fi hotspot project 
(ii) Broadband connectivity to schools 
(iii) BSNL High speed cyber cafe project 
 
d) Modernisation of WLL network. At present the latest Mobile Switching Centre 
(MSC) based 2000 1X / EVDO system is being used in the BSNL network. 
BSNL optimises its network periodically for its optimal performance. In order to 
reduce interruptions due to media failure, Ring connectivity of Optical Fibre 
Cable (OFC) media are provided to additional WLL BTS. However, BSNL has 
not planned any expansion of its WLL network at present.  
 
(e) BSNL is making all efforts to increase number of WiMAX connections.   
Various promotional offers are being offered to attract  more & more customers 
to popularise the service. BSNL has not planned any expansion for its WiMAX 
network at present.      
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.3 
 
The committee observe that the main reasons for BSNL’s f all in its market 
share in wireless segment from 18.66% as on 31 -03-2007 to 10.99% as on 
31.09.2012 was due to impediments in augmenting its capacity of mobile network and 
consequent congestion in various pockets. BSNL, for reasons beyond its control, 
could not procure any equipment for GSM network during the last five years due to 
repeated cancellation of tenders for procurement of 93 million lines in the year 2008. 
The Committee note the Telecom Secretary’s admission that in the past there were 
some delay s on account of procedural factors which adversely affected the 
performance of BSNL. The Committee deprecate the way the BSNL has to face 
inordinate delay in procurement of equipments essential for its expansion of mobile 
network. The repeated cancellation  of tenders and consequent undue long delay in 
this regard was either due to Government’s procedural requirement or due to 
Government’s security guidelines or due to vendor’s complaints / litigation. The 
Committee feel that it is high time that DoT looks into the matter afresh and streamline 
the system in such a way that BSNL is able to procure its much needed equipments 
within a time frame comparable to its competitors. Alternatively, BSNL should be 
compensated for the losses it suffers on adhering to Gove rnment prescribed 
procedural requirements.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A committee comprising of officers from BSNL and MTNL has been constituted 
which will review the existing procurement manual of both the PSUs and the 
limitations, if any, of the procedures/guidelines and submit its recommendations to the 
Department. 
 
Procurement thorough E - tendering had been implemented in BSNL. In the e -
procurement, the detailed NIT & tender documents are uploaded on e -portal. The 
vendor is required to submit his bids e lectronically, which are downloaded. The e -
tendering system also prepares a comparative statement. It is also possible to have e-
reverse auction for better price.  
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.4 
 
The Committee desir e that the procurement process of new tender finalized 
recently be completed expeditiously and ensure speedy capacity augmentation and 
network expansion under intimation to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has concluded the tendering process of 14.37 million lines for 
augmentation of GSM capacity in North Zone, South Zone & East Zone. Work order 
had been issued to the finalized vendor and the roll out of the same is under process. 

 
 
For West Zone the capacity was reserved for M/s ITI, a CPSE. Si nce, M/s ITI 
expressed its inability to accept the reservation quota order, therefore tenders for 
expansion of GSM network by 0.63 Million lines have been invited. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.6 
 
The Committee obser ve that the Company earns revenue by monetizing the 
huge assets of land and building, towers and bandwidth. The Committee have been 
assured by the Telecom Secretary that BSNL will not dispose its land and other 
assets. BSNL has only been allowed to utilize idle assets in a productive manner. The 
Committee hope that such efforts will add to the revenue of BSNL. The Committee 
would like to know how much has been earned through such efforts during each of 
the last three years.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has been sharing spare capacities of its passive infrastructure (towers) 
with other operators and have registered additional revenue on this account. The 
Physical and Financial achievements of last 4 years in the Sharing of Infrastructure is 
given below. 
 
Achievement of tower sharing by BSNL 
Year 
Physical (No. of additional 
towers leased out during the 
financial year) 
Total Revenue during the financial 
year in Crores. 
2009-10 341 1.80 
2010-11 491 29.38 
2011-12 609 42.67 
2012-13 877 73.63 
2013- 14 
 (upto 
31/7/2013) 
96 30.17 
 
Utilisation of Telecom Factory Infrastructure for Revenue Generation        
 
             It has been decided to appoint a consultant to advise and assist BSNL in 
selection of suitable partners / manufacturers for manufacturing tele com / Electronic 
equipments and other related products in telecom Factories. For this purpose an EOI 
has been floated and opened on 22.05.2013. As per the scope of work of EOI, the 
consultant is required to prepare a detailed business plan inter -alia prepa ration of 
techno-commercial viability report for different products (to be suggested by 
consultant) for revenue generation in telecom Factories. The technical bid is under 
evaluation.  
 
 
 

 
 
Monetizing of Land Assets of BSNL: 
 
 BSNL has taken up a pilot projec t for monetization of 10 vacant land parcels in 
different cities, viz., Mumbai, Kolkata, Noida, Gurgaon, Trivandrum & 
Hyderabad. A Consultant had been appointed, to assist BSNL for effective 
utilization of BSNL lands for revenue generation. In this regard,  the consultant 
has submitted final reports for 3 parcels of lands and draft detailed reports for 5 
parcels of lands. 
 BSNL Board has approved final report of Borivali to be submitted to DOT for 
granting permission to monetize this land, the case is being s ent to DOT. The 
cases pertaining to Santacruz and Deonar (Mumbai) are being submitted to 
Management Committee of BSNL Board for approval. The draft detailed reports 
of 5 parcels of lands are under scrutiny. 
 The anticipated / projected revenue by developing  10 BSNL lands at these 
locations for which Consultant has been appointed is as follows: 
 
(i) Upfront Value during 2013-14            :  Rs. 250 Crore. 
(ii) Rental income from 2016-17 onwards: Rs. 250 Crore per annum. 
 
 The revenue realized by leasing out spare spac e in different buildings is 
estimated to be about Rs. 15 Crore per annum. 
 
Data Centres : 
 
 Ten Internet data centers (IDCs) in association with M/s SIS and Dimension 
Data on revenue sharing business have been opened and started working. This 
has resulted in generating a new stream of revenue for BSNL. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.8 
 
The Committee find that there is huge potential for BSNL to exploit in 
broadband service segment in rural areas. As against 5,93,601 inh abited villages only 
1,69,201 villages constituting 28.5% have been covered with broadband connectivity 
as on 30.09.2012. According to BSNL’s Annual Report (2011 -12), huge Copper Line 
Network, Optical Fibre Cable connectivity will enable the Company in tap ping the vast 
broadband opportunities thrown open for grabbing by the changing market dynamics. 
The Committee desire that BSNL should evolve suitable tariff rates and marketing 
strategies to exploit the full potential of broadband segment. The Committee are of the 
opinion that if the Company optimally utilizes its rural infrastructure and capitalize on 
its strengths, the revenue so generated would help its turnaround. The Committee 
urge that problems such as irregular functioning of mobile towers, incidents  of thefts, 
and modernization of telephone exchanges in rural areas need to be dealt with on 
priority basis in order to improve telephone service connectivity in rural areas. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL had planned optimal utilization of rural wireline infrastructure by;  
 
 Provisioning of IP enabled NGN technology for enhanced Broadband 
penetration in rural areas:  BSNL has planned to make the entire wireline 
exchanges, IP enabled in next five years starting from FY 2013 -14. With the 
migration to/ replacement by Next Generation Network (NGN), it will be possible 
to provide value added services to our wireline customers.  
 
 Tariff Plans: New attractive tariff plans are being launched time to time as per 
the market demands. Recently, BSNL has introduced flex i and unlimited plans 
to grab more customer base and enhance the revenue.  
 
 Flexi combo plan- BSNL has launched various flexi combo plans from plan 500 
to plan 1500.  In these plans, there is virtually no rent and customer may avail 
unlimited on-net free ca lls within SDCA/Circle/country without paying any extra 
charge. 
 
 Un-limited plan - MOU based plan wherein unlimited number of calls to BSNL 
landline/mobile were allowed against fixed plan charges. 
 
As on 31/8/2013, BSNL has provided broadband facility in ru ral areas and has 
covered 1,71,033 villages through broadband services. To exploit the full potential of 
broadband segment in rural areas, BSNL has taken following steps:- 
 
(a) Launched lowest and attractive broadband plan to its rural customers with 
minimum plan of Rs, 99/-. 
(b) Provided Personal Computers to its rural subscriber on subsidy basis.. 
(c) Providing broadband connectivity to Customer Care Centres in collaboration 
with DIT. 
(d) As on 31.08.2013, BSNL has covered 87,064 Customer Care Centres (CS Cs) 
through various technologies of broadband i.e. ADSL2+, WiMAX and 3G 
mobile services. 
  
Wireless solution like 3G/4G are expected to provide a complementary 
broadband solution to wireline broadband to enable 100% rural coverage.  
 
Out of 2642 SDCAs, 2614 SDCAs are covered by WLL. As on 31.08.2013, total 
8,314 numbers of Rural BTS are commissioned and 4,79,355 villages are covered by 
WLL. 
 
Out of 2.5 lakhs village Panchayats, 78,501 village panchayats have been given 
coverage by WiMAX as on 31.08.2013.  
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 

 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 9 
 
Though staff strength of BSNL has come down from 3.97 lakhs in the year 
2000 to 2.58 lakhs as on 30.09.2012, Sam Pitroda Committee has held the view that 
around 1 lakh employees (wage  cost of Rs. 5000) crore are redundant and may be 
dispensed with through best possible processes like VRS. The Committee note that 
staff cost was about Rs. 13,406 crore in 2011 -12 i.e. almost 50 per cent of its 
revenue, which is abnormally on the higher si de as compared to private companies 
whose expenditure is stated to be in the range of 5 -10 per cent. BSNL has requested 
the Government to provide Rs.18,000 crore to implement VRS scheme which is 
stated to be under the consideration of the Government. The C ommittee desire that 
the request be considered sympathetically and an expeditious decision taken in the 
matter. The Committee also suggest that BSNL should identify the divisions/areas 
which are burdened with excessive staff and work out a plan for their r edeployment to 
other suitable sections/ departments.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17.4.2013 to look 
into the matter of revival and revitalization of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) 
and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL).   A draft note for consideration of 
this GoM for the proposal to reduce employees expenses in BSNL and MTNL has 
been circulated for Inter -Ministerial consultations on 29.10.2013.  This note will be 
submitted to the GoM after getting comments from concerned Ministries. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.10 
 
The Committee regret to note that even eight years after commencing the 
process for absorption of Group ‘A’ officers of DoT in BSNL, the process has not been 
completed. The Committee desire that the Government should take up this issue with 
due promptitude and complete the process without any further delay. The Committee 
are of the view that excessive dependence of BSNL on the deputationists officers for 
handling important managerial posts is not in the best interests of the Company, as 
they may not have a sense of belonging. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Company should expedite the process of building up its own cadre and complete  the 
same within a time bound period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The process of absorption for Group ‘A’ officers of DOT in BSNL under Rule 
37-A has been concluded on 11.03.2013. Now, the ITS officers of Group ‘A’ have 
been deployed in BSNL for a period of 10 years on diminishing basis w.e.f. 
11.03.2013. 
 
 

 
 
BSNL has started the process of building up of its own cadre strength in Senior / 
Middle level Executives by initiating the following steps: 
 
a. In the first phase, Recruitment of 150 Deputy General Managers from the open 
market has been initiated against which 44 Executives have already been 
recruited and the process for balance 106 Executives is underway. 
b. Notification for appointment of the grade of CGM / GM and DGM level posts in 
BSNL on immediate absorptio n basis under Rule - 37 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 
1972 has also been issued. 
c. Recruitment Rules for induction for Management Trainees in BSNL have been 
notified.  
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.12 
 
The Committee have been informed that recommendations of the Sam Pitroda 
Committee were discussed in the full Telecom Commission meeting and an internal 
committee under the Chairmanship of Member (Services) has been constituted to 
give its recommendations on the report. The Comm ittee would like to be apprised of 
the Internal Committee’s reports and action taken thereon.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Sam Pitroda Committee report was submitted to the Government. Internal 
Committee under the chairmanship of Member(s), Telecom Commission was set up in 
DoT. The decision of the Telecom Commission on the Pitroda Committee 
recommendations was conveyed to BSNL in January, 2011. Progressive 
implementation of the recommendations concerning operational and commercial 
issues is already underway in BSNL.   
 
Action taken by BSNL/status on the recommendations of the Sam Pitroda 
Committee report/recommendations of FTC: 
 
Recommendations Status 
Focus on selection of the best professionals from 
the market  at market rates  
TC decided that taking 30 -50 
professional from market at market rates, 
changing Board constitution or 
separating Chairman and MD posts may 
not be feasible in only one PSU as it may 
trigger protest from BSNL and demand 
for similar treatment by other PSUs. 
Separate the post of the M anaging Director/ CEO 
(from CMD)   
Change the board composition to seven directors 
(one internal (MD/CEO), two government nominee, 
three external and non-executive chairman). 
Appoint an eminent person from the private sector 
as the chairman. 
CMD was se lected by Search cum 
Selection Committee which was open to 
private sector also.  
Provide three year contracts with specific targets for 
all key management team 
Output of key officials is already being 
reviewed periodically. 

 
 
Establish four independent bus iness units for Fixed 
access, Mobility, enterprise and New businesses. 
Implemented by BSNL 
Complete ITS absorption process immediately. Cabinet decision dated 13.02.2013 has 
been implemented. 
Induct significant young talent in technology, IT, 
marketing, sales, etc. 
Being Done by BSNL from time to time. 
Retire or transfer around 100K employees through 
processes like VRS. 
VRS proposal received from BSNL is 
being examined in DoT.   
Change procurement processes and procedures 
substantially  using tools such  as e -Procurement, 
vendor rating, rate running contracts, schedules, 
etc.  
Implemented by BSNL 
Disinvest 30%  through Indian strategic investor and 
at Initial Public Offering (IPO) to return 10% to the 
government and use 20% for employee VRS, 
expansion and operation.  
TC decided that this is not the opportune 
time for listing & disinvestment of BSNL, 
as company is on downward 
performance path & disinvestment may 
not realise true value of the company. In 
absence of listing, option of giving stocks 
as incentive, to key management team is 
not available for the present. 
Provide 30 million new high speed broadband 
connections in the next three years 
As on 30.09.2013, 9.98  million broad -
band connections are working in BSNL 
Unbundle local loop for public and pr ivate 
companies  
To be decided by BSNL  Board as per its 
commercial decision 
Proactively offer sharing of active and passive 
infrastructure to other operators  
Implemented by BSNL 
Enhance rural communication facilities by 
connecting 250,000 panchayats  
A separate company named BBNL has 
been constituted for this purpose of 
implementing project a for linking 
250,000 Gram Panchayats with 
incremental fibre under National Optical 
Fibre Network (NOFN). 
Create a separate subsidiary company for tower 
related infrastructure  
The proposal is under consideration.  
Create a separate subsidiary to hold  land bank and 
other real estate assets  
The proposal is under consideration.  
Establish a BSNL venture fund to invest and/ or 
acquire small appropriate technology companies. 
This issue is of operational and 
commercial in nature for which BSNL 
Board is competent to take decisions. 
 
Further, Government has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17.4.2013 
to look into the matter of revival and revitalization of Bhara t Sanchar Nigam Limited 
(BSNL) and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL).   A draft note on the 
proposal to reduce employee’s expenses in BSNL and MTNL has been circulated for 
Inter-Ministerial consultations on 29.10.2013.  This note will be submitted t o the GoM 
after getting comments from concerned Ministries. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 

 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.13 
 
The Committee further note that BSNL has engaged a professional consultant 
M/s Boston Consultancy Group (BCG) to improve it s overall performance and 
change the management structure. Based on the recommendations of BCG, BSNL 
has reportedly restructured itself into four business verticals viz Consumer Mobility, 
Consumer Fixed Access, Enterprise and New Business. The Committee tr ust that 
the restructuring of the company would give a professional orientation to its 
functioning and help the company in improving its performance to desired level. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the impact of the restructuring on the overall  
performance of the company. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the changes in the telecom operating environment, BSNL had 
undertaken a systematic exercise to develop an overall strategy and transformation 
agenda. Changes have been implemented in BSNL's organization structure with the 
objective of effectively implementing the overall business strategy. The exercise is 
aimed at providing adequate end -to-end focus on key growth segments, clearly 
defined accountability for different business and functions an d significantly higher 
thrust on marketing, sales & distribution and customer activities. 
  
Restructuring exercise has resulted in: 
 
 Building of BSNL's own sales team for CFA products to actively sell broadband 
and wireline services to the customer. 
 Increasing product reach, extraction and improving channel management for 
mobile products especially through franchisee channel. 
 Strengthening of sales focus on enterprise customers through creating 
dedicated account management teams, viz National Account Manage rs for 
Platinum customers, Key Account Managers for Gold customers and Channel 
Partners for Silver enterprise customers. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.14 
 
For revival of BSNL, action is reportedly being taken on several  fronts and 
given the kind of spread and presence the BSNL is having, clearly there are 
opportunities for BSNL to take advantage of these opportunities more than the other 
players who may not have such a wide presence in rural areas. Further, the BSNL 
has the highest spread of infrastructure in terms of optical fibre across the country 
and it is being worked out how such infrastructure could be better leveraged. The 
Committee feel that Company’s widespread infrastructure and future business 
potential in telecom market offers immense possibility of turnaround of the Company. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that it is imperative that the Government 
finalize a concrete revival plan and take necessary steps to enable the Company to 
harness the emerging opportunities in telecom sector.  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Conscious of the national and strategic interests served by operations of 
BSNL, Government has  constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17.4.2013 to 
deliberate on short -term, medium term and long -term measures for revival and 
revitalisation of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar Telephone 
Nigam Limited (MTNL). GoM has met on three occasions i. e. 12.06.2013, 01.08.2013 
and 12.09.2013. Its recommendations would be placed before the Union Ca binet, 
once the recommendations are finalised. 
 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.15 
 
The Committee have been informed by the Secretary, DoT that BSNL has 
made a proposal for surrender some part of the spectrum under its  possession. The 
Committee urge the Government to consider the request of the BSNL expeditiously 
keeping in view the BSNL’s poor financial condition.  
 
Government has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17.4.2013 to look 
into the matter of revival an d revitalisation of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) 
and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL).    
 
 Group of Ministers (GoM) has decided to recommend to the Union Cabinet full 
refund of one-time upfront charges paid on surrender of BWA spectrum in r espect of 
6 service areas proposed by BSNL and both service areas of MTNL. The 
recommendations of GoM are expected to be placed before the Union Cabinet 
shortly. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.5 
 
One of the factors which adversely affects BSNL’s performance relates to 
services provided by it, which are uneconomical but socially desirable. BSNL was 
compensated initially for these services through reimbursement of lice nse fee and 
spectrum charges from 2001 -02, subsequently, through Access Deficit Charges 
(ADC) from May 2003 and later through Universal service obligation fund as subsidy 
for rural wireline network from July 2008 to February, 2011. TRAI is stated to have 
recommended the subsidy for two years from July 2011 – Rs. 1500 Crore for the first 
year and Rs. 1250 Crore for the second year. The release of amount for the first year 
is stated to have since been cleared. The Committee are of the view that there should 
be a level playing field for BSNL and private operators. The Committee desire that 
BSNL should not be put to any disadvantage because of operation of uneconomical 
services mandated by the Government and should continue to be compensated for 
this purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The subsidy payment of Rs. 1500 Crore recommended by TRAI towards 
settlement of subsidy claim under USO for sustenance of wireline network installed 
prior to 01.04.2002, for one year (period from 18.07.2011 to 17.07.2012) has been 
received by BSNL on 11.07.2013. In respect of subsidy for 2 nd year, of Rs. 1250 
Crore, Telecom commission has decided to carry out an assessment study of the 
current status of these infrastructure by USOF. The task has been assigned to NICF 
(National Instit ute for Communication Finance) by USOF and information is being 
collected. 
                                                                
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.7 
 
The Committee have been informed that Sam Pi troda Committee in its report 
on restructuring of BSNL has, inter-alia, recommended for substantially changing the 
procurement procedures using tools like e -procurement, vender rating, rate running 
contracts, schedules etc. Pitroda Committee has also recom mended ‘managed 
capacity’ model for procurement and ‘managed service model’ for giving operation 
and maintenance to the vendor. This is presently not possible in BSNL set up due to 
availability of surplus manpower to maintain the network. However, the ‘man aged 
capacity model’ has been followed in case of providing Value Added Services as well 
as Call centres. The Committee hope that necessary steps will be taken to implement 
the aforesaid recommendations of Pitroda Committee at the earliest.  

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has attempted to prepare a RFP (Request For Proposal) for 
procurement of GSM equipment based on managed capacity model prescribed by 
Sam Pitroda committee. There were various challenges in RFP like the procedures to 
be followed in the Gover nment set up as well as the governance model for the 
managed capacity model.  In the managed capacity model, it is imperative the vendor 
undertakes operation and maintenance of the equipment commissioned by him. Thus, 
the vendor as investor expects payment s of at least operational cost incurred by him 
from BSNL from the day the equipment is operational irrespective of the traffic carried.  
Thus, BSNL management is finding it difficult to accept anticipated loss to BSNL as it 
will start incurring expenses wi thout income (zero traffic)  in case   of insufficient 
traffic. 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 12-2013) 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.11 
 
The Committee note that BSNL is not only beset with large number of 
employees but also the skills of majority of these em ployees do not suit or align with 
the requirement for rendering services to the growing mobile and broadband 
customers against the backdrop of emerging modern technologies. Though BSNL has 
taken for upgrading the skills of its employees through training pr ograms and 
corporate restructuring initiatives, the Committee feel that there is an imperative need 
to have more such programme at frequent intervals so as to reorient and upgrade the 
skills of legacy manpower in view of the demand of modern telecom market . 
Considering the fact that the Company has entered into the 3G market, the 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to induct fresh and professional talent in 
the organization to meet the need of the rapidly changing telecom market. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company should expeditiously fill up the 
vacant posts meant for the skilled staff so as to have a pool of employees who can 
deliver as per the requirements of the Company in a highly competitive telecom 
market. The Committee also desire that until the recruitment process for required 
skilled staff is completed the Company should evolve a plan for rational deployment of 
its manpower in accordance with the various operational needs so as to deal with the 
shortage of skilled manpower.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BSNL has evolved the following plans to upgrade the skills of the employees 
through training programme and re-deploy them suitably :-  
 
a. 3 APEX level training centres viz ALTTC Ghaziabad, BRBRAITT, Jabalpur and  
NATFM, Hyderabad, 15 RTTCs, 11CTTCs and 6 DTTCs caters to the training 
need of BSNL staff (executives and non-executives) country wide.  
b. As per the MOU target for financial year 2012 -13, 10% executives will be 
trained through Executives Development programmes. 

 
 
c. This trainin g is carried out through various modes i.e. Class Room Training, 
Field Training programmes, Webinars / Workshops, etc. 
d. Executives at various level, are required to undertake training courses to  get 
themselves updated through successful completion of learn ing, as per 
provisions of executives promotion policy at the time of their respective 
financial up gradation.  
 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.2 
 
There have been steady decline in BSNL’s market share of wireline 
connections from 82.75% as on 31.3.2007 to 69.73 % as on 31.9.2012. BSNL’s 
capacity utilization in landline segment also fell from 61.8% as on 30.09.2009 to 
52.66% as on 30.09.2012. The Committee are not satisfied with the BSNL’s 
explanation that substitution of landline phones by mobile phones/surrender of extra 
wireline telephones causes the fall in landline market shares. The committee note  in 
this connection that wireline market share of private players went up from 8.13% to 
20.16% during the same period. The Committee feel that the fall in BSNL’s market 
share has something to do with its quality of service which has been way below 
compared to that of private operators. The Committee emphasize that management of 
BSNL should take urgent steps to improve its customer service and regain the 
confidence of customers through efficient service to ensure full utilization of its 
landline capacity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The constraints faced by BSNL in providing quality of service in wire line 
services are given below:  
 
(a)  Large scale damages to underground cables by NHAI, PWD and local 
authorities due to massive road expansion and repair works and obstacles in 
digging of roads for repairs and relaying of underground cables. 
(b) Poor availability of commercial electric power supply in rural telecom 
installations particularly in the states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, 
Maharashtra etc. 
 
To impr ove the Quality of Service in Wireline Network, following steps are 
being taken / planned:  
 
(i) Rehabilitation and up gradation of external plant. 
(ii) Close monitoring of Quality of service parameters to adhere to the benchmarks  
stipulated by TRAI  
(iii) Introduction of effective network management system. 
(iv) Coordination with local bodies to minimise cable damages due to road works. 
(v) Replacement of faulty telephones whenever required. 
(vi) AMC of the telecom equipment and instruments has been done. 
(vii) Continuous improvement in cu stomer care is being done through Project 
Smile. Around 4000 new Customer Service Centres (CSCs) are being 

 
 
upgraded with single window clearance concept and Information Technology 
enabled change business processes. 
(viii) Battery sets at number of places have been planned for replacement. 
 
BSNL has taken the following steps for improving the wireline services and for 
optimizing the utilization of its wireline capacity.   
 
a) BSNL has planned to make the entire wireline exchanges, IP enabled in next 
five years starting from FY 2013-14. With the migration to/ replacement by Next 
Generation Network (NGN), it will be possible to provide value added services 
to our wireline customers. 
b) The migration process is planned to be implemented through following 
projects:-  
 
I) Replacement of Digital Telephone Exchanges by NGN (Next Generation 
Network) equipment: it is planned to deploy NGN gradually and replace the 
entire Digital Telephone Exchanges (OCB, EWSD, AXE and 5ESS TDM 
types). The tender for 4 Million Ports has been fina lized, and order placed 
for first phase. 
II) Migration of C -DOT TDM Switches to NGN C -5 (C-DoT MAX NG): BSNL 
has signed a MOU with C -DoT on 19th Dec, 2012 as part of encouraging 
indigenous development of technology. BSNL has planned migrating   C -
DOT TDM techn ology exchanges with NGN solution. In the next one year 
100, existing C -DOT exchanges shall be upgraded to NGN i.e. 50 C -DoT 
MAX sites in North and East Zones each. The migration shall result in 
reduction of operational cost along with ease of induction of  new value 
added services to the landline customers.  
 
c) Re-deployment of RSUs/RLUs: BSNL has issued instructions to optimize the 
capacity utilization by making rearrangement of deployed exchanges and re -
deploy the spare RLUs/ RSUs to new developed / developing area.   
d) Providing Value Added services- With the migration to NGN network, BSNL will 
be able to offer following value added services to its wireline customers.  
 
o Games on Demand (GoD), Music on demand (MoD) and Video 
surveillance to BB customers. 
o Voice & Video over Broadband (VVoBB) services for BB customers. 
o Personalized Ring Back Tone (PRBT) as well as Multimedia Ring Back 
Tone (MRBT), an advanced version of Colour Ring Back Tone (CRBT) to 
PSTN subscribers. 
o Wide Area IP Centrex - IP Centrex allow s small and medium size 
enterprises to deploy PABX/ CUG service without really installing system 
physically in their premises.  
o Multimedia video conferencing service will be available across the country. 
o The Prepaid solution will be provided with all funct ionalities to provide 
voice, video and data pre-paid services including roaming.  

 
 
o Fixed Mobile convergence (FMC) services by using the NGN -IMS core 
along with the PSTN Access network and already deployed Mobile 
network.   
 
e) BSNL is in process to start Ho t spot broadband services for broadband 
customers.  
 
(OM NO. 59-137/2012-SU-IV dated 27-12-2013) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:  JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
17 February 2014 Chairman 
28 Magha 1935(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 

 
 
 
APPENDIX  
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2013-2014) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 th February 2014 from 1500 hrs to        
1530 hrs in Room No. 147 (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House (Third Floor), 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
4. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5. Prof. Saugata Roy 
6. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
7. Shri Uday Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sh. P. C. Koul, Director 
2. Sh. M. K. Madhusudhan, Additional Director 
3. Sh. G. C. Prasad, Dy. Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Sh. P Sesh Kumar, Director General (Commercial)-II 
2. Sh. B. C. Mandal, Dy. Director 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman wel comed the Members and the Officers of C&AG 
to the Sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Reports on the 
following subjects and adopted the same without any modifications: 
 
(i). Report on action taken by the Governme nt on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report on Bharat Sanchar 
Nigam Limited; and, 
 
(ii). XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports on the 
basis of factual verification and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FOURTH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON BHARAT 
SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED. 
 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
15 
II. Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government [ vide Recommendations in Chapter II at Sl. Nos . 
1,3,4,6,8,9,10,12,13,14 and 15]   
  
Percentage of total  
11 
 
 
 
73.33% 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies  
 
 
Percentage of total  
 
0.0 
 
 
 
  0.0% 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee [ vide 
Recommendations in Chapter IV at Sl. Nos. 5,7 and 11] 
 
Percentage of total.  
 
03 
 
 
 
20.00% 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final reply of Government 
is still awaited [vide Recommendations in Chapter V at Sl. No.2] 
 
Percentage of total 
01 
 
 
6.67% 
 
 
 