CPU. No. 982 
 
 
 
SECOND  REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2014-2015) 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
PURCHASE OF CONDENSATE AT CRUDE OIL PRICE BY OIL & NATURAL GAS 
CORPORATION LIMITED  
[BASED ON AUDIT PARA NO. 13.5.1 OF C&AG‟S REPORT NO. 9 OF 2009-10] 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -eighth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings on 
purchase of condensate at crude oil price by Oil & Natural Gas Corporatio n 
Limited (Based on Audit para no. 13.5.1 of C&AG‟s Report no. 9 of 2009-10)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2015 
 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 19.03.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
March 2015 / Phalguna 1936(S) 
  2 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1-4 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
5-10 
CHAPTER III 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
11 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
12 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which fina l replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
13 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting 14 
   
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -eighth Report of Committee on 
Public Undertakings ( Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
purchase of condensate at Crude Oil Price by Oil 
& Natural Gas Corporation Limited. 
 
16 
 
 
 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2014 – 2015) 
 
Chairperson 
 
   Shri Shanta Kumar 
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri L. K. Advani 
3.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
4.  Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
5.  Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
6.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu 
9.  Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
10.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
11.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
12.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
13.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
15.  Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16.   Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.   Shri Narendra Budania 
18.   Shri Majeed Memon 
19.   Shri Muthukaruppan 
20.   Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
21.   Shri C. M. Ramesh 
22.   Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Yogendra singh   Executive Officer 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Second Report on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -eighth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on “Purchase of Condensate at crude oil price by ONGC Limited based on Audit 
Para No. 13.5.1 of &AG Report No. 9 of 2009-10”. 
2. The Twenty -eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 5 February 2014.  Replies of th e Government to the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10 December 2014.  The 
draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on        
28 January 2015.  The Minutes of the Sitting are given in Appendix-I.  
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-eighth Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi SHANTA KUMAR              
11 March 2015 Chairperson 
20 Phalguna, 1936(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 
 
 
(v) 

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -eighth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Commi ttee on Public Undertakings (2013 -14) on “ Purchase of 
Condensate at Crude Oil Price by ONGC based on Audit Para No. 13.5.1 of C&AG‟s 
Report No. 9 of 2009-10” which was presented to Lok Sabha on the 5th February, 2014. 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
seven Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7                (Total 7)  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies (Chapter III)                 (NIL) 
                          
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV)       (NIL) 
              
(iv) Observations / Recommendations to which the Government have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V)          (NIL) 
 
3. The Government have accepted all the Observations / Recommendations made 
by the Committee in their Twenty -eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha). However, some 
replies of the Government have been commented upon in Chapter -I of the Report.  The 
Committee desire that r esponse to these comments should be furnished to them 
expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
5.  The Committee in their Twenty-eighth Report had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are distressed to know the serious deficiencies in a commercial 
contract entered into between the Government of India, Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited (ONGC), Reliance I ndustries Limited (RIL) and British Gas 
Exploration and Production India Limited (BGEPIL) formerly known as Enron Oil 
and Gas India Limited.  The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) of the Tapti Gas 

Field, a joint venture (JV) jointly operated by ONGC, RIL a nd BGEPIL was 
executed in December 1994.  The PSC devised by ONGC did not provide for 
disposal of Tapti condensate and there was no separate pricing mechanism for 
condensate. The PSC was also silent about the appointment of Government 
nominee for purchase of the condensate and there was also no clarity in the PSC 
about delivery point of condensate which led to different interpretations. The 
Committees‟ pointed query seeking reasons for these lapses has not yielded any 
specific information.  The Committee de plore the lapses on the part of ONGC 
and urge ONGC and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to exercise 
extreme care in future and ensure that there are no shortcomings in commercial 
contracts.” 
 
6.  The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in their acti on taken reply have stated 
that the observations of the Committee are pertinent and have been noted. Due care 
will be taken to avoid such short comings in future NELP PSCs. 
  
7.  The office of the C&AG in their comments on the action taken reply of the 
Government have stated that they have no further remarks to offer in view of the 
assurance given by MOP&NG that due care will be taken to avoid such short comings in 
future NELP PSCs.  
 
8.  In their response to the Audit observations, the Ministry have stated  that no 
further reply appears necessary in view of the remarks of C&AG. 
 
9.  The Committee note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has 
assured to take due care to avoid shortcomings in future New Exploration and 
Licensing Policy Production Sha ring Contracts (NELP PSCs).  The Committee, 
however, desire that they be apprised of the safeguards proposed to be taken / 
incorporated in the future PSCs so as to obviate any ambiguity or loophole that 
may lead to different interpretations which can be ex ploited by the JV partners to 
their advantage. 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
10.  The Committee in their Twenty-eighth Report had recommended as follows:-  
 
“ONGC is the transporter and processor of JV gas and its issues on fixation of 
transportation and pr ocessing charges were outstanding with the JV partners. 
The JV partners (viz., RIL and BGEPIL) insisted on valuation of condensate at 
crude oil price as a precondition for settlement of JV gas transportation and 
processing charges. ONGC entered into a „set tlement agreement‟ on 31 
December 2005 (effective 1 April 2005) with JV partners which fixed pricing of 
condensate at crude oil price and resolved other issues like transportation and 
processing charges and delivery point, etc. The Committee see no reason why 
the issue of fixation of transport and processing charges was linked to valuation 
of condensate. Since the ONGC was legally entitled to receive transportation 
charges for JV gas, it should have gone for independent amicable settlement or 

gone in for ar bitration in the matter, particularly in view of Law Ministry‟s opinion 
that JV is liable to pay transportation charges to ONGC.”   
 
11.  The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  in their action taken reply have stated 
that Law Ministry examined the legal o pinion obtained by ONGC from Additional 
Solicitor General of India, Shri Altaf Ahmed, which inferred that the cost of 
transportation of Panna-Mukta gas is to be borne by the Buyer or its nominee i.e. GAIL. 
The apparent conflict in various provisions of PSC  in respect of delivery point of Panna -
Mukta gas was acknowledged by Law Ministry and ONGC was not receiving 
transportation tariff either from sellers (JV) or from buyer (GAIL). Despite ONGC‟s 
efforts, the issue could not be resolved. In addition, there we re pending issues w.r.t. 
interim nature of tariffs being paid by JV to ONGC for transportation & processing of 
Tapti gas, processing for Panna -Mukta gas and 10% gas sales revenue of Panna -
Mukta lying in escrow account. In the absence of absolute certainty about the legal 
position w.r.t. Panna-Mukta Transportation Tariff, ONGC thought it prudent to enter into 
an omnibus „Settlement Agreement‟ with JV partners.  However, as advised by the 
Committee earlier, care would be taken to avoid such shortcomings in future. 
 
12.  The office of the C&AG in their remarks on the reply of the Government have 
stated that they have no further remarks to offer in view of the assurance given by 
MOP&NG that due care will be taken to avoid such short comings in future. 
 
13.  In t heir response to the Audit observations, the Ministry have stated that no 
further reply appears necessary in view of the remarks of C&AG. 
 
14.  The Committee do not subscribe to the justification given by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas with rega rd to ONGC‟s decision to enter into an 
omnibus „Settlement Agreement‟ with JV partners on transportation/processing 
issues.  The Committee may like to emphasise that ONGC was legally entitled to 
receive transportation charges for JV gas as per the opinion of Ministry of Law.  
The Committee may like to reiterate their earlier stand that ONGC should have 
explored legal alternative / arbitration to settle this transportation issue with JV 
partners instead of entering into an omnibus agreement with its JV partn ers.  
Now when the Ministry has assured that due care would be taken to avoid such 
shortcomings in future, the Committee hope and trust that due caution would be 
exercised in future while finalizing such contracts to ensure that there remains no 
scope for ambiguities, which may place the Company in a disadvantageous 
position.  
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
15.  In their original Report, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“What irks the Committee is that the „settlement agreement‟ in 2005 was made 
by ONGC without prior approval of the Board of Directors and without the 
approval of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas which was the first signatory 
to the original production sharing contract. Since the „settlement agreement‟ with 

huge financial impli cations replaced the operational interim arrangement which 
had been devised at the instance of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in 
1998, propriety demanded that prior approval of the Board of Directors and the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas was  taken before implementation of the 
„settlement agreement‟. It is regrettable that even the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas ignored the question of propriety in the matter and drew satisfaction 
from the fact that Panna -Mukta & Tapti JV intimated them o f the developments 
expost facto.  The Committee hope that there will be no repetition of such lapses 
in future.” 
 
16.  The Ministry in its action taken reply have stated that as has been suggested by 
the Committee, it is assured that due care will be taken to avoid such lapses in future. 
 
17.  The office of the C&AG in their remarks on the reply of the Government have 
stated that they have no further remarks to offer in view of the assurance given by 
MOP&NG that due care will be taken to avoid such short comings in future. 
 
18.  In their response to the Audit observations, the Ministry have stated that no 
further reply appears necessary in view of the remarks of C&AG. 
 
19.  In view of the assurance given by the Ministry, the Committee hope that the 
Government would take necessary steps to ensure that provisions of any 
agreement / interim arrangement between ONGC and other JV partners are not 
altered without the prior approval of the administrative Ministry.  Moreover, due 
process / procedure in the Ministry s hould be followed in this regard.  The 
Committee, accordingly, desire that the administrative Ministry should also 
evolve a mechanism to ensure that any violation in this regard should be dealt 
with severe penalties.  The Committee would also like to be ap prised of the steps 
taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
 

CHAPTER II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
  The Committee are distressed to know the serious deficiencies in a commerc ial 
contract entered into between the Government of India, Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited (ONGC), Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and British Gas 
Exploration and Production India Limited (BGEPIL) formerly known as Enron Oil and 
Gas India Limited .  The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) of the Tapti Gas Field, a 
joint venture (JV) jointly operated by ONGC, RIL and BGEPIL was executed in 
December 1994.  The PSC devised by ONGC did not provide for disposal of Tapti 
condensate and there was no separat e pricing mechanism for condensate. The PSC 
was also silent about the appointment of Government nominee for purchase of the 
condensate and there was also no clarity in the PSC about delivery point of condensate 
which led to different interpretations. The C ommittees‟ pointed query seeking reasons 
for these lapses has not yielded any specific information.  The Committee deplore the 
lapses on the part of ONGC and urge ONGC and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas to exercise extreme care in future and ensur e that there are no shortcomings in 
commercial contracts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the committee are pertinent and have been noted. Due care 
will be taken to avoid such short comings in future NELP PSCs. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
In view of the assurance given by MOP&NG that due care will be taken to avoid 
such short comings in future NELP PSCs , no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 9 of Chapter I. 
 

Recommendation Serial No. 2 
  The lacunae in the PSC with regard to disposal and  pricing of condensate led to 
an interim arrangement whereby ONGC retained the JV condensate and in turn 
delivered its own gas to GAIL on energy equivalent basis as per the PSC gas pricing 
mechanism.  The fact that the interim arrangement, made at the inst ance of the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas, continued for almost seven years (i.e. from May 1998 to 
March 2005) shows the apathy with which the matter has been handled. The Committee 
feel that adhocism on the part of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Ga s in such a crucial 
matter is inexplicable. It is only in December 2005, the interim arrangement was 
replaced by a „settlement agreement‟ which was signed between ONGC and JV 
partners.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the absence of clear PSC provisions on th e treatment of condensate as crude 
oil or gas the matter was referred to Law Ministry. The law ministry stated the matter as 
technical and sought comments from the ministry. GOI referred the matter to Engineers 
India Ltd. (EIL) for technical comments and a lso took up with concerned JV, Govt. 
nominee and DGH but the issue remained inconclusive due to which interim 
arrangement continued till 2005.  In the absence of certainty about the legal position 
ONGC entered into “settlement agreement” after obtaining le gal opinion. Due care will 
be taken to avoid such lapses in future. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
In view of the assurance given by MOP&NG that due care will be taken to avoid 
such short comings in future, no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
ONGC is the transporter and processor of JV gas and its issues on fixation of 
transportation and processing charges were outstanding with the JV partners. The JV 
partners (viz., RIL and BGEPIL) insisted on valuation of condensate at crude oil price as 
a precondition for settlemen t of JV gas transportation and processing charges. ONGC 
entered into a „settlement agreement‟ on 31 December 2005 (effective 1 April 2005) 
with JV partners which fixed pricing of condensate at crude oil price and resolved other 
issues like transportation a nd processing charges and delivery point, etc. The 
Committee see no reason why the issue of fixation of transport and processing charges 

was linked to valuation of condensate. Since the ONGC was legally entitled to receive 
transportation charges for JV gas , it should have gone for independent amicable 
settlement or gone in for arbitration in the matter, particularly in view of Law Ministry‟s 
opinion that JV is liable to pay transportation charges to ONGC. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Law Ministry examined th e legal opinion obtained by ONGC from Additional 
Solicitor General of India, Shri Altaf Ahmed, which inferred that the cost of 
transportation of Panna-Mukta gas is to be borne by the Buyer or its nominee i.e. GAIL. 
The apparent conflict in various provisions of PSC in respect of delivery point of Panna -
Mukta gas was acknowledged by Law Ministry and ONGC was not receiving 
transportation tariff either from sellers (JV) or from buyer (GAIL). Despite ONGC‟s 
efforts, the issue could not be resolved. In addition,  there were pending issues w.r.t. 
interim nature of tariffs being paid by JV to ONGC for transportation & processing of 
Tapti gas, processing for Panna -Mukta gas and 10% gas sales revenue of Panna -
Mukta lying in escrow account. In the absence of absolute c ertainty about the legal 
position w.r.t. Panna-Mukta Transportation Tariff, ONGC thought it prudent to enter into 
an omnibus „Settlement Agreement‟ with JV partners.  However, as advised by the 
Committee earlier, care would be taken to avoid such shortcomings in future. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
In view of the assurance given by MOP&NG for taking care to avoid such short 
comings in future, no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
  
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 14 of Chapter I. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
  ONGC justified its decision to value condensate at crude oil price on the basis of 
Article 19.11 of the PSC. Audit, relying on the proviso to Article 1.18 of the PSC, took 
the stand that condensate could be treated as crude oil only if the conditions laid down 
in the proviso are fulfilled. The Committee feel that the proviso to Article 1.18 which 
deals with the condensate from an oil field is not relevant in this case, as Tapti is a gas 
field and not an oil field.  The definition of „condensate‟ in Article 1.18 and pricing of 
condensate as stipulated in Article 19.11 are relevant. 

Reply of the Government 
 
As at para 4 the committee has stated that the definition of „condensate‟ in Article 
1.18 and pricing of condensate as stipulated in Article 19.11 are relevant. ONGC 
justified its decision to value condensate at crude oil price on the basis of Article 19.11 
of the PSC which  is as follow:- 
 
The provisions specified above for the determination of the price of sales of 
Crude Oil shall apply mutatis mutandis to Condensates”. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
In view of COPU decision regarding applicability of Article 19.11 for pricing of 
Condensate, no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
The Committee note that the joint meeting held on 13 -14 April 1998 (at the 
instance of Ministry of Petroleum & Natur al Gas), wherein representatives of ONGC, 
EIL and DGH were present had inter-alia concluded that „the well fluid produced at Tapti 
field contains hydrocarbons which fall under the definition of natural gas and 
condensate due to their being in vapour phase and liquid phase respectively at normal 
temperature and pressure conditions.‟ It is also noteworthy to mention that a Committee 
constituted by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas in September 1998 comprising 
senior technical experts of GAIL and ONGC co ncluded that the composition of Tapti 
Gas Condensate matches almost with light stabilized crude oil and pointed out that „gas 
condensate is not being treated as gas internationally.‟ The Committee note that barring 
problems in separation and measurement of  the condensate, the interpretation arrived 
at by these bodies with respect to properties of condensate broadly conforms to the 
definition of condensate given in Article 1.18 of the PSC. Further, the legal opinion of 
Additional Solicitor General in this re gard states that „the price of the condensate 
produced from Mid & South Tapti Contract area is necessarily to be fixed under Article 
19 of the PSC which means that Article 19.2 to 19.10 have to be applied, with the 
modification that the price has to be fix ed with reference to the price of condensate and 
not of crude oil‟ also broadly conforms with the interpretation of ONGC. Taking into 
consideration the various views of the expert bodies and also given the fact that there is 
no separate pricing mechanism f or condensate in the PSC, the Committee feel that 
condensate produced from Tapti Gas field (as defined in article 1.18) could not have 
been valued other than in accordance with Article 19.11.   

 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Through settlement agreement ONGC is valuing „condensate‟ as per provision of 
Article 19.11 as mentioned above which is in compliance with the observation of 
committee. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
In view of COPU decision regarding applicability of Article 1 9.11 for pricing of 
Condensate, no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
Though, EIL study of 2005 concluded that condensate should be treated as gas, 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had categorically stated that EIL Report has not 
been accepted by them as it was not required as per PSC. H owever, Audit has 
contended that the Ministry had accepted EIL recommendations. The Committee, 
however, are of the view that as per PSC, „gas‟ and „condensate‟ are two different 
products with different characteristics and „one‟ cannot be treated as „the other‟. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per Article 1.18 of PSC „condensate‟ is defined as follow:- 
 
Condensate means those low vapour pressure hydrocarbons obtained from 
Natural Gas through condensation or extraction and refers solely to those hydrocarbons 
that are liquid at normal surface temperature and pressure conditions (provided that in 
the event Condensate is produced from an Oil Field and is segregated and transported 
separately to the Delivery Point, then the provisions of this Contract shall apply to  such 
Condensate as if it were Crude Oil).  Accordingly the „Gas and „Condensate‟ are two 
different products and are to be treated separately as per PSC provisions.”  
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
In view of COPU decision regar ding applicability of Article 19.11 for pricing of 
Condensate, no further remarks are offered. 

 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appears necessary. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
  What irks the Committee is that the „settlement agreement‟ in 2005 was made by 
ONGC without prior approval of the Board of Directors and without the approval of the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natu ral Gas which was the first signatory to the original 
production sharing contract. Since the „settlement agreement‟ with huge financial 
implications replaced the operational interim arrangement which had been devised at 
the instance of the Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural Gas in 1998, propriety demanded 
that prior approval of the Board of Directors and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas was taken before implementation of the „settlement agreement‟. It is regrettable 
that even the Ministry of Petroleum &  Natural Gas ignored the question of propriety in 
the matter and drew satisfaction from the fact that Panna -Mukta & Tapti JV intimated 
them of the developments expost facto .  The Committee hope that there will be no 
repetition of such lapses in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  As has been suggested by the Committee, it is assured that due care will be 
taken to avoid such lapses in future. 
 
Remarks of office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
 
In view of the assurance given by MOP&NG that due care wil l be taken to avoid 
lapses in future, no further remarks are offered. 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In view of the remarks of C&AG no further reply appear necessary. 
 
(Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(O.M. No. O-37011/9/2010-ONG-II dated 26th November, 2014) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 19 of Chapter I. 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
 
- NIL - 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi, SHANTA KUMAR 
11 March 2015 Chairperson, 
20 Phalguna1936(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 

 
Appendix-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28 th January 2015 from 1500 hrs to 1640 
hrs in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Shanta Kumar  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Lal Krishna Advani 
3.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
4.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
5.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
6.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
7.  Shri Narendra Budania 
8.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
9.  Shri C.M. Ramesh 
10.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3.  Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
Shri P.K. Mishra  - Director General (Commercial) 
WITNESSES 

MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Naved Masood Secretary 
2. Smt. Anjuly Chib Duggal Special Secretary 
3. Smt. Sibani Swain Economic Adviser 
4. Shri Amardeep Singh 
Bhatia 
Joint Secretary 
2. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   
 
(C&AG officials were then called in.) 
3. The Committee, then, considered the draft Action Taken Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-eighth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
purchase of condensate at crude oil price by ONGC and adopted the same without any 
change.   
 
(C&AG officials then withdrew.) 
 
(XXXX   XXXX   XXXX) 
 
4. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
5. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -eighth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings on “ Purchase of Condensate at Crude Oil Price by ONGC 
based on Audit Para No. 13.5.1 of C&AG‟s Report No. 9 of 2009-10”. 
 
 
I Total number of Recommendations  07 
lI Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7]  
 
Percentage of total  
07 
 
 
 100% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government‟s replies          
  
Nil  
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Nil 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited.  
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 