CPU. No. 985 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
UNAUTHORIZED WITHDRAWAL FROM THE ESCROW ACCOUNT HELD IN 
A FIDUCIARY CAPACITY ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY 
MUMBAI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PRIVATE LIMITED 
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 2.5 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 3 OF 2011-12] 
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendati ons contained in the 
Thirtieth Report of the Committee on Public Underta kings (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Unauthorized withdrawal from the Escrow A ccount held in a 
fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of I ndia by Mumbai 
International Airport (P) Limited) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 5 

CONTENTS 
 
  Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION  
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect o f 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
 
APPENDIX  
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting 
 
 
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Thirtieth Report of COPU on AAI - 
Unauthorized withdrawal from the escrow 
account held in fiduciary capacity on behalf of the  
Government of India by MIAL based on Para 2.5 
of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011-12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014 – 2015) 
 
Chairperson  
 
   
Shri Shanta Kumar  
 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2.  Shri L. K. Advani 
3.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
4.  Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
5.  Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
6.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu 
9.  Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
10.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
11.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
12.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
13.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
15.  Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. 
  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.   Shri Narendra Budania 
18.   Shri Majeed Memon 
19.   Shri Muthukaruppan 
20.   Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
21.   Shri C. M. Ramesh 
22.   Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri M.C. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertaking s having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, present this 
Fifth Report on action taken by the Government on t he Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report o f the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Airports Auth ority of India Limited - 
Unauthorized withdrawal from the escrow account hel d in a fiduciary capacity on 
behalf of the Government of India by Mumbai Interna tional Airport (P) Limited 
based on Para No. 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2011-12. 
 
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 10 February, 2014 and 11 February, 2 014 respectively.  Replies 
of the Government to the Observations / Recommendat ions contained in the 
Report were received on 12 January 2015.  The draft Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 2 4 April 2015. The Minutes of 
the Sitting are given in Appendix-I.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on  the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  SHANTA KUMAR              
27 April 2015  Chairperson,  
7 Vaisakha, 1937(S)  Committee on Public Undertakings.  
 

REPORT  
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the Action  Taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations co ntained in the Thirtieth 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (15 
th  Lok Sabha) on "Airports 
Authority of India Limited - Unauthorized withdrawa l from the escrow account 
held in fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Governm ent of India by Mumbai 
International Airports (P) Limited”  based on Para 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 of   
2011-12 which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid o n the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 10 February 2014. 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the G overnment in respect of 
all the seven  Observations/ Recommendations contai ned in the Report.  These 
have been categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been acc epted by the 
Government (Chapter-II) 
Sl. Nos. 6                  (Total 1) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committ ee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: (Chapter-III) 
                    (NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of wh ich replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: (Chapter-IV) 
Sl. Nos.1, 2 and 5                  (Total 3) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of whi ch final replies of the 
Government is still awaited: (Chapter-V)    
Sl. No. 3, 4 and 7      (Total 3) 
  
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies on the O bservations / 
Recommendations to which interim replies have been furnished and also 
response to their comments in Chapter I of the Repo rt should be furnished to 
them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action take n by the Government on 
some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
  
 

 
 Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
5. Noting unauthorized withdrawal from the escrow a ccount held in fiduciary 
capacity on behalf of the Government of India by Mu mbai International Airports 
Limited, the Committee in their Thirtieth Report have observed as follows: 
 
 “The Committee note that as per Rule 88 of the Air craft Rules 1937, the 
 licensee of an airport operator is entitled to col lect a levy called Passenger 
Service Fee (PSF) from the embarking passengers at a rate specified by 
the Central Government. The licensee is allowed to retain a fixed part of 
PSF for facilitation. The licensee is also liable to pay a fixed part of this Fee 
to a security agency designated by the Central Gove rnment for providing 
security at the airport. The Order issued by the Mi nistry of Civil Aviation on 
09 May, 2006 under Rule 88 clearly stipulates that PSF is required to be 
deposited in an Escrow Account which would be opera ted by the 
concerned airport operator in fiduciary capacity an d would be utilized for 
payment to Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) deployed at the Airport. 
Any balance amount is to be remitted by the airport  operator to Airports 
Authority of India for being utilized for payment to CISF at other airports. As 
per the said Order, the airport operator was suppos ed to charge Rs. 200 
per passenger as PSF. Out of this, an amount Rs. 70 was to be retained by 
the airport operator and the remaining Rs. 130 was to be deposited in the 
Escrow Account for being paid to CISF. The Audit sc rutiny has, however, 
revealed that Mumbai International Airport (P) Limi ted (MIAL) which 
operates the Chhatrapati Shivaji Mumbai Internation al Airport (CSI Airport) 
w.e.f. 3 May, 2006 has met expenses of Rs. 14.21 Cr . relating to 
consultancy and other professional charges (Rs. 1.8 7 Cr.) and deployment 
of private security agencies (Rs. 12.34 Cr.) from t he PSF (SC) Escrow 
Account during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 in vio lation of various 
orders/instructions by the Government of India rega rding operation of PSF 
(SC) Escrow Account. Further, MIAL also purchased a n X-ray screening 
machine costing Rs. 1.01 Cr. in 2008-09 out of PSF (SC) Escrow Account 
for screening of export cargo. Moreover, the income  earned by MIAL by 
offering the use of this cargo screening machine to airlines and their agents 
was in violation of rules and regulations not credi ted to PSF (SC) Account. 
Audit observed that in view of the Government of In dia’s orders and 
clarifications, withdrawal of the entire amount of Rs. 15.22 Cr. from the 
PSF (SC) Escrow Account by MIAL during the two year s 2007-08 and 
2008-09 was not only in violation of the Government ’s orders prescribing 
the items on which moneys from PSF (SC) Escrow Acco unt could be spent 
but also a loss to the Government/AAI since any sur plus in the PSF (SC) 
Escrow Account should be ultimately transferred to the AAI by the Airport 
operator for being utilised for expenditure on security at other airports”.  
 
 

6. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their action t aken reply have stated as 
follows: 
 
• Passenger Service Fee is a Govt. levy which is bei ng collected 
from each  embarking passenger at Rs. 200/-.  PSF h as two 
components, viz., PSF  (Security Component) of Rs. 130/- and PSF 
(Facilitation Component) of  Rs. 70/-.  
 
• At the time when privatization of airports was goi ng on in the 
Country, MoCA felt it necessary to define the scope  of PSF funds 
collection and utilization. The order dated 09.05.2 006 issued subsequently  
stipulated that AAI, JVC or a private operator coul d collect PSF(SC) at 
their airports. It was further stipulated that for this purpose an escrow 
account would be opened wherever the airport operat or is a JVC or 
private operator ( not AAI ) and that this account would be operated by the 
airport operator. Rs. 130/- of the PSF collected pe r passenger would be 
deposited in the Escrow account by the airport oper ators for payments to 
be made to CISF. In case any amounts remains surplu s the same will be 
transferred to AAI by the airport operator. 
 
• Subsequently, the Airport Operators approached thi s Ministry with a 
request to clarify the scope of PSF utilization. In  response Ministry vide 
order dated 20.06.2007, clarified that the security component of PSF is not 
a regular revenue income of an airport operator. PS F (SC) collected at an 
airport operated by a JVC/Pvt. Operator will utilize at the airport concerned 
only to meet the security related expenses of that airport and that AAI will 
however be considered a single licensee in respect of its airports for this 
purpose with liberty to pool the PSF(SC) collection s from such airports 
and use the same for meeting the security related e xpenses at any of its 
airports. 
 
• Later on, it was found necessary to properly defin e the scope of 
collection, utilization and management of Passenger Service Fee (Security 
Component) funds. Hence, Ministry vide order dated 19.01.2009 
  brought 
out the detailed guidelines in the form of Standard  Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) for PSF (SC) utilization and management. Som e of the relevant 
paras of this order are reproduced below for perusal: 
 
i. Para 3 (ii) (b) states that PSF would be utilise d to pay for security related 
expenses to CISF. 
ii. Para 4.14 states that Annual Accounts should be  submitted by the airport 
operator to the MoCA as well as CAG within 3 months  of the close of the 
financial year. 
iii. Para 5.1 states that Audit of PSF (SC) account s shall be conducted by 
CAG on annual basis or at such periodicity as may b e decided by the 
CAG. 

iv. Para 5.3 states that the audit observations wil l be forwarded to 
JVC/Private Operators for comments and comments of JVC/Private  
Operator would be forwarded by MOCA to C&AG after due vetting. 
v. Para 6.2 states that JVC/Private Operator shall not be entitled to any 
administrative expenses etc. on account of PSF (SC). 
 
 In view of the foregoing paras, it could be seen t hat owing to 
absence of specific guidelines in respect of C&AG a udit, audit of MIAL 
could not be carried out for the period 2006 to 200 9. CAG carried out its 
very first audit of MIAL’s PSF escrow account in th e year 2010 for an 
accumulated period of 3 years i.e. 2006 to 2009.  
 
• The observations made by the C&AG (in its first au dit) were 
received in the month of June, 2010 by this Ministr y.  Ministry for the first 
time came to know about mis-utilization of PSF (SC)  funds by MIAL for 
deployment of private security guards, hiring techn ical consultancy and 
purchase of Cargo X-ray security equipment. The aud it observations were 
accordingly taken up with MIAL to furnish its comme nts over C&AG 
observations. The replies furnished by MIAL were ex amined at length. 
MIAL in response to these observations had stated t hat the deployment of 
private security guards was made due to the shortag e of CISF manpower.  
Claims of MIAL were thereafter examined and it beca me clear that 
shortage of CISF manpower was never an issue at the airport. 
 
• Meanwhile, Ministry vide order dated 08.01.2010 ha d clarified the 
following aspects: 
 
a) Para 3(v): The permissible expenditure out of PS F (SC) shall not 
include the expenditure on any other security staff  or other administrative 
setup created/engaged by the airport operator 
  
b) Para (ii) of Annexure B: if expenditure on scree ning items including 
X-ray machines, multi view X-ray machine on inline baggage system is 
included in the scope of expenditure to be met out of PSF (SC), airport 
operator shall not be allowed to charge any hiring fees from concerned 
agencies, viz airlines, cargo etc. for the same. If  the airport operator is 
charging any hiring fees/charges for use of screeni ng equipment from the 
airlines, cargo agents etc. then the expenditure re lating to the installation 
and use of the screening equipment shall not be inc luded in the scope of 
the expenditure to be met out of PSF (SC). In any c ase the cost of entire 
in-line baggage security system per se  is not eligible to be debited to the 
PSF (SC) funds. 
 
 In view of these guidelines, MIAL was directed to reverse the entire 
expenditure on above items back to the PSF (SC) escrow account. 
 

• In view of these guidelines MIAL was directed vide  this Ministry’s 
communications dated 19.08.2010, 25.10.2010, 30.11. 2010, 09.01.2012, 
27.02.2012, 17.05.2012, 18.05.2012, 22.05.2012, 06. 06.2012, 
14.09.2012, 12.12.2012 & 26.12.2012 to comply with observations of audit 
and to reverse the ineligible expenditure, which fo rmed part of the project 
cost, to the PSF (SC) escrow account. Therefore, it  can be concluded that 
Ministry has not remained silent, but took appropri ate measures to get the 
ineligible expenditure reversed to the PSF (SC) esc row account.  At the 
constant monitoring and directions of the Ministry,  MIAL reversed funds to 
the tune of Rs.15.21 Cr. for the period FYs 2006-09 , the details of which 
are given below:- 
 
i. Private Security Guard expenditure   - Rs. 12.34  Cr. 
ii. Technical Consultancy                       - R s. 1.87 Cr.  
iii. Cargo X ray screening machine        - Rs. 1.00 Cr. 
 
 MIAL had vide its letter dated 20.03.2013 addresse d to this Ministry 
had confirmed that they had deposited Rs.15,21,85,0 97.72 to PSF(SC) 
account No.004620110000536 on 25.02.2013. It may ho wever be added 
that the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi is yet to pass  its final order in the 
matter of W.P. No.4242/2012 wherein MIAL has challenged reversal of the 
aforesaid amount along with its interest component.   The entire matter is 
presently sub judice . The interest component is yet to be reversed by 
MIAL. MOCA is trying get the case heard early. 
 
7. The vetted remarks of the office of C&AG on the reply of the Government 
are as follows: 
 
 
1. Mumbai International Airport was handed over to the private operator with 
effect from 3 
 May, 2006. The private operator was handling the PS F (SC) 
funds and government revenue since then. However, S tandard Operating 
Procedure governing the accounts and audit of these  funds was issued by 
MoCA in January, 2009. 
 
 
2. Though Ministry directed MIAL to get the ineligi ble expenditure of Rs.15.21 
crore along with interest reversed to PSF (SC) in A ugust 2010 itself, MIAL 
has reversed the fund only in February, 2013. It to ok almost 3 years for MIAL 
to act on the directions of Ministry. However the I nterest element still remains 
to be paid by MIAL. 
 
The matter is presently sub-judice.  
 
The amount of Rs.15.21 crore pertains to the period  2007-08 and 2008-09. 
However, instances of utilization of PSF (SC) funds  by MIAL for expenditure 

of capital and instructions of MOCA governing utili zation of these funds 
continued beyond 2008-09. Audit has commented in th is regard on the 
accounts of PSF (SC) funds maintained by MIAL for t he years 2009-10, 
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 and such comments have  been issued to 
MOCA. 
 
 Similarly, instances of incurring of such expenses  from PSF (SC) funds by 
other two private airport operators viz. DIAL and H IAL beyond 2008-09 in 
deviation of SOP/instructions of MOCA have also bee n reported to MOCA in the 
form of comments of C&AG on the PSF (SC) accounts o f the respective years 
maintained by these two private operators.  
 
8. In their response to the above mentioned remarks  of the C&AG, the 
Ministry stated as follows: 
 
 "Factual position, hence need no further comments.   It is however 
clarified in this regard that the process of workin g out modalities of 
accounting / audit procedure in respect of PSF (SC)  funds were started in 
the year 2006 itself.  They were finalized and circ ulated in January, 2009 
after consultation with Ministry of Law and with th e approval of the then 
Minister of Civil Aviation. 
 
 As has already been mentioned in the reply of the Ministry, the 
matter is currently sub judice .  Further action will be taken in the matter in 
accordance with directions, if any, of Hon’ble Court. 
 
 The observations received from the office of C&AG are duly 
examined in this Ministry and suitable directions a re issued to the airport 
operators concerned, including MIAL to reverse expe nditure wherever 
they been incurred unauthorisedly.  Besides, the or der dated 18.02.2014 
issued by this Ministry has issued directions to al l airport operators, 
including MIAL, to reverse entire capital expenditu re incurred out of PSF 
(SC) funds since their inception whether on securit y equipment or on 
accommodation of CISF to the respective PSF (SC) es crow accounts 
along with applicable interest which could have bee n earned in normal 
course.  This order has been challenged by several airport operators, 
including MIAL, in high courts of their respective zones.  In those cases, 
the Hon’ble High Courts have either stayed the said  order or ordered 
status quo (as in the case of the court case filed by MIAL)." 
 
 
9.  The  Committee are appalled to note that despite several  
communications issued by the Ministry of Civil Avia tion (MoCA) between 
August, 2010 to December, 2012 directing MIAL to ge t the ineligible 
expenditure of Rs. 15.21 crore along with interest reversed to PSF (SC), 
MIAL has reversed the fund that too excluding the i nterest amount in 

February, 2013 that took almost three years for MIA L to comply with the 
directives of the MoCA, which speaks volume about t he ineffective 
monitoring by the Ministry.  Obviously Ministry was  merely content with 
sending communications during the period from Augus t 2010 to December 
2012, but in effect remained a mute spectator to th e callous and indifferent 
attitude of MIAL during this period. The Committee desire that a detailed 
account of reasons for inordinate delay in complian ce of MIAL to the 
Ministry’s direction for reversion of the ineligibl e expenditure of Rs.15.21 
crore alongwith interest be furnished to the Commit tee without any loss of 
time.  Now, when the matter is sub-judice, the Comm ittee desire that all out  
efforts be made by MoCA to get the legal process ex pedited and to ensure 
early recovery of the interest amount.  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
10. With regard to administrative Ministry’s role i n the administration and 
regulation of the PSF Escrow Account by the airport  operator in fiduciary 
capacity, the Committee in their Report recommended as follows:  
 
 "The Committee’s examination revealed that while t he airport 
operator is to be squarely blamed for these highly irregular withdrawals 
through deliberate misinterpretation of the law, ru les and regulations and 
basic facts, from an Escrow Account, which it was o perating in fiduciary 
capacity, the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airpor ts Authority of India by 
remaining mute spectators for years together have c ontributed no less to 
these irregularities. This, notwithstanding the fac t that the administration 
and regulation of the PSF Escrow Account held by th e airport operator in 
fiduciary capacity is governed by Standard Operatin g Procedure (SOPs) 
and other orders issued by the Government on the su bject from time to 
time, and is also subjected to internal audit, none  of these checks and 
balances was made use of by the Government to preve nt unauthorized 
withdrawals from PSF (SC) Account by MIAL. Worse, a s per Operation, 
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), though  AAI is 
empowered to seek such other report/information in relation to the airport 
operations it failed to obtain information on unaut horized withdrawal of 
funds by MIAL and consequently, it did not take any  action and let MIAL 
have a complete and unfettered say in the operation of PSF (SC) Account. 
In so far as the administrative Ministry’s role is concerned, the admission 
of the Secretary, Civil Aviation during evidence be fore the Committee “We 
have made specific provision that this account shou ld be audited by the 
C&AG and also by the internal audit. We were all th e while under the 
impression that these two audit mechanisms are out in place” speaks 
volumes about the quality and extent of oversight e xercised by the 
Ministry to ensure that PSF funds were utilized in accordance with the 
extant practices and SOPs".  

 
11. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their action taken reply have stated as 
follows: 
 
" As has been explained in the preceding para of re ply, MIAL was 
regularly given directions through various communic ations to comply with 
observations of audit and to reverse the ineligible  expenditure which forms 
the part of the project cost to the PSF (SC) escrow  account. Therefore, it 
can be concluded that Ministry took all necessary m easures to comply 
with audit observations and to recover the illegible expenditure from MIAL. 
 
• It is again clarified at this juncture that at the  time of privatization of 
airports no definitive Standard Operating Procedure  for collection, 
management and utilization of PSF (SC) funds was in  place.  This could 
have been a contributing factor for mis-utilization  of PSF (SC) funds by 
airport operators.  
 
• As a corrective measure, this Ministry has brought  in suitable 
amendments in Rule 88 of Aircraft Rules, 1937 on 5 
th  March, 2014 by way 
of inserting a new Rule “88A”, relevant extracts as  below, whereby 
Private/JV Airport Operators are no longer entitled  to collect PSF (SC) 
collections.   
 
“88A. Aviation security fees - (1) The Central Gove rnment, or any other 
authority designated by it in its behalf, may levy and collect aviation 
security fees on:  
  
(a) embarking passengers;  
(b) cargo transported out of an airport;  
(c) departing private aircrafts of general aviation;  
(d) chartered aircraft operations; and  
(e) any other dedicated civil aviation operations,  
 
at such rate or rates, as the Central Government ma y specify from time to 
time, and different  
rates may be specified for different categories spe cified herein, to meet 
the expenditure on aviation security.  
 
The aviation security fee shall be regulated and ut ilized in the manner as 
may be specified by the Central Government”.  
 
• This Ministry is in the process of revising/re-dra fting Standard 
Operating Procedure so as to facilitate implementat ion of the provisions of 
the newly inserted Rule 88A.  This Ministry is prop osing therein to 
designate AAI as a single authority to collect and pool Aviation Security 
Fee and to settle revenue expenses of Aviation Secu rity Group/APSU 

deployed at the airports. Once this SOP comes into effect, revenue 
expenditure of Aviation Security Group (including C ISF) so specified 
therein, will be met out of security fee.  
 
12. Remarks of the office of the C&AG on the reply of the Government are as 
follows: 
  
"The Airports were privatized in May, 2006 and PSF account was held by 
private operator in fiduciary capacity but the Mini stry has issued the SOP 
in January, 2009 based on which C&AG Audit was cond ucted for three 
years i.e. from 2006 to 2009 for the first time.   Revision to the SOP in line 
with the revisions of the newly inserted Rule 88A o f the Aircraft Rules is 
still under process in the Ministry." 
 
13. In response to the aforesaid remarks of the C&A G the Ministry have 
stated as follows: 
 
"Revision of SoP is under active consideration in t he Ministry so as to 
define modalities with respect of collection, utili zation. and management of 
the Fee to be levied in accordance with Rule 88A..  Draft SoP in this 
regard has been circulated for the purpose of consu ltation with few central 
Ministries/ Departments and the stakeholders concer ned such as Airport 
Operators." 
 
14.  The Committee are surprised to note that while the  Airports were 
privatized way back in May, 2006 and PSF account wa s held by private 
operator in fiduciary capacity, the Ministry issued  the SOP  which  governs 
the  administration  and regulation of the PSF Escr ow Account only in 
January 2009, based on which the C&AG conducted aud it of the Accounts 
of MIAL in June, 2010 for three years i.e. from 200 6 to 2009 for the first time 
and only thereafter could find the irregularities. In this entire process, what 
has been confounding to the Committee is the delay in issuing the SOPs by 
the Ministry.  The Committee are of the considered view that  had the  
Ministry  appreciated  the urgent need for finalizi ng and issuing of  the SOP  
in 2006 itself it would have facilitated early audi t by C&AG thereby 
detecting  unauthorized withdrawals from PSF (SC) A ccount by MIAL and 
thus would have helped prevent irregular payments f rom the Escrow 
account. The Committee understand that as a correct ive measure, the 
Ministry have now brought in suitable amendments in  Rule 88 of Aircraft 
Rules, 1937 on 5 th  March, 2014 by way of inserting a new Rule “88A”, 
whereby Private/JV Airport Operators are no longer entitled to collect PSF 
(SC) collections and  the revision of SoP  in line with the provisions of the 
newly inserted Rule 88A of the Aircraft Rules is un der active consideration 
in the Ministry. While acknowledging that the Minis try have taken a right 
move albeit belatedly, the Committee trust that dra ft SoP, which is learnt to 
have been circulated for the purpose of consultatio n with some central 

Ministries/ Departments and the stakeholders concer ned would be finalized 
within a stipulated timeframe so that the new Rule 88 A may be inserted in 
the Aircraft Rules, 1937 with due promptitude.  The Committee would like to 
be informed of the outcome in this regard.  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
15. On the process of debiting the cost of capital security items in PSF (SC) 
Escrow Account, the Committee had recommended as follows: 
  
"Audit pointed out that purchase of an X-ray screen ing machine by MIAL 
costing Rs. 1.01 Cr in 2008-09 out of PSF (SC) acco unt for screening of 
export cargo and non-crediting the income earned by  MIAL by offering the 
use of cargo screening machine to airlines and thei r agents to PSF (SC) 
Escrow Account was in clear violation of MOCA clari fication issued in 
January 2010. The Civil Aviation Secretary admitted before the Committee 
that the expenditure should have been capitalized a nd debited to the 
project cost itself and not doing so and debiting i t to PSF is definitely a 
violation. To obviate recurrence of such lapses, th e Ministry of Civil 
Aviation have stated that based on the C&AG observa tion and also 
considering the OMDA obligations, they are in the p rocess of withdrawing 
the said permission to meet the cost of capital ite ms (Security) from PSF 
(SC) funds. The Committee desire that Government sh ould take a final 
decision in the matter with due promptitude so that  process of debiting the 
cost of capital security items in PSF (SC) Escrow A ccount is discontinued 
forthwith. The Committee further desire that the Mi nistry should inquire 
into as to how in the first instance the instant in structions which were in 
the breach of OMDA were issued and share with the C ommittee the 
inquiry report and action taken thereon.   
 
16. The Ministry of Civil aviation in their action taken reply on the above 
recommendation have stated as follows: 
 
"The issue of meeting out the cost of security equi pment out of PSF (SC) 
has been reviewed in this Ministry in the light of relevant provisions of 
OMDA/SSA & Concession agreement and with the approv al of Hon’ble 
Minister of Civil Aviation Ministry vide its order dated 18.02.2014 has 
issued directions to all airport operators includin g MIAL to reverse entire 
capital expenditure incurred out of PSF (SC) funds since their inception 
whether on security equipment or on accommodation o f CISF to the PSF 
(SC) escrow account. MIAL has already reversed the amount of Rs. 1.01 
Cr during February, 2013." 
 
 
 

17. The office of C&AG in their vetted remarks on t he reply of the Government 
stated as follows: 
 
"The amount of Rs, 1.01 crore reversed by MIAL form s part of the amount 
of Rs.15.21 crore pointed out by the Ministry for r eversal in August, 2010. 
The amount of Rs.1.01 crore was incurred towards co st of procurement of 
X ray machines by MIAL. The amount of Rs. 15.21 cro re does not 
constitute entire capital expenditure incurred by M IAL from PSF (SC) 
account in deviation of SOP/instructions governing utilization of PSF(SC) 
funds. The direction of Ministry of 18.02.2014 are yet to be complied with 
by MIAL. These directions are silent on reversal of  expenditure of revenue 
nature."  
 
18. The Ministry in their response to the Audit rem arks stated as follows:  
  
"The observations received from the office of C&AG are duly examined in 
this Ministry and suitable directions are issued to  the airport operators 
concerned, including MIAL to reverse expenditure wh erever they been 
incurred unauthorisedly.  Necessary steps will also  be taken by the 
Ministry to get the unauthorized revenue expenditur e, if any, of airport 
operators reversed back into the respective Escrow Accounts." 
 
19. The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have s tated that MIAL has 
already reversed the amount of Rs. 1.01 crore durin g February 2013.  They 
have also stated that the issue of meeting out the cost of security 
equipment out of PSF(SC) has been reviewed by them and the Ministry vide 
their order dated 18 February 2014 have issued dire ction to all airport 
operators including MIAL to reverse entire capital expenditure incurred out 
of PSF(SC) funds.  However, the Committee find that  the above direction of 
the Ministry is yet to be complied with by MIAL.  M oreover, these directions 
are also silent on reversal of expenditure of reven ue nature.  The Ministry 
have now assured to take necessary steps to get the  unauthorised revenue 
expenditure, if any, of airport operators reversed back into the respective 
Escrow Accounts.  In view of the assurance given by  the Ministry, the 
Committee hope that the Ministry will make all out efforts to see that their 
directions be complied with by all airport operator s including MIAL in letter 
and spirit and ensure that the component of revenue  expenditure are 
credited back to the Escrow Account.  
 
  

CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
 The Committee note that MoCA have also decided to reverse the entire 
cost of capital security items already debited by t he operators including AAI to 
PSF (SC) Escrow Account. The Cost of Capex being re versed here would be 
taken in to project cost and will be considered for  additional tariff fixation by 
AERA. The Committee, however, deprecate the marked reluctance of the 
Ministry about the changes in tariff claims of MIAL  for the past period as it would 
supposedly inconvenience MIAL and lead to accountin g complications based on 
which statutory liabilities like Income Tax, etc. a re discharged. They, therefore, 
strongly recommended that the airport operator shou ld be asked to pay all its 
liabilities to various government agencies for the entire period of it indulging in 
unauthorized withdrawals from PSF (SC) Escrow Account.   
 
Reply of the Government 
    
 It may be relevant to quote Ministry’s order No. A V.13024/03/2011-AS 
(Pt.I) dated 18.02.2014 vide which all airport oper ators have been directed to 
reverse the entire capital expenditure since their takeover together with the 
interest that would have accrued in normal course h ad the said amount not been 
debited against the PSF (SC) escrow account, back t o the respective escrow 
accounts within a period of one month.  It has also  been made clear in the said 
order that PSF (SC) funds are meant only for meetin g revenue expenditure on 
deployment of CISF and other security forces at the airports.  
 
 As per relevant provisions of OMDA/Concession agre ement and State 
Support agreement airport operators are allowed to book the cost of capital items 
as project cost and to claim the same in the form o f tariff through AERA. It is the 
liability of an airport operator to do the same. 
 
 In order to plug the existing deficiencies, this M inistry has brought in 
suitable amendments in Rule 88 of Aircraft Rules, 1 937 on 5th March, 2014 by 
way of inserting a new Rule “88A”, whereby Private/ JV Airport Operators are no 
longer entitled to collect PSF (SC) collections.  A lso, a new Standard Operating 
Procedure is being drafted in regard to implementat ion of the provisions of Rule 
88A wherein it has been proposed/recommended to des ignate Airports Authority 
of India as a single authority to collect and settl e revenue expenses of Aviation 
Security Group/APSU so deployed at the airports in the Country. Once this SOP 
comes in to force, only  specified expenditure of Aviation Security Group 
(including CISF) will be met out of security fee.  
 

Remarks of the office of C&AG 
 
 The Ministry’s order No.AV.13024/03/2011-AS (P11) dated 18.02.2014 
(annexure – I) has been noted.  
 
 Though Rule 88A was inserted in March, 2014 in Air craft Rules, 1937 in 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, the revised SOP to designate Airports Authority of India as 
a single authority to collect and settle revenue ex penses of Aviation security 
Group IAPSU so deployed at the airports in the Coun try is awaited from the 
Ministry (October, 2014), 
 
 Evidence given by MOCA to COPU on 6 
th  December, 2012 also refers in 
this regard.  
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
 Insertion of new Rule88A has introduced the concep t of collection of 
Aviation Security Fee (ASF) in place of PSF(SC).  T his Rule has widened the 
scope of collection of ASF.  Presently, modalities of collection of ASF (including 
creation of a dedicated Personal Deposit Account (P DA) for pooling in the 
collections, its utilization and management are bei ng worked out by way of 
revising the existing SoP for PSF(SC).  This Minist ry is vigorously pursuing the 
matter of revision of SoP.   
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 

 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
                               
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
       
 
 The Committee note that as per Rule 88 of the Airc raft Rules 1937, the 
licensee of an airport operator is entitled to coll ect a levy called Passenger 
Service Fee (PSF) from the embarking passengers at a rate specified by the 
Central Government. The licensee is allowed to reta in a fixed part of PSF for 
facilitation. The licensee is also liable to pay a fixed part of this Fee to a security 
agency designated by the Central Government for pro viding security at the 
airport. The Order issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 09 May, 2006 under 
Rule 88 clearly stipulates that PSF is required to be deposited in an Escrow 
Account which would be operated by the concerned ai rport operator in fiduciary 
capacity and would be utilized for payment to Centr al Industrial Security Force 
(CISF) deployed at the Airport. Any balance amount is to be remitted by the 
airport operator to Airports Authority of India for  being utilized for payment to 
CISF at other airports. As per the said Order, the airport operator was supposed 
to charge Rs. 200 per passenger as PSF. Out of this , an amount Rs. 70 was to 
be retained by the airport operator and the remaini ng Rs. 130 was to be 
deposited in the Escrow Account for being paid to C ISF. The Audit scrutiny has, 
however, revealed that Mumbai International Airport  Private Limited (MIAL) 
which operates the Chhatrapati Shivaji Mumbai Inter national Airport (CSI 
Airport) w.e.f. 3 May, 2006 has met expenses of Rs.  14.21 Cr. relating to 
consultancy and other professional charges (Rs. 1.8 7 Cr.) and deployment of 
private security agencies (Rs. 12.34 Cr.) from the PSF (SC) Escrow Account 
during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 in violation v arious orders/instructions by 
the Government of India regarding operation of PSF (SC) Escrow Account. 
Further, MIAL also purchased an X-ray screening mac hine costing Rs. 1.01 Cr. 
in 2008-09 out of PSF (SC) Escrow Account for scree ning of export cargo. 
Moreover, the income earned by MIAL by offering the  use of this cargo 
screening machine to airlines and their agents was in violation of rules and 
regulations not credited to PSF (SC) Account. Audit  observed that in view of the 
Government of India’s orders and clarifications, wi thdrawal of the entire amount 
of Rs. 15.22 Cr. from the PSF (SC) Escrow Account b y MIAL during the two 
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 was not only in violation of the Government’s orders 
prescribing the items on which moneys from PSF (SC) Escrow Account could be 
spent but also a loss to the Government/AAI since a ny surplus in the PSF (SC) 
Escrow Account should be ultimately transferred to the AAI by the Airport 
operator for being utilised for expenditure on security at other airports”.  

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Passenger Service Fee is a Govt. levy which is bei ng collected from each 
embarking passenger at Rs. 200/-.  PSF has two comp onents, viz., PSF 
(Security Component) of Rs. 130/- and PSF (Facilitation Component) of Rs. 70/-.  
 
• At the time when privatization of airports was goi ng on in the Country, 
MoCA felt it necessary to define the scope of PSF funds collection and utilization. 
The order dated 09.05.2006 
 issued subsequently  stipulated that AAI, JVC or a 
private operator could collect PSF(SC) at their air ports. It was further stipulated 
that for this purpose an escrow account would be op ened wherever the airport 
operator is a JVC or private operator ( not AAI ) and that this account would be 
operated by the airport operator. Rs. 130/- of the PSF collected per passenger 
would be deposited in the Escrow account by the air port operators for payments 
to be made to CISF. In case any amounts remains sur plus the same will be 
transferred to AAI by the airport operator. 
 
• Subsequently, the Airport Operators approached thi s Ministry with a 
request to clarify the scope of PSF utilization. In  response Ministry vide order 
dated 20.06.2007 clarified that the security compon ent of PSF is not a regular 
revenue income of an airport operator. PSF (SC) col lected at an airport operated 
by a JVC/Pvt. Operator will utilize at the airport concerned only to meet the 
security related expenses of that airport and that AAI will however be considered 
a single licensee in respect of its airports for th is purpose with liberty to pool the 
PSF(SC) collections from such airports and use the same for meeting the 
security related expenses at any of its airports. 
 
• Later on, it was found necessary to properly defin e the scope of collection, 
utilization and management of Passenger Service Fee  (Security Component) 
funds. Hence, Ministry vide order dated 19.01.2009 
 brought out the detailed 
guidelines in the form of Standard Operating Proced ures (SOPs) for PSF (SC) 
utilization and management. Some of the relevant pa ras of this order are 
reproduced below for perusal: 
 
vi. Para 3 (ii) (b) states that PSF would be utilis ed to pay for security related 
expenses to CISF. 
vii. Para 4.14 states that Annual Accounts should b e submitted by the airport 
operator to the MoCA as well as CAG within 3 months  of the close of the 
financial year. 
viii. Para 5.1 states that Audit of PSF (SC) accoun ts shall be conducted by CAG on 
annual basis or at such periodicity as may be decided by the CAG. 
ix. Para 5.3 states that the audit observations wil l be forwarded to JVC/Private 
Operators for comments and comments of JVC/Private  Operator would be 
forwarded by MOCA to C&AG after due vetting. 

x. Para 6.2 states that JVC/Private Operator shall not be entitled to any 
administrative expenses etc. on account of PSF (SC). 
 
 In view of the foregoing paras, it could be seen t hat owing to absence of 
specific guidelines in respect of C&AG audit, audit  of MIAL could not be carried 
out for the period 2006 to 2009. CAG carried out it s very first audit of MIAL’s PSF 
escrow account in the year 2010 for an accumulated period of 3 years i.e. 2006 
to 2009.  
 
• The observations made by the C&AG (in its first au dit) were received in 
the month of June, 2010 
 by this Ministry.  Ministry for the first time cam e to know 
about mis-utilization of PSF (SC) funds by MIAL for  deployment of private 
security guards, hiring technical consultancy and p urchase of Cargo X-ray 
security equipment. The audit observations were acc ordingly taken up with MIAL 
to furnish its comments over C&AG observations. The  replies furnished by MIAL 
were examined at length. MIAL in response to these observations had stated that 
the deployment of private security guards was made due to the shortage of CISF 
manpower.  Claims of MIAL were thereafter examined and it became clear that 
shortage of CISF manpower was never an issue at the airport. 
 
• Meanwhile, Ministry vide order dated 08.01.2010 
 had clarified the 
following aspects: 
•  
c) Para 3(v): The permissible expenditure out of PS F (SC) shall not include 
the expenditure on any other security staff or othe r administrative setup 
created/engaged by the airport operator 
  
d) Para (ii) of Annexure B: if expenditure on scree ning items including X-ray 
machines, multi view X-ray machine on inline baggag e system is included in the 
scope of expenditure to be met out of PSF (SC), air port operator shall not be 
allowed to charge any hiring fees from concerned ag encies, viz airlines, cargo 
etc. for the same. If the airport operator is charg ing any hiring fees/charges for 
use of screening equipment from the airlines, cargo  agents etc. then the 
expenditure relating to the installation and use of  the screening equipment shall 
not be included in the scope of the expenditure to be met out of PSF (SC). In any 
case the cost of entire in-line baggage security sy stem per se  is not eligible to be 
debited to the PSF (SC) funds. 
 
 In view of these guidelines, MIAL was directed to reverse the entire 
expenditure on above items back to the PSF (SC) escrow account. 
 
• In view of these guidelines MIAL was directed vide  this Ministry’s 
communications dated 19.08.2010, 25.10.2010, 30.11. 2010, 09.01.2012, 
27.02.2012, 17.05.2012, 18.05.2012, 22.05.2012, 06. 06.2012, 14.09.2012, 
12.12.2012 & 26.12.2012 to comply with observations  of audit and to reverse the 
ineligible expenditure, which formed part of the pr oject cost, to the PSF (SC) 

escrow account. Therefore, it can be concluded that  Ministry has not remained 
silent, but took appropriate measures to get the in eligible expenditure reversed to 
the PSF (SC) escrow account.  At the constant monit oring and directions of the 
Ministry, MIAL reversed funds to the tune of Rs.15. 21 Cr. for the period FYs 
2006-09, the details of which are given below:- 
 
iv. Private Security Guard expenditure   - Rs. 12.3 4 Cr. 
v. Technical Consultancy                       - Rs . 1.87 Cr.  
vi. Cargo X ray screening machine        - Rs. 1.00  Cr. 
 
 MIAL had vide its letter dated 20.03.2013  addressed to this Ministry had 
confirmed that they had deposited Rs.15,21,85,097.7 2 to PSF(SC) account 
No.004620110000536 on 25.02.2013. It may however be  added that the Hon’ble 
High Court of Delhi is yet to pass its final order in the matter of W.P. 
No.4242/2012 wherein MIAL has challenged reversal o f the aforesaid amount 
along with its interest component.  The entire matt er is presently sub judice . The 
interest component is yet to be reversed by MIAL. M OCA is trying get the case 
heard early. 
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
  Mumbai International Airport was handed over to t he private 
operator with effect from 3 
 May, 2006. The private operator was handling the 
PSF (SC) funds and government revenue since then. H owever, Standard 
Operating Procedure governing the accounts and audi t of these funds was 
issued by MoCA in January, 2009. 
 
 
  Though Ministry directed MIAL to get the ineligib le expenditure of 
Rs.15.21 crore along with interest reversed to PSF (SC) in August 2010 itself, 
MIAL has reversed the fund only in February, 2013. It took almost 3 years for 
MIAL to act on the directions of Ministry. However the Interest element still 
remains to be paid by MIAL. 
 
  The matter is presently sub-judice.  
 
  The amount of Rs.15.21 crore pertains to the peri od 2007-08 and 
2008-09. However, instances of utilization of PSF ( SC) funds by MIAL for 
expenditure of capital and instructions of MOCA gov erning utilization of these 
funds continued beyond 2008-09. Audit has commented  in this regard on the 
accounts of PSF (SC) funds maintained by MIAL for t he years 2009-10, 2010-11, 
2011-12 and 2012-13 and such comments have been issued to MOCA. 
 
 Similarly, instances of incurring of such expenses  from PSF (SC) funds by 
other two private airport operators viz. DIAL and H IAL beyond 2008-09 in 
deviation of SOP/instructions of MOCA have also bee n reported to MOCA in the 

form of comments of C&AG on the PSF (SC) accounts o f the respective years 
maintained by these two private operators.  
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
 Factual position, hence need no further comments.  It is however clarified 
in this regard that the process of working out moda lities of accounting / audit 
procedure in respect of PSF (SC) funds were started  in the year 2006 itself.  
They were finalized and circulated in January, 2009  after consultation with 
Ministry of Law and with the approval of the then Minister of Civil Aviation. 
 
 As has already been mentioned in the reply of the Ministry, the matter is 
currently sub judice .  Further action will be taken in the matter in ac cordance with 
directions, if any, of Hon’ble Court. 
 
 The observations received from the office of C&AG are duly examined in 
this Ministry and suitable directions are issued to  the airport operators 
concerned, including MIAL to reverse expenditure wh erever they been incurred 
unauthorisedly.  Besides, the order dated 18.02.201 4 issued by this Ministry has 
directions to all airport operators, including MIAL , to reverse entire capital 
expenditure incurred out of PSF (SC) funds since th eir inception whether on 
security equipment or on accommodation of CISF to t he respective PSF (SC) 
escrow accounts along with applicable interest whic h could have been earned in 
normal course.  This order has been challenged by s everal airport operators, 
including MIAL, in high courts of their respective zones.  In those cases, the 
Hon’ble High Courts have either stayed the said ord er or ordered status quo (as 
in the case of the court case filed by MIAL). 
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to para no 9 of this Report 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
 The Committee’s examination revealed that while th e airport operator is to 
be squarely blamed for these highly irregular withd rawals through deliberate 
misinterpretation of the law, rules and regulations  and basic facts, from an 
Escrow Account, which it was operating in fiduciary  capacity, the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Airports Authority of India by remaini ng mute spectators for years 
together have contributed no less to these irregularities. This, notwithstanding the 
fact that the administration and regulation of the PSF Escrow Account held by the 
airport operator in fiduciary capacity is governed by Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOPs) and other orders issued by the Gov ernment on the subject 
from time to time, and is also subjected to interna l audit, none of these checks 
and balances was made use of by the Government to p revent unauthorized 

withdrawals from PSF (SC) Account by MIAL. Worse, a s per Operation, 
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), though  AAI is empowered 
to seek such other report/information in relation t o the airport operations it failed 
to obtain information on unauthorized withdrawal of  funds by MIAL and 
consequently, it did not take any action and let MI AL have a complete and 
unfettered say in the operation of PSF (SC) Account . In so far as the 
administrative Ministry’s role is concerned, the ad mission of the Secretary, Civil 
Aviation during evidence before the Committee “We h ave made specific 
provision that this account should be audited by th e C&AG and also by the 
internal audit. We were all the while under the imp ression that these two audit 
mechanisms are out in place” speaks volumes about t he quality and extent of 
oversight exercised by the Ministry to ensure that PSF funds were utilized in 
accordance with the extant practices and SOPs".  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As has been explained in the preceding para of rep ly, MIAL was regularly 
given directions through various communications to comply with observations of 
audit and to reverse the ineligible expenditure whi ch forms the part of the project 
cost to the PSF (SC) escrow account. Therefore, it can be concluded that 
Ministry took all necessary measures to comply with  audit observations and to 
recover the illegible expenditure from MIAL. 
 
• It is again clarified at this juncture that at the  time of privatization of 
airports no definitive Standard Operating Procedure  for collection, management 
and utilization of PSF (SC) funds was in place.  Th is could have been a 
contributing factor for mis-utilization of PSF (SC) funds by airport operators.  
 
• As a corrective measure, this Ministry has brought  in suitable 
amendments in Rule 88 of Aircraft Rules, 1937 on 5 
th  March, 2014 by way of 
inserting a new Rule “88A”, relevant extracts as be low, whereby Private/JV 
Airport Operators are no longer entitled to collect PSF (SC) collections.   
 
“88A. Aviation security fees - (1) The Central Gove rnment, or any other authority 
designated by it in its behalf, may levy and collect aviation security fees on:  
  
(a) embarking passengers;  
(b) cargo transported out of an airport;  
(c) departing private aircrafts of general aviation;  
(d) chartered aircraft operations; and  
(e) any other dedicated civil aviation operations,  
 
at such rate or rates, as the Central Government ma y specify from time to time, 
and different rates may be specified for different categories specified herein, to 
meet the expenditure on aviation security.  The avi ation security fee shall be 

regulated and utilized in the manner as may be spec ified by the Central 
Government”.  
 
• This Ministry is in the process of revising/re-dra fting Standard Operating 
Procedure so as to facilitate implementation of the  provisions of the newly 
inserted Rule 88A.  This Ministry is proposing ther ein to designate AAI as a 
single authority to collect and pool Aviation Secur ity Fee and to settle revenue 
expenses of Aviation Security Group/APSU deployed a t the airports. Once this 
SOP comes into effect, revenue expenditure of Aviat ion Security Group 
(including CISF) so specified therein, will be met out of security fee.  
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
 The Airports were privatized in May, 2006 and PSF account was held by 
private operator in fiduciary capacity but the Mini stry has issued the SOP in 
January, 2009 based on which C&AG Audit was conduct ed for three years i.e. 
from 2006 to 2009 for the first time.    Revision t o the SOP in line with the 
revisions of the newly inserted Rule 88A of the Air craft Rules is still under 
process in the Ministry. 
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
 Revision of SoP is under active consideration in t he Ministry so as to 
define modalities with respect of collection, utili zation. and management of the 
Fee to be levied in accordance with Rule 88A..  Draft SoP in this regard has been 
circulated for the purpose of consultation with few central Ministries/ Departments 
and the stakeholders concerned such as Airport Operators." 
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to para no 14  of this Report 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
 Audit pointed out that purchase of an X-ray screen ing machine by MIAL 
costing Rs. 1.01 Cr in 2008-09 out of PSF (SC) acco unt for screening of export 
cargo and non-crediting the income earned by MIAL b y offering the use of cargo 
screening machine to airlines and their agents to P SF (SC) Escrow Account was 
in clear violation of MOCA clarification issued in January 2010. The Civil Aviation 
Secretary admitted before the Committee that the ex penditure should have been 
capitalized and debited to the project cost itself and not doing so and debiting it 
to PSF is definitely a violation. To obviate recurr ence of such lapses, the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation have stated that based on the C&A G observation and also 
considering the OMDA obligations, they are in the p rocess of withdrawing the 

said permission to meet the cost of capital items ( Security) from PSF (SC) funds. 
The Committee desire that Government should take a final decision in the matter 
with due promptitude so that process of debiting th e cost of capital security items 
in PSF (SC) Escrow Account is discontinued forthwit h. The Committee further 
desire that the Ministry should inquire into as to how in the first instance the 
instant instructions which were in the breach of OM DA were issued and share 
with the Committee the inquire report and action taken thereon.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The issue of meeting out the cost of security equi pment out of PSF (SC) 
has been reviewed in this Ministry in the light of relevant provisions of 
OMDA/SSA & Concession agreement and with the approv al of Hon’ble Minister 
of Civil Aviation Ministry vide its order dated 18. 02.2014 has issued directions to 
all airport operators including MIAL to reverse ent ire capital expenditure incurred 
out of PSF (SC) funds since their inception whether  on security equipment or on 
accommodation of CISF to the PSF (SC) escrow accoun t. MIAL has already 
reversed the amount of Rs. 1.01 Cr during February, 2013. 
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
 The amount of Rs, 1.01 crore reversed by MIAL form s part of the amount 
of Rs.15.21 crore pointed out by the Ministry for r eversal in August, 2010. The 
amount of Rs.1.01 crore was incurred towards cost o f procurement of X ray 
machines by MIAL. The amount of Rs. 15.21 crore doe s not constitute entire 
capital expenditure incurred by MIAL from PSF (SC) account in deviation of 
SOP/instructions governing utilization of PSF(SC) funds. The direction of Ministry 
of 18.02.2014 are yet to be complied with by MIAL. These directions are silent on 
reversal of expenditure of revenue nature. 
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
 The observations received from the office of C&AG are duly examined in 
this Ministry and suitable directions are issued to  the airport operators 
concerned, including MIAL to reverse expenditure wh erever they been incurred 
unauthorisedly.  Necessary steps will also be taken  by the Ministry to get the 
unauthorized revenue expenditure, if any, of airpor t operators reversed back into 
the respective Escrow Accounts. 
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to para no 19  of this Report 
 
 

CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
 The Committee finds it highly intriguing that thou gh internal audit of PSF 
(SC) escrow account was conducted in 2009, no signi ficant observations were 
made by the internal auditors regarding the manner of utilization of money from 
the account. However, in a subsequent internal audi t of PSF (SC) Escrow 
Account got conducted by MOCA in 2012 i.e. after th e C&AG Audit, several 
irregularities reportedly came to the fore. Mysteri ously, the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation have no information available with them on  unauthorized withdrawals of 
funds out of PSF (SC) Escrow Account. It is also su rprising that the matter was 
never discussed in the Board level meetings. All th is while the airport operator 
has used all sorts of excuses to continue with the unauthorized withdrawals and 
justify them in contravention of all rules and regu lations. To further compound the 
illegality, it has also brazenly continued to defy the instructions, albeit, very 
belated of MOCA to reverse the withdrawals from the  Escrow Account which it 
was operating merely in a fiduciary capacity. What is all the more galling is that 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, instead of coming d own on the errant airport 
operator with a heavy hand, has given it a long rop e by remaining content with 
advisories which have not been enforced. The testim ony of the Principal Witness 
i.e. the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviatio n before the Committee where he 
harped upon the airport operator being in some fina ncial problem and some of its 
projects being under construction is sufficiently i ndicative of how the Ministry, 
rather than ensuring the safety of the public money , have gone ahead with 
bailing out the airport operator. Unfortunately, th e Committee’s pointed and 
repeated queries as to how internal audit/control a nd oversight mechanisms 
failed to detect these blatant irregularities did n ot yield any specific information 
which is highly condemnable.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is once again submitted that detailed guideline s with regard to utilization 
of PSF (SC) funds towards CISF accommodation, basic  security equipment and 
vehicles etc. were issued after the conduct of firs t internal audit (2009). Prior to 
these, no specific guidelines were in place. In suc h a circumstance, the first 
internal audit team could not adjudge the rationali ty of expenditure incurred by 
the airport operator. Also, the mechanism of intern al audit with its scope was 
never specified in the circulars issued by this Ministry in the initial years. 
 
• Further, while examining C&AG audit observations i n respect of other 
airport operators including MIAL it was decided by the then Secretary, Ministry of 

Civil Aviation to have fresh internal audit specifi cally for PSF(SC) escrow account 
of MIAL with other airports. The irregularities obs erved by the internal audit 
during 2012 were taken up with MIAL for corrective and remedial action. 
Directions were also issued to all airport operator s, including MIAL, to reverse 
unauthorized expenditure on private security deploy ment incurred out of 
PSF(SC) escrow funds along with the applicable inte rest.  MIAL moved a court 
case (W.P. No.4242/2012) in the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi seeking stay on the 
said directions of MOCA towards reversal of illegib le expenditure of Rs.15.21 Cr. 
and the subsequent order dated 22.05.2012 of this M inistry on the subject.   The 
Hon’ble Court was apprised of all facts and figures  which resulted in the direction 
of the Hon’ble Court to MIAL to reverse ineligible expenditure on account of 
Private Security Guards, Technical Consultancy and Cargo X-ray. As has already 
been mentioned, the matter is currently sub judice. 
 
 The financial problems (of the airport operator) p ointed out by Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation relate to capital expenditure incurred by MIAL out of PSF 
(SC) funds. It is assured that there is no reluctan ce on the part of Ministry to take 
action towards making recoveries.    
 
 In view of the above, it may be construed that the  audit mechanism set out 
by this Ministry has not failed to detect the irreg ularity on the part of MIAL. 
Actions/Directions issued by this Ministry are base d on the audit findings of 
C&AG and internal audit.  It may also be noted in t his regard that the issue 
relating to meeting cost of security equipment out of PSF (SC) funds has been 
reviewed in this Ministry in the light of relevant provisions of OMDA/SSA & 
Concession agreement and with the approval of Hon’b le Minister of Civil Aviation 
Ministry vide its order dated 18.02.2014 has issued  directions to all airport 
operators including MIAL to reverse entire capital expenditure incurred out of 
PSF (SC) funds since their inception whether on sec urity equipment or on 
accommodation of CISF to the PSF (SC) escrow accoun t along with applicable 
interest which could have been earned in normal cou rse.  This order has been 
challenged by different private/JV airport operator s in different high courts, 
including MIAL. 
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
 C&AG in its audit of PSF (SC) had pointed out irre gular expenditure 
towards deployment of private security and expendit ure towards procurement of 
capital equipment (X-ray baggage screening machines ) in subsequent years also 
(besides 2006-09) but Ministry asked MIAL only for reimbursement of 
expenditure for the period 2006-09 of Rs.15.21 cror e. The matter is currently 
sub-judice.  
 
 Though Ministry has issued directions to private o perators to reverse the 
entire capital expenditure back to PSF account alon g with interest, the same has 
been challenged in the court by the airport operato rs. Matter is now sub-judice. 

Ministry’s directions are, however, silent on the r eversal of the revenue 
expenditure.   
 
 This Ministry has also directed MIAL to reverse th e unauthorized 
expenses on private security agency of Rs.7.07 cror e and makeup room 
baggage loaders of Rs.0.21 Cr., consultancy charges  of Rs.4.05 Cr. and salaries 
to private security and baggage screeners of Rs.3.7 6 Cr. pertaining to 2009-10.  
This additional amount of Rs.7.07 Cr. was also refe rred to during the hearing 
held on 29.01.2013, wherein the Hon’ble High Court had observed that this 
aspect would examined on the next date of hearing.  As of now, the matter is sub 
judice, and final orders of the Hon’ble Court are awaited. 
 
 The issue of meeting the cost of security equipmen t out of PSF (SC) funds 
has been reviewed in this Ministry in the light of relevant provisions of 
OMDA/SSA & Concession agreement and with the approv al of Hon’ble Minister 
of Civil Aviation Ministry vide its order dated 18. 02.2014 has issued directions to 
all airport operators including MIAL to reverse ent ire capital expenditure incurred 
out of PSF (SC) funds since their inception whether  on security equipment or on 
accommodation of CISF to the PSF (SC) escrow account.  It has also been made 
clear in the said order that PSF (SC) funds are mea nt only for meeting revenue 
expenditure on deployment of CISF and other securit y forces at the airports. This 
order has been challenged by several airport operat ors, including MIAL, in high 
courts of their respective zones.  The matter is currently sub judice . 
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
 The observations received from the office of C&AG are duly examined in 
this Ministry and suitable directions are issued to  the airport operators 
concerned, including MIAL to reverse expenditure wh erever they been incurred 
unauthorisedly.  Necessary steps will also be taken  by the Ministry to get the 
unauthorized revenue expenditure, if any, of airpor t operators reversed back into 
the respective Escrow Accounts.  
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
 The Committee also note that MIAL has continued wi th this patently illegal 
practice of unauthorized withdrawals in subsequent years as well. An amount of 
Rs. 7.07 Cr. was withdrawn in 2009-10 for deploymen t of private security related 
expenditure out of PSF (SC) and it has also deploye d of private people for 
loading/aligning and in-line screening facility inside the airport during the 2010-11 
and has incurred an expenditure of Rs.3.17 Cr. on this account. 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 The explanatory notes given in the previous para w ill hold good.  The 
Hon’ble High Court in its order dated 29.01.2013 in  the matter of W.P. 
No.4242/2012 inter alia ordered that the aspect related to recovery of Rs.7.07 Cr. 
reflected in the Ministry’s letter dated 26.12.2012  would be examined in the next 
date of hearing.  As of now, orders of the Hon’ble Court are still awaited in the 
matters raised in W.P. No.4242/2012.  
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
The matter is sub-judice and decision of High Court is still awaited.  
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
Factual position; hence needs no comments. 
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
The Committee note that pursuant to the Ministry of  Civil Aviation direction 
issued on 17.05.2012 to all airport operators, incl uding MIAL, for reversal of the 
ineligible expenditure incurred by the private operator from PSF (SC) funds in the 
Escrow Account an amount Rs. 15.21 Cr. for the peri od FYs 2006-09 has been 
reversed. As regards recovery of penal interest fro m MIAL, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation stated that since writ petition has been f iled by the MIAL in Delhi high 
Court for claiming the expenses incurred by the pri vate airport operator on 
deployment of private security guards to provide ad equate security on the city 
side of the airport, it would be difficult to provi de details on this account as the 
extant matter is sub-judice. From the information p laced before the Committee, it 
is observed that the High Court has not granted a s tay on the Writ Petition file by 
MIAL. They, therefore, find it inexplicable as to w hy the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
are reluctant even to work out the interest compone nt on the suspicious plea that 
the matter is sub-judice. More so, when the Ministr y are liable to file all these 
details in support of their claim while pleading in  the said case. The Committee 
also find it inexplicable as to why the Ministry ha s not ensured the reversal of all 
unauthorized withdrawals by the airport operator, p ost C&AG audit. While 
expressing their strong disapproval of this inaction by the Ministry, the Committee 
desire that needful should be done at the earliest along with all out efforts to 
expedite the legal process".  
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 It is humbly submitted that this Ministry has alre ady issued directions 
(letter dated 18.02.2014) to all the airport operat ors, including MIAL, to reverse 
the entire unauthorized capital expenditure incurre d out of PSF(SC) Escrow 
Accounts since inception together with the interest  component. Action is 
underway to calculate the interest and the same wil l be taken up with MIAL for 
crediting back to PSF a/c. 
 
Remarks of office of the C&AG 
 
The instructions of 18.2.2014 are silent on reversa l of unauthorized 
expenditure of revenue nature.  
 
Final reply of the Government 
 
It is further submitted that the observations recei ved from the office of 
C&AG are duly examined in this Ministry and suitabl e directions are issued to the 
airport operators concerned, including MIAL to reve rse expenditure wherever 
they been incurred unauthorisedly.  Necessary steps  will also be taken by the 
Ministry to get the unauthorized revenue expenditur e, if any, of airport operators 
reversed back into the respective Escrow Accounts. 
 
(Ministry of  Civil Aviation's O.M. No.AV 13024/65/2011-AS dated 12 th  January,2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi,  SHANTA KUMAR  
27 April 2015  Chairperson,  
7 Vaisakha, 193 7(S)  Committee on Public Undertakings.  
 

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014-2015) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 24 
th  April 2015 from 1500 hrs to 1530 
hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Shanta Kumar  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
3.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
4.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
5.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
6.  Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Majeed Memon 
8.  Shri Muthukaruppan 
9.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
 Shri M.C. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE C&AG OF INDIA 
 
Shri P. Sesh Kumar Director General-II (Commercial)  
 

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the memb ers and 
representatives of the C&AG to the Sitting of the C ommittee.  The Committee 
then considered the draft Report on the action take n by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Thi rtieth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sab ha) on Airports Authority of 
India Limited - Unauthorized withdrawal from the escrow account held in fiduciary 
capacity on behalf of the Government of India by Mu mbai International Airports 
Limited based on Para 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2 011-12 and adopted the 
same without any change. 
 
(The representatives of the C&AG then left.) 
 
3. XXXX    XXXX    XXXX. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to  present the Reports to 
Parliament on their behalf, after obtaining factual verification. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report. 

APPENDIX - II  
 
(Vide para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the O bservations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report o f the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Airpor ts Authority of India 
Limited - Unauthorized withdrawal from the escrow a ccount held in 
fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of I ndia by Mumbai 
International Airports (P)  Limited  based on Para 2.5 of C&AG Report No. 3 
of 2011-12. 
 
 
I Total number of Recommendations  07 
lI Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
[vide Recommendations at Sl. No.6]  
 
Percentage of total  
01 
 
 
 
 14.2% 
 
lII Recommendation which the Committee do not desir e to pursue 
in view of Government’s replies   
 
Nil  
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of t he 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2 and 5] 
 
Percentage of total 
 
03 
 
 
 
 
42.9% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies  of 
Government are still awaited.  
 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4 and 7] 
 
Percentage of total 
 
03 
 
 
 
 
42.9% 
 
 