CPU. No. 983  
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations  / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of Committee o n Public Undertakings 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Bharat Electronics Limited] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 2015 / Vaisakha 1937(S) 
  
  3 

CONTENTS 
 
  
Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by Government 
 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government Replies  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
 
APPENDIX  
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting  
II Analysis of the action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-sixth Report of Committee on 
Public Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Bharat Electronics Limited.  
 
 
 
 
  

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014 – 2015)  
 
Chairperson  
 
   
Shri Shanta Kumar  
 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2.  Shri L. K. Advani 
3.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
4.  Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
5.  Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
6.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu 
9.  Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
10.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
11.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
12.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
13.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
15.  Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha  
 
16.   Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.   Shri Narendra Budania 
18.   Shri Majeed Memon 
19.   Shri Muthukaruppan 
20.   Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
21.   Shri C. M. Ramesh 
22.   Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Smt. Sudesh Luthra Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,  present this Third Report on action 
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recom mendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee on Public Unde rtakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Bharat Electronics Limited”. 
 
2. The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sab ha / laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 9 December 2014.  Replies of the Gov ernment to the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report were receiv ed on 28 October 2014.  The 
draft Report was considered and adopted by the Comm ittee at their Sitting held on        
6 April 2015.  The Minutes of the Sitting are given in Appendix-I.  
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-eighth Report is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi          SHANTA KUMAR              
24 April 2015  Chairperson  
4 Vaisakha, 1937(S) Committee on Public Undertakings.  
 
 
 
(v) 
  

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the T wenty-sixth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2013-14) on “Bharat Electronics 
Limited”. The Report was presented to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 12 th  October, 
2013 and to the Parliament on the 9th  December, 2013. 
  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the G overnment in respect of all the 
nineteen Observations / Recommendations contained i n the Report.  These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 18 
                      (Total 14)  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Commi ttee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III)     
                               Nil  
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of  which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 7, 17  and 19                                (Total 4) 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations to which the Go vernment have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V)       
 Sl. No. 8                          (Total 1) 
  
3. The Committee desire that final replies on the O bservations/Recommendations 
to which interim replies have been furnished should be expedited.  They also desire that 
response to their comments in Chapter I of the Repo rt should be furnished to them 
expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Tak en by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
 Performance of BEL 
 
 
5.  The Committee in their Twenty-sixth Report had recommended the following on 
the performance of BEL: 
 
“The Committee are not impressed by BEL's performan ce. BEL has been making 
profits but its profits have declined during the la st two years and its value of 
production has stagnated of late. BEL's value of pr oduction which stood at 
Rs.5273 Crores in 2008-09 rose marginally during th e three year period to reach 
Rs.5794 Crores in 2011-12. Its profits declined con siderably from Rs.1161 
Crores in 2010-11 to Rs.1075 Crores in 2011-12. Acc ording to BEL's CMD, the 
poor performance is mainly caused due to BEL's migr ation from equipment 
manufacturing to system integration and opening of defence market to private 
sector. The Committee are not convinced of these re asons. The Company still 
gets 70% of its orders on single vendor nomination and BEL's migration from 
equipment manufacturing is not an unplanned step. I t has been stated that the 
performance will improve in two to three years with  about Rs.25,000 Crores 
orders in hand and by effecting cost reduction meas ures. It is a matter of 
satisfaction to note that the profit of BEL increas ed to Rs.1125 Crores and the 
value of production registered a quantum jump to to uch Rs.6290 Crores during 
2012-13, after the Committee went into the function ing of BEL. The Committee 
feel that in order to further improve its performan ce; there is need for 
diversification, cost cutting measures and re-focussing R&D….” 
 
6.  The Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence in their action taken 
reply stated as follows: 
 
“Value of Production:  Despite a healthy order book, BEL has not been able  to 
achieve significant increase in the value of produc tion due to following 
constraints: 
• Majority of the contracts in order book have stagg ered delivery and are 
spread across 3 to 4 years. 
• Most of the projects available in order book are f irst-time inducted projects 
and such development projects entail concurrent des ign, Bulk Production 
Clearance, platform readiness (ship, aircraft, vehi cles) etc. Hence execution 
requires longer cycle time. 
• Naval projects require Harbour & Sea Acceptance Tr ials which are linked to 
ship availability resulting in longer cycle time. 
• Frequent changes in user requirements post-contrac t leads to re-design and 
consequent delay in execution in major projects suc h as Battlefield 

Surveillance System(BSS),Command Information & Deci sion Support 
System(CIDSS). 
• Issues in respect of security grading (Chinese com ponents), malware 
certification etc. (Project Shakti, CIDSS, BSS). 
• BEL is associated in many projects of National imp ortance such as Socio 
Economic and Caste Census, National Population Regi ster (NPR), 
Parliament Security etc. which requires huge effort s in terms of design and 
execution. 
 
Profitability 
 
• A major reason for low profitability has been incr ease in material cost as 
compared to value of production during past four ye ars - from around 57% 
levels between the years 2008-09 to 2010-11 to 63 %  levels in 2011-12 & 
64.44 % in 2012-13. However, the company’s profitab ility has risen from 
Rs.1115 Crore during 2012-13 to 1175 Crore during 2013-14.  
• In order to address the issue of low profitability , instructions have been issued 
to all concerned to eschew unnecessary non-productive expenditure. 
• Focus has now been placed on reduction of material  cost through other 
methods like value engineering, indigenization, sourcing etc.  
• Manpower recruitment is restricted on a need basis  only. Additions to service 
areas like Finance/HR are closely monitored.  
  
Diversification 
 
BEL has adopted diversification into new areas as a  strategy for growth.  Though 
supplies to Defence constitute a majority share in BEL’s turnover, BEL realizes 
that, to grow in the years to come, it has to diversify into other areas. 
 
Leveraging the capabilities and strengths in the De fence business, BEL is also 
focussing on new business with reputed foreign OEMs /Defence Labs for 
collaboration, in the following technology areas: 
 
• Indigenous Air Defence Systems including manufactu re of Missiles 
• Satcom Terminals for GSAT6 of ISRO. 
• Ammunition Fuses for varieties of Guns 
• Homeland Security (Critical infrastructure) 
• Air Traffic Management Radar 
 
BEL has obtained Government approval for the format ion of a Joint Venture 
Company with Thales, France to Design, Develop, est ablish Market, Supply and 
Support of Civilian & select Defence Radars for Indian and Global markets.  
 
 

 
Cost cutting measures 
 
As part of cost cutting measures Company has initiated following actions: 
 
● Issued circulars in line with DPE OM no. DPE/3(4)/ 08-Fin dated 15 th  
October 2013, indicating cost cutting measures in t he areas of organizing 
Seminars & Conferences, Purchase of Vehicles, Domes tic & Foreign 
Travel  Expenses, Creation of Posts and other Admin istrative Expenses 
(including Office Expenses). 
 
● Identified various Cost Reduction avenues which wi ll be reviewed 
periodically at Unit/Strategic Business Unit level.  
 
Re-focusing R&D 
 
• BEL has a Three-Tier R&D structure with Central Re search Labs working on 
cutting edge technologies.  
 
• As directed by the Ministry during 2013, BEL is re -aligning its R&D plan in line 
with the Technology Perspective & Capability Roadma p (TPCR) requirements 
in line with long-term plan of Tri-services brought out in the TPCR document. 
 
• BEL is setting up a Central Product Development & I nnovation Centre (PDIC) 
which will focus on development of common technolog y modules and sub-
systems for use across the company. Development of such sub-systems is 
expected to result in Savings & Value Addition thro ugh prevention of 
duplication of R&D efforts and through replacement of bought-out 
subsystems.”  
 
 
7.  Notwithstanding the several measures taken by B EL for cost cutting, 
diversification and refocusing its R&D so as to imp rove its performance, BEL has 
not been able to achieve significant increase in th e value of production as 
acknowledged by BEL itself due to the constraints e laborated in the action taken 
note. The Committee would, therefore, like to empha size that BEL should explore 
all possible avenues to overcome / address the prob lems so as to increase its 
value of production. The Committee would like to be  apprised of the action taken 
in this regard within three months from presentation of the Report to Parliament. 
 
  

Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Delays in Evaluation / clearance of Equipment / Products  
 
8.  Noting undue delays in evaluation / clearances of newly developed equipments / 
products by Armed forces / Ministry of Defence, the  Committee in their Twenty-sixth 
Report had recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee have been informed that evaluation/f inal clearance of newly 
developed equipment/products by armed forces / Mini stry of Defence takes 
unduly long time with resultant delay in placement of orders causing huge 
investment being locked up and manpower remaining i dle. Another fall out of this 
delay is the new technology becoming obsolete in th e rapidly changing 
technological environment. The Committee feel that the problems faced by BEL 
in this regard can be obviated if the Ministry of D efence in consultation with the 
evaluation agencies/armed forces and taking into account all relevant factors lays 
down a time frame for evaluation and clearance of e quipments/products and 
ensures its adherence. The Committee hope that nece ssary action will be taken 
in this regard under intimation to the Committee.” 
 
9.  The Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence in their action taken 
reply stated as follows: 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been consi dered positively by the 
Ministry.  In order to cut down the delays in procurement of e quipment and 
ensure that the procurement system is more responsi ve to the needs of the 
Armed Forces, broad time frames for completion of d ifferent procurement 
activities have been addressed in the Defence Procu rement Procedure (DPP) -
2013 which include various Technical, Field and Sta ff Evaluations. Major 
deviations from this time frame are brought to the notice of the Defence 
Procurement Board (DPB), for necessary corrective m easures.  In addition, 
Standard Operating Procedure for ‘Handling of compl aints’ is being formalized in 
the Ministry, as complaints had delayed the procurement process in the past.  
 
Timely completion of evaluation is also affected by following factors: 
 
(a) Poor quality of the vendor’s Equipment which le ads to equipment failure 
during evaluation and consequent re-engineering the reby lengthening the 
process.  
(b) Delay in modification & resubmission of modifie d equipment by the vendor 
to meet specifications of the Armed Forces.” 
 

 
10.  The Committee are not inclined to accept the c ontention of the Ministry that 
poor quality of vendor equipment as well as delay i n their modification and 
resubmission by vendors are the reasons for delay i n timely completion of 
evaluation / clearance by the Armed forces. The Com mittee are of the considered 
view that these problems are not entirely new and o ught to have been anticipated 
and factored into by the Company while developing t he equipment / products. 
The Committee hardly need to emphasize that the Gov ernment should take all out 
measures for broadening the vendor base as also its  development so as to 
obviate the problem of poor quality of equipment be ing supplied by them. The 
Committee trust that the Ministry would strictly mo nitor adherence to the time 
lines laid down in Defence Procurement Procedure so  as to ensure that there are 
no delays in procurement of the equipment by the Armed forces.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
Exemption of Taxes to BEL and Defence PSUs 
 
 
11. Noting loss of many contracts by BEL due to unf air global bidding process, the 
Committee in their Twenty-sixth Report had recommended the following : 
 
“BEL is facing international competition in "Buy Gl obal" category of Defence 
purchases and reportedly lost major market opportun ities in the segment of 
Radar, C41, communication etc., and facing competit ion from indigenous private 
sector companies in all its major business segments . The Company has lost 
around 28 contracts amounting to Rs.1624 Crores dur ing the last five years in 
multi-vendor environment. One of the main reasons a ttributed for the loss of 
contracts was that in the case of Global Tender, th e pricing by an overseas 
vendor when compared to that of BEL is more competitive due to the fact that the 
overseas vendor incurs 'nil' customs duty, excise d uty and sales tax.                 
To aggravate the matter further, in case of service s, the 'Reverse Charge' 
mechanism in India further puts the burden of servi ce tax on import of services 
on the Company and not on the overseas vendor. The Committee is concerned 
about the loss of such large contracts to foreign s uppliers having an edge on 
account of exemption of Customs, Central Excise Dut y and Sales Tax being 
offered to global bidders at the cost of BEL. What is most surprising is that the 
Department of Defence Production has done precious little to ensure a level 
playing field for BEL and other Defence PSUs. In fa ct, the Department was not 
even aware of this very unfair situation until the matter was brought to their notice 
by the Committee. This speaks volumes about the qua lity of performance review 
meetings held by the Department. The Committee feel s that the issue is serious 
and needs to be attended to without any further los s of time. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department of Defence Pr oduction take up the matter 
at the highest level in the Finance Ministry to get  the issue resolved and ensure 

that the Indian Companies do not lose precious cont racts in global biddings due 
to the grossly unfair preferential treatment being accorded to foreign companies 
at the cost of the domestic industry.”  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12.  The Department of Defence Production, Ministry  of Defence in their action taken 
reply stated as follows : 
   
“In Buy (Global) cases, while carrying out evaluati on of bids to determine L1, 
necessary criteria have been laid down in Defence P rocurement Procedure 
(DPP) 2013 in order to neutralize the impact of tax es and duties payable by the 
Indian Industry.  In case of Indian bidders includi ng Defence PSUs/OFs, excise 
duty on fully formed equipment, VAT/Sales Tax and o ther local levies i.e. octroi, 
entry tax etc. quoted by Indian bidders are not con sidered for the purpose of 
comparison of various bids.  
 
However the issue of Reverse Charge mechanism in ‘S ervice Tax’ on service 
remains to be resolved. The burden of service tax d oes not arise when DPSUs 
and Indian private firms participate in Buy(Global)  bids without taking recourse to 
import of services. However on account of lack of i ndigenous capability if DPSUs 
and Indian pvt firms decide to participate in such bids, the burden of service tax 
has to be borne by them. Since the matter involves seeking exemption/ change 
in existing provisions of Customs laws, matter has been taken up with Acquisition 
Directorate of this Ministry and further progress w ill be informed to the 
Committee.”  
 
13. The Committee note that the issue of seeking ex emption / change in 
existing provisions of Customs laws to ensure a lev el playing field to BEL and 
Defence PSUs in global bidding has been referred by  the Ministry of Defence to 
its Acquisition Directorate.  The Committee feel th at the issue needs to be 
attended without any further loss of time.  The Com mittee reiterate that the matter 
be taken up at the highest level by the Ministry of  Defence with the Ministry of 
Finance to ensure that precious contracts in global  biddings are not lost by BEL 
due to unfair preferential treatment accorded to foreign companies. 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
 
Attendance of Members in the Board Meetings  
 
14. With regard to attendance of members in the Boa rd meetings of the Company, 
the Committee in their Twenty-sixth Report had observed as follows: 
 
“The Committee note that there are nine non-officia l Directors and 2 Government 
Directors on the Board of the Company. There were s ix Board meetings during 
2008-09 and seven each in 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Committee note that one 
Government Director attended just one out of six Bo ard meetings during 2009-
10. The Committee have been informed that although the Director was absent 
from the Board meeting, he had been by virtue of hi s positioning interacting quite 
often with the Company management even other wise a nd also on crucial 
matters. The Committee are of the view that attenda nce of all Directors in the 
Board meetings is vital for the Company to benefit from their vast experience and 
expertise. Frequent absence of Directors from Board  meetings will defeat the 
very purpose of existence of the Board. The Committ ee, therefore, recommend 
that regular attendance of other members of the Boa rd should be invariably 
insisted upon and ensured. The Department of Defenc e Production should also 
ensure the presence of their officers in the Board meetings so that the purpose of 
their inclusion in the Board is served and the Comp any benefits from their vast 
experience and expertise.” 
 
15. The Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken 
Reply stated as follows: 
 
“Following steps have been taken by the Company to encourage regular 
attendance of Directors in the Board Meetings: 
• A calendar of Board Meetings for the whole financi al year, approved by 
the Board in April every year is communicated to all Board members and 
Special invitees. 
• Board Meeting Notices are issued one month in adva nce. 
• Detailed Agenda and briefing papers are circulated  to the Board 
Members and Invitees one week in advance of each Board Meeting.” 
 
16.  From the action taken reply furnished by the M inistry of Defence, the 
Committee regret to note that BEL was merely conten t with issuing notices, 
agenda and briefing papers to members well in advan ce of the Board meetings. 
Apparently no efforts seem to have been made by the  management of the 
Company to urge and impress upon the members to att end the Board meetings 

regularly. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that  steps should be taken by the 
Ministry / BEL to invariably insist upon and ensure  regular attendance of all 
members to the Board meetings. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
 Problems faced by BEL 
 
 
17.  The Committee in their Twenty-sixth Report had reco mmended the following for 
resolving the various problems faced by BEL:  
 
“It is the responsibility of the Department of Defe nce Production to identify the 
problems faced by BEL which are beyond its control and render all possible help 
to resolve them. During the course of examination o f the Company, it transpired 
that intervention of the Department of Defence Prod uction could have helped 
BEL to tide over some problems in matters such as ( a) Funding of Strategically 
Critical Technology Projects e.g. IR Detector (Cool ed & Un-cooled), II Tubes, IF 
& RF Seekers, High Power Laser etc., (b) Placement of order of Security 
Sensitive Projects on DPSUs only - EW Systems., (c)  Disposal of obsolete 
inventory to generate revenue- Amendment required i n Custom Duty rules., (d) 
Exemption of Octroi (approx 3.5%) for BEL and BEL O ptronic Devices Limited in 
Pune (Maharashtra)., (e) Shorter evaluation cycle t ime for indigenized products 
and (f) Early placement of order for which trials h ave been completed 
successfully. It is only after the matter was taken  up by the Committee, BEL has 
reportedly been asked by the Department of Defence Production to submit 
proposals for being taken up with the concerned Min istries. The Committee urge 
the Ministry of Defence to examine the issues in ri ght perspective and get them 
resolved expeditiously by taking them up at the hig hest level with all concerned 
Ministries/Departments / Agencies.” 
 
18.  The, Department of Defence Production, Ministr y of Defence in its action taken 
reply stated as follows: 
 
(a) “Ministry of Defence has invested about Rs. 269  Crore for Transfer of 
Technology in respect of Night Vision Devices to BE L. While processing the 
categorisation cases for procurement of various cat egories of Night Sights, DDP 
has been insisting on the utilization of the existi ng facilities by BEL before 
undertaking procurement under any other categorizat ion. Now, the proposal for 
incremental Transfer of Technology for XR-5 technol ogy forwarded by BEL is 
under consideration by the Ministry. 
 

(b) Subsequent to review undertaken by NSA on our c apabilities and our 
capacity for indigenous manufacture of Electronic W arfare(EW) equipment, 
guidelines were issued by Ministry of Defence, in O ct 2009, restricting the 
manufacture of sensitive systems for military use t o Defence PSUs and DRDO 
labs considering the spate of acquisition and merge rs of private companies. Any 
fresh global procurement proposal with regard to th e EW systems was to be 
placed before the Screening Committee Chaired by DG  (Acq) before it is placed 
in various categorisation committees. In November 2 012, NSA reviewed the 
existing guidelines and partially modified guidelin es have been issued by the 
Ministry in December 2012. As per these guidelines,  proposals for addressing 
the existing gaps as well as new proposals for acqu isition of EW systems will be 
considered on case-by-case basis by the Screening C ommittee followed by 
Categorisation Committees. While determining the ca tegorization for these 
proposals, the Committee will take into considerati on the capabilities of DRDO 
labs, Defence PSUs as well as Indian Private Sector ; operational requirements 
and security sensitivity of the system. As per the guidelines, steps will be taken 
for augmentation of capabilities of DRDO labs and D efence PSUs in the area of 
EW.   
(c) BEL’s products range comprises small components , standalone 
equipment, complex systems and System of Systems. T he input materials 
imported for these Defence applications are exempte d from Customs Duty with 
the condition that they are utilized for specified purpose for which they were 
imported under Customs Notification 39/96. Over the  period of time, due to 
change in Technology, Design, Customer requirements , Obsolescence etc,. 
some of the input materials procured for these appl ications have become 
unusable inventory and company is unable to dispose  the same in view of 
Customs Duty Exemption availed for utilization against specific purpose. BEL has 
been advised to re-examine and submit a proposal wi th details of inventory 
rendered obsolete, quantity, and cost project-wise and ways the company 
propose to dispose these items if permissible. Depending on the scale and extent 
of obsolescence this Ministry will take up matter with the ministry of Finance. 
(d) This Ministry has requested Government of Mahar ashtra vide letters dated 
12-06-2013 and 25-03-2014 to look into the matter f or waiver of Local Body Tax 
(LBT) for the inputs material for defence products of BEL Pune and BELOP so 
that the production of electro Optical Products and  Batteries for Defence 
applications from these two locations where skilled  manpower and specialized 
infrastructure is available continues without dislocation.  
(e) This aspect has been covered in the reply to Recommendation Serial No. 8.   
(f) This aspect is covered in the reply to Recommen dation Serial No. 8. 
Further, BEL had brought to the attention of the Mi nistry regarding early 

placement of orders for Weapon Locating Radar (WLR) , Missile Approach 
Warning System(MAWS) and L-70 Gun Upgrade. On date Contract Negotiation 
has been completed for WLR and L-70 Gun Upgrade and  orders will be placed 
after obtaining approval of sanctioning authority (These orders are above Rs. 500 
Cr). As regards MAWS, orders were placed on BEL dur ing 2013 itself and 
contract is under execution.” 
 
19.  The Committee regret to note that despite thei r recommendation to address 
the various problems faced by BEL, barring few issu es, not much progress has 
been made by the Ministry in this regard as several  issues which are critical to 
the improvement of its functioning are yet to be resolved by the Government.  It is 
seen from the action taken reply that the issue of funding of various strategically 
critical technology projects, is still under consid eration by the Ministry of 
Defence.  Further, on the issue of amendment in Cus tom Duty Rules for enabling 
BEL to dispose of obsolete inventory to generate re venue, the Ministry of 
Defence is yet to take up the matter with the Minis try of Finance.  While 
expressing their dissatisfaction over the slow prog ress made by the Ministry of 
Defence in resolving critical issues of BEL the Com mittee reiterate that the 
various problems / constraints faced by BEL should be resolved by the 
Government in the right earnest within a definite t ime period. With regard to 
waiver of Local Body Tax (LBT) for the inputs mater ial for defence products of 
BEL, Pune and BELOP, though the Ministry has taken up the matter with the 
Government of Maharashtra, the matter need to be pu rsued further. Besides, 
concerted efforts need to be made for augmentation of capability of DRDO labs 
and Defence PSUs in the area of EW systems. The Com mittee would like to 
emphasize urgent and immediate action in this regar d. Besides the Committee 
may again like to stress for proactive intervention  by the Ministry of Defence to 
help BEL tide over the problems resulting in growth  in production and profit of 
BEL. 
  

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
As is obvious from the information furnished to the  Committee that, there will be 
increasing participation of private sector in Defen ce, facilitated mostly by back-to-back 
collaboration with foreign partners. In order to be  competitive, DRDO has suggested 
that BEL should become an overall integrated consor tium head involving private players 
with proven strength in identified areas and workou t MoUs with them on a work sharing 
basis. The Committee would like the Government to e xamine the suggestion from all 
angles and the Committee be apprised of the outcome.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BEL has been partnering with Indian companies having complementary strengths 
to address large system projects of Indian Defence Forces. 
 
For e.g. BEL has led the following projects in Publ ic Private Partnership (PPP) 
model successfully: 
 
• Akash Weapon System for Indian Air Force (BEL, BDL , ECIL, L&T,TATA) 
• Central Acquisition Radar (CAR) Rohini (BEL, L&T, ASTRA) 
• Samyukta EW System (40 Work Centres around Hyderab ad developed) 
 
BEL is in discussion with both public & private des ign houses for partnership in 
the upcoming indigenous ‘Make’ programs like Tactic al Communication Systems (TCS), 
Battlefield Management Systems (BMS), Future Infantry Combat Vehicle (FICV) etc. 
 
Also, BEL has recently floated an ‘Expression of In terest’ asking niche 
technology companies / Academic institutions / Cons ultants to respond for joint 
development of subsystems / products through collab orative R&D. The first phase of 
empanelment of partners has been done. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
The Committee would also suggest that the measures recommended by them for 
optimalising the performance of the Company need to  be implemented expeditiously, 
particularly in the wake of the present global down turn in the economy, slow down in 
domestic market, the depreciation of rupee, the increasing competition, etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has taken note of the recommendation s of the Committee and 
the measures are under implementation. 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
The Committee notes that during 2010-11 and 2011-12 , the MoU rating of the 
Company was downgraded to 'very good' category. The  slide in performance is 
reportedly due to erosion in profit before tax caus ed by payment of wage arrears of 
employees in 2010-11. This also had a cascading eff ect on the Company's balance-
sheet in 2011-12 as well. The Committee is of the opinion that the revision of wages in a 
listed Company ought not to be such a time consumin g exercise as to affect its fortunes 
in a negative manner. Had the process been complete d expeditiously, the cumulative 
effect of the revision of wages could have been avo ided. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that since another wage revision will, in  normal course, be due after three 
years or so, the Company should work out a mechanis m, albeit of interim nature, 
including presumptive allocations, whereby, the arr ears of wages are not carried 
forward for years together, but liquidated in subst antial measure during the very year 
they become due.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company has been following the accepted account ing practices with regard 
to making provision for the revision of wages/salar y be it for non-executives or 
executives. The executive revision is decided by DP E and is implemented after 
receiving Presidential guidelines on the subject. T he non-executives revision is a 
negotiated settlement between the union representat ives and the Management which is 
then put up to the Board prior to implementation of the revision. In both these cases, the 
revision does not happen as soon as it becomes due.  Till such time the actual revision 
takes place, the Company makes a provision in the b ooks for each financial year based 

on certain assumptions. Any variation between the a ssumed increase and the actual 
revision impacts the profitability of the year/s in  which the revision is implemented. In 
case of 2007 revision of BEL, the executive revisio n took place in March 2009 and non- 
executive revision happened in May 2010. The Compan y has taken note of the advice 
of the Hon’ble Committee and would make efforts to make more realistic provisions for 
the next Revision of pay scales due from 01.01.2017.  
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
New projects are necessary for growth and expansion  of any organization. 
However, no major project has been undertaken by BE L in the recent past, other than 
the Product Support Centre at Kochi. Even the Minis try of Defence does not appear to 
have given any direction to BEL in this regard exce pt monitoring the progress of BEL's 
R&D project, reviewing its infrastructure requireme nts and modernization plans. With 
the opening of the Defence sector to private indust ry, the Committee feel that there is 
an urgent need for BEL to explore new areas of grow th and' would like BEL and the 
Ministry of Defence to work out a suitable plan and  identify major projects for 
implementation in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following are some of the new projects BEL has been  working on, in view of 
growth and expansion: 
 
• BEL has signed MoUs with LRDE(Electronics and Rada r Development 
Establishment) for the joint development of next ge neration Active Electronically 
Scanned Array (AESA) based Surveillance Radars & Fi re Control Radars. Prototype 
development of these Radars is under progress. This  initiative is expected to 
translate into business for BEL in the coming 3 to 4 years.  
 
• BEL has planned to diversify into Missile Electron ics and has signed a MoU with 
Research Centre Imarat(RCI), Hyderabad to develop a nd manufacture RF seekers 
used in ASTRA Missile program based on ToT from Aga t, Russia. BEL has also 
taken up indigenous development of Integrated Seeke r Electronics unit, Ku band 
synthesizer / exciter and Front end receiver for us e in ASTRA Missile. This will be a 
new business area for BEL. 
 

• BEL has signed a MoU with RCI, Hyderabad to develo p and manufacture Inertial 
Navigation Systems(INS) for various land based applications. This also will be a new 
business area for BEL.  
 
• Joint Venture with M/s. Thales:   During December 2013  the Government approved 
the formation of Joint Venture Company by BEL with M/s.Thales, France for the 
design, development, marketing, supply and support of civilian and select Defence 
Radars for Indian and Global markets.  The sharehol ding of BEL and Thales in the 
JVC is 74% and 26% respectively. Thales is an ackno wledged world leader in Radar 
technology. With the support of BEL and Thales, the  JVC is expected to provide 
state of the art Radar solutions for Indian and export markets. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Thin order book of some of the BEL's units operatin g in Radio Business is stated 
to be a major concern, notwithstanding the fact tha t BEL is currently having an order 
book of about Rs.25000 Crores and is expecting orde rs of Rs.27,000 Crores in another 
three years. Reasons for BEL's radio business not g etting sufficient orders and steps to 
remedy the situation should be studied and the Comm ittee be apprised of the outcome. 
The Committee feels that BEL has not done much to t ap the vast export potential for 
variety of its products. Whatever little exports ma de by BEL - US $ 38.45 Million in 
2011-12 are mainly on account of offset sales. The Committee hardly needs to stress 
that BEL should draw up an export strategy to boost  exports exclusive of offset sales, 
with specific targets and show results in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Insufficient orders for Radio Business: 
 
• Some of BEL’s business units were engaged in the m anufacture of earlier 
generation communication equipment/analog radios fo r Defence Forces. However 
change in technology from analog to Software Define d Radios (SDRs) was 
responsible for underutilization of capacity. In li ne with new requirement of 
technologies, BEL has been developing SDRs in collaboration with DRDO labs.  
 
• For optimal utilization of capacity, business unit s dealing with analog  technology 
have now been allocated with other product lines li ke small Surveillance Radars, 
Night Vision Devices (NVDs), Instant Fire Detection  and Suppression System 
(IFDSS), Signal Data Processor for Radars etc.  
 
 

 
 
BEL’s Export strategy: 
 
Export is one of the thrust areas and BEL is explor ing various possibilities to export 
its products & systems to different countries. Expo rt made by BEL during 2011-12 was 
US$ 38.45 million, out of which offset was US$13.14 million  and other than offset was 
US$ 25.31 million . BEL achieved an all-time high export turnover of US $42 Million 
during 2013-14 due to continued thrust. Some of the  initiatives under BEL’s Export 
strategy are- 
 
• Participation in AERO INDIA,DEFEXPO and overseas D efence exhibitions. 
• Presentations and demonstration of BEL’s products & systems to prospective 
overseas customers through Indian High Commissions and representatives in other 
countries. 
• Contract Manufacturing (both build-to- print and b uild-to-specs) with OEMs.  
• Supply chain partnership with Aerospace OEMs like BOEING, PILATUS. 
• Strategic alliances with global OEMs (Elbit, IAI, Thales, SAAB) for joint development 
/ co-production. 
• Focus on SE Asian Countries for Radar, Sonars and C4I solutions.  
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
  
The Committee finds that though Research & Developm ent activity of BEL 
started five decades ago and R&D expenditure as a p ercentage of turn- over has been 
healthily improving from 3.55% in 2006-07 to 8.21% in 2011-12, no efficiency audit of 
R&D projects was carried out till recently. It is o nly in August 2012 that a methodology 
of measuring in-house R&D value addition has been i ntroduced. The measurement 
carried out for the last five years has reportedly shown in-house R&D value addition of 
around 56% (average) across BEL. The Committee woul d like to know, how this 
percentage compares internationally and whether the  methodology of measurement is 
globally recognized. Incidentally, the Committee no te the observation of one of the 
Directors of the Company that the R&D interface and  customer interface is weak in BEL 
and that there is need to modify the Company's stra tegy to reflect customer focus. 
Notwithstanding some steps taken to address these i ssues, the Committee feel that 
BEL should not be found wanting in this respect in future.  
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
R&D Value Addition Index:  
 
The R&D value addition index worked out by BEL give s a relative measure of 
value addition between Units / Strategic Business U nits and Year-on-Year performance. 
The model provides for highest emphasis for in-hous e development of subsystems/ 
systems followed by indigenous development within the country. 
  
  However, there is no globally accepted single R&D  value addition model that can 
fit all models of business. Models and metrics for measurement vary depending on the 
type of product mix. Among many metrics followed, R &D investments, Gross profit, IP 
management etc are also followed internationally fo r measuring R&D value addition. 
Since measurement models and metrics vary, there ar e no international Value addition 
index figures to compare. 
 
R&D and Customer interface: 
 
In line with recommendation of the Committee, the Government has directed BEL 
to align its R&D to meet the Technology Perspective  Capability Roadmap (15 years 
TPCR) of the Armed Forces. BEL has carried out tech nology mapping for the 
capabilities required in areas of its core competencies. 
BEL also undertakes many R&D Projects which are cri tical to National defence based 
on directives from MOD. (E.g., Coastal Surveillance System for Indian Coast Guard). 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
The Committee is surprised to know that a company h aving long record of 
successful R&D activity and having 54% of its turno ver from in- house developed 
products had not patented the technologies develope d in- house for Defence 
equipment. The Committee would like to have an asse ssment of the loss, if any, 
incurred on account of this lapse over the years. I t has been stated that an aggressive 
campaign has been initiated over the past two years  to protect the intellectual property 
rights for the new technologies I process developed  and 12 patent applications filed 
during 2011-12 and 7 applications till August 2012.  The Committee urges that patenting 
activity should be one of the elements to be manage d by the structural mechanism 
which has been put in place by BEL for R&D initiative.  
 

Reply of the Government 
 
Patenting and other IPR management:  
 
• In the 1980’s, BEL had obtained patents for Liquid  Crystal Displays. BEL has also 
obtained patents for Surface-Acoustic-Wave Filters,  Phase tapering techniques in 
antennas for Cellular Base Station, Solar Traffic S ignaling System and Electronic 
Voting Machines. BEL had not actively pursued filin g patents in the area of Defence 
systems as filing patents involves publishing infor mation which could be counter-
productive. 
 
• However, in order to protect its business interest s, BEL has launched measures for 
filing Patents and other IPR like Integrated Circui t design layout registration. In the 
last two years, nearly 30 patents have been filed a nd are being actively pursued for 
grants. There is no assessment of loss, since BEL h as not paid any IP charges to 
vendors for technologies already developed by BEL.  
 
• BEL has put in place a structural mechanism for ma naging R&D initiatives through 
Corporate Technology Planning division which is act ively managing filing of patents 
& other IPR and pursuing for grants by centrally co ordinating with all R&D groups 
across the company and with IP attorneys. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
  
On a suggestion made by the Committee that BEL lice nse out its designs which 
could become a major profit area, the CMD, BEL was candid in his admission that BEL 
never explored that particular area. The Committee wishes that necessary action is 
taken in this regard at the earliest under intimation to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Patenting and Licensed production: As suggested by the Committee BEL has 
examined the possibility of licensing out its designs. From among technologies for which 
BEL has obtained patents such as Liquid Crystal Dis plays, Surface-Acoustic-Wave 
Filters, Phase Tapering Techniques in Antennas for Cellular Base Station, Solar Traffic 
Signaling System (STSS) and Electronic Voting Machi nes (EVMs), the last two i.e. 
STSS and EVMs are products  that could be licensed for production through other 
companies. However, confidentiality requirements of  the EVM and investments in an 

internal Mass Manufacturing Facility at BEL have de terred licensed production through 
other companies. This restriction need not apply to  the STSS. BEL will consider 
licensed production of the STSS and other similar products in civilian domain.  
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
The Committee note that BEL has taken up a number o f marketing initiatives to 
counter competition being faced from private player s which include recruitment of ex-
service personnel, conducting marketing conferences , imparting short term and long 
term professional training in marketing to executiv es by top business schools like India 
Institute of Management, etc. BEL has also taken in itiatives for cost reduction and has 
successfully achieved savings of Rs.2.3 Crores duri ng 2011-12 by coordinating in-
house efforts of 57 Task Forces. The Committee has also been informed that BEL is in 
the process of creating a Central Marketing Researc h Group for securing marketing 
intelligence to address marketing challenges. The C ommittee believes that generating 
customer trust with highest standards of quality coupled with effective marketing are key 
to ensuring customer satisfaction. Increasing reven ues and enhanced profits 
automatically flow, thereafter. The Committee, ther efore, recommends renewed focus 
by the Company on a state-of-the-art, robust R&D me chanism with best available and 
complementing human resource on rolls, a highly pro fessional market intelligence 
network, a reliable feedback and vigorous follow-up  interface with the customers, a 
bouquet of products with a reasonable price band. T he Committee would like to be 
apprised of a definite road-map encompassing all these facets at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following initiatives have been taken up to enh ance the effectiveness of R&D, 
the marketing intelligence and customer co-ordination activities in the company: 
 
•• •• Research &Development:  BEL’s R&D is spearheaded by  the Central 
Research laboratory (CRL) at the apex of three-leve l R&D structure with a 
dedicated team of over 300 scientists involved in d evelopment of futuristic 
technologies. The research scientists in CRL have a  separate remuneration 
package in order to attract and retain the best tal ent.   The R&D engineers 
working in Central Design & Engineering Group and U nits/Strategic Business 
Units are recruited through all India competitive e xamination drawn from the 
best Institutions in the country . Further,  BEL is in the process of setting up a 

centralized Product Development & Innovation Centre , pooling the best 
available resources in the company, with a long term focus in line with TPCR.  
 
•• •• A Marketing Research Core group has been establishe d at the Corporate Office, 
with a Two-Tier structure, for carrying out the Mar keting Research activity in the 
Company: 
 
i. Marketing Research Core Group at Corporate Offic e. 
ii. Marketing Research Resource Persons at Unit/SBU  level.  
 
• A Competitor’s database portal has been created in  SAP(ERP application) in order 
to  analyze business scenarios and competitive envi ronment for each business 
segment of BEL. This will enhance competitive edge in the market. 
 
•• •• Institutional meetings are held with the customers throughout the year. For Army 
requirements, regular institutional meetings were h eld with Directorate Generals of 
Artillery, Army Air Defence, EME and Ordnance etc. Indian Air Force holds Projects 
Progress Review meetings regularly, at Air Head Qua rters. The Navy holds 
WESMMC meetings which deal with spares as well as e quipment maintenance 
related aspects. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
 
The Committee feels that ensuring the quality of pr oducts is vital to improve the 
market presence, reliability and trustworthiness of  the products supplied by BEL. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that BEL should ens ure a stringent quality control 
regime for each and every product being rolled out from its plants so that the quality of 
products is thoroughly checked before supply, espec ially the Defence products which 
may otherwise directly risk the safety and security  of the Country. Furthermore, as 
stated previously in this Report, marketing strateg ies and customer interface should be 
improved to infuse reliability and for enhancing th e customer satisfaction level. It would 
also be worthwhile if apart from the stipulated pre -delivery tests post delivery tests are 
also conducted to ensure that the quality of produc ts supplied is maintained at highest 
levels and the customers have no reasons to complain.  
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
A stringent quality control regime exists for each and every product rolled out 
from the plants. 
 
• BEL has an extremely well established quality cont rol mechanism, manned by 
competent personnel wherein inspections and testing  is carried out on the basis of a 
structured Quality Plan and Approved Test Procedure.  
 
• Inspection and test records are maintained and the se are verified during 
manufacturing by DGQA & associated agencies.  
 
• Endurance test and factory acceptance tests are al so performed.  
 
• Products and systems are dispatched only after obt aining DGQA & DGAQA 
inspection clearance notes.  
 
Marketing strategies and customer interface should be improved to infuse 
reliability and enhancing the customer satisfaction. 
 
Following steps have been taken for enhancing customer satisfaction levels- 
 
• Customer interaction meetings are being held at th e senior management levels, on a 
regular basis, to discuss and resolve various issues related to product performance.  
 
• Customer Satisfaction Survey is being conducted on  regular basis, to capture 
perceptions of our customers and take corrective/preventive actions as necessary.  
 
• A comprehensive Marketing Plan is being prepared f or continuously tracking new 
technologies/products required by our customers and  converting them to business 
opportunities for BEL.  
 
• Toll-Free telephone number facility has been estab lished for registering customer 
complaints, which has been functioning since December 2011.  
 
 
Post delivery test apart from pre-delivery tests. 
 
• Functional tests are carried out for all products/ systems by BEL during installation 
and commissioning phases. 
 

• Harbour Acceptance Test/Sea Acceptance Test perfor med by BEL at Naval 
Dockyards. 
 
• Post delivery test are validated through simulated  test condition by way of sending 
equipments to extreme environmental conditions. or by creating those conditions in 
laboratory/factory as per Quality Assurance Plan(QAP). 
 
• Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) and Repair Contr act, post warranty are 
established with customers to ensure product quality during use.  
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
The Committee observe that out of 83 products deliv ered to the armed forces 
during the last five years, there was delay in deli very of 27 products (33% of products) 
ranging from one month to more than two years. The major delay was in delivery of 
products such as TRANSPORTABLE SATCOM TERMINAL, FCS  LYNX U1 P16 AND 
CMS (SNF), where the delay period was of more than two years. According to BEL, 
there are certain delays mainly in system integrati on, change in configuration by 
customer, site readiness, etc. The Committee would like to be assured that delay in 
none of the products is attributable to BEL. The Co mmittee desire that in case, delay is 
due to lapse on the part of BEL, its product planni ng should be designed in such a way 
as to ensure timely delivery of products in future.  This is all the more necessary in a 
competitive situation increasingly faced by BEL.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Delay in some of the projects is due to its nature of large / complex systems and 
concurrent engineering change in user requirement, specifications to incorporate 
additional features, first time inducted projects, site / platform readiness, etc.  
Following are the steps taken by BEL to ensure timely delivery of products 
 
• Adequate thrust is provided at all levels in the o rganization for ‘Contract 
Management’ through continuous process improvement to enhance on-time delivery 
and to meet customer commitments.  
• Focused groups have been established at Units/Stra tegic Business Units for 
continuous monitoring and review of the projects to meet delivery commitments.  

• Implementation of SAP(ERP application) and deploym ent of state-of-the-art Project 
Management Tools to ensure timely delivery of products. 
• Engineers are extensively trained on project manag ement techniques certified by 
Project Management Institute (PMI), USA. Company ha s around 120 PMI certified 
engineers for effective monitoring & execution of projects. 
 [Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
The Committee notes that e-Procurement has been imp lemented by the 
Company in all its nine units for both purchase and  sub-contract. Further, BEL has also 
adopted Integrity Pact with all vendors/suppliers/c ontracts/ service providers for all 
orders/ contracts of value of over Rs.20 Crores as per the initiative of CVC to eradicate 
corruption in procurement activities. So far 52 ord ers/contracts are covered under 
Integrity Pact. The Committee, however, is concerne d to find that a large quantum of 
procurement in BEL is still being done through sing le vendor though the number of 
single vendor procurements has come down from 13 pe r cent in 2008-09 to 3.88 per 
cent in 2011-12. The Committee also notes that abou t 27.34 per cent of the purchases 
have been made through Limited Tendering process du ring 2011-12 and about 12.31 
per cent of the purchases through nominated tenderi ng and 23.52 per cent through 
License Agreement. This is in sharp contrast to the  principles enunciated by the 
Company as only 32.95 per cent of the purchases hav e been made through Open 
Tendering process. From the information furnished t o the Committee, the Committee 
does not find any plausible explanation for BEL res orting to single vendor/ limited 
tendering process. The Committee feels that it is a  serious matter as it is not in 
conformity with the CVC guidelines which emphasize that single vendor procurement 
should be gradually reduced through vendor developm ent. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that intensive efforts should be made by  the Company to increase the 
vendor base in constant consultation with DRDO. Fur thermore, single vendor 
tendering/procurement should be reduced to barest m inimum and resorted to only in 
rarest case. With a view to ensure strict adherence  to the principle, the procurement 
system should be continuously monitored and reviewe d through frequent meetings and 
progress reports.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  There are certain situations where single vendor procurement becomes 
unavoidable when procurements are Designer Approved , Customer Suggested 
Sources, through ToT Partner, Proprietary etc.  
However, as recommended by the Committee, BEL has t aken following measures to 
reduce single tender procurement: 

•• •• the Company is developing alternate indigenous sour ces in case of ToT 
procurements 
•• •• In-house development programs for sub-systems/modul es in customer 
suggested cases.  
•• •• In case of the designer approved cases, the company  has taken up the issue 
with designers (DRDO) for involving BEL in the vendor selection process.  
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
 
The Committee also notes that the value of most of the purchases made by open 
tendering or through nominated sources is below Rs. 20 Crores and therefore does not 
attract provisions of the Integrity Pact. The Commi ttee, therefore, feels that the matter 
for reducing the value of the Integrity Pact from R s.20 Crores should be taken up with 
the concerned Department with a view to cover more and more orders/ contracts under 
it. This would not only ensure transparency in open  tendering but would also go a long 
way in ushering fairness in procurement and minimiz ing scope for corruption to a large 
extent.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BEL has implemented the Integrity Pact (IP) for thr eshold value of Rs.20 Crores 
during 2010-11 and the same has been amended to Rs.10 Crores in February 2013 and 
further reduced to Rs.5 Crs w.e.f May 2014. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
 
 
The Committee notes a number of measures being take n by BEL to strengthen 
its manpower which includes periodical review of ma npower requirements, regulating 
various forms of recruitment, provision of training , effective deployment of manpower, 
taking suitable welfare measures for staff, etc. Th e Committee however note that the 
number of regular employees of the Company has gone  down from 13750 persons in 
2002-03 to 11180 persons in March 2012. This, in sp ite of the explanation of the 
Company about it professing a need based HR policy appears too drastic a cut. On the 

other hand, the number of contract laborers has inc reased from 3204 persons in 2009-
10 to 4460 persons in 2011-12 giving an impression that the Company is encouraging 
provisional employment which may be prone to exploi tation. It also implies a lacuna in 
manpower planning and projection as over one-third of BEL's work force is temporary 
staff. The Committee finds such a trend disturbing and feels that in the long run it may 
prove counter- productive and impede the consistenc y and stability of the organization. 
The Committee believe that fresh talent combined wi th experience would, like in any 
other commercial organization, strengthen BEL's hum an resource and with infusion of 
new technology in the coming years, the in-house ac tivities will grow to accommodate 
more and more permanent staff. The Committee recomm ends the Company should 
make a realistic assessment of its manpower require ment and its in-house work without 
undermining the importance of permanent staff to en sure that core areas of production 
and marketing do not suffer.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The manpower requirement in BEL is assessed based o n the requirements 
projected by Units/Strategic Business Units at the start of the financial year.  The 
manpower reports are consolidated and examined vis- à-vis the projected volume of 
business, changes in technology, skill sets require d, manpower cost and its long term 
sustainability. 
 
The decline in manpower is mainly due to retirement s. Further, due to the 
changes in Product line and technology, many manufa cturing processes are not labour 
intensive as in the past. Also, one-to-one replacem ent may not be desirable keeping in 
view the upward trend in manpower cost. 
 
From 2009-10 to 2013-14 the total number of non-executives recruited were 373. 
 
Further in keeping with the changing business requi rements, the Company has 
been recruiting Probationary Engineers/ Probationary Executives based on requirement.  
The details of Probationary Engineers recruited during the last 5 years are as follows: 
 
From 2009-10 to 2013-14 the total number of executives recruited were 1447. 
 
As indicated above the number of engineers has been  growing particularly in the 
core areas of Production, Research & Development and Marketing. 
Contract labour in BEL is deployed only in non-core  areas in conformity with existing 
statutory requirements. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
 
  

CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-------NIL------- 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER IV 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
The Committee is not impressed by BEL's performance . BEL has been making 
profits but its profits have declined during the la st two years and its value of production 
has stagnated of late. BEL's value of production which stood at Rs.5273 Crores in 2008-
09 rose marginally during the three year period to reach Rs.5794 Crores in 2011-12. Its 
profits declined considerably from Rs.1161 Crores i n 2010-11 to Rs.1075 Crores in 
2011-12. According to BEL's CMD, the poor performance is mainly caused due to BEL's 
migration from equipment manufacturing to system in tegration and opening of defence 
market to private sector. The Committee is not conv inced of these reasons. The 
Company still gets 70% of its orders on single vend or nomination and BEL's migration 
from equipment manufacturing is not an unplanned st ep. It has been stated that the 
performance will improve in two to three years with  about Rs.25,000 Crores orders in 
hand and by effecting cost reduction measures. It i s a matter of satisfaction to note that 
the profit of BEL increased to Rs.1125 Crores and t he value of production registered a 
quantum jump to touch Rs.6290 Crores during 2012-13 , after the Committee went into 
the functioning of BEL. The Committee feels that in  order to further improve its 
performance; there is need for diversification, cos t cutting measures and re-focusing 
R&D, as brought out in some of the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Value of Production:  Despite a healthy order book, BEL has not been able  to 
achieve significant increase in the Value of Production due to following constraints:- 
 
• Majority of the contracts in order book have stagg ered delivery and are spread 
across 3 to 4 years. 
• Most of the projects available in order book are f irst-time inducted projects and such 
development projects entail concurrent design, Bulk  Production Clearance, platform 
readiness (ship, aircraft, vehicles) etc. Hence execution requires longer cycle time. 
• Naval projects require Harbour & Sea Acceptance Tr ials which are linked to ship 
availability resulting in longer cycle time. 

• Frequent changes in user requirements post-contrac t leads to re-design and 
consequent delay in execution in major projects suc h as Battlefield Surveillance 
System(BSS),Command Information & Decision Support System(CIDSS). 
• Issues in respect of security grading (Chinese com ponents), malware certification 
etc. (Project Shakti, CIDSS, BSS). 
• BEL is associated in many projects of National imp ortance such as Socio Economic 
and Caste Census, National Population Register (NPR ), Parliament Security etc. 
which requires huge efforts in terms of design and execution. 
 
Profitability 
• A major reason for low profitability has been incr ease in material cost as compared 
to Value of production during past four years - fro m around 57% levels between the 
years 2008-09 to 2010-11 to 63 % levels in 2011-12 & 64.44 % in 2012-13. 
However, the company’s profitability has risen from  Rs.1115 Crore during 2012-13 
to 1175 Crore during 2013-14.  
• In order to address the issue of low profitability , instructions have been issued to all 
concerned to eschew unnecessary non-productive expenditure. 
• Focus has now been placed on reduction of material  cost through other methods like 
value engineering, indigenization, sourcing etc.  
• Manpower recruitment is restricted on a need basis  only. Additions to service areas 
like Finance/HR are closely monitored.  
  
Diversification 
BEL has adopted diversification into new areas as a  strategy for growth.  Though 
supplies to Defence constitute a majority share in BEL’s turnover, BEL realizes that, to 
grow in the years to come, it has to diversify into other areas. 
 
Leveraging the capabilities and strengths in the De fence business, BEL is also focusing 
on new business with reputed foreign OEMs/Defence L abs for collaboration, in the 
following technology areas: 
 
• Indigenous Air Defence Systems including manufactu re of Missiles 
• Satcom Terminals for GSAT6 of ISRO. 
• Ammunition Fuses for varieties of Guns 
• Homeland Security (Critical infrastructure) 
• Air Traffic Management Radar 
 
BEL has obtained Government approval for the format ion of a Joint Venture Company 
with Thales, France to Design, Develop, establish M arket, Supply and Support of 
Civilian & select Defence Radars for Indian and Global markets.  
 
 

 
 
Cost cutting measures 
As part of cost cutting measures Company has initiated following actions: 
 
● Issued circulars in line with DPE OM no. DPE/3(4)/ 08-Fin dated 15 th  October 
2013, indicating cost cutting measures in the areas  of organizing Seminars & 
Conferences,  
 
Purchase of Vehicles, Domestic & Foreign Travel  Ex penses, Creation of Posts 
and other Administrative Expenses (including Office Expenses). 
 
● Identified various Cost Reduction avenues which wi ll be reviewed periodically at 
Unit/Strategic Business Unit level.  
 
Re-focusing R&D 
• BEL has a Three-Tier R&D structure with Central Re search Labs working on cutting 
edge technologies.  
• As directed by the Ministry during 2013, BEL is re -aligning its R&D plan in line with 
the Technology Perspective & Capability Roadmap (TP CR) requirements in line with 
long-term plan of Tri-services brought out in the TPCR document. 
• BEL is setting up a Central Product Development & Innovation Centre (PDIC) which 
will focus on development of common technology modu les and sub-systems for use 
across the company. Development of such sub-systems  is expected to result in 
Savings & Value Addition through prevention of dupl ication of R&D efforts and 
through replacement of bought-out subsystems. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 7 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
The Committee has been informed that evaluation/fin al clearance of newly 
developed equipment/products by armed forces / Mini stry of Defence takes unduly long 
time with resultant delay in placement of orders ca using huge investment being locked 
up and manpower remaining idle. Another fall out of  this delay is the new technology 
becoming obsolete in the rapidly changing technolog ical environment. The Committee 

feel that the problems faced by BEL in this regard can be obviated if the Ministry of 
Defence in consultation with the evaluation agencie s/armed forces and taking into 
account all relevant factors lays down a time frame  for evaluation and clearances of 
equipments/products and ensures its adherence. The Committee hopes that necessary 
action will be taken in this regard under intimation to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The recommendation of the Committee has been consid ered positively by the 
ministry.   In order to cut down the delays in procurement of e quipment and ensure that 
the procurement system is more responsive to the ne eds of the Armed Forces, broad 
time frames for completion of different procurement  activities have been addressed in 
the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) -2013 which  include various Technical, 
Field and Staff Evaluations. Major deviations from this time frame are brought to the 
notice of the Defence Procurement Board (DPB), for necessary corrective measures.  In 
addition, Standard Operating Procedure for ‘Handlin g of complaints’ is being formalized 
in the Ministry, as complaints had delayed the procurement process in the past.  
 
Timely completion of evaluation is also affected by following factors: 
 
(b) Poor quality of the vendor’s Equipment which le ads to equipment failure during 
evaluation and consequent re-engineering thereby lengthening the process.  
 
(c) Delay in modification & resubmission of modifie d equipment by the vendor to 
meet specifications of the Armed Forces. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 10 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
 
The Committee notes that there are nine non-official Directors and 2 Government 
Directors on the Board of the Company. There were s ix Board meetings during 2008-09 
and seven each in 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Committe e notes that one Government 
Director attended just one out of six Board meeting s during 2009-10. The Committee 
have been informed that although the Director was a bsent from the Board meeting, he 
had been by virtue of his positioning interacting q uite often with the Company 

management even other wise and also on crucial matt ers. The Committee is of the view 
that attendance of all Directors in the Board meeti ngs is vital for the Company to benefit 
from their vast experience and expertise. Frequent absences of Directors from Board 
meetings win defeat the very purpose of existence o f the Board. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that regular attendance of ot her members of the Board should 
be invariably insisted upon and ensured. The Depart ment of Defence Production should 
also ensure the presence of their officers in the B oard meetings so that the purpose of 
their inclusion in the Board is served and the Comp any benefits from their vast 
experience and expertise.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following steps have been taken by the Company to e ncourage regular attendance of 
Directors in the Board Meetings: 
 
• A calendar of Board Meetings for the whole financi al year, approved by the Board in 
April every year is communicated to all Board members and Special invitees. 
• Board Meeting Notices are issued one month in adva nce. 
• Detailed Agenda and briefing papers are circulated  to the Board Members and 
Invitees one week in advance of each Board Meeting. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 16 of Chapter I. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
It is the responsibility of the Department of Defen ce Production to identify the 
problems faced by BEL which are beyond its control and render all possible help to 
resolve them. During the course of examination of t he Company, it transpired that 
intervention of the Department of Defence Productio n could have helped BEL to tide 
over some problems in matters such as (a) Funding o f Strategically Critical Technology 
Projects e.g. IR Detector (Cooled & Un-cooled), II Tubes, IF & RF Seekers, High Power 
Laser etc., (b) Placement of order of Security Sens itive Projects on DPSUs only - EW 
Systems., (c) Disposal of obsolete inventory to gen erate revenue- Amendment required 
in Custom Duty rules., (d) Exemption of Octroi (app rox 3.5%) for BEL and BEL Optronic 
Devices Limited in Pune (Maharashtra)., (e) Shorter  evaluation cycle time for 
indigenized products and (f) Early placement of ord er for which trials have been 

completed successfully. It is only after the matter  was taken up by the Committee, BEL 
has reportedly been asked by the Department of Defe nce Production to submit 
proposals for being taken up with the concerned Min istries. The Committee urge the 
Ministry of Defence to examine the issues in right perspective and get them resolved 
expeditiously by taking them up at the highest leve l with all concerned 
ministries/departments / agencies.  
 
Ministry’s Reply 
 
(d) Ministry of Defence has invested about Rs. 269 Cr for Transfer of Technology in 
respect of Night Vision Devices to BEL. While proce ssing the categorisation cases for 
procurement of various categories of Night Sights, DDP has been insisting on the 
utilization of the existing facilities by BEL befor e undertaking procurement under any 
other categorization. Now, the proposal for incremental Transfer of Technology for XR-5 
technology forwarded by BEL is under consideration by the Ministry. 
 
(e) Subsequent to review undertaken by NSA on our c apabilities and our capacity for 
indigenous manufacture of Electronic Warfare(EW) eq uipment, guidelines were issued 
by Ministry of Defence, in Oct 2009, restricting th e manufacture of sensitive systems for 
military use to Defence PSUs and DRDO labs consider ing the spate of acquisition and 
mergers of private companies. Any fresh global procurement proposal with regard to the 
EW systems was to be placed before the Screening Co mmittee Chaired by DG (Acq) 
before it is placed in various categorisation commi ttees. In Nov 2012, NSA reviewed the 
existing guidelines and partially modified guidelin es have been issued by the Ministry in 
Dec 2012. As per these guidelines, proposals for ad dressing the existing gaps as well 
as new proposals for acquisition of EW systems will  be considered on case-by-case 
basis by the Screening Committee followed by Catego risation Committees. While 
determining the categorization for these proposals,  the Committee will take into 
consideration the capabilities of DRDO labs, Defenc e PSUs as well as Indian Private 
Sector; operational requirements and security sensi tivity of the system are considered. 
As per the guidelines, steps will be taken for augm entation of capabilities of DRDO labs 
and Defence PSUs in the area of EW.   
(f) BEL’s products range comprises small components , standalone equipment, 
complex systems and System of Systems. The input ma terials imported for these 
Defence applications are exempted from Customs Duty  with the condition that they are 
utilized for specified purpose for which they were imported under Customs Notification 
39/96. Over the period of time, due to change in Te chnology, Design, Customer 
requirements, Obsolescence etc,. some of the input materials procured for these 
applications have become unusable inventory and com pany is unable to dispose the 
same in view of Customs Duty Exemption availed for utilization against specific 
purpose. BEL has been advised to re-examine and sub mit a proposal with details of 
inventory rendered obsolete, quantity, and cost pro ject-wise and ways the company 

propose to dispose these items if permissible. Depe nding on the scale and extent of 
obsolescence this Ministry will take up matter with the ministry of Finance. 
(d) This Ministry has requested Government of Mahar ashtra vide letters dated 12-
06-2013 and 25-03-2014 to look into the matter for waiver of Local Body Tax (LBT) for 
the inputs material for defence products of BEL Pune and BELOP so that the production 
of electro Optical Products and Batteries for Defen ce applications from these two 
locations where skilled manpower and specialized in frastructure is available continues 
without dislocation.  
(e)  This aspect has been covered in the reply to R ecommendation Serial No. 8.   
(f) This aspect is covered in the reply to Recommen dation Serial No. 8. Further, 
BEL had brought to the attention of the Ministry re garding early placement of orders for 
Weapon Locating Radar(WLR), Missile Approach Warnin g System(MAWS) and L-70 
Gun Upgrade. On date Contract Negotiation has been completed for WLR and L-70 
Gun Upgrade and orders will be placed after obtaini ng approval of sanctioning authority 
(These orders are above Rs. 500 Cr ). As regards MA WS, orders were placed on BEL 
during 2013 itself and contract is under execution. 
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Product ion), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please see para 19 of Chapter I. 
 
  

CHAPTER V  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
BEL is facing international competition in "Buy Glo bal" category of Defence 
purchases and reportedly lost major market opportunities in the segment of Radar, C41, 
communication etc., and facing competition from ind igenous private sector companies 
in all its major business segments. The Company has  lost around 28 contracts 
amounting to Rs.1624 Crores during the last five ye ars in multi-vendor environment. 
One of the main reasons attributed for the loss of contracts was that in the case of 
Global Tender, the pricing by an overseas vendor wh en compared to that of BEL is 
more competitive due to the fact that the overseas vendor incurs 'nil' customs duty, 
excise duty and sales tax. To aggravate the matter further, in case of services, the 
'Reverse Charge' mechanism in India further puts th e burden of service tax on import of 
services on the Company and not on the overseas vendor. The Committee is concerned 
about the loss of such large contracts to foreign s uppliers having an edge on account of 
exemption of Customs, Central Excise Duty and Sales  Tax being offered to global 
bidders at the cost of BEL. What is most surprising  is that the Department of Defence 
Production has done precious little to ensure a lev el playing field for BEL and other 
Defence PSUs. In fact, the Department was not even aware of this very unfair situation 
until the matter was brought to their notice by the  Committee. This speaks volumes 
about the quality of performance review meetings he ld by the Department. The 
Committee feels that the issue is serious and needs  to be attended to without any 
further loss of time. The Committee, therefore, des ire that the Department of Defence 
Production take up the matter at the highest level in the Finance Ministry to get the 
issue resolved and ensure that the Indian Companies  do not lose precious contracts in 
global biddings due to the grossly unfair preferent ial treatment being afforded to foreign 
companies at the cost of the domestic industry.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  In Buy (Global) cases, while carrying out evaluat ion of bids to determine L1, 
necessary criteria have been laid down in Defence P rocurement Procedure (DPP) 2013 
in order to neutralize the impact of taxes and duti es payable by the Indian Industry.  In 
case of Indian bidders including Defence PSUs/OFs, excise duty on fully formed 
equipment, VAT/Sales Tax and other local levies i.e . octroi, entry tax etc. quoted by 
Indian bidders are not considered for the purpose of comparison of various bids.  
   
 However the issue of Reverse Charge mechanism in ‘ Service Tax’ on service 
remains to be resolved. The burden of service tax d oes not arise when DPSUs and 
Indian private firms participate in Buy(Global) bid s without taking recourse to import of 
services. However on account of lack of indigenous capability if DPSUs and Indian pvt 
firms decide to participate in such bids, the burde n of service tax has to be borne by 

them. Since the matter involves seeking exemption/ change in existing provisions of 
Customs laws, matter has been taken up with Acquisi tion Directorate of this Ministry 
and further progress will be informed to the Committee.  
 
[Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production), O.M.No.-23/13/2013-D (BEL) 
dated 28 October, 2014]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi,  SHANTA KUMAR              
24 April  2015                        Chairperson,  
4 Vaisakha 1937(S) Committee on Public Undertakings.  
 
  

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 6 th  April 2015 from 1100 hrs to 1230 hrs in 
Committee Room No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Shanta Kumar  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Lal Krishna Advani  
3.  Shri Ramesh Bais  
4.  Shri Pankaj Chaudhary  
5.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi  
6.  Shri Baijayant Panda  
7.  Shri Prahlad Patel  
8.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa  
9.  Prof. Saugata Roy  
10.  Shri B. Senguttuvan  
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
11. 
 Shri Naresh Agrawal  
12.  Shri Narendra Budania  
13.  Shri Majeed Memon  
14.  Shri Muthukaruppan  
15.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna  
16.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Sudesh Luthra Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
NTPC LIMITED 
1. Dr. Arup Roy Choudhury  CMD 
2. Shri U.P. Pani Director (HR) 
3. Shri A.K. Ahuja Executive Director (CP) 

 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the memb ers to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, then, considered the dra ft Action Taken Report on the 
action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report of Committee on Public Undertak ings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Bharat Electronics Limited and adopted the same wit hout any change.  The Committee 
also authorised the Chairperson to present the Repo rt to Parliament on their behalf, 
after obtaining factual verification. 
 
3. XXXX    XXXX    XXXX.   
 
4. XXXX    XXXX    XXXX 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 
 
XXXX  Matter not related to this Report. 
  

APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)  
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations / 
observations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Bharat Electronics Limited 
 
 
I.
 Total number of recommendations: 
 
19 
II. 
 Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
(vide  recommendations at Sl. No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 14, 16 and 18) 
 
14 
 Percentage of total 
 
73.68% 
III. 
 Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
 
Nil 
IV. 
 Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Vide  recommendations at Sl. No. 1, 7, 17 and 19) 
 
4 
 Percentage of total 
 
21.05% 
V.  Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
1 
 
 
 
 Percentage of total 
 
5.26% 
 
 
 
 
 