 
 
 
 
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED  
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
6 

 
 
CPU NO. 986 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
LOK SABHA 
APRIL 2015 / VAISAKHA 1937(S) 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 28.04.2015 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
APRIL 2015 / VAISAKHA 1937(S)  
6 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013 -2014)   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014 -2015)   
INTRODUCTION   
PART - I 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I OVERVIEW 
 
a) India’s Nuclear Energy Program 
b) Role of BHAVINI   
c) Corporate Mission, Objectives and Functions 
d) Organization Structure 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II NUCLEAR POWER GENERATION 
 
a) Importance of Nuclear Energy 
b) XI Plan Targets 
c) XII Plan Targets 
d) Thorium Reserves 
 
 
CHAPTER III COMMISSIONING OF PFBR 
a) Delay in Commissioning of PFBR 
b) Close down of Fast Breeder Reactors  
c) Role of DAE 
d) Study Tour of COPU for BHAVINI 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Cost of Production and Economic Viabilit y  
 
a) Cost Escalation of PFBR 
b) Economic Viability and Sustainability of Nuclear  
Power 
c) Comparative Tariff  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V Procurement Policy  
CHAPTER VI Safety of Nuclear Power Plants 
 
a) Safety Measures Adopted 
b) Nuclear Waste Management 
c) Civil Liability of Nuclear Damages 
 
  

 
 
PART  II  
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
APPENDICES  
 
I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on                
24 August 2013. 
 
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on               
6 January 2015. 
 
III Extracts of the Minutes of the Sitting of the C ommittee 
held on 24 April 2015. 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2013-2014)  
 
 
Shri Jagdambika Pal - Chairperson  
 
Members, Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Hansraj Gangaram Ahir 
3.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.  Shri Sanjay Bhoi 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury 
7.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
8.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
9.  Shri Rajendrasinh Rana 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
12.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
13.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14.  Shri Uday Singh 
15.  Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
Members, Rajya Sabha 
 
16. 
 Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
19.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
20.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
21.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
22.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2014-15)  
 
      
Shri Shanta Kumar - Chairperson  
 
Members, Lok Sabha  
 
2. Sh. L.K. Advani 
3. Sh. Ramesh Bais 
4. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
5. Shri Nand Kumar Singh Chauhan 
6. Sh. Biren Singh Engti  
7. Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi  
8. Dr. Kambhampati Haribabu 
9. Shri Yogi Aditya Nath  
10. Shri Baijayant  Panda  
11. Shri Prahlad Patel 
12. Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
Members, Rajya Sabha  
 
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
17. Shri Narendra Budania 
18. Shri Majeed Memon 
19. Shri Muthukaruppan 
20. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
22. Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
  
Secretariat  
  
1. Shri M.C. Sharma – Joint Secretary 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan – Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das – Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Sunny Goel – Executive Assistant 
 
 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertaking s (2014-15), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, present this Sixth 
Report on Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited (BHAVINI). 
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2013-14) h ad selected the above 
subject for detailed examination.  Since the examin ation of the subject could not be 
completed during the term of that Committee, the Co mmittee on Public Undertakings 
(2014-15) reselected the subject to complete the unfinished task. 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2013-14) h ad taken Oral Evidence of 
the representatives of BHAVINI on 24 August 2013.  Thereafter, the Committee (2014-
2015) took oral evidence of the representatives of Department of Atomic Energy on         
6 January 2015.   
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their Sitting held on             
24 April 2015.      
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e representatives of BHAVINI 
and Department of Atomic Energy for tendering evide nce before them and furnishing 
the requisite information to them in connection with the examination of the subject.   
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the O bservations / Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                         SHRI SHANTA KUMAR 
27 April 2015 
                  Chairperson, 
7 Vaisakha,1937 (S)                              Co mmittee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
A. INDIA’S NUCLEAR ENERGY PROGRAMME  
 
The nuclear energy programme in India has been visu alized to grow in three 
stages.  The programme is sequential and each stage  has fuel cycle linkages in which 
spent fuel from one stage is reprocessed to obtain fuel for the next stage.  Stage I 
consists of natural uranium fuelled, Pressurized He avy Water Reactors (PHWRs) which 
have a power potential of about 320 GW years. Stage  II consists of Fast Breeder 
Reactors (FBR) using plutonium as fuel which have t he power potential of about 40,000 
GW year. Stage III based on Thorium-Uranium 233 fue l cycle has the potential of 
155000 GW years. 
  
Nuclear energy offers the most potent solution to l ong term energy security.  
India has to successfully realize the three stage d evelopment and thereby tap its vast 
thorium resources to became truly energy independen t beyond 2050.  The commercial 
deployment of thorium requires a significant capaci ty of FBRs and development of 
technologies for thorium utilisation. 
 
Having obtained commercial success in the Stage I-P HWRs, to attain energy 
security for the Nation, Stage II Fast breeder Reactors was taken up for implementation. 
  
B. ROLE OF BHAVINI 
 
 
To facilitate implementation of Stage II expeditiou sly and enable commercial 
borrowings, a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), BHAVIN I which is a Government 
Company was floated under the Companies Act. 
  
Stage-I- PHWRs are under Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) 
which are operating reactors in commercial domain. Stage-II- Fast Breeder Reactors 
are under Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited to focus, develop and enrich on 
FBR technology. To support FBR technology financial ly, first prototype FBR with debt 
equity ratio of 20:80 was conceived. This debt equi ty ratio will have adverse impact on 
NPCIL capital structure, if FBR were under NPCIL do main. Further a dedicated 
company needs to pay focused attention on a technol ogy which has huge potential. 
BHAVINI was thus formed in parallel to NPCIL. 
 
BHAVINI's role in implementing Stage II is procurem ent, construction, 
commissioning and operation of Fast breeder Technol ogy based nuclear power 
station(s) as a safe, environmentally benign and ec onomically viable source of electrical 
energy. 
 
 
 

 
 
C. CORPORATE MISSION, OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS  
 
The Corporate Mission of BHAVINI is to plan, execut e and upgrade an integrated 
program of Fast Breeder Technology based Nuclear Po wer Stations on a safe, 
environmentally benign and economically viable source of electrical energy. 
 
Moreover, BHAVINI’s objective to develop economical ly viable fast breeder 
reactor for energy security for the future generati on is in consonance with its Corporate 
Mission. 
 
The functions of BHAVINI are stated to be as follows: 
 
• To plan, execute and operate an integrated program me of Fast Breeder 
Technology based nuclear power station/s for genera ting electricity on a 
commercial basis.   
 
• To own, operate and manage, or to operate and mana ge as an agent, power 
stations and ancillary facilities of every kind and  description and promote 
research and development,  
 
• Participate in selection of suitable sites for fas t breeder power stations and 
ancillary facilities, construct, commission, operat e and maintain them, coordinate 
their installation and operations with other organisations,  
 
• ensure safe and efficient disposal of waste produc ts, participate in fuel cycle 
management,  
 
• ensure proper evacuation of power from power stati ons by providing for 
associated transmission facilities required for the  purpose or otherwise and 
undertake all measures required therefore or incidental to any or all of the above.   
 
• To exchange, distribute and sell power in accordan ce and within the regulatory, 
legal and statutory framework. 
 
 
 Giving a brief introduction about the Company, the  acting CMD stated during 
evidence as follows: 
 
“…BHAVINI is a public sector undertaking under Depa rtment of Atomic Energy.  
This was incorporated as a separate PSU, a Governme nt company in October 
2003 and BHAVINI is mandated to construct, commissi on and operate fast 
breeder reactors and this marks the beginning of se cond stage nuclear 
programme where fast breeder reactor technology is being put on commercial 
scale.  So the first commercial fast breeder reacto r is being constructed by 
BHAVINI.”   
 

 
 
D. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE  
 
 According to the Company, Chairman and Managing Di rector, Director 
(Technical), Director (Finance), two Government par t time Directors, four official part 
time Directors constitute BHAVINI Board of Directors.  Chairman and Managing Director 
and two full time functional Directors with the sup port of Executive Director 
(Operations), Project Director, Deputy General Mana ger (Human Resource), Deputy 
General Manager (Finance and Accounts) and Deputy General Manager (Contracts and 
Materials Management) steer the programme of BHAVIN I under the guidance of Board 
of Directors. 
  
It has also been informed that induction of two Ind ependent Directors is required 
in the Board of the Company to comply with AEC guid elines and proposal for 
appointment of Independent Directors has been submitted to the Government. 
 
In this regard, when the Company was asked about th e AEC guidelines 
regarding the composition of the Board of Directors  and to what extent they differ from 
DPE guidelines, the Company in a written reply submitted as follows: 
 
“AEC guidelines regarding the composition of the Bo ard of Directors are as 
under:  
 
The Board shall consist of: 
 
(a). Full time Chairman-cum-Managing Director assis ted by whole time 
(executive) directors, whose number shall not norma lly exceed 50% of the actual 
strength of the Board. 
 
(b). Non-executive (Part-time) Directors: 
 
In order to provide a liaison role and a channel of  communication between 
the DAE and BHAVINI, Additional Secretary/Joint Sec retary dealing with 
BHAVINI matters will be appointed as Government rep resentative from the 
Department of Atomic Energy as non-executive direct or. Directors representing 
the Government, at any time, shall not exceed two.   
 
Keeping in view the technology used in BHAVINI and the sensitivity/ 
confidentiality of information, other non-executive  positions on the Board will be 
filled up by officers of the level of Director, BAR C; Director, IGCAR; 
AS/JS/Adviser drawn from the Ministries like Power,  Environment & Forests and 
Planning Commission and also by officers of the lev el of Director/Executive 
Director drawn from PSUs in power sector.   
 
(c)  Non-official independent directors. 
 

 
 
With a view to make the Board professional and broa d based, two 
professionals of eminence from industry in private/ non-government sector with a 
high degree of proven ability may also be inducted as non-executive (non-official) 
independent directors. 
 
Difference of AEC guidelines from DPE guidelines on composition of Board are: 
 
(a) DPE guidelines state that “The number of nomine e directors appointed by 
Government/other CPSEs shall be restricted to a maximum of two. 
 
(b) Further one-third of the Board Members should b e Independent Directors 
for BHAVINI being non-listed company."   
 
When asked about the rationale behind having separate guidelines with regard to 
composition/appointments to Board of Directors of B HAVINI, the Company replied as 
follows: 
 
“Pursuit of the objectives set for the Company invo lves management of certain 
unique challenges unlike other Public Sector Enterp rises in the country.  
BHAVINI’s organisational role encompasses implement ation of an entire 
spectrum of activities from developing technology, design, engineering and 
construction to commissioning, operation and mainte nance of fast breeder 
reactors. BHAVINI is required to achieve these obje ctives entirely by indigenous 
efforts without access to external resources, eithe r technological, financial or in 
terms of human resource expertise. Expansion of fas t breeder reactor 
programme in the commercial domain also calls for d evelopment of industries for 
design, manufacture and supply of equipment, system s and various other 
materials to meet the highest technical standards.  The several constraints, 
within which the Company has to operate, call for s pecial powers and operational 
freedom being made available to it with a view to s ustain and grow, especially in 
a liberalised and competitive environment, to fulfi l the long-term objectives before 
it.  
 
For this, BHAVINI needs to build, sustain and conti nuously improve a 
conducive and enabling work and social environment for nurturing and 
developing scientific and, engineering talents coup led with commercial acumen 
and, accordingly, it is envisaged that the Company should have the operational 
flexibility required to develop a framework for hum an resource development that 
would aid the objective of attracting talent, their  retention and development 
besides maintaining high motivational levels among its employees.  With this 
objective Board members are drawn from BARC, IGCAR and other government 
units.” 
 
On being asked when the proposal for appointment of Independent Directors was 
actually sent to the Government and what is the cur rent status of appointment of these 
two Independent Directors, the Company stated: 
 

 
 
“Proposal for appointment of only one Independent D irector was sent to 
Department of Atomic Energy on 3 rd August 2013 and is under consideration. For 
the second position action is being taken by the Company.” 
 
When the Company was asked as to how in the absence  of these two directors 
on the board, the matters relating to functioning o f the Company are being monitored, 
BHAVINI submitted as follows: 
 
“Board  inter-alia consists of  i) Additional Secre tary, DAE,  ii) Joint Secretary 
(Finance), DAE, iii) Adviser, Planning Commission,  iv) Director(Thermal), 
Ministry of Power, v) Director, Bhabha  Atomic Rese arch Centre and vi) Director, 
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research.   They ar e eminent professionals in 
their area and contribute, guide and monitor various functions of the Company.  
  
As a good corporate citizen, BHAVINI with a view to  make the Board 
broad based, two professionals of eminence from ind ustry in private/non-
government sector with a high degree of proven abil ity will be inducted as 
independent directors in near future.” 
 
 
On being asked whether DAE has received any proposa l from BHAVINI 
regarding appointment of independent directors on t heir board, the Department replied 
as follows: 
 
“BHAVINI has sent a proposal to DAE in this regard.  DAE has asked BHAVINI to 
propose a list of 6 prospective candidates for posi tion of Independent Directors 
for selection. BHAVINI has shortlisted the names of  prospective candidates who 
could facilitate the growth of BHAVINI. Revised pro posal is expected to be 
received by DAE shortly.” 
 
To a query regarding time frame for inducting the i ndependent directors on the 
board of BHAVINI, the Department stated that the process may take three months time.  
 
 
 Subsequently, the DAE has informed that it approved  the appointment of two 
independent directors to the Board of BHAVINI and s ent the same for further 
processing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
NUCLEAR POWER GENERATION 
  
A. IMPORTANCE OF NUCLEAR ENERGY 
 
 
According to the Department of Nuclear Energy (DAE) , the country’s oil and gas 
resources are inadequate and most of their demand i s being met through imports. As 
per the Integrated Energy Policy (2006) India’s coa l and lignite reserves are expected to 
last only for 140 years at 2004-05 production level s and run out in about 45 years if the 
production increases at 5% every year. The potentia l renewable resources of hydro and 
non-conventional sources like wind, solar, biomass etc. are also limited.  Thus, it is 
inevitable that given its huge potential, nuclear e nergy has an important role in the 
energy mix of the country, particularly in the cont ext of energy security. The share of 
nuclear power in the energy mix is thus expected to gradually increase.  
  
It has been stated by DAE that the exact share of n uclear energy in the country’s 
energy mix at a point in time would depend on the s hare of the other sources. Several 
projections in this regard have been made and as pe r one of the projections, Strategy 
for growth of Electricity in India by Department of  Atomic Energy, the share of nuclear 
energy in the total energy at the primary level, wh ich was 1.72% in 2002-03 is expected 
to gradually increase to about 16.58% by 2052. In t erms of electricity generation, the 
nuclear share (which was 3.6% in 2012-13 in total e lectricity generation) is projected to 
be 26% by 2052. 
 
 
B. XI PLAN TARGETS  
 
The details of the XI Plan nuclear generation targe ts, the targets at MTA and the 
actual generation are given below: 
 
 Generation of Nuclear Power (Million Units) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total XI Pl an 
Target 18685 25894 32413 40703 45699 163395 
MTA 16956 14927 22000 31232 39492 124608 
Actual 16956 14927 18831 26473 32455 109642 
 
The reasons for shortfall in nuclear power generati on in the XI Plan were 
primarily related to shortage of fuel. The target o f 163395 MUs was revised to 124608 
MUs at MTA stage considering the fuel supply positi on.  The detailed reasons for 
shortfall were stated to be as follows: 
 
 
• Demand-Supply mismatch of Domestic Uranium: There was a demand–supply 
mismatch in domestic fuel from 2003-04 onwards and efforts to augment the 
same had been initiated. At the time of formulation  of XI Plan targets in 2006, it 

 
 
was expected that there would be an improvement in supply of domestic uranium 
in the XI Plan period and the targets for generatio n were set accordingly. 
However, the domestic fuel supply improvement was s een only towards the later 
years of the XI Plan leading to shortfall in meetin g the targets. It also led to delay 
in startup of Kaiga-4 after completion of construction and restart of Narora Atomic 
Power Station (NAPS-2) and Kakrapar Atomic Power St ation (KAPS-1) after 
Renovation and Modernisation, which were awaiting f uel, leading to loss of 
generation from the units. 
 
• Delay in international cooperation: The fruition o f international cooperation was 
expected at the start of the XI Plan period and it was assumed while setting the 
targets that imported fuel for reactors to be place d under IAEA Safeguards would 
be available. However, the international cooperatio n materialised only in late 
2008, and imported fuel was available only from lat e 2009-10 onwards. This also 
delayed the start of units RAPS-5&6, which were com pleted, but had to wait for 
imported fuel for startup.  
• Delay in completion of Kudankulam 1&2 (KKNPP 1&2) projects. The XI Plan 
targets envisaged a total generation of 29784 MUs f rom KKNPP 1&2 over the 
last three years of the plan. However, the completi on of the project was delayed 
due to delays in sequential receipts of equipment f rom Russian Federation and 
subsequently, local protests in 2011, which severely impeded the work.  
 
• Delay in completion of PFBR (BHAVINI) projects. Th ere was a shortfall of 2190 
MUs due to delay in completion of PFBR, which was o riginally targeted in the 
year 2011-12. BHAVINI faced number of technological  challenges being first of 
its kind. PFBR is constructed on an indigenous desi gn, which was also a maiden 
experience.  Therefore, designs kept undergoing cha nges through the course of 
manufacturing also.  The necessity to use special m aterials like SS316LN, 
SS304LN, follow special stringent manufacturing pro cesses and observe 
stringent tolerances and dimensions never experienc ed in the past, led to 
challenges and delays although the equipment were o rdered on industries with 
proven capabilities and after due diligence. The Go vernment has approved 
revised timeline for completion of PFBR as September, 2016. 
 
C. XII PLAN TARGETS 
 
 
The XII Plan nuclear power generation targets fixed for NPCIL are 237149 Million 
Units and that of BHAVINI 1092 Million Units. The y ear-wise generation targets fixed for 
the XII Plan and achievements in 2012-13 and 2013-1 4 (April to December 2013) in 
Million Units are as follows:  
 
Financial 
Year 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Target 38000 46167 48688 50678 # 58014 # 
Actual 32863 35333 27292*   
 

 
 
*Apr – Dec, 2014  
#includes target of 1092 MUs 2016-17 from BHAVINI 
The generation in 2013-14 and 2014-15 (Apr-Dec 2014 ) includes about 1106 and 2242 
Million Units of infirm power respectively, from KKNPP-1  
 
The shortfall in generation was stated to be on acc ount of delay in start of 
operation of Kudankulam 1&2. The work on the projec t was delayed due to protests 
during September 2011 to March 19, 2012; subsequent  remobilization in the prevailing 
atmosphere and building up momentum took time. Furt her, the commissioning of the 
project was taken up only after fulfilling the dire ctives of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 
July 13, 2013. The Unit-1 was connected to the grid  on October 22, 2013 and its power 
level raised in accordance with the stage-wise clea rances of the Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board. The unit commenced commercial ope ration on December 31, 2014. 
It generated about 3348 Million Units of electricit y till its start of commercial operation. 
Unit-2 is following closely following and the Unit 2 is expected to be operationalised in 
2015-16.  
 
D. THORIUM RESERVES 
 
 
When asked as to whether the government has carried  out assessment of the 
available and extractable reserves of thorium and w hether these reserves are sufficient 
for the three stage nuclear power programme of the country, the Department of Atomic 
Energy stated as follows: 
 
“Thorium is abundantly available in India, in the b each sand, placer deposits 
along the west and east coasts of India. DAE throug h its Atomic Minerals 
Directorate for Exploration & Research (AMD) has su rveyed almost the entire 
Indian coastline and identified locations where the  beach sand contains 
significant quantities of monazite, which is the ma in source of thorium in India. 
Exploration activities carried out by AMD over the past six decades have resulted 
in establishing in situ resources of 11.93 million tonnes of monazite in the 
country, which in turn contains about 1.07 million tonnes of thorium oxide (ThO2). 
 
Unlike Uranium, which can be used as nuclear fuel, thorium cannot be 
directly used as nuclear fuel. In the first instanc e, thorium has to be used along 
with either enriched uranium or plutonium while bei ng put into any reactor. The 
spent fuel then contains an isotope called uranium- 233. This is the second man-
made fissile material apart from plutonium. The thi rd stage of Indian nuclear 
power programme contemplates making use of Uranium-233 to fuel Uranium-233 
– Thorium based reactors, to provide energy securit y to the country for several 
centuries. The intention of the DAE is to use thori um as the mainstay of its long-
term nuclear power programme. Using the nuclear pro perties of uranium, 
plutonium and thorium, it can be easily shown that to get a rapid growth of 
installed nuclear generation capacity in a country like India with limited uranium 
resources, the large-scale deployment of thorium ha s to be postponed to the 
third stage of the Indian nuclear programme after t he plutonium-based (Fast 

 
 
Breeder Reactors) (FBRs) have enabled accelerated g rowth in the nuclear 
generation capacity in the second stage of this programme.  
 
BARC and other research organisations under DAE are  engaged in 
various R&D activities to address the utilisation o f thorium in different types of 
reactors. Some important highlights of these activities are as follows: 
 
(i) Thorium Oxide (Thoria) pellets contained in bun dles have been used in 
the initial cores of our Pressurised Heavy Water Re actors (PHWRs). 
Thoria based fuels have also been irradiated in the  research reactors 
CIRUS and Dhruva. After such irradiation, these fue l elements have been 
examined in the laboratories at BARC, yielding excellent results.  
(ii) The irradiated thoria pins of CIRUS have been reprocessed to obtain 
U233. The recovered uranium 233 has been fabricated  as fuel for the 30 
Kilo Watt (thermal) KAMINI reactor which is in oper ation at Indira Gandhi 
Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) at Kalpakkam.  
(iii) The very challenging technologies for fabrica tion of Thoria based fuel 
pellets, carrying uranium-233, have been established.   
(iv) A 300 MW Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) u sing thorium based 
fuel has been designed and developed. This reactor will serve as a 
technology demonstrator for not only the thorium fu el cycle technologies, 
but also several advanced passive safety features. A Critical Facility was 
commissioned in 2008 at BARC, and is used for carry ing out experiments 
to further validate the physics design features of AHWR. A project for 
launching construction of AHWR has been included in the XII plan.” 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
COMMISSIONING OF PROTOTYPE FAST BREEDER REACTOR 
 
 
 Government of India accorded the administrative an d financial approval for 
launch of PFBR in September 2003 with the completio n duration of seven years i.e. 
September 2010.  Government of India, in April 2012 , has accorded approval for 
revision of the project completion schedule to Sept ember 2014.  The present target for 
project completion is September 2016 as per Governm ent’s approval in December 
2014. 
 
A. DELAY IN Commissioning of PFBR 
 
 
 During oral evidence held on 6 January 2015, the a cting CMD explained in detail 
about the commissioning of PFBR as follows: 
 
“The company was incorporated in October 2003 and t he first pour of concrete 
which marks the beginning of these nuclear projects  actually commenced in 
December’ 2004.  After the tsunami which struck Kal apakkam, this had to be re-
done.  The work has been going on since June 2005 a nd today we have almost 
completed the construction of the project.  All the  reactor components have been 
received and they have been evacuated.  Now what is  happening is that each of 
these components has been commissioned independentl y.  The integrated 
commissioning together of all the equipments is bei ng undertaken in BHAVINI 
now.  The physical progress is 97.65 per cent and t he Cabinet has approved 
date of September 2016 for completion of the projec t and process of integrated 
commissioning.  We would start the process of filli ng of sodium as sodium is 
used as coolant in this reactor.  Sodium filling in the second fuel filling in the main 
vessel will start serially.  All components one aft er another other than the sodium 
pumps would be commissioned and then the fuel will be filled in main vessel 
where fuel will be loaded and would be heated.  We expect that fuel loading 
could commence by July-August 2015 and then there w ould be zero power 
initially. The power would be stepped up gradually because this is the first-of-its-
kind reactor in the country and physics experiment like low and high power need 
to be done for data validation.  Eventually we woul d go for 100 per cent power.  
This is in brief the present status of fast breeder reactor.” 
 In this regard, the representatives of DAE submitt ed as follows: 
 
“...I would also like to submit to the august Commi ttee some of the reasons why 
BHAVINI is facing considerable delay in execution o f this project.  Some of the 
important reasons my colleague has just now mentioned.  This is virtually the first 
of its kind project anywhere in the world.  Among t he developed countries also, 
only earlier Soviet Russia, prior to current Russia n Federation, had started in 60s 
and it is said that they are continuing to build th e same.  They have not come to 
the completion of the breeder reactor.  In effect, the BHAVINI breeder reactor we 

 
 
are building in India is effectively the first of i ts kind for us in the country.  The 
second important point is we have what we describe in the scientific community a 
denial regime.  Anything related to this Plant or e ven any other nuclear plant, 
mostly we will have to design and build it ourselve s.  Even the smallest 
component or part, no other country is prepared to sell it to us.  They have 
extensive means to see if any other importer is ind irectly giving that item to the 
Department of Atomic Energy, they would like to imm ediately put a halt to the 
export of that item from that country. 
 
As I have submitted, every single equipment, every single component has 
to be internally designed, there is always a proces s of trial and error.  They start 
with an expectation that they need this particular function to be discharged.  To 
discharge that function they design equipment and a fter designing that they will 
have to rest it in laboratory conditions.  If it is  successful in laboratory conditions 
on a smaller scale they give it for manufacture to an identified commercial 
manufacturer.  After that it has to be verified whe ther it continues to discharge 
the expected functions when built on a commercial s cale.  So, they are in that 
process.  As my colleague has mentioned, they have completed almost 97 per 
cent of all the equipment.  Two items of equipment,  very delicate ones, they are 
still having small degree of problem with them…….. we are reasonably hopeful, 
as of now, that we will be able to complete the exe cution of the project and 
commence commercial generation of power by September, 2016.” 
 
Acting CMD, BHAVINI further submitted as follows: 
 
“....I can give reasonable assurance to the hon. Ch airperson and Members of the 
Committee that there has been no instance of avoida ble delay between 14 
th  
September and now. The delays whatever happened hav e been completely 
unavoidable. For instance, the initial plan was by February 2014 most of the 
reactor critical components were to be received and  erected and commissioned 
in Kalpakkam. What happened was many of these equip ment were over 
dimensional and first of the kind for which even te chnology development could 
not take place by the designers, the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research. 
So, they were being manufactured straightaway. Ther e were several issues in 
the manufacture because of the stringent specificat ions, because of the stringent 
tolerance required. Even the tools and the methodol ogies were first of the kind. 
So, they also had to be concomitantly evolved along  with the manufacturing 
process. Because of which a number of components we re received after 
September 14. For example, the air heat exchangers,  which are safety grade 
equipment and then the fuel handling equipment like  the fuel transfer machine or 
the transfer arm, were received late and are being commissioned now. That is 
one. The second reason is the receipt, erection and  commissioning had to be 
done in a sequential manner and not in a parallel m anner. So, non-receipt or 
delay in receipt of one component resulted in the d elay of erection of another 
component. So, these were the reasons because of wh ich there was this delay. 
Now, as we have projected, by the end of this year we should be able to start fuel 

 
 
loading in the reactor and start generating low pow er initially and then step up 
power gradually and reach 100 per cent power by September 2016.”  
 
 DAE further stated as follows: 
  
“The first question is relating to the enormous del ay in this project and the hon. 
Member has expressed the opinion that somebody shou ld be made responsible.  
While I fully agree with that sentiment, I would li ke to once again submit to the 
Committee that this is the first of its kind effort .  Nuclear technology is one of the 
most complicated technologies in the realm of scien ce and technology.  What 
has been done earlier in other countries is the pro of of concept. Our scientists 
also know that such and such a thing can be done to  achieve such a result but 
the actual technological pathways of doing those th ings and achieving that result 
is a thing which is left to ourselves to identify, to design and to invent and to 
actually implement on ground.  I would like to humb ly submit that our scientists 
are making the best of their efforts and whenever w e do a thing for the first time, 
it is definitely likely to take more time than init ial envisaged and it is likely to take 
more cost than initially envisaged.  
 
 In the same vein, the current project is seeing te chnological problems.  
Most recent ones are the detection of neutrons and another piece of equipment. 
Every single piece of equipment has to be considere d as critical for the project.  
The equipment has to meet all the requirements and all the standards.   It has to 
be approved by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board b efore it can actually be 
utilised in a safe manner.  Therefore, I humbly req uest hon.  Members that we 
place trust in the scientific community with whom w e have entrusted this project 
and I sincerely believe that they are making best p ossible effort and they should 
see the completion of this project.” 
 
B. CLOSE DOWN OF FAST BREEDER REACTORS 
 
 
From information provided by BHAVINI, the Committee  noticed that out of 18 
units / projects using Fast Breeder Technology worl d over as many as 8 units / projects 
have been closed down. It was also noted that all t hese units pertain to developed 
countries viz US, UK, France& Germany etc.  In this  regard, on being asked as to why 
most of the developed countries have closed down th eir fast breeder reactors 
particularly in the context of the financial viabil ity and safety/security/environmental 
threat from the reactors, the DAE in a written reply stated as follows: 
 
“Out of the 8 reactors that have been closed down worldwide, four reactors are of 
experimental type, EBR_II (USA), ENRICO FERMI-I(USA ), DOUNREAY DFR 
(UK) and KARLSRUHE KNK-II(GERMANY). Most of the dev eloped countries 
have decided to proceed for generation-4 reactors a nd are presently engaged in 
designing Fast Breeder Reactors meeting generation- 4 criteria which are being 
evolved. Japan has Monju & JOYO reactors. These rea ctors have not started 
after post Fukushima incident, though the Japan Ato mic Energy Commission has 

 
 
plans to restart them. In Russia BN 600 reactor is under operation and BN 800 is 
scheduled to commence commercial operation by the e nd of December, 2014. 
Russia is also designing a 1200 MWe FBR. France is also in the process of 
designing generation-4 reactor and the ASTRID react or is expected to be 
launched for construction by 2020. Germany took a p olitical decision to phase 
out nuclear power programme in their country.”  
 
In this regard, the representative of BHAVINI stated as follows: 
 
“In Japan, they have got two reactors - Joyo and Mo nju. Joyo is the experimental 
reactor and the Monju is a commercial type reactor.  So in respect of both the 
reactors, they had some problems in the refuelling machines. They have rectified 
all the deficiencies. Post-Fukushima, they are wait ing for Government clearance 
to start all the reactors. So, they expect that the  fast breeder reactor will be 
started. That is the position in Japan. 
 
 In Russia, the BN 600 reactor is operating since 1 980 and it is operating at 
a very high capacity for the last 30 years. They ha ve also started one reactor, the 
BN 800. In December, they made the reactor critical. This year, they will be going 
for commercial production. In China, they have star ted one experimental reactor, 
the CEFR. That is also operating. The European coun tries have not gone in for 
fast breeder reactors because they do not require t his type of a reactor to 
generate power. They have got enough uranium from w hich they can operate the 
Boiling Water Reactor and the Pressure Water Reacto r to get power. But  
countries like India do not have uranium. That is w hy, Dr. Baba envisaged the 
three-stage programme in which with the available u ranium in the first stage, we 
will produce power;  the plutonium produced in the first stage will be used for this. 
Plutonium will go to the second stage and then to t he third stage which is thorium 
based. Unless we have sufficient number of second s tage reactors having 
plutonium which has more breeding ratio and neutron  flux, we cannot 
immediately rush to the third stage. So, at least 1 5-20 years of operation of the 
second stage is required so that we have thorium wh ich can be converted into U-
233. So, that is the third stage when you are achie ving it. This is a step by step 
programme for India. When we achieve the third stag e, maybe after 20 years, 
India will have sufficient power available through the thorium cycle. Even though 
we do not have  uranium, yet  the  breeding ratio m ore than one, enough fuel will 
be generated subsequent to the commissioning of the  third stage. So, this is a 
stage-wise programme which our country is envisagin g. In the second stage, the 
PFBR is the first reactor to be commissioned and we  have to do it very safely to 
avoid any lacuna in commissioning. As we are tellin g that the world is watching 
us, we should not make any mistakes. The experience  from other reactors in 
other countries shows the sodium leak which is the main thing.  So, we should 
have a systematic approach so that with safe condit ion, we will be 
commissioning the PFBR.” 
 
 

 
 
 
C. ROLE OF DAE  
 
When asked about the steps taken by DAE for expedit ious completion of the 
project, it replied as follows: 
 
“Steering committee headed by Secretary, DAE conduc ts regular meetings on 
quarterly basis for monitoring the activities of va rious projects including PFBR 
being built by BHAVINI. Achievements, constraints, physical and financial 
progress, forthcoming activities are reviewed criti cally. These meetings help in 
identifying and resolving the inter-organisational issues. Further the support 
extended from different units of DAE to PFBR are re viewed and strengthened 
wherever required.” 
 
On being asked why the resultant time-lag was not e nvisaged or factored in 
when the original schedule was proposed despite knowing fully well that the equipments 
would be manufactured for the first time, the DAE stated: 
 
“When original schedule was proposed, IGCAR had det ermined completion time 
based on technology development of a few critical n uclear components. Since it 
was not practical to manufacture reactor size equip ment during technology 
development programme, only scaled model or sectors  of the equipments were 
manufactured. When equipment were ordered for manuf acture for PFBR and 
tested, many new issues cropped up including scale up issue, not envisaged 
during technology development, requiring additional time for resolution.” 
 
The Department of Atomic Energy was asked to furnis h a detailed statement 
about the exact road map for the remaining works /s tages of completion of the project.  
In its reply, the Department submitted: 
 
“PFBR is in advanced stage of completion. Erection of all reactor components 
has been completed. Most of the supporting systems have been commissioned 
and are being operated on regular shift basis. Fini shing works are under 
progress which includes testing, integrated commiss ioning and last mile 
connectivity from control room.  
 
The following activities are remaining to be done for completion of the project: 
 
/head2right Sodium filling, purification  and commissioning of  secondary sodium circuits * 
/head2right Sodium filling, purification and commissioning of safety grade decay heat 
removal circuits* 
/head2right Filling of sodium and purification in Main vessel * 
/head2right Commissioning of sodium pumps 
/head2right Testing of fuel handling equipments in sodium at 2 00 deg C and at 450 deg C* 
/head2right Commissioning of Neutronic channels & Reactor prot ection system  

 
 
/head2right Replacement of Dummy Sub-Assemblies and loading of  Fuel Sub-
Assemblies* 
/head2right First approach to criticality* 
/head2right zero power tests* 
/head2right Raising of power to 20% of full power and conducti ng all intermediate power 
tests* 
/head2right Raising of power to 30% of full power* 
/head2right Rolling of turbine and synchronizing 
/head2right Raising of power to 50% of full power and conducti ng high power physics 
tests* 
/head2right Raising of power to 90% of full power and conducti ng high power physics 
tests* 
/head2right Raising of power to 100% of full power and conduct ing high power physics 
tests* 
/head2right Commercial operation 
 
*indicates that clearances from Atomic Energy Regul atory Board at each 
stage is required prior to start of the activity. 
 
With completion of all of the above said activities , it is expected that the PFBR 
project will be commissioned by September 2016.  
 
D. STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE TO PFBR PLANT, KALP AKKAM 
 
 
 In order to have a firsthand information about the  development of the PFBR, the 
Committee decided to undertake on the spot study vi sit of BHAVINI’s plant at 
Kalpakkam on 12 February 2015.  During their study visit, the Committee found that 
PFBR complies with the latest state of the art tech nology; its design is above Gen-III 
and closer to Gen-III+ reactors. 
 
 During informal discussion held with representativ es of BHAVINI during the study 
visit, the Committee were informed that since its i nception BHAVINI has been engaged 
in consistent and concerted efforts with the neighb orhood populace to allay their 
apprehensions, if any, on the safety of nuclear pow er. Through their continuous 
activities and participation in the well-being and emancipation of the local people, a 
symbiotic relationship has been fostered and maintained. This is borne out by the fact of 
peaceful co-existence of BHAVINI with the local pop ulation, even during times of 
disturbances in the other nuclear power station in the state.  Further, technical visit to 
BHAVINI site is regularly arranged for the students  from neighborhood schools/colleges 
and they in turn are also adequately equipped to al lay the fears of people. Industrial 
visits for technical students are permitted and in- plant training is imparted to have 
firsthand knowledge on the safety of PFBR. Pictoria l pamphlets about the need for 
nuclear power and on the safety features of PFBR ar e distributed to the local public. 
Street plays in regional language are also conducte d to educate the public on the need 
for nuclear power.  
  

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
 
COST OF PRODUCTION AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY ON NUCLEAR POWER 
 
 According to BHAVINI, initially the project was to  be handled by Indira Gandhi 
Center for Atomic Research (IGCAR) and the Detailed  Project Report (DPR) was 
prepared by them. However, later on the company (BH AVINI) was formed to execute 
the project which led to cost escalation due to tax and other additional costs.  Explaining 
the reason for the project being taken away from IG CAR, the Company in a written 
information stated that IGCAR, Kalpakkam has carrie d out Research & Development 
and design of PFBR. Government took the decision to  build the project in company 
mode in view of the long term perspective of many f uture fast breeder reactors that 
have to be built in the country on commercial scale .  For the implementation of the 
PFBR project, the Government has approved formation  of a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) under the companies Act 1956. BHAVINI will co nstruct and operate future Fast 
Breeder Reactors too. 
 
 
A. COST ESCALATION OF PFBR 
 
 
 As per information furnished by the Company, the c ost of the project in the DPR 
was Rs. 3440 crore as prepared by IGCAR in the year  2002 and the sanctioned cost 
was Rs. 3492 crore which was inclusive of 52 crore as the interest during construction. 
The Committee noticed that the cost of the Prototyp e Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) 
Project went up by     Rs. 2185 Cr. from Rs. 3,492 Cr. to Rs. 5,677 Cr. (increase of 
62%) even though 5% escalation per annum had been p rovided for in the DPR. The 
reasons for huge cost escalation were stated to be change in tax structure, inflation rate 
of 11% in 2008, hike in salary of employees and mod ifications in execution of the 
project.   
 
When asked about the modifications in the project a nd increase in cost 
attributable to these modifications, the Company in a written reply stated as follows: 
 
“PFBR is prototype reactor and first of its kind in  India. Complexity of the project 
has necessitated substantial changes / modification s in specifications / designs 
during detailed engineering as well as during manuf acturing of components, 
which resulted in an increase in the cost of raw ma terials, machines and 
manpower. Price variation clause as well as changes  / modifications in 
specifications and designs subsequent to placement of orders in few other cases 
have resulted in increase of cost by Rs. 284 crore.” 
 
  

 
 
On being asked to provide factor-wise increase in c ost, the Company submitted 
as follows: 
 
Sl. No.  Particulars  Amount (Rs. 
in Crore). 
1 Escalation (present & future) of core materials s uch as stainless 
steel, copper, cement, steel, construction material s, POL and labour 
for the items covered under all  USI 
747 
2 Changes/modifications in specifications/ designs and effect of price 
variation clause 
284 
3 Foreign exchange rate variation 103 
4 Tsunami rehabilitation cost 4 
5 Other Items   
5.1 Items other than at construction facilities not  considered under DPR 
 
382 
5.2 Taxes and duties 206 
5.3 Working capital 136 
5.4 Interest during construction 106 
5.5 Increase in Housing expenditure 87 
5.6 Expenses beyond criticality up to commercial op eration 60 
5.7 Heavy Duty crawler crane 56 
5.8 Credits ( Sale of In-firm power) 55 
5.9 Sixth  pay commission effect  on the Project ma nagement & 
superintendence 
17 
5.10 Induction of CISF 16 
5.11 Project Station Building 14 
5.12 Contingencies -61 
5.13 Net interest income -27 
 Total  2185 
 
B. ECONOMIC VIABILITY AND SUSTAINABILITY OF NUCLEAR  POWER 
 
 
BHAVINI has stated that the cost of nuclear power g enerated by PFBR is sure to 
become competitive as technology of fast breeder re actor reaches maturity, which may, 
however, take some time.  When asked about the expe cted time frame by which the 
cost of nuclear power will become competitive and e conomical in comparison with other 
source of energy in its written reply, DAE submitted as under: 
 
“By the time BHAVINI starts construction of FBR 1&2 , the experience and 
lessons learnt from construction, operation & maint enance of PFBR will make 
Fast Breeder Reactor technology and operation more robust. Besides, the cost of 
FBR 1 & 2 is expected to be more competitive than P FBR on account of 
economies of constructing twin units in the same si te as PFBR and with minimal 
changes to PFBR design.” 
 
 

 
 
On being asked as to when the company is expected t o break even and start 
making Profits, the DAE in a written reply submitte d that BHAVINI is expected to break 
even when the 500 MWe PFBR operates at 62.8% capacity factor. 
 
 In a detailed note on the relative project cost, g estation period, cost of 
generation, etc. of the each sources of power gener ation in the country, the DAE reply 
submitted as follows: 
 
“The cost of generation or the unit energy cost is the barometer for adjudging 
economic viability and competitiveness of a source of electricity generation. The 
cost of generation of hydro electricity, which is h ighly location specific and 
intermittent sources like renewable are not exactly  comparable to those of base 
load units of nuclear, coal and gas.  The cost of g eneration of base load 
generation units broadly comprise capital cost, ope ration & maintenance costs 
and fuel costs. Typically, ratio of unit energy cos t and fuel cost of nuclear power 
ranges from 80:20 to 75:25 in a new nuclear power s tation while in case of new 
coal power stations, the ratio is typically 40:60 to 50:50; and in case of gas power 
stations the same ranges from 20:80 to 25:75. Over a period of time, cost of fuel 
increases and thus thermal power tariffs are highly  sensitive to fuel prices 
whereas tariff of nuclear power is not so. 
 
The cost of setting up power projects is technology  specific. The 
benchmark costs of coal based thermal power station s at 2011 prices range from 
Rs. 4.01 to 5.37  crore /MW (source: CERC). The ove rnight costs of nuclear 
power projects KAPP 3&4 and RAPP 7&8 under construction at 2011 prices work 
out to about Rs.7.0 crore per MW.  The overnight co st of Gorakhpur Haryana 
Anu Vidyut Pariyojana (GHAVP), for which administra tive approval & financial 
sanction was accorded in February, 2014, works out to 14.71 crore per MW at 
2021 price level. 
 
 
The gestation period of nuclear power plants, which  are typically set up as 
twin units, is five and half years from first pour of concrete (FPC) to commercial 
operation for the first unit and six years for the second unit. The gestation period 
of coal power stations is typically around four years.” 
 
When asked about the sustainability and environment al implications of nuclear 
power, the Department of Atomic Energy in its written reply stated: 
 
“In terms of sustainability, nuclear power is inher ently sustainable. Its potential is 
huge and the spent fuel can be reprocessed and recy cled to multiply its potential 
manifold. Nuclear fuel is an intense energy source,  and very small quantities of 
fuel are required to fuel a large power plant. For instance, the annual fuel 
requirement of a 700 MW nuclear power plant (PHWR t ype) would be about 125 
tons  of uranium (about 12 truck loads per year) and for  a LWR type NPP, only 
about 30 tons of enriched uranium (about 3 truck lo ads per year) for 1000 MW , 
as against 4 to 5 million tons of coal (about 5 to 6 trainloads a day) for thermal 

 
 
power plant of similar capacity. The latter puts im mense pressure on rail, port 
and other infrastructure, apart from the emissions arising out of transporting such 
large quantities of coal and resulting environmenta l impact.  Nuclear power 
plants have no greenhouse gas emissions and are cle an. The lifecycle 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions of nuclear power pla nts are comparable to 
those of renewable like Hydro & Wind. Deployment of  Nuclear Power to produce 
electricity avoids emission of Carbon dioxides, thu s help in decarbonisation of 
environment.  
 
A 1000 MW nuclear power plant thus saves about 6-8 million tons of CO2 
emissions annually. Land requirement for setting up  nuclear power plants (per 
MW) is among the lowest as compared to other electr icity generating 
technologies based on coal and hydro. Coal based po wer plants require 
additional land for coal and ash handling facilitie s and for hydro it involves 
submergence of significant amount of land. Renewabl e energy resource such as 
solar and wind require large land area. Further, on ly about 20% to 30% of the 
land acquired for setting up nuclear power plants i s used for locating plant 
buildings and facilities. The remaining land is acq uired for establishing an 
‘exclusion zone’ around the plant. This is maintain ed in its pristine form and 
further enriched by establishing a green belt for e ndemic species. This attracts a 
lot of native and migratory birds, animals and othe r forms of life and rich natural 
ecosystem flourishes around nuclear power plants.” 
 
C. COMPARATIVE TARIFF 
 
 
 According to DAE, the notified tariffs of nuclear power presently in operation 
range from Rs. 0.97 to Rs. 3.43 per kWh. The tariff  of recently commissioned 
Kudankulam unit is provisionally projected to be about Rs. 3.94 per unit.  
 
The tariffs (2013-14) in respect of generating stat ions in the central sector of 
other generating technologies range as follows: 
 
Source / Fuel  Tariff Range (Rs./kWh) 
Coal (Pithead) 1.47 to 3.85 
Coal (Non-Pithead) 3.75 to 5.29 
Lignite 2.79 to 4.01 
Natural Gas 3.36 to 4.39 
Liquefied Natural Gas 9.20 to 12.88 
Liquid Fuel (Naphtha / HSD) 8.46 to 13.67 
Hydro 0.79 to 5.91 
         
Source: Central Electricity Regulatory Commission –  Report on Short Term Power 
Market in India, 2013-14 
 
The generic levelised tariffs notified by CERC for renewable for 2013-14 are: 
 

 
 
Source Tariff Range (Rs./kWh) 
Wind 3.93 to 6.29 
Solar PV 8.75 
Solar Thermal 11.90 
Small Hydro 3.75 to 5.16 
Biomass 5.49 to 6.24 
Biomass Gasifier  5.85 to 6.65 
 
Source: Central Electricity Regulatory Commission – Order dated 28 
th  February 2013 on 
Petition no. 243/SM/2012 (Suo Motu)  
 
 During oral evidence, the representatives of DAE i n this regard stated as under: 
"........ the cost competitiveness of power and the  enormous cost that BHAVNI 
has run into.  I would like to submit that as this is the first project the cost is likely 
to be more than the second or third projects.  In t he first project, we will be facing 
all the technological problems and so, there will b e more time and effort required.  
Once we master the technology, it will become all r ight. We are already 
processing a proposal to set up prototype fast bree der reactor I and II.  We are 
completely confident that when we take up the secon d and third plants, they will 
be much less costlier and they will be done in a much faster period of time.  
 Regarding competitiveness of power, I do admit tha t nuclear power, as of 
today, may not be of the same cost as that of tradi tional thermal power. In this 
regard, I would like to make a small submission.  I  am sure that all hon. Members 
are aware of it.  When we speak of competitiveness of power, it is not merely 
capital expenditure.  It is true that capital expen diture of coal based thermal 
power today is about Rs. 5 crore per megawatt.  The  capital expenditure of 
windmills and solar power is also coming down.  Cap ital expenditure of nuclear 
power has come to Rs. 21 crore per megawatt.  This is as per the latest nuclear 
power plant by NPCL in Haryana and approved by the Union Cabinet.  But what 
also is important is the tariff or the cost of powe r generated.  That is more 
appropriate yardstick or indicator to compare.  In Haryana, we have prepared the 
project report and obtained the approval of the Uni on Cabinet for Rs. 6.49 per 
megawatt in the year 2021.   It has been estimated by the Ministry of Finance 
also that this reasonably compares with other modes  of generation of power. For 
all the other modes of nuclear power generation, we are making sincere efforts to 
achieve approximately the same level of cost of gen eration.  so,  my humble 
submission is that the cost of power finally genera ted and supplied is likely to be 
of comparable level to that of other modes of power  generation.  Let us compare 
these different methods of generation. For example,  when we take wind power, 
the capital cost of per megawatt could be some amou nt but it has to be 
considered in terms of the availability of power.  Nuclear power once completed 
is available 24x7 excepting the maintenance and shu tdown periods similar to 
coal power. But solar power unit or the wind power unit would not be available 
24x7 because of inherent inadequacies.  So, they ar e not perfectly comparable 
on the capital cost point of view."  

 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
PROCUREMENT POLICY 
 
 
When asked about the procurement policy, if any, la id down by the government 
regarding procurement of technologically sophistica ted equipments in the nuclear 
energy sector, DAE stated that it adopts Government  guidelines for procurement by the 
organisation under its control. The companies lay d own their own procurement policies. 
NPCIL, which was established in 1987, has got procu rement manual. BHAVINI has 
adopted the same for their procurement. 
 
BHAVINI has stated that manufacturing of PFBR react or and sodium service 
equipments was awarded to Indian manufacturers with  proven track records.  In this 
regard, when asked about the criteria adopted for t he selection of the stated 
manufacturers, the Company in its written reply submitted as follows: 
 
  “ The manufacturers have been chosen based on the pas t experience in 
manufacturing and delivering equipments for nuclear  industries adopting high 
quality. Their financial capability and availabilit y of high technology infrastructure 
has also been verified before award of contract.”   
 
On being asked about the extent of indigenization i n the equipment produced for 
the projects, DAE submitted in its written reply: 
 
“The construction of PFBR is being facilitated by I ndian efforts and indigenous 
capabilities. More than 95% of PFBR’s equipment has  been sourced from Indian 
Industries. However some components like large size  valves, seals, SS316LN 
plates, sodium, variable frequency drives for sodiu m pumps had to be imported 
either directly or through suppliers as the require d technology wasn’t readily 
available in India. Our endeavor is to indigenise these items too for future FBRs.”  
 
 In connection with procurement of equipment, the re presentatives of BHAVINI 
stated during evidence as follows: 
".........I would assure all the hon. Members that every equipment that has been 
installed is to the benchmark of technology. There is time delay. We have to 
admit that. Whatever has already been installed is functioning as per the 
requirement at hundred percent design expectation. That assurance gives me a 
lot of confidence. The Indian industry supplies onl y very major equipment which 
has been tried first time. Industries like WEL, L&T  are giants. They were facing a 
lot of technological problems. For that matter, the  scientists of Indira Gandhi 
Atomic Research Centre sat with L&T people, WEL peo ple  and solved this 
problem on day to day basis. That is why this equip ment is now delivered. Now, 
there is no equipment which is not delivered. Only two small equipment like the 
neutron detectors and radiation monitoring are yet to be delivered by the ECIL." 

 
 
They further stated: 
"The fast breeder reactors operate at a very high t emperature of 550 degree 
centigrade. Whatever PSW reactors are operating til l now all over India, they 
operate at a maximum temperature of only 300 degree  centigrade. So, the ECIL 
till now successfully manufactured the equipment fo r 300 degree centigrade 
temperature. It became double now – 550 degree cent igrade. When they want to 
manufacture for 550 degree centigrade, they have ma nufactured it. We tested it 
first at 350 degree centigrade and then 400 and 500  degree centigrade. 
Ultimately, at 500 degree centigrade, it just faile d. Then, the BARC scientists 
spent night and day and came out with a different m ethodology of plating all the 
uranium. It is successfully produced, tested and ca librated. It is put in the Kamini 
reactor at Kalpakkam. It is functioning already.  I  would like to give the assurance 
to all the hon. Members that there is no uncertaint y involved  in this. The final 
tuning of the instruments in the circuits, getting all the signals in the control room, 
giving our commands, getting the response correctly , documents, going to the 
Regulator Board, all this  happen. Now onwards, the  Regulatory Board comes 
into the picture at every stage. For the initial fu el loading, the Regulatory Board 
will come and give clearance. For that, I have to d emonstrate the fuel machine, 
take so many bundles nicely,  go back and put back the bundles nicely without 
any problem. So, this demonstration has to happen. 
 Then, the coolant, the liquid sodium comes. Many c ountries experimented 
with this liquid sodium. They faced some problems a nd then they had withdrawn 
it. But in our Indira Gandhi Atomic Research Centre , the fast breeder test reactor 
successfully demonstrated 30 years of operation wit hout any sodium problem. 
Now, we have to start liquid sodium purification pr ocess. It is a time-consuming 
process. It cannot be done in three months’ time. N obody in the earth or the 
world can reduce the timing of that because 1800 to nne of sodium has to be 
purified. That is the one-time bottleneck which can not be compressed. With all 
the inputs put together, I am sure by July we will start loading the fuel and by 
September, 2015 the reactor would become critical. Then, the low-power, high-
power experiment will go on." 
On being asked about the extent and manner in which  the embargo regime is 
responsible for the delays in the procurement of sp ecial items like radiography quality 
castings etc., the Company stated: 
 
  “BHAVINI has placed orders on Indian manufacturers.  For procurement of 
special raw materials such as SS 316LN forged bars etc., main vendors placed 
orders on foreign countries. Even after placement o f orders, the party denied to 
deliver / manufacture equipments for nuclear instal lations.  Some countries, such 
as Germany, after completing the manufacturing at t he time of final stage of 
supply have withheld the dispatch due to embargo. H ence, due to embargo 
problems, limited source of supply and the unique r equirement, special 
components were delayed.”  
 

 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
 
SAFETY OF NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 
 
A. SAFETY MEASURES ADOPTED 
 
 
 According to the Company, safety measures adopted for the PFBR including the 
additional ones which have been / are being put in place keeping in view Tsunami and 
Fukushima incident are as follows: 
 
a) "Reactor Protection System: two independent syst ems are provided. Any one 
system can shut down the reactor. 
b) Core-Catcher to collect the molten corium in cas e of extreme event of melting 
of seven fuel bundles. 
c) Reactor trip is provided in case of a high seism ic activity in the plant area.  
d) Safety grade decay heat removal system (SGDHR) w hich requires no 
electrical or pneumatic power supply for its operat ion. (It is a passive system 
and can remove heat from the reactor). 
e) 4 Nos. of Emergency Diesel Generators. Two numbe rs are sufficient to cater 
to the emergency load requirements.  
f) Finished floor levels of all important plant bui ldings are 9.7 meters above 
mean sea level (which is nearly double of the maxim um water level rise of 4.7 
meters observed at site during the Tsunami in the year 2004). 
g) Shore protection and Tsunami bund is provided al ong the sea coast to protect 
the plant against entry of water during Tsunami. 
h) Sodium system : 
 
Many precautions are taken to prevent sodium leakage and fire 
 
- Guard pipe are provided around sodium piping in r eactor building. 
- Leak collection trays are provided for the second ary sodium piping 
- All pipes are having weld joints only (No flange joint) 
- Sodium firefighting system is a permanent set up in the plant.  
 
Safety measures adopted in view of Tsunami and Fukushima event 
 
PFBR had faced Tsunami in December 2004. Many novel  design features 
were incorporated and layout changes were undertake n to face any future 
Tsunami. In light of this, Post-Fukushima requireme nt of design change was 
minimal. A stress test was done after Fukushima and  PFBR plant was found to 
be safe. However, as a matter of abundant precautio n, the following have been 
done at PFBR post-Fukushima: 
 
a) Tsunami protection bund provided on the sea side  is capable of absorbing the 
Tsunami surge pressure and reduces the water force.  Existing Tsunami bund 

 
 
height will be increased further. Also Tsunami bund will be extended further to 
cover Power Island besides nuclear island. 
b) Water-tight seal doors will be provided to all t he entries to the NICB (Nuclear 
Island Connected Building) to prevent water entry during any Tsunami.  
c) 2 Nos. of 500 KVA each capacity Mobile Diesel Ge nerator sets are provided 
to hook-up the power supply to control room & emerg ency lighting in the 
extreme cases, if all diesel generators fail.  They  will be stationed at site 
(placed away from sea) to meet the emergency power requirement. These 
Mobile Diesel Generators can be hooked up to the ex isting electrical system 
to meet the emergency power requirement if all othe r sources of power at 
PFBR become unavailable.  
d) Diesel operated pumps and bore wells will enable  water addition to the spent 
fuel storage pool (SFSP). This facility will be use d if all other normal sources 
for water addition to SFSP are unavailable. Further , the water level and 
temperature monitoring will be provided.  
e) Provision of solar powered lighting in critical areas of the plant is on the anvil.  
f) Emergency preparedness plan has been prepared an d rehearsed.  This 
includes plans for onsite and offsite emergency. An  emergency response 
center is being created with adequate provisions/eq uipment and provision for 
communication with outside agencies. 
 
The safety of Indian NPPs against external events w as reviewed by the 
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) before incept ion of the project itself. 
AERB has also reviewed the plant specific parameter s to ensure safety under all 
operation and transient situations. Enough diversit y and redundancy has been 
provided to cater to even the worst situations incl uding natural calamities. Severe 
natural events such as earthquakes, Tsunami and flo ods and their possible 
effects, which inter alia include extended station black out have been assessed 
and addressed. AERB has already reviewed probabilis tic safety assessment 
report of PFBR. All safety, security and emergency preparedness measures have 
been instituted.  AERB conducts monthly regulatory inspections to ensure that 
the quality and safety practices are being followed  during construction and 
commissioning of PFBR.” 
 
When asked as to whether DAE has laid down any stan dard operating procedure 
(SOPs) or guidelines and / or safety manual for bei ng followed in setting up, operation 
and maintenance of nuclear power plants in the country, DAE in a written reply stated: 
 
“The safety of Indian Nuclear power plants is gover ned and regulated by Atomic 
Energy Regulatory Board. AERB has issued Standard O perating Procedure 
(SOPs) for setting up, operation and maintenance of  nuclear power plants in the 
country.” 
 
Further, on being asked whether these SOPs / guidel ines / safety manuals are in 
conformity with guidelines laid down by IAEA, DAE submitted that: 
 

 
 
“SOP’s for Indian Nuclear Power Plants are not infe rior to that of IAEA. It is 
reiterated that in many instances SOP’s are much mo re stringent in India as 
compared to international levels.” 
 
 
When asked about the extant status of Nuclear Safet y Regulatory Authority Bill, 
2011, DAE stated that: 
 
“The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2014  which is essentially the 
NCRA Bill, 2011 along with its official amendments could not be taken up for 
consideration by Parliament due to dissolution of 1 5th Lok Sabha.  With the 
change of Government, PMO has directed this Departm ent to carry out inter-
ministerial consultations on the NSRA Bill, 2014 af resh.  Accordingly, a draft note 
for the Cabinet on the NSRA Bill, 2014 was sent to various 
Ministries/Departments for comments.  Comments from  most of the 
Ministries/Departments have been received and the s ame are being examined in 
the Department.” 
 
Explaining the steps taken by BHAVINI to allay the apprehensions among the 
general public regarding the risks associated with nuclear reactors, the Company in its 
written reply submitted as follows: 
 
“BHAVINI has been actively engaged in public outrea ch programme to allay the 
apprehensions. Public is informed on robust design features and safety aspects 
of PFBR plant. A glimpse of strategies for outreach  program adopted by 
BHAVINI are as follows:   
 
/head2right Reach to people through press and media 
/head2right Reach to people through students and teaching facu lties 
/head2right Neighbouring villagers are encouraged to visit PFB R site to clear 
apprehensions in their mind.  
/head2right Mark presence of BHAVINI professionals among the n eighbouring 
population and identify ourselves with them.  
/head2right BHAVINI Participation in the public gathering like  exhibitions etc. 
/head2right Industrial visits are being permitted for students  and In-plant training has 
been imparted to a larger extent. 
/head2right Base line survey and Medical surveys have been tak en up through external 
agencies and shared with all the concerned.  
/head2right Installation of BHAVINI banners in most of the imp ortant seminars, 
conferences, symposiums, workshops etc.  
/head2right BHAVINI outreach programme includes seminars on nu clear awareness for 
the students and neighbouring villagers. However ra lly, street drama, print 
and media have facilitated awareness. 
/head2right Senior BHAVINI management officials have been peri odically visiting 
schools, universities, engineering colleges, arts &  science colleges and 
given presentation about the nuclear energy for students.  

 
 
/head2right BHAVINI team in a mobile van with the safety banne rs have been visiting 
schools and educating them about the nuclear & industrial safety aspects. 
 
In this way, BHAVINI has developed many educational  institutions & 
students as positive messengers of Department of Atomic Energy.” 
 
 
B. NUCLEAR WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
 
The Committee enquired about the directives laid do wn by the Government for 
the safe treatment / disposal of nuclear waste emer ging out of various nuclear plant 
operating in the country.  In response, the DAE  in its reply submitted as follows: 
 
“Most of the radioactive waste generated in nuclear power plant is retained within 
the fuel assemblies and after discharge of spent fu el from the reactor they are 
stored in spent fuel storage facility at the power station for a minimum period of 5 
years (for Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors) and 10  years (for Light Water 
Reactors) for cooling down.  India follows ‘closed fuel cycle’ policy in which all the 
spent fuel is reprocessed after adequate cooling.  Hence the spent fuel from the 
nuclear power station is shifted to the reprocessin g plant after cooling.  At the 
reprocessing plant the Uranium and Plutonium is sep arated from the radioactive 
fission products and sent to fuel fabrication plant  for making fuel for Fast Breeder 
Reactor based second stage of power reactor program me.  Radioactive waste, 
which is below 3% of the total volume of spent fuel , is vitrified into glass matrix.  
At the present level of technology, for 4 T/year of  vitrified waste product is 
generated corresponding to the operation of 1 GWe e lectrical power station for a 
period of one year, at 80% capacity factor.  This w aste is then stored at vitrified 
storage facility for a period up to 40 years.  Later this waste can be transported to 
geological disposal facility for long term storage.   Taking into account the 
projected growth of the nuclear power, sufficient q uantity of cooled vitrified waste 
will be available only after 2070 for transfer into geological disposal facility.”   
 
When asked as to what extent the ongoing project of  BHAVINI (PFBR) is in 
conformity with these directives, DAE stated: 
 
“The spent fuel from second stage programme involvi ng Fast Breeder Reactors, 
being/to be constructed by BHAVINI will be cooled f or a period of 3 years and 
transported to Fast Reactor Fuel Cycle Facility loc ated at the same site.  In this 
facility, fuel will be reprocessed to take out plut onium and the radioactive fission 
products from the Uranium. The depleted uranium and  plutonium will be used for 
production of fresh fuel for the Fast Breeder React ors.  The radioactive fission 
product will then be cooled for about seven years b efore it is taken up for 
vitrification.  Vitrified fission product will be t reated in the same manner as stated 
above.” 
 
 
 

 
 
During oral evidence held on 6 January 2015, the Co mmittee expressed 
apprehensions about possible threat due to theft or  loss of highly enriched uranium or 
plutonium and desired to know as to what safeguards  are being taken to ensure there is 
no theft or loss of the fuel.  In response, the representatives of DAE stated as follows: 
 
“According to the Atomic Energy Act, nuclear fuel i s the property of the 
Government of India, anywhere in any form, right fr om ore up to the finished fuel, 
and even when it is being used inside the nuclear p ower plant after it is used, 
that is the spent fuel in any form is the property of the Government of India. The 
Government of India keeps continuous checks and acc ounts for the fuel, right 
down to the last gram. We have broadly two types of  nuclear power plants right 
now. When it comes to the verification of fuel acco unts, the first type is called 
within the safeguards of the IAEA. When we bring ou r nuclear power plants 
within the safeguards as established by the IAEA, w e become entitled to import 
fuel for those reactors and the IAEA inspectors com e in a regular manner to 
verify how the fuel is being used, how it is being stored, whether it is being 
accounted for to the last gram. In a similar manner , for what we describe as out-
of safeguards plants, those plants which are not un der the IAEA safeguards, but 
are under our own internal safeguards, because for variety of reasons, the 
Government of India has decided not to place all th e nuclear power plants under 
the IAEA safeguards. So, for the plants which are u nder the domestic 
safeguards, the Government of India has a fail-proo f system to continuously 
monitor and scrutinise the safety of the fuel right  down to the last gram. I seek to 
assure the hon. Committee that we need not have any  worry on this count. The 
other point is the use of thorium as a nuclear fuel  for power. This conceptually 
has been admitted that the conceptual knowledge is there. But the actual 
translation of the conceptual knowledge into actual  practice is still considered a 
few stages away. Right now we are in the second sta ge. This might come as part 
of the third stage. It is true that India has consi derable amount of thorium 
reserves in the form of monazite that is found on t he sea shores of the country. 
We have about 10 million tonnes estimated reserves of monazite. Monazite when 
broken gives rise to thorium. Monazite processing a lso gives rise to uranium of a 
small quantity. This thorium can be utilised. One h on. Member asked about the 
Rawatbhata matter. I would humbly like to submit th at Rawatbhata is under the 
Nuclear power Corporation of India."  
C. CIVIL LIABILITY OF NUCLEAR DAMAGES 
 
 During evidence held on 6 January 2015, the Commit tee desired to know about 
the latest position regarding civil liability for n uclear damage.  In response, the 
representatives of DAE during evidence deposed: 
 "........The next point is about the civil liabili ty for nuclear damages. It us under 
considerable discussion. The Department of Atomic E nergy in consultation with 
the General Insurance Corporation is working out th e developing of a nuclear 
insurance pool for coming up with an insurance poli cy for the liability under this 
Act.  For that I had made a request to the Ministry  of Finance because as it 

 
 
stood, the nuclear industry within the country did not have the adequate capacity 
to raise this nuclear insurance pool. They required  Rs. 1,500 crore. That is the 
maximum liability under this. The domestic nuclear industry all put together could 
set apart only Rs. 7,500 crore as the nuclear pool because they are restricted by 
the international norms. Under the international no rms, whenever an insurance 
company creates an insurance pool in a new area of business, it cannot set apart 
more than three per cent of their networth. So, the  net worth of all the general 
insurance companies in the country put together was  only Rs. 750 crore. So, we 
have requested the Ministry of Finance to extend a sovereign guarantee for Rs. 
750 crore. That is under discussion. We also have r aised the idea of issuing a 
catastrophe bonds in a manner similar to that exist s in the United States of 
America and other developed countries. That is also  being considered. Once this 
becomes feasible, the adequate nuclear insurance po ol will be created and then 
the General Insurance Corporation would be in a pos ition to offer a nuclear 
product. So, we are discussing other developments a lso with the foreign 
companies with whom we are right now discussing par tnership for nuclear power 
plants. But they are still under progress.” 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
PART – II  
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
1. India’s Nuclear Energy Programme: Role of BHAVIN I 
 
  
 The Committee observe that the nuclear energy prog ramme has been 
visualized to grow in three stages, which is sequen tial as each stage has fuel 
cycle linkages in which spent fuel from one stage i s reprocessed to obtain fuel 
for the next stage. The Committee understand that h aving obtained commercial 
success in the Stage – I Pressurized Heavy Water Re actors (PHWRs), Stage II 
Fast Breeder Reactors (FBRs) was taken up for imple mentation to attain energy 
security for the Nation. The Committee feel that BH AVINI, which was formed as a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to facilitate impleme ntation of the Stage II 
expeditiously has a greater role to play in bringin g long-term energy security of 
the nation.  Since nuclear energy offers the most p otent solution to long term 
energy security, the Committee are firmly of the vi ew that India has to 
successfully realize the three stage development an d thereby tap its vast thorium 
reserves to become truly energy independent beyond 2050. They, therefore, urge 
upon BHAVINI to make all out efforts for expediting  the commissioning of and 
also ramp up the capacity of FBRs so as to achieve energy security in the 
country. They also desire that DAE develop adequate  technologies for 
commercial exploitation of vast thorium reserves of the nation. 
 
2. Board of Directors 
 
 
 The Committee note that while the Board of Directo rs of all Government 
companies are constituted as per the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
guidelines, BHAVINI’s Board of Directors was consti tuted as per Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC) guidelines. Giving justification f or having separate guidelines, 
BHAVINI stated that pursuit of the objectives set f or the Company involves 
management of certain unique challenges unlike othe r PSEs. Further BHAVINI’s 
organizational role encompasses implementation of a n entire spectrum of 
activities from developing technology, design, engi neering and construction to 
commissioning, operation and maintenance of FBRs wh ich is different from other 
PSUs. Notwithstanding separate guidelines for the C ompany, the Committee find 
that there were vacancies for two independent Direc tors and proposal for 
appointment of only one Director was sent by the Company to DAE on 3 
rd  August, 
2013. It was only in February, 2015 that DAE inform ed the Committee that it has 
approved the appointment of two independent directo rs to the Board of BHAVINI 
and sent the same for further processing. The Commi ttee are of the considered 
view that since BHAVINI is required to achieve its objectives entirely by 

 
 
indigenous efforts without access to external resou rces, either technological, 
financial or in terms of human resource expertise, timely induction of two 
professionals of eminence from industry in private / non-government sector with 
a high degree of proven ability as independent dire ctors in BHAVINI’s board 
would have certainly provided the Company the exper tise needed for better 
operational proficiency in the project management o f PFBR. They, therefore, 
deprecate the flippant attitude of the Management i n treating an important matter 
in an unimportant and unprofessional manner. They, therefore, would like to 
caution the Company to be careful in future while d ealing with such important 
issues. 
 
3. Nuclear Power Generation vis-à-vis Plan targets 
 
  
 The Committee note with concern that the generatio n of Nuclear Power 
declined during the XI Plan period. Despite revisio n of the target from 163395 
MUs to 124608 MUs at MTA stage, the actual power ge nerated was merely 109642. 
The reasons for shortfall during the XI Plan were s tated to be primarily related to 
shortage of fuel due to demand-supply mismatch of d omestic uranium, delay in 
international co-operation, delay in completion of Kudankulam 1 & 2 projects and 
delay in completion of PFBR (BHAVINI) projects. Fur ther, delay in completion of 
Kudankulam also accounted for the shortfall during the XII Plan period as well. 
The Committee are disquiet to note that targets wer e fixed by the DAE taking into 
account presumptive factors and they could not fore see the impending 
difficulties, which accounted for the shortfall in targets. The Committee are of the 
considered view that since nuclear energy has an im portant role in the energy 
mix of the Country, particularly in the context of energy security, they, therefore, 
recommend that DAE should make all out efforts to s ee that all impediments / 
problems are removed so that the targets set for ge neration of nuclear power are 
achieved  by all the nuclear plants.   
 
4. Delay in Commissioning of BHAVINI Project 
 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that there hav e been inordinate 
delays in the commissioning of the PFBR at Kalpakka m. As per the original 
schedule, the project was to be commissioned in Sep tember, 2010, which was 
later revised to September, 2014. The deadline was further extended to 
September, 2016. The reasons for delay were attribu ted to factors such as 
Tsunami (December, 2004), technological challenges involved in manufacturing 
of the first of its kind equipment and integration of the equipment in a sequential 
manner etc. The Committee feel that though this pro ject is first of its kind yet 
such challenges could have been anticipated and the  completion schedule 

 
 
should have been fixed accordingly. Repeated postpo nement of the deadlines 
causes enormous time and cost overruns leading to h uge loss to national 
exchequer. Besides, such delay would also hamper In dia’s effort towards 
achieving energy security in the long run. The Comm ittee regret to note that 
despite steering committee headed by Secretary, DAE  conducting regular 
meetings on quarterly basis for monitoring the acti vities of various projects 
including PFBR in which achievements, constraints, physical and financial 
progress are reviewed, such review meetings have no t yielded any concrete 
results as the completion schedule has been changed  due to various constraints 
resulting in considerable delay in achieving critic ality. During their study visit to 
BHAVINI’s project site at Kalpakkam, the Committee found that the PFBR have 
incorporated state of the art technology and had ac hieved considerable physical 
progress. While appreciating the remarkable work do ne by the scientists of our 
country, the Committee hope that the Company will t ake all necessary steps to 
expedite the remaining work so that the reactor com missioned within the 
stipulated revised time schedule. 
 
5. Cost of Production and Economic Viability of Nuc lear Projects 
 
 
 The Committee note that the cost of the PFBR proje ct went up from Rs. 
3492 crore to Rs. 5677 crore leading to cost escala tion of Rs. 2185 crore. The 
Committee find that although initially the project was planned to be handled by 
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) an d the DPR was prepared by 
them, subsequently BHAVINI was formed to execute the project, which led to cost 
escalation. Government took the decision in view of  the long term perspective of 
many future fast breeder reactors that have to be b uilt in the country on 
commercial basis. The Committee wonder why the Gove rnment failed to visualize 
this at the time of conceptualization of the project. 
 
 Another related issue is the economic viability of  the Nuclear Power vis-à-
vis other conventional sources of energy. The proje cted tariff of nuclear power to 
be produced from Kudankulam appears to be costlier than that of the other 
generating technologies. DAE’s own admission that ‘ the cost of generation or the 
unit energy cost is the barometer for adjudging eco nomic viability and 
competitiveness of a source of electricity generati on’ speaks eloquently of the 
competitive disadvantage of the nuclear power vis-à -vis other sources of energy. 
The Committee have been informed that BHAVINI is ex pected to break even when 
the 500 MWe PFBR operates at 62.8% capacity factor,  which means that the 
gestation period of Nuclear Power Plants is very hi gh. However, the Committee 
are of the considered view that nuclear power is an  intense energy source and is 
inherently sustainable. Moreover, deployment of Nuc lear Power to produce 

 
 
electricity avoids emission of carbon dioxide, ther eby helping in decarbonisation 
of environment. Having appreciated the usefulness o f the nuclear power, as a 
clean form of energy, the Committee urge the Company to make concerted efforts 
towards reducing the overall cost of Nuclear power to make it economically more 
viable. They also desire that the nodal Department should ensure that 
bottlenecks, if any, faced by the Company in the pr ocess are sorted out without 
any loss of time. 
 
6. Procurement Policy 
 
 
 The Committee are heartened to note that notwithst anding the fact that 
equipment being used in Prototype Fast Breeder Reac tor is technologically 
sophisticated and entails stringent specifications and that the tools and 
methodologies used are first of its kind. Yet, more  than 95 per cent of the 
equipment for the PFBR is being sourced from Indian  industry. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts made by BHAVINI for procurin g its equipment through 
indigenous sources as this will give fillip / boost  for the ‘Make-in-India’ campaign. 
The Committee desire that BHAVINI should continue m aking efforts towards 
indigenization of the manufacturing of various comp onents and engage more 
proactively with the Indian companies both in publi c and private sector for the 
development of state of the art technologies, so th at apart from achieving the 
objectives of energy security, it will provide a de finite boost to the indigenous 
manufacturing capabilities. 
 
7. SAFETY OF NUCLEAR PLANT 
 
 
 The Committee were informed that in the aftermath of December 2004 
Tsunami, many novel design features had been incorp orated in Prototype Fast 
Breeder Reactor (PFBR) which provide a robust safet y architecture. Besides, the 
safety of the plant is governed and regulated by At omic Energy Regulatory Board 
(AERB) and the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)  issued by it are very 
stringent and rigorously followed. However, the Com mittee feel that post 
Fukushima nuclear disaster, there is an increasing apprehension in the minds of 
the people regarding the safety of nuclear plants. Therefore, the Committee urge 
upon the Company to take proactive steps to allay s uch fears from the minds of 
the people so as to mould a favourable public opinion about the usefulness of the 
PFBR. A robust media campaign highlighting the sign ificance and importance of 
the project and its environment-friendly attributes  will have to be given adequate 
thrust. Further, keeping in view the current trends  of terrorism, the Department 
should take adequate safeguards to ensure that ther e is no theft or loss of 
nuclear material. Moreover, the Committee would hop e that the depleted uranium 

 
 
and plutonium after the reprocessing of the fuel sh ould be properly cooled and 
stored before it is ultimately vitrified. 
 
8. Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages 
 
 
 Another related issue which needs to be highlighte d in the light of safety of 
Nuclear Power Plant is the civil liability for nucl ear damages. The Committee note 
that DAE, in consultation with the General Insuranc e Corporation (GIC) of India is 
trying to develop a nuclear insurance pool, which w ill help in coming up with an 
insurance policy for the liability of nuclear power  / energy. The Committee were 
informed that since the nuclear industry in the cou ntry does not have adequate 
capacity and resources to raise the nuclear insuran ce pool, DAE has requested 
the Ministry of Finance for providing with assistan ce to extend a sovereign 
guarantee for Rs. 750 crore, which is stated to be under their consideration. The 
Committee urge upon DAE to pursue this matter with Ministry of Finance at the 
highest level so that the sovereign guarantee  is e xtended by the Government for 
creation of adequate nuclear insurance pool so that  GIC will be in a position to 
offer an insurance product for the risks, associate d with generation of Nuclear 
Energy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                         SHRI SHANTA KUMAR 
27 April 2015 
                  Chairperson, 
7 Vaisakha,1937 (S)                              Co mmittee on Public Undertakings 
  

 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Saturday, the 24 
th  August, 2013 from 1500 hrs to 1600 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
3.  Shri Raja Ram Pal 
4.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
6.  Smt. Sushila Saroj 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
8.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  
 
Shri A. Louis Martin 
 
Joint Secretary 
2. 
 Shri P.C. Koul Director 
3. Shri M. K. Madhusudhan Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
 
BHARATIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LIMITED (BHAVINI) 
 
1. Dr. Prabhat Kumar  CMD 
2. Shri T.K. Mitra Director (Technical)  
3. Smt. Rajani Sankaran Director (Finance) 
4. Shri K.A. David Executive Director (Operations) 
 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the repr esentatives of Bharatiya 
Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited (BHAVINI) to the Sit ting. He also drew their attention to 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker regar ding confidentiality of evidence 
before the Parliamentary Committees and asked them to introduce themselves.  
 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence o f the witnesses in connection 
with examination of ‘BHAVINI’.  The CMD, BHAVINI ex plained in brief the various 
constraints / problems faced by the Company in the construction of Fast Breeder 
Reactor Project at Kalpakkam and the reasons for de lays in its commissioning. He also 
made an audio-visual presentation highlighting the achievements of the Company 
making use of advanced technology in the manufactur e of various critical components 
that go into the making of PFBR.  Thereafter, the C hairperson and members raised 
queries on issues relating to cost escalation, dela y in project completion, environmental 
and safety concerns, etc.  In respect of points for  which information was not readily 
available with the representatives of the Company, they were asked to furnish the same 
to the Committee Secretariat by 6 
th  September 2013. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6 
th  January 2015 from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Shanta Kumar   - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Lal Krishna Advani 
3.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
4.  Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
6.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
7.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Narendra Budania 
9.  Shri Majeed Memon 
10.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
11.  Shri Tapan Kumar Sen 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. 
 Smt. Sudesh Luthra Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY (DAE)  
 
1. Dr. C.B.S. Venkataramana Additional Secretary, D AE 
2. Smt. Rajani Sankaran CMD (Acting), BHAVINI  
3. Shri K.A. David Executive Director(Operations), BHAVINI 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the repr esentatives of the Department 
of Atomic Energy (DAE) to the Sitting. He also drew  their attention to Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of evidence before the Parliamentary 
Committees and asked them to introduce themselves.  
 
3.  Thereafter, the Additional Secretary, DAE, brie fly outlined the activities and 
achievement of BHAVINI and explained in brief the v arious constraints / problems faced 
by the Company in the construction of Fast Breeder Reactor Project at Kalpakkam and 
the reasons for delays in its commissioning. Therea fter, the Chairperson and members 
raised queries on issues relating to cost escalatio n, delay in project completion, 
environmental and safety concerns, etc. The represe ntatives of the DAE responded to 
most of the queries. In respect of points for which  information was not readily available 
with them, the witnesses assured the Committee that  written replies in respect of those 
points will be furnished at the earliest. 
 
The Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 24 
th  April 2015 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Shanta Kumar  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bais 
3.  Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
4.  Shri Prahlad Patel 
5.  Shri Ram Sinh Rathwa 
6.  Shri B. Senguttuvan 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Majeed Memon 
8.  Shri Muthukaruppan 
9.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. 
 Shri M.C. Sharma Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan Director 
3. Shri Tirthankar Das Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri G.C. Prasad Deputy Secretary 
 
2. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft R eport on Bharatiya Nabhikiya 
Vidyut Nigam Limited and adopted the same without any change. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to  present the Reports to 
Parliament on their behalf, after obtaining factual verification. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
XXXX Matter not related to this Report. 