    
9 
 
 
LOSS DUE TO IMPRUDENT UNDERWRITING AND LACK OF PROPER RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
 
[Based on Para No. 3.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019] 
 
 
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2020-21) 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


2 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
LOSS DUE TO IMPRUDENT UNDERWRITING AND LACK OF PROPER RISK 
ASSESSMENT 
 
[Based on Para No. 3.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019] 
 
 
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.03.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
24 March, 2021/03 Chaitra, 1942 (Saka) 


3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
Page 
 
Composition of the Committee(2020-21)                                                                  (iv) 
 
Introduction                                                                                                                (v) 
 
   
R E P O R T 
   
PART – I 
   
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
   
A.. AUDIT PARAGRAPH 
 
1 
 I. Loss due to imprudent underwriting and lack of proper risk 
assessment 
1 
 II. Audit Observations 2 
B. ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
3 
 I. Premium rate and the terms of depreciation revised in favour of the 
insured. 
3 
 II. Insurable Interest 6 
 III. Actuarial valuation of the policy 6 
 IV. Authenticity of claims & delay in taking decision to cancel the policy 7 
 V. Strengthening of Internal control systems 9 
 VI. Fixing of responsibility for the lapses 10 
   
PART – II 
   
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE                         11 
   
ANNEXURES 
   
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18 February 2021 
 
24 
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10 March 2021 
 
27 
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10 March 2021 
 
30 
IV. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 23 March 2021 
 
33 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2020-21) 
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi       -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Dr.Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
3.   Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4.   Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
5.   Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
6.   Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7.   Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.   Shri Janardan Mishra  
9.   Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
10.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
11.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh  
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.  Shri Prasanna Acharya  
17.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
18.  Shri Anil Desai  
19.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar  
20.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
21.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
Shri R.C. Tiwari            -     Joint Secretary 
Shri G.C. Prasad               -      Additional Director 
Shri Haokip Kakai              -      Assistant Executive Officer 
 

5 
 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present th is Ninth  
Report on „Loss due to Imprudent Underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment' 
[Based on para No. 3.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019] relating to New India 
Assurance Company Limited.  
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) selected t he above said 
subject for detailed examination.  
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) were initially briefed about the 
subject by the representatives of the C&AG on 18 th February, 2021. The Committee 
then took evidence of the representatives o f New India Assurance Company Limited 
and Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on 10th March, 2021.  
4. The Committee (2020-21) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting 
held  on 23 March, 2021. 
5. The Committee wish to exp ress their thanks to the representatives of  New India 
Assurance Company Limited and Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to 
them in connection with examination of the subject. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observa tions and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
 
New Delhi            MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
23 March, 2021                   Chairperson 
02 Chaitra, 1942 (S)                         Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

6 
 
  

7 
 
R E P O R T 
 
PART-I  
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL)  was founded by  Sir Dorabji 
Tata in 1919. It is a multinational General Insurance Company which operates in  28 
countries with it headquarters at Mumbai. NIACL is one of the market leaders in India in 
Non-Life business for more than 50 years. It has been leading the market in premium, in 
reserves & net worth for many years. Its global crossed Rs. 29715 crores  an d its Indian 
business crossed Rs.26813 crores in March 2020.Net worth of the company including 
its fair value stands at Rs.34851 crores, The Company‟s Investments at Market value is 
Rs.68424 crores and its Asset base at Rs.85697 crores. 
 
2. There are 60 odd insurance companies today in operation in the country. New 
India Assurance is one of the leading companies with 17 percent of the market share 
and its Gross Written Premium is the highest in the country as far as one single general 
insurer is concerned. 
  
A. AUDIT PARAGRAPH 
I. Loss due to Imprudent underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment 
 
3. New India Assurance Company Limited incurred loss of Rs. 91.32 crore due to 
imprudent underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment. 
4. Appsdaily Solutions Private Limited (Insured), a mobile application provider sold 
mobile applications through its agents at the mobile sales points. It offered free 
insurance cover for new mobile handsets, provided the customer bought their 
application within 15 days of purchase of mobile handset. 
 
5. The insured took a Master Package Policy from Bommasandra Branch Office of 
New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) to cover the risk undertaken at the time 
of sale of mobile handsets with coverage of file & allied perils, t heft, burglary and 

8 
 
accidental damages. Claims were to be processed by the insured as per (i) General 
Guidelines for theft claims and (ii) General Guidelines for damage claims.  
 
6. The policy was initially issued with an estimated sum insured (SI) for Rs. 5 crore 
and a premium of Rs. 6 lakh was collected (at the rate of 1.2 per cent) for the period 
from 04 June2013 to 03 June 2014. The policy was cancelled and reissued twice during 
October 2013and February 2014 respectively, after re -negotiation of the term s and 
conditions with theinsured. The premium rate and terms of depreciation were revised in 
favour of the insured; however, detailed justification for fixing initial rates and their 
subsequent revisions was notavailableon record. 
 
II. Audit Observations 
 
7. Despite increasing trend of Incurred Claim Ratio (ICR), the company renewed 
the policy during February 2015 and August 2015. The policy was cancelled in 
November 2015. Till then, NIACL collected total net premium of Rs. 33.78 crore against 
which it had to settle claims to the extent of Rs. 125.10 crore. 
 
8. To insure a risk, the insured should have insurable interest in the subject matter 
of insurance. In the instant case, the master policy was issued to the insured who did 
not have insurable interest in  the mobile handset, which was the subject matter of 
insurance. Rather, the customers who purchased the handset and installed the app had 
the insurable interest in the mobile sets. This was against the fundamental principles of 
insurance. 
 
9. Though it was  an evolving line of business, no actuarial valuation of the policy 
was done by NIACL, while fixing the premium rate, etc. 
 
10. The policy was issued and renewed without the approval of the competent 
authority. 
11. The Management in its reply (October 2018 ) stated that the policy was within the 
acceptance authority of the Regional Offices/Branch Office as per the circulars of Head 
Office (HO). Policy issuing office was authorised to decide the acceptance, loading and 

9 
 
deductibles based on previous three year s experience in case of adverse claims. Claim 
ratio was closely monitored and to sustain the policy, premium rate was increased and 
finally the policy was cancelled in November2015. 
 
12. The reply is not in consonance with the facts as stated below: 
 
 As per the prescribed acceptance limits for underwriting, the portable 
equipment  could be insured only with the approval of RO whose 
acceptance limit was Rs. 5 crore for the SI. However, the approval of RO 
for the initial policy was taken after the commencemen t of the policy. 
Subsequently, the policy was reissued for a SI of Rs. 50 crore without 
getting the approval of the competent authority i.e. HeadOffice. 
 
 The policy was cancelled in November 2015 only, while the ICR was 
on an increasing trend since inception of the policy. 
 
 Thus, imprudent underwriting without the approval of competent 
authorities and of proper risk assesment, insurable interest and actuarial 
valuation resulted in loss of Rs. 91.32 crore. 
 
13. The matter was referred to the Ministry in November 2018; their response was 
awaited(May2019). 
 
B. ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
I. Premium rate and the terms of depreciation revised in favour of the insured 
 
14. The premium rate and the terms of depreciation were revised by NIACL in favour  
of the insured. However, as per the Audit para, detailed justification for fixing initial rates 
and their subsequent revisions were not provided to Audit.  
 
15. When asked about the reasons for not retaining the records on such important 
decisions,  NIACL in a written note stated as under : 
 
"Branch/DO had discussed the proposal with RO Technical team and had 
obtained oral consent to proceed with premium acceptance and 
subsequently the data sheet which was tendered along with policy for 
formal Approval by the Competent authority at RO as per discussions. 
 
The same was approved by the then Regional Manager (Misc. Technical 
Dept.), Bangalore RO duly mentioning the period of the policy as 4 -6-2013 

10 
 
to 3 -6-2014 in the letter dated 17/18 -6-2013 and all subsequent  policies 
and changes were discussed in detail with the then RM, Technical Dept., 
Bangalore RO and as per the express directions/consent of RO/RM only 
such changes had been effected." 
 
16. When enquired about the criteria and procedure followed by NIACL fo r fixing and 
revision of premium rates, the Company in a written note submitted as under; 
"Premium rates are fixed based on risk features, loss experience if 
available, expected premium volumes and market competition. 
 
As a restricted cover (i.e. removal o f Electrical & mechanical breakdown, 
larceny, territorial restriction of India, equipment value restriction etc.) was 
given in comparison to the Standard Package Policy for Portable 
Equipment, and in the de-tariff pricing regime, initial premium rate charg ed 
was higher than the prevalent market rates for the total turnover assured 
under the policy.” 
 
17. Elaborating further on observance of due diligence & prudency, and rating 
justification for the initial pricing, NIACL stated as under : 
 
a) “Standard Fire & Allied Perils comprising of 12 basic covers attracts 
a basic rate of Rs. 2.50% or 0.25% under erstwhile tariff whereas for the 
Basic Fire cover, 0.25% on the sum insured value was charged. 
b) For Burglary & Theft (excluding larceny) – then Prevailing market 
rate was around 0.04 to 0.05% whereas we have charged 0.60% on the 
sum insured considering the nature of risk. 
c) For Accidental damage including wet damage – Prevailing market 
rate was around 0.25% whereas a rate of 0.35% on the sum insured was 
charged. 
 
Necessary underwriting controls like Depreciation, Policy Excess etc. were 
part of the policy terms. Subsequent pricing changes were in line with the 
claims experience visible at that point of time on the risk assumed as well 
as changed terms, reduced intermed iary cost etc. The ICR as on 
31/03/2014 in respect of this account (June 13, Oct 13 & Feb 14 – 3 
policies combined) was 40%. 
 
Since this policy had a long tail, claims continued to get reported for one 
full year after the policy expiry date and, as such, t he actual ICR to full 
extent and the correction required was not immediately known. 
 
There was close monitoring of the account and when the claims ratio was 
behaving adversely, the premium was revised mid -term during currency of 
the policy in August 2015 to 1.38% from 1.10%.  The intermediary charges 

11 
 
were also reduced from 15% to 11% during Feb 2015 renewal itself.  As 
the claims ratio continued to behave adversely a premium rate of Rs. 
2.75% was demanded (Mid -term) in October 2015 which was not 
forthcoming from insured and hence further acceptance of declarations 
under the policy after 10/11/2015 were stopped. 
 
The above measures/steps taken suggest that the observance of due 
diligence and prudency exhibited by the office concerned, in the   
monitoring of the account.” 
 
18. When asked about the compelling reasons for revising the premium rates and 
terms of depreciation in favour of the insured despite the fact that the initial policy had 
not completed its full period, the Company in a written reply stated as under; 
 
"The first Master Policy was issued for the period from 04/06/2013 to 
03/06/2014 and the Premium rate for the coverage on all risk basis was 
Rs. 1.20% + ST. This premium rate was quoted keeping in mind the 
projected targeted turnover of Rs. 75 cro res. Prevalent market rate at that 
phase was much lower at 0.80% to 0.90 % for such similar risks. 
 
The Insured sought a new intermediary to solicit the business and for 
technical reasons (there is no provision to modify/change the intermediary 
during the currency of Policy) hence the old master policy had to be had to 
be discontinued and a new one was i ssued w.e.f. 15/10/2013. The initial 
policy was not cancelled, as observed in the C&AG para but only 
declarations were discontinued in the light of New Policy issued. While re -
issuing the Policy as above, the turnover assured was increased to 
250/300 crore , warranting rate adjustment to a little lower rate.  Further, 
the claim experience at that point of time was not un- favourable.  
 
Though Master Policy was issued for a period of one year, each 
equipment was covered for period of 12 months from the date o f purchase 
and hence it was warranted for not cancelling the Policy, as otherwise 
claims reported on or after the date of cancellation could not have been  
registered, processed or settled. 
 
Rate was reduced as the assured turnover (owing to festive season ) was 
increased to a minimum of Rs. 250 to 300 crores. 
 
Further, the claims under the initial policy at that time (4 months of cover) 
was very minimal and in the light of market prevailing rate, price was 
negotiated @ 1% keeping in mind the turnover which had substantially 
increased. In addition, AppsDaily assured to initiate various claim control 
measures like: 
 

12 
 
 Dedicated / customized software dealing with mobile claims which 
was linked to web portal, IVRS and call center, 24x7 access for customers.  
 
 Software was equipped to take claim intimations, track claim status, 
provide summary sheet and to update customer by automated sms, mails.  
 
New Policy i.e effective from 1st February 2014 had following changes in 
the terms and pricing: 
 
 An annual turnover of Rs. 1000 crores (Sum Insured) was the 
minimum requirement under the policy with an initial premium to be paid 
for a sum insured value of Rs. 100 crores and subsequent increase was to 
be effected for similar Rs. 100 crores of SI. 
 
• This assured a minimum premium of Rs. 11 crores of premium with 
this above change whereas none of such similar policies in the market 
during that period had generated such volume of premium."  
 
II. Insurable interest; 
 
19. CAG in their report had observed that : 
 
“To insure a risk, the insured should have insurable interest in the subject 
matter of insurance. in the instant case, the master policy was issued to 
the insured who did not have insurable interest in the mobile handset, 
which was the subject matter of the insurance. Rather, the customers who 
purchased the handsets and installed the app had the insurable interest in 
the mobile sets. This was against the fundamental principles of insurance”. 
 
20. When asked to furnish a note on the aforesaid observa tion of C&AG, the 
Company in a written note submitted as under; 
 
"Master Policy issued to AppsDaily as Group Manager. Policy defined 
insured as – Purchaser of mobile handset installed with application 
manufactured and marketed by AppsDaily solution Pvt. Lt d”. All the claims 
were settled in favour of the individual insured, as defined above and 
reimbursed to AppsDaily. This is within the group guidelines of IRDAI." 
 
21. On  the issue of whether the insured had insurable interest in the subject matter 
of insu rance in the instant case, CMD, NIACL during the course of evidence on 10 
March 2021 deposed before the Committee as under; 
 
".........This policy is very much valid. This policy was issued and as far as 
insurable interest is concerned as you spoke, this i nsurable interest did 

13 
 
exist. Here he is not the mobile manufacturer. The AppsDaily was software 
providers and as we come across quite often that if you buy our software, 
then, your phone is insured for its loss or for its damage.". 
 
III. Actuarial valuation 
 
22. CAG in their report had  observed that : 
 
'Though it was an evolving line of business, no actuarial valuation of the 
policy was done by NIACL, while fixing the premium rate, etc'. 
 
23. When asked whether actuarial valuation of policies was not required to be done 
by Insurance Companies to mitigate risk factor, and what were the specific reasons for 
not  doing actuarial valuation while fixing premium rates despite the fact that the 
business model was an evolving one and claims could be long tail,  NIACL, in a written 
reply, submitted as under; 
"The actuarial pricing is at product level and not at a policy level.   This 
being the case, with regard to AppsDaily there was no new product as 
such and the same was issued under tailor -made policy under the  
Miscellaneous line of business."   
 
24. On the aforesaid issue, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) in a written reply submitted as under : 
 
“The policy in question is issued under and governed by IRDAI‟s 
Guidelines on Group Insurance Policies, dated 14.7.2005.” 
25. During the course of evidence on 10 March 2021, CMD, NIACL on the issue of 
actuarial valuation clarified as under: 
 
“Actuarial assessment is done on the basis of pricing. How much we shall be 
charging is done at that product level. As far as individual policies are 
concerned, it is left to the discretion of the underwriters. We have no 
objection. We assess the risk, we exercise our judgement. This is the very 
nature of insurance that when we assess we make our assessme nt at what 
price. In 80 percent of the cases it goes right and in 20 percent of the cases it 
goes wrong and that is why there are losses……..I would say that though we 
have not written, but possibly this is an underwriting assessment that went 
horribly wrong.” 
 
 
 

14 
 
IV. Authenticity of Claims & delay in taking decision to cancel the policy 
 
26. When asked as to what mechanism was put in place by the Company to ensure 
the authenticity of the claims, the Company in a written reply stated as under; 
 
"Each and every claim was processed at Claims Hub in line with 
established claims procedure." 
 
27. When asked to furnish reasons for the delay in taking decision to cancel the 
policy despite continued adverse claim experience and increasing Incurred Claim 
Ratio(ICR), the Company in a written reply stated as under; 
 
"There was no delay in deciding on cancellation of policy, as can be kindly 
seen from the claim history given below: 
 
1. Policy premium on 31/03/2014 - 4.80 Crs, Claims - 1.93 Crs (ICR 40%) 
2. Policy premium on 31/03/2015 – 19.99 Crs, Claims – 26.57 Crs (ICR 
133%) 
3. Policy Premium on 31/03/2016 – 12.88 crs, Claims – 70.91 Crs (ICR 551%) 
4. Policy discontinued on 10/11/2015. 
 
Thus the policy was discontinued during the period 2015 -16, when the 
claim ratio became adverse." 
 
28. On the issue of delay in cancellation of policy, CMD, NIACL during the course of 
evidence on 10March 2021 deposed before the Committee as under : 
 
"......This policy that was issued was a long -tail policy. For instance, 
suppose this policy was issued from 1st January of certain year to 31st 
December of that year. So, any mobile that installed their app and got the 
insurance, say, on 30th December, so the insurance was valid up to the 
next 364 days. That means, practically this policy was valid f or one year 
and 364 days for certain mobile phones bought at the end of it. Therefore, 
when making such assessment, possibly they erred because when the 
first policy was issued, the claim ratio was only 40 per cent. When the next 
avatar came, it was 133 pe r cent. But possibly, they failed to assess that 
this policy is going continue, clearance will keep coming for certain number 
of mobile sets which were insured at the end of the policy period. Their 
policy was to run for 365 days. Therefore, this is error of judgment........". 
 
 
29. CMD, NIACL during the course of evidence before the Committee on 10 March 

15 
 
2021 also highlighted the limitations of quicker decision making process as under : 
 
“….It is because, here, my decision making is delayed. My competitors are 
taking on the spot decision; and I cannot do that. First of all, I get affected 
by psyche that if I take these decision, how many questions will be asked 
by so many agencies. Therefore, the private companies take the decisions 
quickly. For example, ju st to bring to your knowledge, all the companies 
are heavily dependent on IT these days. So, there is a huge amount of 
cost involved because of obsolescence.  I cannot replace it quickly. I have 
to float the tender as per CVC. So, these are the things whic h slow down 
while decision making.” 
 
V. Strengthening of Internal Control Systems 
 
30. According to Audit observation, the policy was issued and renewed without the 
approval of the competent authority. When asked about the measures taken to 
strengthen the internal control system to avoid such lapses in future, NIACL, in a written 
reply stated as under; 
"The concerned office is on record that due approvals were given and also 
periodical audits were conducted to ensure that policies conformed to the 
approvals taken." 
 
31. When enquired as to who is the competent authority for issuance and renewal of 
policies according to the audit observation, the Company in a written note submitted as 
under; 
"Each technical department has laid -down limits for acceptance of po licy 
based on Sum Insured and/or underwriting features." 
 
32. When asked whether any risk assessment study was required before fixing of 
rates, revision of rates, issuing and renewal of policy, NIACL in a written note stated as 
under : 
"Risk assessment study is done before fixing up rate, revision of rate and 
on policy renewals, both at product level and also at policy level, 
depending on the type of policies". 
 
33. On the issue of making corrections in the internal control systems to prevent the 
recurrence of such lapses due to human error, the CMD, NIACL during the course of 
evidence on 10 April, 2021 elaborated on following steps taken : 
 

16 
 
”It is a human error which goaded us to do certain corrections also. When 
this thing happened, we immediately issue d the circular, we withdrew the 
authority from all operating offices to do this type of mobile insurance, and 
the Head Office became the only authority to give this sanction. Otherwise, 
every officer according to the Branch or Division was authorized to do  
certain amount of insurance. In the year 2015 itself, we also issued a huge 
list of Dos and Don’t’s that when you do mobile insurance, what is to be 
done and what is not to be done. So, that was immediately done. My team, 
in private, realized that they did not assess the risk properly, and therefore, 
it is high time that we should not trust the local expertise, and we should 
have it concentrated in the corporate office where the exclusive team of 
Actuaries and others are there. So these two steps were imme diately 
taken.” 
 
VI. Fixing of responsibility for the lapses 
 
34. When asked whether any responsibility has been fixed and any action taken 
against any officer for underwriting or causing the avoidable loss of ₹91.32 crore to 
NIACL, it was submitted, in a written reply, as under; 
 
"The officers concerned have been charge -sheeted by the Competent 
Authority and a disciplinary enquiry is already underway. Hence we wish to 
submit that it will be subsequent to the conclusion of enquiry, we will get to 
know if an y action against any of the Officers require to be taken. The 
outcome of the enquiry may also result in confirming the earlier 
submissions made by us, here above." 
 
35. On the aforesaid issue, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) in a written reply clarified as under: 
 
“Responsibility would be fixed on the basis of the outcome of the 
disciplinary inquiry.  In light of the report of CVO, NIACL, the matter was 
examined by DFS and major penalty proceedings initiated against the 
officers concerned. Accordingly, charge -sheets were issued to Shri K. 
Sanath Kumar, Ex -CMD, NICL (then General Manager and Director, 
NIACL) who retired on 30.4.2018, and Shri C.Narambunathan, Ex General 
Manager and Director, NIACL (then DGM), who retired on 31.5.20 19. 
Resultantly, the memorandum of charges has been issued to Shri K. 
Sanath Kumar, ex -CMD of NICL, and Shri C. Narambunathan. The 
proceedings have commenced on 14.12.2020 against both the charged 
officers.” 
 

17 
 
36. Elaborating further on the charges framed a gainst the officers, the Secretary, 
Department of Financial Services during the course of evidence before the Committee 
on 10 April 2021 submitted as under : 
 
”Primarily, two or three charges were framed against these two officers. 
Firstly, they did not ha ve the authority to delegate the responsibility and 
probably that was one of the reasons why this happened. Also, there was 
the question of whether they were competent or they needed to seek the 
approval of the Board in order to delegate those financial po wers of claim 
settlement. Secondly, the other charge was made by the Vigilance 
Department which was about the unauthorized settlement of the claims.” 
 
  

18 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
A. OVERVIEW 
 
1. New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) was founded by Sir 
Dorabji Tata in 1919. It is a multinational General Insurance Company which 
operates in 28 countries with its Headquarters at Mumbai. The Company‟s global 
business has crossed Rs. 29,715 crore and it is one of the leading market 
leaders in India for more than 50 years in the Non -life business,  The present 
C&AG Audit Para no. 3.2 of Report No. 13 of 2019 (Compliance Audit 
Observation) examined by the Committee relates to „Loss due to imprudent 
underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment‟ by New India Assurance 
Company Limited (NIACL).The Committee were informed that the policy in 
question was governed by Insurance Regulatory Development Authority of India 
(IRDAI) and was issued by NIACL in Ju ne 2013 but was discontinued in 
November 2015.  AppsDaily Solutions Private Limited (Insured), a mobile 
application provider sold mobile applications through its agents at the mobile 
sales points. It offered free insurance cover for new mobile handsets pro vided 
that the customer bought their application within 15 days of purchase of mobile 
handset. In the policy, the Company collected a total premium of Rs. 33.78 crore 
against which it settled claims of Rs. 125.10 crore that resulted in loss of Rs. 
91.30 cr ore due to imprudent underwriting without the approval of the 
competent authorities, lack of proper risk assessment, insurable interest and 
not carrying out the actuarial valuation of the policy while fixing the premium 
rate. On the basis of a preliminary enquiry conducted by CVO, NIACL who found 
that there were lapses in the policy, the matter was referred to CVC. On the 
advice of CVC, major penalty proceedings were initiated against the then 
General Manager (IT), and the then DGM In -charge of Regional Office, Bangalore 
and four other officers. The Committee before finalising their observations in 
their report heard the views of the officers from C&AG that conducted the audit, 

19 
 
and also the views of the representatives of NIACL and the representatives of 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). On the basis of the 
views gathered from all concerned, the Committee is given to understand that 
insurance is a business of underwriting the risk but the risk has to be a 
calculated one. It has to be  based on actuarial calculations. Yet, the Committee 
feel that conscious decisions taken  complying with all the extant rules/ 
regulations/ guidelines may not get the desired results all the times and can also 
go awry at sometimes. The Committee is aware t hat unlike their counterparts in 
private companies, officers of public companies owe public accountability of 
their decisions and are answerable to many agencies of the Government that 
eventually hampers the entire process of quick decision making.  The 
Committee in their report, has therefore, without casting any aspersions on the 
integrity or competence of the officers concerned;  have rather attempted to 
address a larger issue of bringing improvement in decision making process, 
emphasizing more and more on technological systems to have increased level 
of transparency & accountability for minimizing human errors and risks attached 
to the  insurance business. 
 
B. REVISION OF PREMIMUM RATE AND TERMS OF DEPRICIATION IN 
 FAVOUR OF THE INSURED 
 
2. The Committee note that New India Assurance Company had initially 
issued Master Package Policy with an estimated Sum Insured (SI) of Rs. 5 crore 
and a premium of Rs. 6 lakh was collected for the period from 04 June 2013 to 03 
June 2014.  The policy was can celled and reissued twice during October, 2013 
and February, 2014 after renegotiation of terms in favour of the insured despite 
increasing trend of Incurred Claim Ratio (ICR). NIACL in their response defended 
their decision stating that the premium rate fo r the first Master Policy was 
quoted keeping in mind the projected targeted turnover of Rs. 75 crores. 
Prevalent market rate at that phase was much lower at 0.80% to 0.90% for such 
similar risks as against the 1.20% + ST charged by the Company. The Insured  
sought a new intermediary to solicit the business and for technical reasons 

20 
 
(there is no provision to modify/change the intermediary during the currency of 
Policy) hence the old master policy had to be discontinued and a new one was 
issued w.e.f. 15 October 2013.  NIACL clarified that the initial policy was however 
not cancelled but only declarations were discontinued in the light of New Policy 
issued. While reissuing the policy, the turnover assured was increased to Rs. 
250/ 300 crore warranting rate adju stment to a little lower rate. Further the claim 
experience at that point of time was not un -favourable. The new policy that was 
effective from 01 February 2014 had many changes in terms of pricing viz. an 
annual turnover of Rs. 1000 crore (Sum Insured) wa s the minimum requirement 
under the policy with an initial premium to be paid for a sum insured value of Rs. 
100 crore and subsequent increase was to be effected for similar Rs. 100 crore 
of SI. This assured a minimum premium of Rs. 11 crore of premium wit h this 
change whereas none of such similar policies in the market during that period 
had generated such volume of premium.  The Committee however are not in 
agreement with the explanation given by NIACL for cancellation of the old 
Master Policy or reissuan ce of the new Policy. This is substantiated by the fact 
that NIACL in another response has stated that the “Master Policy issued to 
AppsDaily as Group Manager Policy defined „Insured‟ as – Purchaser of mobile 
handset installed with application manufactured  and marketed by AppsDaily 
solution Pvt. Limited”.  In the given explanation, if the policy had to be 
discontinued, it could only have been discontinued if all the purchasers (Insured 
in this case) of the mobile handset could have sought a new intermediary . The 
Committee do not understand as to why the old master policy was discontinued 
on AppsDaily seeking a new intermediary when it was not the „Insured‟ as 
defined in the Master Policy. And what was more surprising is the officers of 
NIACL relenting on the  request of AppsDaily for change of intermediary, and 
discontinuing the old policy to come out with another new policy in favour of 
AppsDaily. This is admitted by the fact that all the claims were settled in favour 
of the individual insured as defined abov e and reimbursed to AppsDaily. The 
Committee feel that adequate precautions should have been taken in this case.  
The Committee while hoping that sufficient checks and balance must have now 

21 
 
been put in place NIACL on the discretion given to its officers im plementing 
policies of the Company so that it is employed for the goodwill of the Company 
and not in favour of someone undeserving.  
 
C. NON-MAINTENANCE OF PROPER RECORDS 
 
3. The Committee also find it rather surprising that the documents/papers 
pertaining to the revision of premium and the terms of depreciation were not 
available on record and all decisions related to the proceeding with the premium 
acceptance and revision of terms of depreciation were taken on oral consent at 
the Branch, Divisional and Re gional Office level. The Committee feel that such a 
lackadaisical approach was not only against the system of ensuring 
transparency in public dealings/ business of the Company but it also raises 
suspicion on the integrity of the persons involved in taking those decisions. The 
Committee is happy to note that in the year 2015 itself, NIACL issued a list of 
Do's and Don'ts to all those dealing with the mobile insurance, risk assessment 
and actuarial valuation.  The Committee desire that in future records of th e 
Company should maintained properly and major decisions taken on record so 
that in the event of any lapse, problems can be identified and responsibility fixed 
on erring officials. 
 
D. EXPEDITING THE COMPLETION OF INQUIRY 
 
4. The Committee note that NIACL did not have any kind of lapse or fraud 
warning system to alert them that something wrong or unusual was happening 
in their Company. It was only after a complaint was received and on a 
preliminary enquiry by the CVO, the matter was reported to the CVC and the 
issue of imprudent underwriting and proper risk management came to light. 
Even though when the matter came to light in 2016, the officers concerned were 
charge sheeted on the last day of their retirement in 2018 and the enquiry began 
in December 2020. The charges framed against the officers was primarily of two 
counts. Firstly, whether the officers had the authority to delegate the 

22 
 
responsibility or needed to seek the approval of the Board in order to delegate 
those financial powers of claim settlement and second was regarding the 
unauthorized settlement of the claims. The Committee find the delay in initiation 
of enquiry quite unusual. The Committee understand that the insurance 
business is a business of underwriting and there could have been an error in the 
calculation of risk and underwriting by the charged officers. But, taking of action 
on a lapse that was detected not through the Company‟s own internal 
mechanism but through a complaint by an outsider and delay in charging the 
officers and initiation  of enquiry only substantiates the involvement of the 
officers of the Company while they may not be involved.  Although the loss to 
the Company owing to wrong risk assessment was only Rs. 91.32 crore, yet it 
was public money that could have been saved. The  Committee without casting 
any aspersions on the integrity or competence of the officers charged or without 
delving much on the possibility of any collusion between the apps provider and 
the insurer;  desire expediting the completion of the enquiry so that  the officers 
charged may come out clean if not guilty or may be punished quickly if they had 
deliberately committed the lapse. 
 
E. STRENGTHENING OF INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISMS 
 
5.  The Committee note that  NIACL did not have any concrete internal 
control mechanisms  in place to check/detect  the lapse before its occurrence.  
Firstly, NIACL did not have detailed justification for fixing of initial rates & 
subsequent revision  on record. Secondly, the issue of new policy and it getting 
renewed without the ap proval of the competent authorities also went 
unchecked.  Thirdly, the Company did not got the actuarial valuation done which 
is the basic requirement of any risk management in the non-life insurance 
business. And lastly, the lapse that should have been de tected by the 
Company's own mechanism was detected through a complaint lodged from 
outside and a preliminary enquiry conducted by the CVO, NIACL which is an 
extended arm of the CVC. All these factors resulted in loss of Rs. 91.32 crore to 
the Government ex chequer which could have been saved. The Committee feel 

23 
 
that had there been sufficient internal control mechanism to induce advance 
warnings of any unusual activity or frauds could be detected and precious time 
and public money could be avoided.  The Commi ttee, therefore,  recommend 
NIACL to build rationale decision making processes and build workable internal 
warning systems depending on its nature of business & functions to detect 
various kinds of frauds/ lapses on the part of the Company.  This could be done 
through (i) use of technology embedment into their systems with suitable 
measures enabling data protection.  (ii)  NIACL can maintain a data -base to 
serve its local interest and engage independent surveyors and analyzers to help 
in rational decision m aking. (iii) In future, Risk should be managed 
professionally and any assessment  should be based on actuarial  valuation 
supported by research and scientific methodology.  (iv) the functioning of the 
Company and all the decisions taken for the customers sh ould be made 
transparent and have sufficient mechanism for fixing of accountability. (v) 
Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism and other modes of receipts of 
complaint mechanism of NIACL should be strengthened and every complaint 
should be taken seriously a nd personally looked into by a Manager/higher level 
and should be redressed to the satisfaction of the customer/client. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
23 March, 2021                   Chairperson 
02 Chaitra, 1942 (S)                         Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

24 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021) 
 
          MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th February, 2021 from 1450 hrs to 1520 
hrs in Committee Room No. 1, Parliament House  Annexe Extension Building , New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
          Smt Meenakashi Lekhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
3.  Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
4.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
5.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
6.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
7.  Shri Prasanna Acharya 
8.  Shri Anil Desai 
9.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. R. C. Tiwari            -     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Khakhai Zou           - Additional Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad            - Additional Director 
 
 

25 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
1. Ms Shubha Kumar          - Dy. C&AG 
2. Shri Deepak Anurag        - Director General  
3. Dr. Kavita Prasad            - Director General  
4. Ms. Ritika Bhatia             - Director General 
5. Sh. Manish Kumar           -   Director General 
6. Sh. Shailendra Vikram     - Director General 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of Memorandum No. 2 regarding 
inclusion of 'Container Corporation of India (CONCOR)' under comprehensive 
examination. The Committee, thereafter, considered the Memorandum and 
unanimously agreed to select 'Container Corporation of India (CONCOR)' for 
comprehensive examination by the Committee during its current term, i.e  2020-21. 
(Representatives of the O/o C&AG were then called in) 
3. Chairperson, COPU welcomed the representatives of C&AG and drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of 
evidence before the Parliamentary Committees. Representatives of C&AG briefed 
the Committee on Audit Para No. 3.2 of Compliance Report No. 13 o f 2019 titled 'Loss 
due to Imprudent underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment' relating to New India 
Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) highlighting therein various issues such as, 
NIACL issuing Master Package Policy to an entity who had no insurable  interest in 
subject matter of risk; Policy being cancelled and reissued twice after re -negotiation of 
terms and conditions with the insured despite increasing trend of incurred claim ratio; 
Premium rate and terms of depreciation revised in favour of the i nsured; detailed 
justification for fixing initial rates and subsequent revisions not available on record; 
NIACL issuing and renewing policy without getting the approval of competent 
authorities, the Company neither ensuring existence of insurable interest nor getting 
actual valuation done before issuing policy; Imprudent underwriting, lack of proper risk 
assessment, insurable interest and actual valuation resulting in loss of Rs. 91.32 crore 
etc. The representatives of C&AG also informed that the Company in  their Action Taken 
Note had stated that the NIACL considered the value of individual equipment and not 

26 
 
the policy Sum insured and there was no need for special reference to Head Office, at 
the time of renewal of policy. Incurred Claim Ratio (ICR) was well  within the 
favourable/reasonable limits and actuarial rating was not required as it was a package 
policy covering standard perils as per already approved Guidelines and filed product. 
The Committee was also informed that besides Audit observation on the s ubject, a 
complaint was also received and preliminary enquiry conducted by Chief Vigilance 
officer, NIACL found that there were lapses in processing the policy and the matter was 
referred to CVC. On advice of CVC, major penalty proceedings have been initia ted 
against the officers of NIACL associated with the case. 
4. Thereafter, Chairperson and members raised queries on various aspects of the 
case with the representatives of the C&AG.  The representatives of the C&AG  
responded to the queries  and it was deci ded that the Department of Financial Services 
and NIACL may be called for tendering evidence before the Committee. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/----------/ 
 
 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021) 
 
          MINUTES OF THE FIFTEEN SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th March, 2021 from 1500 hrs to 1550 
hrs in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
          Smt Meenakashi Lekhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
3.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4.  Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
5.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
6.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
   7. 
   8. 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhan Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. R. C. Tiwari            -     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda    - Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad            - Dy. C&AG 
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia             - Director General  
 

28 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
 
1.  Shri Atul Sahai                   - CMD 
2. Shri Jitender  Mehndiratta  - Dy. General Manager 
3. Ms. Jayashree Nair            - Company Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take evidence of the representatives of New India Assurance 
Company Limited (NIACL) in connection with the examination of Para No. 3.2 of 
Compliance Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 titled 'Loss due to Imprudent unde rwriting and 
proper risk assessment relating to New India Assurance Company Limited. She then 
drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
maintaining confidentiality of evidence tendered before the Parliamentary Committees. 
3. The CMD, NIACL, after introducing himself and his colleagues to the Committee 
gave a brief report on the issues mentioned in the aforesaid Audit Para. Hon‟ble 
Chairperson then raised specific issues such as NIACL issuing Master Package Polic y 
to an entity who had no insurable interest in subject matter of risk; Policy being 
cancelled and reissued twice after re -negotiation of terms and conditions with the 
insured despite increasing trend of incurred claim ratio; Premium rate and terms of 
depreciation revised in favour of the insured; detailed justification for fixing initial rates 
and subsequent revisions not available on record; NIACL issuing and renewing policy 
without getting the approval of competent authorities, the Company neither ensuri ng 
existence of insurable interest nor getting actuarial valuation done before issuing policy; 
Imprudent underwriting, lack of proper risk assessment, lack of insurable interest 
resulting in loss of Rs. 91.32 crore etc. The representatives of NIACL respond ed to the 
queries and also explained several issues like presence of insurable interest in the 
policy, policy being issued on acceptable lines of business, policy being a long -tail one, 
absence of mala-fide intent by the policy issuer etc. 
 4. Thereafter, Chairperson and Members sought clarifications on various aspects 
related to the case under examination. The representatives of NIACL clarified some 
issues on which information was readily available with them.  In respect to points on 

29 
 
which information was not readily available, the Chairperson directed them to submit 
written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/----------/ 
 
 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX-III 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021) 
 
          MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th March, 2021 from 1550 hrs to 1640 
hrs in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
          Smt Meenakashi Lekhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
3.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4.  Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
5.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
6.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
7. 
8. 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhan Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri. R. C. Tiwari            -     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda    - Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
 
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad            - Dy. C&AG 
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia             - Director General  
 
 

31 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
1. Shri Debasish Panda             - Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Agrawal                    - Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Saurabh Mishra                - Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
1.  Shri Atul Sahai                   - CMD 
2. Shri Jitender  Mehndiratta  - Dy. General Manager 
3. Ms. Jayashree Nair            - Company Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) and New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to take evidence of the representatives of DFS in 
connection with the examination of Para No. 3.2 of Compliance Audit Report No. 13 of 
2019 titled 'Loss due to Imprudent underwriting and proper risk assessment relating to 
New India Assurance Company Limited. She then drew their attention to Direction 55(1) 
of the 'Directio ns by the Speaker' regarding maintaining confidentiality of evidence 
tendered before the Parliamentary Committees. 
3. Secretary, DFS after introducing himself and his colleagues to the Committee 
gave a brief report on the issues mentioned in the aforesaid Audit Para. Hon‟ble 
Chairperson then raised specific issues such as due diligence not being followed before 
and after issue of the policy, policy being approved through oral consent at the Regional 
office level, no proper risk assessment and actuarial valuation being carried out, no vital 
records being maintained by NIACL, exact role of the DFS in determination and 
monitoring of policies, frequency of meetings or interaction of DFS with Banks, 
Insurance and Financial Institutions, action taken by the Department in this particular 
issue etc. The representatives of DFS responded to the queries and also explained 
several issues like risk factor in Insurance business, how the industry is evolving and 
growing, robust systems being built into the system not only to regulate public sector 
companies but also private sector companies, policy being a long -tail one etc. 
Secretary, DFS also informed the Committee that the officials of NIACL who issued the 
policy has been charge sheeted and that an departmental Inquiry is ongoing. 

32 
 
4. Thereafter, Chairperson and Members sought clarifications on various aspects 
related to the case under examination. The representatives of DFS and NIACL clarified 
some issues on which information was readily available with them.  In respect to points 
on which information was not readily available, the Chairperson directed them to submit 
written replies to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/----------/ 
 
  

33 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021) 
 
  MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23 rd March, 2021 from 1500 Hrs. to  
1530 Hrs. in Room No. 147 (Room of Hon‟ble Chairperson CoPU), 3 rd Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
         1.   Shri R.C.Tiwari                  -               Joint Secretary                       
        2.  Shri Srinivasulu Gunda     -              Director 
        3. Shri G.C. Prasad               -                       Additional Director 
    
Lok Sabha 
     2. 
     3. 
     4. 
     5. 
     6. 
     7. 
     8. 
Shri Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
Shri  Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
Janardan Mishra 
Ravneet Singh 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
9. 
10. 
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. 
12. 
 
Shri Prasanna Acharya 
Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 

34 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
at the sitting convened for consideration and adoption of the following reports; 
 (i)                  *****                  ******                      *****; 
 
 (ii)    Para no. 3.2 of Report No. 13 of 2019 (Compliance Audit) regarding „Loss 
due to Imprudent Underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment‟ related to New India 
Assurance Company Limited (NIACL). 
 
   
3.  The Committee then considered the aforesaid draft reports and  adopted it 
without any changes/modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the report on the basis of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministry/Department/C&AG and consider for presenting the reports to Parliament d uring 
the current Session of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 
 
 