 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
'FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA' 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-21) 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


ii 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
      COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
           (2020-21) 
 
 
    (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.01.2021 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.01.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
January, 2021/  Magha, 1942(Saka ) 


iii 
 
                             CONTENTS                                          Page 
 (i) COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iii) 
(ii) COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) (iv) 
(iii)  INTRODUCTION (v) 
 
REPORT  
PART- I 
CHAPTER - I  ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS  
  A. Food Corporation of India (FCI) – Functions and Mandate 1 
  B. Management of the Corporation 2 
  C. Board of Directors 
(i) Composition of the Board of Directors 
(ii) DPE Guidelines on Composition of the Board 
(iii) Earlier recommendations of CoPU 
(iv) Representation of States in the Board 
(v) Independent Director 
(vi) Autonomy of Board of Directors 
2 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7 
6 
  D. Role and functions of Executive Committee 6 
  E. Applicability of provisions of Companies Act, 2013 7 
  F. Constitution of High Level Committee by the Government 9 
CHAPTER – II  HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 10 
  A. Sanctioned and Actual  Strength of Employees 10 
  B. CVC Guidelines – Transfer/Posting Policy 10 
  C. Categories of Labour and Wages paid 11 
  D. Work Study on Labour Strength 12 
  E. Denotification of already Notified Depots 13 
  F. Recommendations of High Level Committee on Labour System and its 
implementation 
14 
  G. Declaration of Departmental Labour as Dying Cadre 14 
  H. Change in existing incentive scheme 15 
CHAPTER – III  PROCUREMENT OF FOOD GRAINS 16 
  A. Food Policy 
(i) The National Food Security Act, 2013 
(ii) Role of FCI in implementation of food policy 
16 
16 
17 
  B. Procurement process 17 
  C. Procurement System 
(i) Centralized Procurement System (Non-DCP) 
(ii) Decentralized Procurement System (DCP) 
18 
18 
18 
  D. Procurement and Minimum Support Price(MSP) 
(i) Procurement and MSP of Wheat 
(ii) Procurement and MSP of Rice 
(iii) Procurement vis-à-vis allotment 
21 
21 
22 
22 
  E. Allotment of food grains under PDS/NFSA/other welfare schemes 25 
  F. Procurement of Beyond Rejection Limit(BRL) Stocks 26 
  G. Monitoring mechanism for procurement activities 27 

iv 
 
  H. Future Role of FCI in changing scenario 
 
27 
CHAPTER-IV  OPERATIONAL,  BUFFER AND EXCESS FOOD GRAIN STOCKS 29 
  A. Stocking norms for food grains 29 
  B. Excess Stocks 31 
  C. Disposal of excess Stocks 
 
31 
CHAPTER – V  STORAGE OF FOOD GRAINS 34 
  A. Storage Capacity 
(i) Availability of Storage Capacity 
(ii) Region-wise availability of Storage Capacity 
(iii) Storage capacity vis-à-vis Central Pool Stock 
(iv) Utilization of Storage Capacity 
(v) Capacity utilization of Depots/Godowns 
(vi) Monitoring mechanism for Godowns 
34 
34 
36 
36 
37 
37 
38 
  B. Schemes for construction of Godowns 39 
  C. Silos – Modern storage system 
(i) Storage capacity under Silos 
(ii) Status of Silo construction 
(iii) Creation of Silos under „Hub and Spoke‟ model 
39 
40 
41 
42 
  D. Storage under Cover and Plinth(CAP) 42 
  E. Maintenance of Depots and Godowns 43 
  F. Storage Construction Plan 43 
  G. Outsourcing of Stocking Operations 
 
44 
CHAPTER -VI  MOVEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD GRAINS 46 
  A. Movement of foodgrains 46 
  B. Modes of movement of foodgrains 46 
  C. Quantum of foodgrains moved through Rail and Road 46 
  D. Quantum of foodgrains moved through Coastal and Reverine modes 46 
  E. Movement from Surplus Regions 47 
  F. Coordination with Railways 48 
  G. Multimodal Transport Movement 48 
  H. Containerized Movement 48 
  I. Long Route Road Transportation 49 
  J. Bulk Movement 49 
  K. Cost efficiency in storage and movement 
 
50 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
  
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
  A. Turnover of FCI 52 
  B Operational cost and budget 52 
  C. Details of Sales, Subsidy on foodgrains, Receipts and other income  53 
  D. Subsidy 
(i) Elements of Subsidy 
(ii) Economic cost of Wheat 
(iii) Economic cost of Rice 
55 
55 
56 
57 
  E. Short term loans 58 

v 
 
  F. Components of Food Subsidy 59 
  G. Issue related to MSP, Subsidy and its sharing between Centre and States  60 
  H. Diversification of Crops 64 
  I. Equity Infusion 
 
64 
CHAPTER –VIII  LOSSES AND DAMAGES OF STOCKS 66 
  A. Storage Losses 66 
  B. Steps taken to overcome the losses 68 
CHAPTER – IX  COMPUTERIZATION AND MODERNIZATION 69 
  A. Depot Online System 69 
  B. Implementation of DOS in CWC and SWC Godowns 70 
  C–Governance initiatives 70 
  D. Food & Essential Commodities Assurance & Security Target (FEAST)  
 
71 
CHAPTER - X  QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
 
72 
CHAPTER – XI  VIGILANCE SYSTEM 76 
  A. Preventive measures in Procurement 77 
  B. Preventive measures in Storage and Contacts 77 
  C. Preventive measures in Transportation/movement 78 
  D. Preventive measures in Distribution 78 
  E. Preventive measures related to Labour 78 
 
CHAPTER-XII           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
AUDIT OBSERVATIONS OF C&AG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
81-94 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings held on           
14.10.2019………………………………………………………………………………………………….95 
 
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings held on  
16.3. 2020……………………………………………………………………………………………………98                       
 
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings held on                                        
18.3.2020…………………………………………………………………………………………………….101 
 
IV. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings held on 
07.01.2021…………………………………………………………………………………………………..104 
 
  

vii 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2020-21) 
 
 
 
  
  
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi- Chairperson 
 Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
2.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
3.  Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
4.  Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
5.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
7.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
8.  Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
9.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
10.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
11.  Shri Ravneet Singh  
12.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
13.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 Rajya Sabha 
15.  Shri Prasanna Acharya 
16.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
19.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
Secretariat 
Shri R.C. Tiwari          -     Joint Secretary 
Shri Srinivasulu Gunda         -        Director  
Shri Khakhai Zou                   -        Additional Director 
Shri Satyakaam Yadav          -     Assistant Executive Officer                     

viii 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2019-20) 
 
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi    - Chairperson 
     Members 
 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6. Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
7. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Prof. Saugata Roy 
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
12. Shri Ravneet Singh 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
14. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
15. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri  Prasanna Acharya 
17. Dr. Anil Jain 
18. Mohd. Ali Khan 
19. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
20. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
21. Shri A.K. Selvaraj 
22. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

ix 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Third Report on 'Food Corporation of India.' 
  
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2019 -20) had selected the said subject for detailed examination. 
As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive during the terms of the previous Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2019 -20), the present Committe e decided to carry forward the subject so as to complete the 
unfinished task.  
 
3. The previous Committee (2019 -20) was briefed about the subject by the representatives of the Food 
Corporation of India  on 14 th October, 2019. Thereafter, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
Food Corporation of India on 16 th March, 2020 and also took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) on 18th March, 2020. 
 
4. The Committee (2020-21) considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 7 January, 2021. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of  Food Corporation of India and  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) and for 
tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with 
examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Comm ittee wish to express their sincere thanks to the predecessor Committee for their  valuable 
contribution in examination of the subject.  
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
7 January, 2021                  Chairperson 
17 Pausha, 1942 (S)                                         Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
ORGANISATIONAL MATTERS 
A. Food Corporation of India –Functions and Mandate  
1.1 The Food Corporation of India (FCI) is a Public Sector Undertaking established by “The Food 
Corporations Act, 1964” (Act No. 37 of 1964). It came into existence on 01.01.1965 and is functioning under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Dep artment of Food and 
Public Distribution).  The functions of FCI primarily consist of procurement, storage, preservation, transportation 
and distribution of food grains on behalf of the Central Government.  FCI performs its function under administered 
price mechanism. Procurement of food grains is made at Minimum Support Price(MSP) and is distributed at the 
Central Issue Price (CIP).  The difference between economic cost and the issue price is reimbursed  as a susidy  
by the Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, 
Government of India.  The functions of FCI as defined in Section 13 of the Act are as under:  
"13(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the primary duty of the Corporation to 
undertake the purchase, storage, movement, transport, distribution and sale of food grains and 
other foodstuffs.  
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Corporation may also, with the previous app roval of the Central 
Government – 
(a)  promote by such means as it thinks fit the production of food grains and other 
foodstuffs;  
(b)  set up, or assist in the setting up of, rice mills, flour mills and other undertakings for 
the processing of food grains and other foodstuffs, and  
(c)  discharge such other functions as may be prescribed or as are supplemental, 
incidental or consequential to any of the functions conferred on it under this Act."  
 
1.2 The Government of India takes policy decision on the fixation of the prices at which foodgrains are to be 
purchased and to be issued and also about the quantum of allotment  of food grains to  the State Governments. 
The FCI's contribution in implementing the food policy objectives of the Government and building the national food 
security system had a significant effect in sustaining the high growth rate of production both in wheat and rice and 
also for maintaining price stabilit y. The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and 
business of the Corporation vests in the  Board of Directors which exercises all such powers and does all such 
acts and things as provided under the Food Corporations Act, 1964. The Food Corporation of India coordinates its 
functions through a country wide network of offices with Headquarters at New Delhi and 5 Zonal Offices, 25 
Regional Offices,163 District  Offices, 1888 Depots and 1 Special Regional Office at Imphal covering the State of 
Manipur. 
 
B. Management of the Corporation 
1.3 As per section 6 of the Act, t he management of Food Corporation of India will be carried out as 
under :- 
 

2 
 
“(i)   The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the 
Corporation shall vest in a board of directors which may exercise all such powers and do all 
such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under this Act.   
(ii)   The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act on business principles having 
regard to the interests of the producer and consumer and shall be guided by such 
instructions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the Central Government;  
(iii)  If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of 
the Central Government shall be final.” 
 
C. Board of Directors  
 (i) Composition of Board of Directors 
1.4 As per Section 7(1) of the Act, the Board of Directors of FCI shall consist of 12 Directors as follows:  
 “(a)  Chairman 
 (b)  Three Directors to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central Government dealing with: 
  (i) Food  
  (ii) Finance, and; 
  (iii) Co-operation. 
 (c)  Managing Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation established underSection -3 of the 
Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), Ex-Officio; 
 (d)  Managing Director, FCI. 
 (e)  Six other Directors” 
 
1.5 As per the information collected by the Committee from different sources including the  website of FCI and 
the materials submitted to them by the FCI,  it was found that as on 31.12.2019,there were nine (9) Directors  in 
position  in  the Board of Directors of FCI  as per the details given below: 
Sl.No Name of Directors Designation Period 
1 Shri D. V. Prasad, IAS Chairman & Managing Director, FCI w.e.f. 01.01.2019  
2 Shri Dharmendra, IAS AS&FA, Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution w.e.f. 26.09.2018  
3 Ms. Nandita Gupta, IAS 
Joint Secretary (P&FCI), Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution 
w.e.f. 14.11.2019 
4 Shri Abhilash Likhi IAS 
Addl. Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture & Co -operation & 
Farmer Welfare. 
w.e.f. 14.08.2019 
5 Shri Arun Kumar Managing Director, Central w.e.f. 18.06.2018   

3 
 
Shrivastava, IRSE Warehousing Corporation 
6 Dr. G.A. Rajkumar, IAS 
(Retd.) Non-official Director 
w.e.f. 31.01.2017 
for a period of 
three years or 
until further orders 
whichever is 
earlier 
7 Shri KAP Sinha, IAS 
Principal Secretary, Food, Civil 
Supplies and Consumer Affairs. 
Govt. of Punjab 
w.e.f. 05.07.2017  
8 Smt. Neelam Shami Rao 
Principal Secretary, Food, Civil 
Supplies & Consumer Protection. 
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh 
w.e.f. 29.05.2018   
9 Smt. Archana Ranjan, IRS 
(Retd.) Non official/independent  Director w.e.f. 13.08.2018  
 
(ii)  DPE Guidelines on Composition of Board 
1.6 As per the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises vide OM No.18(6)/91-GM dated 16.03.1992, the composition of the Board of  Directors in 
thePublic Sector Enterprises should be broadly on following lines:  
 (A) Functional Directors:  Every Board should have some full time Functional Directors. The 
number of such Directors on a Board should not exceed 50% of the actual strength of the Board.  
(i) In cases where the number of Functional Directors on the Board is more than the 50% of 
its actual strength (not sanctioned strength), Administrative Ministries will immediately 
undertake a review of the strength of the Board in consultation with Department of Public 
Enterprises and PESB.  
(ii) On such Boards where the posts of Functional Direct ors do not exist, Administrative 
Ministries will take immediate steps to create such posts in accordance with the prescribed 
guidelines.  
(B) Government Directors:  The number of the Government Directors on the Board of 
Directors of an enterprise should not exceed one-sixth of the actual strength of the Board.  
(i) It will be preferable to have only one Government Director from the concerned 
Administrative Ministry on each Board. The choice of the nominee Director would vest with 
the Secretary of the concerned Department (As per DPE OM No.18(6)/91 -DPE(GM) dated 
13.11.1995, the choice of nominee Director would vest with the Administrative Ministry.)  
(ii) In case of PSEs where it is considered essential to give representation on the Boards to 
other concerned Government agencies/Ministries/State Governments, only one 
representation from the Group could also be appointed on the Board as part -time 
Government Director.  
(iii) The number of Government Directors on a Board should in no case exceed two.  

4 
 
 
(C) Non official Directors :  
(i) The number of Non-Official Part-time Directors on a Board should be at least one -third of 
its actual strength. Wherever there is under representation of such Directors on the Board , 
the concerned Ministries should take immediate steps to fill up the vacan cies to stipulated 
level.  
(ii) A Panel of suitable persons who could be considered for appointment as Non -Official 
Part-Time Director on the Boards of PSEs will be maintained centrally by Department of 
Public Enterprises. This Panel will be prepared in co nsultation with PESB and the 
Secretary of the concerned Administrative Ministry.  
1.7 The Department of Public Enterprises issued guidelines vide their OM No.9(15)/2012 -GM dated 31st July, 
2013 laying down the criteria of eligibility for appointment as Ind ependent Directors in the Board.  The 
Department of Public Enterprises  further vide their OM No.18(6)/91 -GM dated 16 March, 1992 and OM 
No.18(6)/2000-GM dated 26 November, 2001  prescribed the strength of Independent Directors in the Board .
  
(iii) Earlier Recommendations of COPU 
1.8 The Committee on Public Undertakings  (1998-99) in its Fourth Report on “Senior Level Posts in Public 
Undertakings- Appointment and related matters” had expressed the opinion that shortage of non -official directors 
on the Board d eprives the undertakings of expert guidance  of seasoned, professionals and technocrats.  This is 
particularly true in the case of sick/potentially sick undertakings or those which are to be restructured . The 
Committee at that time had, therefore, recommended that the strength of non -official directors in PSUs should be 
brought to the level stipulated in the guidelines without further loss of time and at the same time care should be 
taken that persons having  vested interests directly or indirectly in the particular industry are not inducted into the 
Board of PSEs.  This recommendation of the Committee was circulated by the Department of Public Enterprises 
vide their OM No.2(20)/99-GM dated 25.01.2000 to all the Ministries/Departments. 
1.9 The guidelines issued by DPE vide  OM No.18(6)/91 -GM dated 16.03.1992 inter alia provided that the 
number of Government Directors on the Board of Directors of an Enterprise should not exceed one -sixth of the 
actual strength o f the Board and that the number of such Directors should in no case exceed two.  The 
Committee(1998-99) in its above mentioned Fourth Report , while observing non -compliance of the directions of 
DPEs by some of the PSUs in this regard, had expressed strong displeasure over the deviations in some of the 
Undertakings and had desired that the number of government directors should be brought within the prescribed 
limits. 
1.10 In response to queries a bout the norms for composition of the BoD  in FCI, deviation of  norms for board 
membership of FCI  from those of other  PSEs and also the reasons for having  many board members from the 
administrative Ministries/Departments, the FCI in a written reply submitted as under:  
“FCI is a statutory corporation formed as per the  provisions of Food Corporation Act, 1964. 
Therefore, it cannot fully comply with the guidelines of DPE due to this statutory composition of 
BOD. All the Directors are directly appointed by the Administrative Ministry…”  
 
1.11 Elaborating further on the subject, FCI, stated that:  
“….Further as per aforementioned Act, the Board can have a maximum of 12 members. The 
Chairman and MD of FCI is an integral part of the Board. The representatives from the Department 
of Food, Finance and Cooperation and the MD (CWC ) are vital for constructive discussions in the 
Board. Similarly, the State Food Secretary of two or three major procuring states are needed in the 

5 
 
Board for appreciation of field situation and required course correction. Under these circumstances, 
a maxim um of three or four independent directors can be on the FCI Board. Thus, it will not be 
feasible for the FCI to follow DPE guidelines in this regard.” 
 
1.12 In  a written response to a query as to the disadvantages FCI would have incase the DPE guidelines on 
Board level appointments are followed, FCI stated inter- alia as follows:  
“The DPE guidelines provide that in the case of companies with Executive Chairman, at  least half of the 
Board should comprise of independent directors.… ……………As the FCI Act, 1964 limits the number of 
Directors to 12 and representatives from the Department of Food, Finance and Cooperation, MD (CWC) 
are vital for healthy discussion in the Bo ard. Similarly, the State Food Secretary of two or three major 
procuring states are required in the Board for appreciation of field situation and required course 
correction.  The chairman and MD of FCI also have to be on the Board. Hence, the maximum numbe r of 
independent directors who can be on the Board in FCI will be limited to three or four. Thus by following 
DPE guidelines on appointment of Board of Directors the Corporation will have a disadvantage.”  
 
  (iv)  Representation of States in the Board 
1.13 On being asked about the criteria for deciding the representation  of the States on its B oard of Directors  
and also whether the members from Madhya Pradesh and Punjab  are  fixed or are they appointed  on rotation 
basis,   the FCI in a written reply stated as follows:  
“All the Board of Directors are nominated by the Administrative Ministry i.e. M/o CAF&PD and is in 
accordance with the Food Corporations Act,1964.”   
 
“There are no specific criteria for representing Officers from the states to the Board. Criteria laid 
down by DPE for appointment of Board of Directors are applicable for representing officers from the 
States to the Board. No members from states of MP and Punjab are fixed for appointment. Principal 
Secretary of any major food producing states  could be appointed in Board of Directors of FCI.  This 
is, because Department has a view to give some representation to major producing states in the 
board of Directors of FCI.” 
 
1.14 With regard to the criteria adopted for representing officers from the States on FCI‟s B oard of Director 
during the last five years, the FCI further submitted as under :  
“Food Corporation of India was established under Food Corporations Act 1964 (FC Act) with the 
vision to ensure efficient and effective procurement and distr ibution of food grains. Hence, it was 
decided in the Department to give representations to the major food producing states in the Board 
of Directors so that the major decisions of FCI are based on field situations.”  
 
(v) Independent Directors 
1.15 With regard to the number of independent Directors, FCI in a written reply submitted inter alia as under : 
                          “… out of these 12, a maximum of three or four could be Independent Directors”  
 
 

6 
 
 
(vi) Autonomy of the Board of Directors 
1.16 In a written reply to a query as to whether the  Board  of FCI is really autonomous/independent in view of 
the fact that  that all the Directors on the Board are from the administrative Ministry and there are no Functional 
Directors, FCI submitted as follows :  
“The Board of Directors of FCI is entirely indep endent even though the Directors on the Board are 
appointed by the administrative Ministry. The Directors, as per FCI Act, 1964 are from different 
Ministries and Departments. In addition, the independent Directors appointed are person of 
eminence in their respective field and sufficiently qualified to contribute in the healthy deliberation 
of the Board. There is one functional director i.e. Chairman and Managing Director and whenever 
required concerned Executive Director assist the functional director as and when required.” 
 
1.17  On being pointed out that the Government of India takes  decisions on all vital points like  fixation of 
prices at which food grains are to be purchased and issued, fixation of quantity of allotment to State Governments 
and thus, it  appears that the Board has very little role in decision making process and is confined to taking 
instructions, orders and implementing decisions taken by the administrative Ministry ,  the FCI, i n a written 
response, submitted as under:  
“Within the broad policy framework regarding the procurement and allotment there remains many a 
important operational and administrative issues on which crucial decisions are taken by the Board. 
Besides the Board being the apex authority in decision making in FCI, important  policy decisions 
are deliberated in the Board before either implementation or forwarding to the government for 
approval.” 
 
1.18 In the light of  the fact that major policy decisions are taken by the Government, the Committee sought to 
know the precise role played by the Bo ard of Directors of FCI . In a written reply, D epartment of Food and Public 
Distribution submitted as follows:  
“FCI has to implement the decisions taken by the Government under the overall supervision and control 
of Board of Directors” 
 
D. Role and Functions of Executive Committee 
1.19 The composition, role and functions of the Executive Committee have been mentioned in the Section 14 of 
Food Corporation Act,1964 which reads as under:  
(1) The Board of Directors of the Corporation may constitute an Executive Committee 
which shall consist of- 
 (a)   the Chairman of the board 
 (b) the managing director; and 
 (c)  three other directors, of whom one shall be a non-official. 
(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be the Chairman of  the Executive 
Committee. 
 
 

7 
 
 
(3) Subject to the general control,  direction and superintendence of the board of 
directors, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within 
the competence of the Corporation.” 
 
1.20 In a written reply to a specific query as to the necessity of having another power Centre as the Executive 
Committee when the Board is empowered to take all decisions, the FCI submitted as under: 
 “As per the FCI Act, 1964 the general superintendence, direction  and management of the affairs 
and business of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of Directors which may exercise all such 
powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under the 
Act. The BOD constitutes the Executive Committee and subject to the general control, direction and 
superintendence of the board of directors, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with 
any matter within the competence of the Corporation.  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX. The Chairman of the 
Board shall be the Chairman of the Executive Committee.” 
 
1.21 In a written reply to a query about the major decisions taken by the Executive Committee during the last 5 
years, the FCI stated as under : 
“Though no major decision has been taken by the Executive Committee as the Board meeting 
invariably has been held on the same day and all the decisions are taken by the Board. The major 
thrust given by Executive Committee has been on reducing the occurrence of storage and transit 
losses and regularization of pending losses.” 
 
E.  Applicability of provisions of Companies Act, 2013 
1.22 The Committee was informed that FCI is governed under the Food Corporations Act, 1964. The FCI follows the 
relevant provisions of the Companies Act 2013 including applicable Accounting Standards in India and the  FCI‟s Act.  
However, as per FCI, any deviation from applicable Accounting Standards has been suitably disclosed. In  a written reply to a 
query as to what advantages or disadvantages will be for  the FCI if it is brought under the Companies Act,  the Ministry 
informed as under :  
“Food Corporation of India was established under Food Corporations Act 1964 (FC Act).  It is a Corporation 
governed as per the provisions of FC Act.  Section 34 of the said Act provides  as under: 
(1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an 
annual Statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance -sheet in such 
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
(2) The Accounts of Food Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable  by 
the Food Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
The format of Accounts has been last notified by the Government vide GSR 1133 (E) dated 02.12.2016.  
While devising the format, provision of Schedule -III of Companies Act 2013 was ke pt in mind and some 
additions/deletions/modifications have been done in consultation with C&AG keeping in view the special 
nature of operations of FCI i.e. “ No profit No loss and a 100% subsidized Corporation.” and the 
format is adopted in a manner that the financial statement gives all relevant information to the readers. 

8 
 
 
FCI is implementing food policy of Govt. of India and all major policy decisions like fixation of MSP, CIP, 
monthly allocation of foodgrains to the States, procurement targets, Procureme nt Seasons, off-loading of 
stock in open market to stabilize prices, construction of godowns/ silos etc.  
The Companies Act provides general provisions to be followed by all the Companies in India which 
largely focus on commercial entities which are set up with profit motives and adding value to its 
shareholders. However, the objective of the Government is not to make profit by procuring foodgrain at a 
lower cost and selling it at a higher price. The  stated objectives of the government is to  
(i) provide remuner ative production cost to farmers by ensuring payment of Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) 
(ii) provide foodgrain to public at large at subsidized price and  
(iii) maintain buffer stock and strategic reserve of foodgrain for the country.  
 
FCI executes Government welfare programs and fulfils it social objectives and thus is not a profit oriented 
entity. In case all the provisions of the Companies Act are made applicable to FCI, it may materially 
impact the subsidy calculation and will have financial implications on Government  of India. Hence the 
provisions of Companies Act cannot be applied to it.  
Further, presently, FCI enjoys certain exemptions from compliance to few RBI and SEBI regulations as it 
is not a company registered under the Companies Act. Some of these exemptions  are (i) RBI regulation 
issued vide circular no. DBR.BP.No.12/21.04.048/2018 -19 dt.05.12.2018 regarding mandatorily parking 
60% of sanctioned Credit limit as a Working Capital Loan. (ii) RBI circular no. RBI/2016 -
17/50.DBR.BP.BC.No.8/21.01.003/2016-17 dt. 25.08.2016 which stipulate a cap on borrowing through 
banking sector (iii) SEBI regulation regarding mandatory creation of Debenture Redemption Reserve. If 
FCI is registered as a Company under the Companies Act, above exemptions are unlikely to be 
extended. This would add to financing cost for running welfare programs of the government, which in turn 
would add to subsidy burden.  
   
1.23 Adding further, the FCI in a written reply on the issue submitted as follows:  
“ …The procurement of foodgrains is majorly done through State Govts./ Agencies and the procurement 
incidental charges are provisionally fixed before start of the Season and paid to the  States after 
completion of operation.  The State  Govts. are submitting Audited Accounts to the Govt. of I ndia and 
thereafter,  final procurement incidentals are fixed.  Normally, there is a time lag of 4 -5 years between 
submission of final and provisional accounts. On receipt of final rates, FCI release/ recover the differential 
incidental charges which is ac counted in the year of finalization/ payment which, as per the Companies 
Act,  becomes exceptional items and during Income Tax Assessment it may complicate the assessment 
proceedings due to matching concept followed in the Income Tax Act.  However, for FCI , this is not an 
exceptional item. Hence necessary accounting is done in the year of finalization/ payments.  Similar is the 
case for storage charges payable to CWC/SWC which is decided after 2 -3 years with the approval of 
Ministry of Finance.   
Apart from  accounting aspects, there are several provisions to facilitate control of the Corporation by 
Govt. of India, especially appointment of Directors from various Ministries.  Presently, only CMD is 
functional Director and all Directors are nominated by Govt. of India whereas for a Company, Directors 
are appointed by Public Enterprises Selection Board. If an independent Board is setup, the Government 
control would be diluted. Though FCI is constituted under Food Corporations‟ Act, the essential features 

9 
 
of Companies Act 2013 are followed by FCI. Presentation of the Annual Reports, Corporate Governance, 
Board & its meetings, Accounting Standards etc are to be named few which are in consonance with the 
Companies Act and are followed by FCI. Thus, shifting to the C ompanies Act may not be beneficial for 
FCI.” 
 
F. Constitution of High Level Committee by the Government 
2.24 The Committee was informed that the Government of India vide order dated 20.08.2014 constituted a 
High Level Committee (HLC) under the Chairmanship of Shri Shanta Kumar, Hon‟ble Member of Parliament      
(Lok Sabha) to recommend on restructuring of FCI.   The High Level Committee  (HLC) was mandated to suggest 
restructuring of FCI with a view to improve its operational efficiency and financial management.  The Government 
of India also desired HLC to suggest measures for overall improvement in management of foodgrains by FCI; to 
suggest reorienting the role and functions of FCI in MSP operations, storage and distribution of foodgrai ns and 
food security systems of the country; and to suggest cost effective models for storage and movement of grains 
and integration of supply chain of foodgrains in the country.   The HLC submitted its report on 21.01.2015.  On 
being asked, the FCI informed the Committee about the status of action taken on  various recommendations of 
High Level Committee. 
 
  

10 
 
 
CHAPTER–II 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
A. Sanctioned and  Actual Strength of Staff 
2.1 As formed by the FCI, the  sanctioned and actual strength as on 30.09.2019 in various categories of man 
power in the organization is as under: 
 
CATEGORY 
SANCTIONED 
STRENGTH 
MEN IN 
POSITION 
VACANT POSTS 
Category-I   1111     855   256 
Category-II   6221   4232  1989 
Category-III 27345 13454 13891 
Category-IV   7361 2640    4721 
Total 42038 21181 20857 
 
2.2 In a written reply to a query as to whether any comprehensive study has been done to restructure the 
regular strength of man -power at different levels and in different zones to enhance organizational efficiency, the 
FCI submitted as follows : 
„In pursuance of Board of Director‟s decision a study was conducted by the M/s Mckinsey  & Co. on 
staffing norms and the Sanction strength for FCI was revised on the basis of its report. HR Audit has 
also been conducted.  Further in pursuance to Ministry letter, Tender for c onducting Audit of Staff 
Strength has been floated on 19.09.2019 and technical bid opened on 11.10.2019. Presently, 
Technical bid is under evaluation.” 
 
 2.3 With regard to Human Resource Development interventions carried out at Food Corporation of India t o 
ensure that its employees are competent for handling the current and future needs of the company, FCI, in a 
written reply submitted that : 
“Manpower training is given from time to time to ensure that employees are competent for handling the 
current and future needs of the company. FCI has conducted HR Audit by third party for Audit of identified 
HR policies, processes and systems of FCI and Benchmarking of HR policies, processes and systems of 
FCI with leading practices from similar/ comparable private sector and public sector companies.” 
 
2.4 The Committee was informed that the Human Resource Management System (HRMS) is being 
implemented by M/s Kellton Tech. Ltd for full automation related to Human Resource.  
 
B. CVC Guidelines on Transfer/Posting Policy 
2.18 The Committee during evidence enquired from the representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution(Department of Food and Public Distribution) about the adherence to the CVC 
guidelines in the matters relating to Deputatio n, Transfers and Postings of the Officials in FCI and also the 

11 
 
instances of overstay of deputationists beyond the prescribed three years period.  The representatives of the 
Ministry informed the Committee during evidence as under: 
 "we follow CVC guidelines  and if we  have some specific guidelines which elaborate on CVC 
guidelines, those hold good." 
2.19 The representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  (Department of Food 
and Public Distribution) further submitted as under: 
 "again a humble request, kindly give a recommendation to that effect. It makes our hands 
stronger to ensure that we are able to do it. For transfers and postings, sometimes it does not 
happen for various reasons."  
 
C.  Categories of Labour and the Wages paid 
2.5 The Committee was informed that the FCI engages large number of workers (loaders) for 
loading/unloading of food grains.  Thre e catagories of  Laborurs deployed by FCI are (i) D epartmental Labour (ii) 
Direct Payment System (DPS) Labour and (iii) No-work No-pay(NWNP) Labour.  It is learnt that in addition to this, 
almost one lakh contract workers  are also engaged by FCI . As informed to the Committee, the sanctioned and 
actual labour strength in the organization is as under: 
Labour 
System Depots Sanction In Position Shortage 
(A) (B) (C) (D) E=C-D 
Departmental 54 10095 11350 -1255 
DPS 152 26147 19953 6194 
No Work No 
Pay(NWNP) 88  7871 6705 1166 
Total 294 44113 38008 6105 
 
2.6 As per the information provided by the FCI, th e amount of wages paid to various categor ies of labour  
during the last five years is as follows:  
        ( wages paid – Rs. in Lakh) 
Types of 
Labour 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Departmental 
Labour 2,13,786.25 1,97,587.08 1,43,320.6 1,16,634.33 1,16,166.17 
DPS Labour 1,16,822.35 85,664.24 93,859.85 1,01,990.19 91,384.23 
NWNP 
Labour 6,630.16 7,494 7,695.2 9,441.52 8,582.93 

12 
 
Total 337238.76 290745.32 244875.05 228066.04 216133.33 
 
D. Work Study on Labour Strength 
2.7 FCI has stated that the sanctioned labour strength in the organization is  38,008 labourers. In response to 
queries as to whether sanctioned labour strength is based on any independent work study  and also what are the 
details of  work study  on the staff and labour requirement last carried out by the Ministry of Food & Public 
Distribution or by an Independent Body with the highlights of the Study Report and the status of its implementation, 
the FCI submitted as follows :  
“Consequent upon adoption of 50 Kg packing of foodgrain in FCI, a study was g iven to Delhi Productivity 
Council on January 2002 to study norms. The council submitted its report on October, 2002 which was 
examined. Since there was disagreement of Unions, FCI set up another committee under chairmanship of 
Mr P.K Saxena, the then GM(I R-L) to examine the recommendations of Delhi Productivity Council. Based 
on the recommendation of Saxena Committee, the below mentioned assessment norms were adopted.  
 
 For handling Labour =       Avg. annual turnover of preceding 3 yrs (in bags) 
      240 days X 135 bags 
 For Ancilliary Labour =   4 persons per 5000 MT covered capacity of Godown/Depot 
 
The Sanctioned strength of each depot was calculated by the field offices based on the above norms and 
was circulated vide letter of same no. dated 27.11.20 07.XXXX         XXXXX         XXXXX  Further NWNP 
labour system was introduced in 76 owned depots wherein contract labour system was abolished under 
the provision of CL(R&A) Act 1970 with the approval of Ministry of CAF and PD (GOI) said norms were 
followed to assess the requirement of the Labour in each notified owned depot. ” 
 
2.8  Furnishing the present status of various kinds of labourer, the FCI submitted as follows : 
 
“Sanction strength of labour of the departmental/DPS was fixed vide letter no.-IR-L/1(21)/2005 dated 
27.11.2007, where as in case of NWNP workers same was fixed in the year 2010 -2011 prior to 
rationalization. Rationalization process of Labour Strength have been done on the basis of exemption 
notifications dated 06.07.2016 and 26. 06.2018,  issued under section -31 of C.L(R&A) Act by the ministry 
of labour in respect of already notified 226 depots.  The current exemption notification is operative upto 
06.07.2020. Therefore, revision of sanctioned strength is subject to denotification  of the already notified 
226 depots which is at present pending before the CACLB (Central Advisory Contract Labour Board). 
Denotification of the notified depots is a permanent solution based on which sanctioned strength can be 
reviewed. Keeping in view that rationalization process is temporary measure the men in position has been 
taken as sanctioned strength as the labour have become surplus after rationalization.” 
 
2.9 The Committee was informed that the labour strength in FCI has been rationalized in ligh t of the 
directions given by Hon‟ble High Court of Bombay, Nagpur bench and the exemption notification dated 
06.07.2016 issued by Ministry of Labour  and Employment exempting the 226 depots of FCI from the applicability 
of Section 10 of Contract Labour (R&A ) Act allowing FCI to engage contract labour in these depots.  Also , the 

13 
 
Ministry of Labour and Employment  issued Gazette Notification wherein the 226 notified depots of FCI have been 
exempted under Section 31 of Contract Labour  (Regulation & Abolition) Act from the purview of said Act for a 
further period of two years w.e.f. 06.07.2018 in continuation to earlier exemption notification dated 06.07.2016.  
This exemption had been extended for next two years vide Notification dated 26.06.2018 upto 05.07.2020.   
Various petitions were filed before Hon‟ble Delhi High Court against exemption notification dated 06.07.2016. 
Therefore the matter is sub-judice.  
2.10 In response to a query as to  the fate of the 9193 labourers who have been repositioned and the impact 
on 29,284 contract labourers deployed in vacated depots/railheads as the current exemption is operative until 06 
July 2020,  the Department of F&PD  submitted as follows :   
“It is informed that Ministry of Labour  & Employment vide Notification dated 25.06.2020 has further 
extended the Exemption granted vide notification dated 06.07.2016 for another 02 years w.e.f. 06.07.2020 
to 05.07.2022. Accordingly, th e status of the labour  rationalised and repositioned consequent upon the 
Ministry of Labour& Employment Notification dated 06.07.2016 shall continue to be same and the contract 
labourers shall continue to work in the exempted depots”                                                         
 
2.11 In written reply to queries  as to  the type of jobs carried out by the contractual staff of the company  and how 
does Food Corporation of India ensure s that same level of efficiency  by the contractual employees as  that of  the 
permanent employees, the  FCI submitted as under : 
“At the outset, it is clarified that contractual staff are hired through contractors. Though we are principal 
employer, contractual staff are not FCI employees. F ollowing types of work/jobs a re carried out by 
Contract Labour of Handling & Transport Contractor appointed by FCI: 
 
1. Unloading/Loading of foodgrains bags from /into railway wagons, trucks etc.,  
2. Stacking the foodgrains in bags,  
3. Bagging, weighment, standardization, cleaning of foodgrains, etc. 
 
The contractor has to follow rules as stated in the below mentioned acts and should provide the basic 
amenities to the workers engaged by him at the Depots as per Terms & Conditions stipulated in the 
tender form.  Various liabilities towards per sonnel stipulated in EPF & MP Act, ESI Act, Minimum Wages 
Act, Employees Compensation Act and other facilities/ amenities for welfare of labours and other 
employees etc. and statutory provisions of the Government are to be complied in letter and spirit. 
Necessary records as mentioned in the tender form are to be maintained by the contractor and submitted 
to the concerned authority regularly under the respective Acts as well as the Divisional Manager. 
Statutory Rules and regulations and various policies, as mandated by Government of India from time to 
time are to be complied. Tender terms and conditions are to be complied also in all circumstances.  If the 
performance of contractual labour ers/contractors is not upto the mark, action as deemed fit is initiated 
against the contractor as per the various provisions of Model Tender Form (MTF) is initiated.  As regards 
level of efficiency, the contract labour ers are more efficient and less expensive as compared to 
permanent labour because of sporadic nature of work in FCI.”  
 
E. De-notification of already notified Depots 
2.12 As informed to the Committee, the Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench directed Government of 
India to decide the de -notification of all the notified depots within 6 months. The time limit of 6 months has 
elapsed long back.  In the meantime Hon‟ble High Court Kerala at Ernakulam directed Ministry of labour to  

14 
 
 
consider the de -notification of Kollam depot after obtaining comments of FCI. The proposal for de -notification of 
Kollam depot alongwith the other notified depots has been sent to the Ministry of Labour through the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution vide letter No. IR(L)/31(10)/2004/Vol.III dated 02.07.2018 followed 
by reminders dated 25/26.10.201 8, 21/22.02.2019, 02/03.04.2019, 23.05.2019 & 08.07.2019, but decision is still 
awaited. 
 
F.   Recommendation of HLC on Labour System and its implementation 
2.13 The Government of India had constituted a High Level Committee  (HLC) on restructuring of FCI in 
August, 2014. The HLC submitted its report in January, 2015.  Referring to the expensive departmental labour vis-
a- vis Direct Payment System (DPS)  and Contractual Labour hired by FCI,  the HLC in its report  had  
recommended as under:  
“FCI engages large number of workers (loaders) to get the job of loading/ unloading done smoothly and in 
time. Currently there are roughly 16,000 departmental workers, about 26,000 workers that operate under 
Direct Payment System (DPS), some under no work no pay, and about one lakh contract workers. A 
departmental worker (loader) costs FCI about Rs 79,500/ per month (Apri -Nov 2014 data) vis -a-vis DPS 
worker at Rs 26,000/per month and contract labour costs about Rs 10,000/ per month. Some of the 
departmental labour (more than 300)  have received wages (including arrears) even more than Rs 4 
lakhs/per month in August 2014. This happens because of the incentive system in notified depots, and 
widely used proxy labour, This is a major aberration and must be fixed , either by de -notifying these 
depots, or handing them over to states or private sector on service contracts, and by fixing a maximum 
limit on the incentives per person that will not allow him to work for more than say 1.25 times the work 
agreed with him. These depots should be put on priority for mechanization so that reliance on 
departmental labour reduces. If need be, FCI should be allowed to hire people under DPS/ NWNP 
system. HLC recommends that the condition of contract labour, which works the hardest  and are the 
largest in number, should be improved by giving them better facilities.” 
 
2.14 As informed to the Committee, the FCI has taken the following action in the matter:   
• Consequent upon Exemption Notification, 9193 labourers have been repositioned out of 45009 labourers, 
thereby vacating 149departmentaldepots and 72 railheads and 29284 contract labours deployed in 
vacated depots/railheads. There is likely annual savings of about Rs.600 Crs. 
• In pursuance to award passed by CGIT, Karkardooma, Delhi on  05.07.2016, the datum of departmental 
labour revised from 105 to 135 Bags per worker per day resulting in reduction of incentive by 30% 
(approx). 
• Nodal Officers have been appointed at field level for improving the working condition of contract labour 
and enforcement of statutory benefits. 
• Approval for introduction of VRS in respect of departmental labour from Ministry has been sought 
subsequent of the approval of BoD.” 
 
G. Declaration of Departmental Labour System as dying cadre 
2.15 The FCI informed to the Committee that the  proposal with regard to declaration of Departmental Labour 
system as Dying Cadre has been approved by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  on 
03.01.2020 and same has been communicated to field offices vide Circular No.1/2020 dated 08.01.2020 with the 
instruction that there will be no further induction under this Departmental Labour system. 

15 
 
H. Change in existing incentive scheme 
2.17  In compliance to the above order, FCI Headquarter sent a detailed proposal  to the Ministry of  Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  for effecting changes in the service benefits of Departmental Labour and 
Direct Payment System (DPS) Labour for approval so that further course of action can be initiated by FCI towards 
making the necessary reforms.  The following altered service conditions needed to be adopted: 
[i] Non-inclusion of incentives for computation of CPF; 
[ii] Non-inclusion of incentive for computation of Gratuity; 
[iii] Non- inclusion of HRA elements for computation of Incentive and OTA; 
[iv] No payment of „A‟ Area rates to DPS labour working in „B‟ and „C‟ Area; and  
[v] Consideration of Mandal as Handling Labour. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2.16     The Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench passed the following order:  
 
“We also clarify th at the respondent/Corporation would be at liberty to implement its 
policy of change in the Scheme of incentives”. 
 

16 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
PROCUREMENT OF FOOD GRAINS 
 
A.  Food Policy 
(i) The National Food Security Act, 2013 
3.1 The Government of India enacted the National Food Security Act (NFSA), 2013 and notified it on  10 
September 2013. The NFSA has been implemented in all the 36 States/UTs.  3 UTs viz. Chandigarh, Puducherry 
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli  (partly) have opted for Direct Benefit Transfer  (DBT). The enactment of the  National 
Food Security Act, (NFSA) 2013  marks a paradigm shift in the approach to food security from  welfare to rights 
based approach . The Act legally entitles upto 75% of the rural population and 50% of the urban population to 
receive subsidized foodgrains under Targeted Public Distribution System. About two thirds of the population 
therefore is covered under the Act to receive highly subsidised foodgrains. The National Food Security Act, 
(NFSA) 2013 is being implemented in all the States/UTs on an all India basis. Out of maximum coverage of 81.35 
crore, around 80 crore persons have been covered under NFSA at present for receiving highly subsidized 
foodgrains. The identification of beneficiaries by States/ UTs is a continuous processwhich involves exclusion of 
ineligible/fake/duplicate ration cards and also exclusion on account of death, migration etc. and inclusion on 
account of birth as also that of genuine left -out household. The  salient features of the National Food Security Act, 
2013 are as under: 
 Coverage and entitlement under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) :  Upto 75% of the rural 
population and 50% of the urban population will be covered under TPDS, with uniform entitlement of 5 kg 
per person per month. However, since Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) households constitute poorest of 
the poor, and are presently entitled to 35 kg per household per month, entitlement of existing AAY 
households will be protected at 35 kg per household per month. 
 State-wise coverage : Corresponding to the all India coverage of 75% and 50% in the rural and urban 
areas, State -wise coverage will be determined by the Central Government. Planning Commission has 
determined the State-wise coverage by using the NSS Househol d Consumption Survey data for 2011 -12 
and also provided the State-wise "inclusion ratios”. 
 Subsidised prices under TPDS and their revision : Foodgrains under TPDS will be made available at 
subsidised prices of Rs. 3/2/1 per kg for rice, wheat and coarse gra ins for a period of three years from the 
date of commencement of the Act. Thereafter prices will be suitably linked to Minimum Support Price 
(MSP). 
 In case, any State‟s allocation under the Act is lower than their current allocation, it will be protected u pto 
the level of average offtake during last three years, at prices to be determined by the Central 
Government. Existing prices for APL households i.e. Rs. 6.10 per kg for wheat and Rs 8.30 per kg for rice 
has been determined as issue prices for the additi onal allocation to protect the average offtake during last 
three years. 
 Identification of Households : Within the coverage under TPDS determined for each State, the work of 
identification of eligible households is to be done by States/UTs. 
 Nutritional Support to women and children : Pregnant women and lactating mothers and children in the 
age group of 6 months to 14 years will be entitled to meals as per prescribed nutritional norms under 
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) and Mid -Day Meal (MDM) sch emes. Higher nutritional 
norms have been prescribed for malnourished children upto 6 years of age.  

17 
 
 Maternity Benefit : Pregnant women and lactating mothers will also be entitled to receive maternity 
benefit of not less than Rs. 6,000. 
 Women Empowerment: Eldest woman of the household of age 18 years or above to be the head of the 
household for the purpose of issuing of ration cards. 
 Grievance Redressal Mechanism : Grievance redressal mechanism at the District and State levels. 
States will have the flexibility to use the existing machinery or set up separate mechanism. 
 Cost of intra -State transportation & handling of foodgrains and FPS Dealers' margin : Central 
Government will provide assistance to States in meeting the expenditure incurred by them on 
transportation of foodgrains within the State, its handling and FPS dealers‟ margin as per norms to be 
devised for this purpose. 
 Transparency and Accountability : Provisions have been made for disclosure of records relating to 
PDS, social audits and setting up of Vigilance Committees in order to ensure transparency and 
accountability. 
 Food Security Allowance : Provision for food security allowance to entitled beneficiaries in case of non -
supply of entitled foodgrains or meals. 
 Penalty: Provision for penalty on publi c servant or authority, to be imposed by the State Food 
Commission, in case of failure to comply with the relief recommended by the District Grievance Redressal 
Officer. 
 
(ii) Role of FCI in implementation ofFood Policy 
3.2 On being enquired about the objectives of food policy of the Government of India and the role of FCI  in 
implementing the food policy, the Corporation in a written reply submitted inter alia as under:  
“The Government policy of procurement of Food grains has broad objectives of ensuring MSP to 
the farmers and availability of food grains to the weaker sections at affordable prices. It also 
ensures effective market intervention thereby keeping the prices u nder check, also adding to the 
overall food security of the country.  
 
FCI, the nodal central agency of Government of India, along with other State Agencies 
undertakes procurement of wheat and paddy under price support scheme. The procurement 
operations are majorly carried out by State Govts and its agencies. 
 
There exists a transparent & Uniform Policy for procurement of paddy and wheat by Govt. 
Agencies across the country. Under this policy, whatever food grains, are offered by farmers 
within the stipulat ed procurement period, conforming to the specifications prescribed by 
Government of India, are purchased at MSP by the Govt. agencies including FCI, for central pool. 
However, if any producer/farmer gets better price in comparison to MSP, he is free to sel l his 
produce in Open market.” 
 
B.     Procurement Process 
3.3 The Food Corporation of India executes the food policies of the Government of India through the network 
of its offices situated all over the country. Various operations like Procurement, Storag e, Quality Control, 
Movement and Distribution are involved for the execution of the policies of the Govt. of India.  In a written  
response to the query about the mechanism of procurement in place for procurement, the FCI informed as under: 

18 
 
(i) The Minimum Support Price (MSP) is announced by the Government of India at the 
beginning of the sowing season of crops on the basis of the recommendations of the 
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) which determines the MSP based on 
the input costs and margin to farmers.  FCI and State Govt. Agencies procure the 
foodgrains at MSP fixed by GOI. 
(ii) MSP (Minimum Support Price) operations are given wide publicity through pamphlets, 
banners, sign boards radio, TV and advertisements through print & electronic med ia. 
(iii) Farmers are made aware of the quality specifications and purchase system etc. to facilitate 
the farmers to bring their produce conforming to the specifications. 
(iv) Procurement centres are opened by respective State Govt. Agencies/  FCI taking into 
account the production, marketable surplus, convenience of farmers and availability of 
other logistics / infrastructure such as storage and transportation etc. Large number of 
temporary purchase centres in addition to the existing Mandis and depots/godowns are 
also established at key points for the convenience of the farmers. 
(v) For further strengthening the system that the farmers directly get the MSP announced by 
GOI, the GOI decided to do away with the levy system of procurement of rice with effect 
from KMS 2015-16, allowing the entire procurement of paddy to be done only by the State 
Agencies/FCI. 
(vi) Payment to farmers is done largely through electronic mode or Account payee cheque by 
State Agencies/FCI other than in Punjab & Haryana where it is made to Arthiyas as p er 
APMC Acts of the respective State. Efforts are made to make the payments to the farmers 
within 48 hours of purchase. 
 
3.4 The Committee was further informed that FCI has developed its own Depot Online System which ushers 
in transparency and convenience to the farmers through proper registration and monitoring of actual 
procurement. The States have also been encouraged to procure the produce of the farmers online.  Through 
Depot Online System, farmers get latest/updated information regarding MSP declared, nearest purchase centre, 
date on which the farmer has to bring his produce to the purchase centre etc. This not only reduces the waiting 
period for delivery of stock by the farmers but also enable the farmer to deliver stock as per his convenience in 
the nearest mandi. MSP is released through either electronic mode or Account payee cheque directly to the bank 
accounts of the farmers except in Punjab & Haryana whereas per APMC Acts of the respective State, payment is 
made to Arthiyas. 
 
C.  Procurement System 
3.11 Procurement of food grains is done through  Centralized Procurement System (Non DCP) and 
Decentralized Procurement (DCP) System. The details are given in the succeeding paras. 
  (i)Centralized Procurement System (Non DCP)  
3.12 Under Centralized Procu rement System, the procurement of foodgrains in Central Pool are undertaken 
either by FCI directly or State Government agencies procure the food grains and handover the stocks to FCI for 
storage and subsequent issue against GOI allocations in the same Stat e or movement of surplus stocks to other 
States. The cost of the food grains procured by State agencies is reimbursed by FCI as soon as the stocks are 
delivered to FCI as per cost-sheets issued by GOI. 
  (ii) Decentralized Procurement System (DCP) 
3.13 The scheme of Decentralized Procurement of food grains was introduced by the Government in 1997 -98 
with a view to enhancing the efficiency of procurement and PDS and encouraging local procurement to the 

19 
 
maximum extent thereby extending the benefits of MSP to local farmers as well as to save on transit costs. This 
also enables procurement of food grains more suited to the local taste. Under this scheme, the State Government 
itself undertakes direct purchase of paddy/rice and wheat and also stores and distrib utes these food grains under 
NFSA and other welfare schemes. The Central Government undertakes to meet the entire expenditure incurred 
by the State Governments on the procurement operations as per the approved costing. The Central Government 
also monitors the quality of food grains procured under the scheme and reviews the arrangements made to 
ensure that the procurement operations are carried smoothly.   At present following States are under DCP 
system:-  
S.N. State/UT  Crop for DCP System 
 
1. A&N Islands Rice 
2. Bihar Rice/Wheat 
3. Chhattisgarh Rice/Wheat 
4. Gujarat Rice/Wheat 
5. Karnataka Rice 
6. Kerala Rice 
7. Madhya Pradesh Rice/Wheat 
8. Odisha Rice 
9. Tamil Nadu Rice 
10. Uttarakhand Rice/Wheat 
11. West Bengal Rice/Wheat 
12. Punjab Wheat 
13. Rajasthan ( in 9 District)* Wheat 
14. Andhra Pradesh Rice 
15. Telangana Rice 
16. Maharashtra Rice 
17. Jharkhand (6 District) Rice 
                                                        *Exempted for RMS 2017-18 and 2018-19 only. 
 

20 
 
3.14 With regard  to the need for shifting focus to the regions where the distress sale occurs, the FCI has 
submitted as follows: 
“FCI has already handed over procurement operation to State Governments in Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh fully and is  participating in procurement operations in 
Punjab and Haryana on the request of concerned State Governments” 
3.16 Furnishing further information, the FCI submitted as follows:   
“During KMS 2018 -19, a  quantity of 71.85 LMT of Rice has been procured in Eastern States. As on 
24.02.2020, a quantity of 56.18 LMT rice has been procured in ongoing KMS 2019 -20 in Eastern States.” 
 
3.17 Responding to a query on procurement by the States, the CMD, FCI deposing before the Committee on 
14.10.2019 submitted as under:  
"The procurement at the State level is done by the State agencies. They give to us at our godowns and 
storage points. We accept only after they give fair average quality which is prescribed. If it is below the 
standards, we do not take it.  They keep aside what is required for their public distribution system. If they 
have excess, they give it to the Central Government."  
 
3.18 With regard to decentralization of procurement activities, the  CMD deposing before the Committee on 
16.03.20, submitted as follows:  
“the procurement activities have been decentralized to the State Governments: as many as 16 States 
procure rice and about four to six States procure wheat. After procurement, the surplus part after meeting 
what is required by the State is handed over to the State Government. FCI‟s activities start after the 
States Government hands over the excess to FCI. For example, almost 99 per cent of rice from Punjab is 
taken to other parts of India. Similarly, in respect of wheat, out of whatever is procured by t he State 
Governments, after meeting their requirement, the surplus is handed over and FCI‟s role is to take it to 
consuming States like Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, parts of Karnataka, and other parts of India.”  
3.19 Furnishing the extent of decentralization, the FCI in a written reply, stated inter- alia   as under:  
“FCI is procuring approximately 2% of paddy and 12% of wheat, out of total procurement done for 
central pool. Rest of the procurement is done by State Agencies. FCI has moved towards focus ing 
more on storage and movement of food grains.” 
 
3.20   Elaborating further on the subject, the Department of F&PD in a written reply submitted as follows:  
“….FCI is participating in procurement operations in Punjab and Haryana on the request of concerned 
State Governments. FCI is procuring around 1% of paddy and 10% of wheat out of total procurement 
done for central pool. Rest of the procurement is done by State Agencies. FCI has moved towards 
focusing more on storage and movement of  foodgrains. Conscious and persistent efforts are being 
made towards helping the States especially in the Eastern and North East part of the Country to extend 
the benefit of MSP to the farmers. Paddy is the main crop in the Eastern States.71.85 Lakh MT of paddy 
in terms of rice has been procured in these States during KMS 2018 -19. As on 06.07.2020, 86.34 LMT 
of Paddy in terms of Rice has been procured in ongoing KMS2019-20.” 
 
3.21 The data on the procurement done during last 4 years in the Eastern States is as under as furnished by 
D/o F&PD is as follows: 

21 
 
(Fig. in LMT) 
Sl. 
No. 
STATES Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) 
  2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20* 
1 Assam 0.46 0.35 1.03 1.28 
2 Bihar 12.34 7.93 9.49 13.41 
3 Jharkhand 1.41 1.46 1.55 2.58 
4 U.P. 23.54 28.74 32.33 37.90 
5 WB 28.22 22.11 27.27 31.05 
6 Tripura 0 0 0.18 0.12 
Total 65.97 60.59 71.85 86.34 
*Under Progress. As on 06.07.2020 
 
3.22 With regard to the requirement of entering into an agreement with States before every procurement 
season regarding costing norms and basic rules for procurement, the FCI has submitted that: 
 “MoU with states both DCP and Non DCP are being entered into.”  
 
D. Procurement and Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
3.4 The information on production, procurement and MSP of wheat  and rice since 2010-11 as provided by 
theFCI isgiven as under: 
(i)Procurement and MSP of Wheat(Figures in LMT) 
Crop 
Year  Production  
Procurement  
 MSP+Bonus 
(Rs. Per qtl.)  
RMS  Procurement   MSP  Bonus  Total  
2010-11  868.7  2011-12  283.35  1120  50  1170  
2011-12  948.8  2012-13   381.48  1285     1285  
2012-13  935.1  2013-14  250.92  1350       1350  
2013-14  958.5 2014-15  280.23  1400  
 
1400  
2014-15  865.3 2015-16  280.87  1450  
 
1450  

22 
 
2015-16  922.9 2016-17  229.61  1525  ---  1525  
2016-17  985.1 2017-18  308. 24  1625  ----  1625  
2017-18  998.7 2018-19  357.95  1735  -----  1735  
2018-19  1021.90* 2019-20  341.32  1840  ---  1840  
   * As per 4th Advance estimates of Ministry of Agriculture dated 19.08.2019 
 
(ii)    Procurement and  MSP of Rice 
(Figures in LMT) 
Crop 
year 
KMS  
Production 
Procure
ment of 
rice 
MSP of Paddy ( 
/qtl.)  Bonus         
(Rs./qtl.)  
MSP+Bonus( qtl.)  
Common Grade 
A Common Grade 
A 
2010-11  959.8 341.98  1000  1030  -- 1000  1030  
2011-12  1053.0  350.60  1080  1110  - 1080  1110  
2012-13  1052.4  340.44  1250  1280  - 1250  1280  
2013-14  1066.5 318.45  1310  1345  
 
1310  1345  
2014-15  1054.8  320.40  1360  1400  
 
1360  1400  
2015-16  1044.1 342.18  1410  1450  
 
1410  1450  
2016-17  1097.0 381.06  1470  1510  --  1470  1510  
2017-18  1127.6 381.84  1550  1590  --  1550  1590  
2018-19  1164.20* 443.30  1750  1770  --  1750  1770  
*As per 4th Advance Estimates of Ministry of Agriculture.#Under Progress. As on 27.09.2019  
 
(iii) Procurement vis-à-vis Allotment 
(Figures in LMT) 
YEAR 
KMS/ 
RMS 
PRODUCTION PROCUREMENT 
ALLOTMENT 
(NFSA/TPDS/OWS/ 
Others) 
% of PROCUREMENT 
OVER PRODUCTION  

23 
 
WHEAT RICE TOTAL WHEAT RICE TOTAL WHEAT RICE TOTAL WHEAT RICE 
TOTA
L 
2014-
15 958 1054 2012 280 320 600 241 373 614 29.23 30.36 29.82 
2015-
16 865 1044 1909 281 342 623 266 343 609 32.48 32.85 32.63 
2016-
17 922 1097 2019 230 381 611 271 354 625 24.95 34.73 30.26 
2017-
18 985 1127 2112 308 382 690 255 351 606 31.27 33.90 32.67 
2018-
19 998 1164  2162  358 443  801  253 352 605 35.87 38.06 37.05 
2019-
20 1022  - 1022  341 
416 
(esti
mate
d)  
757 246 331 577 33.37  - -  
 
3.5 About the „wheat procurement‟ during Rabi Marketing Season (RMS)  in the year 2019-20 and 2020-21(under 
progress), the Department of Food and public Distribution informed as  follows : 
“During RMS 2019 -20, total procurement of wheat for the Central Pool was 341.32 Lakh MT.  During 
RMS 2020 -21, 389.42LMT of Wheat has been procured as on 07.07.2020. The Region wise 
procurement of wheat in last and current Rabi Marketing Seasons is asunder:  
 
(Fig. in Lakh MT) 
Sl. No. STATES/ UTs Rabi Marketing Season 
2019-20 2020-21* 
1. Punjab 129.12 127.12 
2. Haryana 93.20 73.98 
3. M.P. 67.25 129.35 
4. UP 37.00 35.53 

24 
 
5. Rajasthan 14.11 22.19 
6. Chandigarh 0.13 0.11 
7. Uttarakhand 0.42 0.38 
8 Gujarat 0.05 0.68 
9 Bihar 0.03 0.05 
10 H.P. 0.01 0.03 
TOTAL 341.32 389.42 
*Under Progress. Data as on 07.07.2020 
 
3.6 With regard to Rice Procurement (including paddy) in Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution submitted that during Kharif Marketing Season 2018 -19,  the Govt. Agencies have 
procured 443.99 LMT of Paddy in terms of Rice at Minimum Support Price (MSP) for Central Pool. Further, in 
ongoing KMS 2019-20 as on 07.07.2020, 502.52 LMT of Paddy in terms of  Rice have been procured at Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for Central Pool. The Region wise procurement of rice in last and current Kharif Marketing 
Seasons is as under: 
 
(figures in LMT) 
Sl.No. 
 
STATES/ UTs KMS 
2018-19 
KMS 2019-20 
(As on 7.07.2020) 
1 A.P. 48.06 53.18 
2 Telangana 51.90 74.64 
3 Assam 1.03 1.28 
4 Bihar 9.49 13.41 
5 Chandigarh 0.13 0.15 
6 Chhattisgarh 39.71 46.56 
7 Delhi 0.00 0.00 
8 Gujarat 0.09 0.14 
9 Haryana 39.41 43.03 
10 HP 0.00 0.00 

25 
 
11 Jharkhand 1.53 2.55 
12 J&K 0.09 0.10 
13 Karnataka 0.59 0.41 
14 Kerala 4.65 4.75 
15 M.P. 13.95 17.40 
16 Maharashtra 5.80 11.13 
17 Odisha 44.47 47.28 
18 Puducherry 0.00 0.00 
19 Punjab 113.34 108.76 
20 Rajasthan 0.00 0.00 
21 NEF(Tripura) 0.07 0.12 
22 Tamil Nadu 12.94 17.72 
23 U.P. 32.33 37.90 
24 Uttarakhand 4.62 6.81 
25 West Bengal 19.79 15.20 
Total 443.99 502.52 
 
E. Allotment of Foodgrains under PDS/NFSA/Other Welfare Schemes 
3.9 The Committee was informed that Public Distribution System (PDS)/NFSA is operated under the joint 
responsibility of Central Government and States/UTs.  While the Central Government makes allocation of 
foodgrains, the distribution of foodgrains under PDS/NFSA and Other Welfare Schemes (OW S) to the targeted 
beneficiaries is made by the State/UT Governments and their agencies. The FCI ensures adequate foodgrains 
stocks at all its base depots throughout the country for PDS/NFSA and OWS. With regard to the procedure of 
allotment/lifting of food grains under Public Distribution System/Other Welfare Schemes, the FCI in a written reply, 
submitted as under: 
(i) Receipt of allotment orders of foodgains from Department of Food & PD, Govt. of India.  
(ii) Forward the allotment orders to concerned Executive Dire ctor (Zones)/General Manager 
(Regions) FCI Hqrs. 
(iii) Receipt of Revenue District -wise allotment of foodgrains from the State/UT Govts. by 
General Manager (Region). 

26 
 
(iv) Issue of Instructions to concerned Area Managers of FCI by General Manager (Region) to 
issue sto cks from depots to the State/UT Govts. or its nominee after receipt of advance 
cost of foodgrains. 
(v) Area Manager on receipt of the cost of foodgrains (except Mid -Day Meal Scheme) at the 
Central Issue Prices fixed by the Govt. of India from time to time, iss ues a release order for 
issuance of stocks. 
(vi) The concerned State/UT Govt. or its nominated agencies lifts the stocks from the godowns 
of FCI within the validity period prescribed by the Govt. of India and within the date for 
which Release Order has been issued. 
(vii) Before issue of the stocks, State/UT Govt. or its nominated agencies are allowed to inspect 
the stocks and get themselves satisfied about the quality. Three representative samples 
are drawn and sealed with joint seal from the stocks issued.  One is gi ven to the recipient 
for displaying at the issue/sale point and two are retained by the FCI, one for depot and  the 
other for District Office. 
(viii) Under Mid Day Meal Scheme, food grains are issued to the concerned authorities State 
Govts   free of cost and FCI  Area Offices raise the bills pertaining to supply of food grains 
during a month to the district administration by the 10 th of the next month and district 
administration will ensure payment within 20 days. 
(ix) The role of FCI is limited to supply of food grain s ex-godown to the nominated agencies of 
State/UT and FCI is not responsible once the stocks are moved outside FCI godown 
premises.” 
 
F. Procurement of Beyond Rejection Limit (BRL) Stocks 
 
3.23 In order to ensure that rice stock within specifications prescribed by Government of India are procured, 
conscious efforts were made which resulted in reduction of procurement of BRL stocks by 86.48% i.e. from 15586 
MT during 2013 -14 to 2107 MT during 2016 -17.  The following table show the quantity detected, BRL , quantity 
procured and percentage of BRL against the quantity procured during the last 5 years: - 
 
KMS Qty. Detected BRL Qty. Procured 
% BRL against 
procured Qty. 
2013-14 15586 MT 310.30 LMT 0.05 
2014-15 10121 MT 317.79 LMT 0.03 
2015-16 4763 MT 336.96 LMT 0.01 
2016-17 2107 MT 375.64 LMT 0.01 
2017-18 1936 MT 364.66 LMT 0.005 
 
3.24  FCI further informed that  2081 samples and 3590 samples were referred to FSSAI 
accredited laboratories during 2016-17 & 2017-18 respectively. 

27 
 
 
G. Monitoring mechanism for Procurement activities 
3.25 FCI has put in place well established Monitoring Mechanism for the procurement and the distribution 
activities as shown below: 
  
(i) Joint inspection of food grain stocks by officials of FCI & State Government on regular intervals.  
(ii) Online Procurement Monitoring System (OPMS) for collecting information on the procurement of 
wheat and rice.  
(iii) An Online Procurement System as part of Depot Online System for procurement of Food Grains 
from farmers by FCI.  
(iv) Checks/Super checks by various authorities to ensure procurement of stocks as per prescribed 
specifications. In addition to this, squads are sent from Hqrs., Zonal Offices & Regional Offices.  
(v) Analysis of samples in Quality Control Laboratories.  
(vi) Regular inspection of Fair Price Shops (FPS) and godowns, creation of vigilance committees at 
the FPS, Block, District and State levels and constitution of State Food Commissions."  
 
H.   Future Role  of FCI in Changing Scenerio 
3.26 It has been mentioned in the Annual Report that the Corporation manages the food policy of the 
Government of India which includes procurement, storage, movement and distribution of food grains. These 
operations are gradually decentralized by the Governmen t of India, by giving the responsibility of procurement, 
storage and distribution to more and more State Governments through a mode of decentralized procurement 
(DCP) scheme. In view of such a scenario the Committee desired to know w hat kind of role does F ood 
Corporation of India see for itself playing in the future.  In response, FCI in its written submission stated as under:  
"With the expansion of decentralized procurement system in all there are Seventeen states where 
procurement is done in DCP mode. It has resulted in less procurement by FCI and less quantum of 
distribution of FCI for state. But overall expenditure more or less remained same on this factor as 
subsidy is being claimed by DCP states as well."  
 
 Hence, FCI‟s role and objectives in India‟s success in transforming the crisis management 
oriented food security into a stable security system remains more or less same in the light of 
following objectives of food policy:- 
 State govt. procures the foodgrains locally for distribution under NFSA  which reduces the 
cost of transportations of foodgrains for other states. 
 Effective price support operations for safeguarding the interests of the farmers. 
 Distribution of foodgrains throughout the country for public distribution system. 
 Maintaining satisfactory level of operational and buffer stocks of  foodgrains to ensure 
National Food Security. 
 
3.27 During the briefing, the CMD of FCI submitted before the Committee regarding the practice of taking 2 kg 
extra in the name if moisture, pilferage and losses, pilferage due to bags being pierced by hooks during handling, 
under weighing and reporting during procurement, as under: 
 "डीसेंट्रऱाइज्डप्रोक्योरमेंट होने के बाद FCI does not procure even one grain. जोस्टेट गवननमेंट 
एजेंसीज़प्रोक्योर करती हैं, डड स्ट्रीब्यूशन भी वेही करती हैं। So, what ever excess  is there with the State 
Government is given to us, which means beyond the excess they give it to us. महोदया, उदाहरण के 
लऱए मध्य प्रदेशका गेहूूं जएक्सेज़ आता है, we take it to Bangalore; we take it to South; we take  it to 
Maharashtra and Gujarat. We do not procure in Rajasthan, but the State Government procures it. 

28 
 
एक्सेज़जो है, वह उनको हम देते हैं। 17 स्टेट्समेंडी सेंट्रऱाइज्ड प्रोक्योरमेंट है before 2013-2014. Once the 
High-Level Committee Report of Shri Shanta Kumar came, FCI does not procure it. It will take it 
from State agency. Madam, the Members have a lot of experience. This sort of reality I have seen 
even in my State of Karnataka that th e hon. Member was mentioning. This sort   of thing truly 
happens, but FCI is not directly involved. This 1 kg or 2 kg issue might be factually correct, but it is 
not FCI that procures it." 
  

29 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OPERATIONAL, BUFFER AND EXCESS FOOD GRAIN STOCKS 
 
A. Stocking Norms for Buffer Stock 
 
4.1 Food Corporation of India has to maintain buffer stocks as prescribed by  the Government of India  
(presently stock equivalent to 4 months allocation) as a measure of food security to guard against scarcity of 
foodgrains. This stock enables the Government to intervene effectively to curb the rising trend of prices of 
foodgrains in the market. Cost of carrying buffer stock is part of food subsidy. Carrying charges for buffer 
comprises of elements like freight, storage an d interest charges allocated on this stock as per norms. In addition, 
in view of recommendation of Economic Reforms Committee, the carryover charges paid to State Agencies by 
FCI are also reimbursed as part of buffer subsidy. 
 
4.2 With regard to the criteria adopted for fixing of stocking norms for foodgrains (wheat and rice). D/o F&PD 
submitted that the following criteria was adopted in recommending the quantum of buffer stock norms:  
(i) Operational stocks: stocks required for month to month distribution to the intended 
beneficiaries, under Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) and Other Welfare 
Schemes (OWS), and  
(ii) Strategic reserve : Government will be requi red only to maintain and renew the 
stocks unless foodgrains are drawn from it in case of crisi s situation such as 
abnormal shortfall in production of foodgrains in the country or natural calamity. In 
such a case, procurement will be required to be higher in the following season to 
the extent of drawl from the strategic reserve. 
 
4.3 In a written reply to a query as to the prescribed buffer stock norms fixed by the Government in respect of 
food grains, pulses etc., for ensuring food security , the  FCI submitted the Govt. of India fixes stocking norms of 
foodgrains (wheat &rice ) for Central   Pool on quarterly basis.  The details of present stocking norms of 
foodgrains are as under:  
 (in Million Tonnes)  
Year FOODGRAIN STOCKING NORMS FOR CENTRAL POOL 
Operational Stock Strategic Reserve Total 
2019-20 Rice Wheat Total Rice Wheat Total Rice Wheat Total 
1st April 11.58 4.46 16.04 2.00 3.00 5.00 13.58 7.46 21.04 
1st July 11.54 24.58 36.12 2.00 3.00 5.00 13.54 27.58 41.12 
1st 
October        
8.25 17.52 25.77 2.00 3.00 5.00 10.25 20.52 30.77 

30 
 
1st 
January 
5.61 10.80 16.41 2.00 3.00 5.00 7.61 13.80 21.41 
    (FCI does not maintain buffer stocking norms of pulses and sugar) 
 
 
4.4 With regard to the reasons for such huge variations in the stocking norms in different quarters of the year, 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution  submitted as follows: 
“Of the total buffer stocks, quarterly norms for operational stocks are based on mapping foodgrain 
distribution requirements with the food procurement  patterns. The food distribution needs are 
uniformly spread through the year but procurement of grains is highly concentrated (99.6 per cent 
wheat is procured in the quarter beginning 1st April and close to 80 per cent of rice is procured in 
the two quarters beginning October and January. It is also because of adoption of open -ended 
procurement policy adopted by Government.” 
 
4.5 During evidence, the Chairman and Managing Director, FCI stated regarding the stocking norms as 
under: 
 "The stocking norms were done by a Committee in 2014 -15, which also had Professor Abhijit 
Sen, the Nobel Prize laureate in it. As of 2014, we should have about 23 million. As you are 
aware, now it is about 64 million. It means it is 40 million excess." 
 
4.6  The actual stock of wheat, rice and paddy as held on 01.09.2019as informed by FCI is as follows: 
(figures in LMT) 
Wheat  Rice  Total=Wheat 
+Rice 
Unmilled 
paddy  
Rice ( CMR 
due from 
unmilled 
addy) 
Total 
wheat&rice 
(incl.CMR 
due) as on 
01.09.2019 
414.90 261.48 676.38 59.70 40.00 716.38 
 
4.7 In a written reply to a specific query as to how it is ensured that the country is maintaining the foodgrains 
and stocks as per the buffer stock norms and how often it is reviewed and at what level, the FCI stated as follows: 
"FCI is monitoring stock position of wheat and rice and preparing data at various levels i.e. Depot/ 
District/ Region.  A statement of physical availability of stocks in the Central Pool is prepared on 
fortnightly/monthly basis at FCI Headquarters  and submitted to higher authorities at FCI and 
Ministry for their perusal.  Comparison of stocking norms and stock of foodgrains available in 
physical form is done regularly in order to ensure that the country is maintaining the foodgrains as 
per the stocking norms fixed by the Govt. of India. The position is reviewed regularly by the officers 
of FCI and Ministry.   It is reviewed closely at the time of taking policy decisions by Govt. of India 
like sale under Open Market in order to liquidate surplus stocks in the Central Pool." 

31 
 
 
4.8 With regard to the stock norms for difficult/hilly terrains, the Committee has been informed as  under: 
“The monthly allocation of food grains for NE is 2.51 LMT and existing storage capacity in NE is 
6.35 LMT. Storage gaps at  various centres have been worked out and being made out through 
construction under PEG Scheme, Silos and Central Sector Scheme (CSS). Construction works for 
30,020 MT are in progress and a capacity of 27,530 MT has been completed in NE under Central 
Sector Scheme. Silo at Changsari (Assam) for a capacity of 50,000 MT has also been planned.  
In Assam, under PEG scheme, 0.25 LMT capacity at Barpeta has been completed and capacity 
creation for another. 50,000 MT at other centres is yet to start.Tender for 27,5 00 MT capacity in 
Meghalaya is also under process. Average monthly allocation in J&K under NFSA/OWS is 0.66 
LMT. As on 31.01.2020, total covered storage capacity with FCI in J&K is 2.46 LMT (Owned 1.03 
LMT and Hired 1.43 LMT),which is sufficient to store more than 4 month‟s requirement. 
 
B.   Excess Stocks 
4.9  The information on Central pool stocks in excess of stocking norms as furnished by FCI is as follows: 
      
(Figures in LMT as on 1st July) 
YEAR 
Stocks of Foodgrains in Central Pool Excess Stocks over Stocking Norms  
WHEAT RICE TOTAL WHEAT RICE TOTAL 
2014-15 398.01 276.60 674.61 197.01 158.60 355.61 
2015-16 386.80 216.71 603.51 111.00 81.31 192.31 
2016-17 301.81 246.69 548.50 26.01 111.31 137.32 
2017-18 322.75 264.68 587.43 46.95 129.28 176.23 
2018-19 418.01 275.52 693.53 142.21 140.12 282.33 
2019-20  458.31 354.63 812.94 182.51 219.23 401.74 
                                 [Stocking Norm on 1st July from 2015 for Rice 135 LMT and Wheat 276 LMT] 
 
C.  Disposal of Excess Stocks 
4.10 In response to a query as to how the liquidation of excess stocks of 40 million tones will be taken care of, 
the Chairman and Managing Director, FCI submitted during evidence as under: 
"About liquidation, we are moving various proposals in the Government. There are four or five 
proposals which are at the Government‟s level. It involves a lot of money for disposal. A lot of other 

32 
 
issues are also there. So, the Government is taking it up seriously ….…  … as of today we have 
worth Rs. 2 lakh crore excess buffer stock in our godowns. If you had spent 25 per cent of that on 
encouraging the alternate crops, you could have achieved wonderful results.”  
 
“we have given quite a few suggestions to the Government which involves a lot of deep financial 
implications. They w ill have to study that. Everything involves a lot of money. It is going on for the 
last one year." 
 
4.11 In response to a query as to the steps taken by the FCI to offload the excess stocks in pursuance of the 
aforementioned recommendation, D/o F&PD submitted as follows: 
“Open Market Sale Scheme(Domestic)(OMSS(D) policy is formulated for every Fiscal Year to 
offload excess stocks of wheat and rice i.e. above buffer stocking norms in the open market. Govt. 
of India has constituted a committee of Secret ary (Expenditure), Secretary (Food & Public 
Distribution), Secretary (Consumer Affairs) and Secretary  (Department of Commerce - for export 
related issues), to recommend quantity and price at which foodgrains stocks in excess of buffer and 
strategic reserve norms are to be offloaded. The recommendations of the committee are placed for 
the approval of Hon‟ble Finance Minister through Minister of Food & PD.  
4.12 The details of sale of excess stocks of foodgrains through OMSS  (D) scheme during 2015 -16 to 
2020-21 are as under: 
(Figs. In LMT)                              
Year Wheat Rice Total 
2015-16 70.77 1.11 71.88 
2016-17 45.67 1.78 47.45 
2017-18 14.22 4.90 19.12 
2018-19 81.84 8.46 90.30 
2019-20 36.36 16.12 52.48 
2020-21(Upto 05.08.2020) 1.00 5.20 6.20 
 
4.13 Sale of Wheat and Rice under Open Market Scheme (domestic) through e-auction is as follows:  
i. “Empanelment of bulk buyers with the service provider conducting e-auction for FCI. 
ii. Govt. of India decides and communicates the quantity and reserve price for  sale of wheat 
and rice for a particular year to FCI. 
iii. FCI float tenders for depot-wise sale of wheat and rice on weekly basis mentioning quantity 
to be tendered and the reserve prices fixed for a particular depot. 
iv. Stock may be inspected by the intending bi dder(s) on any working day of FCI prior to the 
day of E-Auction. 

33 
 
v. Bidder has to electronically deposit EMD calculated @ 10% of the cost of stocks intended 
to be purchased at the reserve price. 
vi. For acceptance of Bids, each depot is treated as a separate unit . Bid(s) is/are accepted on 
the principle of Price, Time and Quantity.  For each depot, first the quantity as quoted by H -
1 is approved at H -1 rates and then to H -2 and so on till the depot wise quantity offered is 
exhausted. 
 
vii. After the e–auction, Acceptance is communicated to the successful bidders by e mail. 
viii. The EMD of all unsuccessful tenderers are refunded within three working days from the 
date of issuance of acceptance letter to the successful bidder. 
ix. Cost of allotted stocks of foodgrains plus all tax es, levies, fees, charges etc. of any nature 
whatsoever leviable by any authority is to be paid by the buyer. 
x. The EMD furnished by the successful bidders is adjusted towards the cost of stocks and 
applicable taxes. The successful bidder(s) deposit remainin g cost of the stocks along with 
applicable taxes within seven (7) working days from the next date of issue of the 
acceptance letter. 
xi. In case, the allotted quantity is equal to or more than 2000 MT, on the request of buyer, 
FCI may allow extension in period  of deposit of  cost of stocks and applicable taxes  for a 
maximum period of another 7 working days. However, penal interest  of 2% over and above 
the Bank rate at which the FCI is borrowing would be charged upto date of deposit of cost 
beyond free period of 7 working days. The buyer can deposit the cost within the above 
period in maximum 2 (two) instalments. 
xii. Release order can be downloaded by the bidder only after deposition of full cost along with 
applicable taxes and no part Release Order are issued. 
xiii. In case the successful bidder fails to deposit the balance cost along with applicable taxes & 
levies within the stipulated time, his bid is liable to be cancelled and the EMD furnished 
forfeited.  
xiv. The buyer has to complete the lifting within free period of fourt een (14) working days from 
the next date of communication of acceptance by FCI. 
xv. After Fourteen (14) working days, on the request of buyer, Area Manager, FCI may allow 
the extension for a maximum period of another Fourteen (14) working days for lifting the 
stocks from FCI godowns on payment of storage charges in case the allotted quantity is 
less than 2000 MT. 
xvi. In case, the allotted quantity is equal to 2000 MT, on the request of buyer, Area Manager, 
FCI may allow the extension for a maximum period of another  Twenty One (21) working 
days for lifting the stocks from FCI godowns on payment of storage charges.  
xvii. The lifting of stocks in the extended period beyond free period of fourteen (14) working day 
is on payment of storage charges at the rate of 50 paise per q tl. per day subject to total 
minimum of Rs. 2000/ -. These storage charges are recovered in respect of the unlifted 
quantity of stocks during the extended period (actual period for which the stocks remain in 
the godown). After expiry of twenty eight (28)/ thirty five (35) working days, as the case may 
be, no further extension is granted and an amount equivalent to value of the unlifted 
quantity or amount equivalent to EMD, whichever is lower, is recovered/ forfeited and the 
balance amount if any, to be refunded to the bidder.” 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
CHAPTER  V 
STORAGE OF FOOD GRAINS 
A. Storage Capacity 
 (i) Availability of Storage Capacity 
5.1 The Committee was informed that i n the last few years, procurement has touched new heights given 
remunerative MSPs coupled with better operational outreach. To meet the short -term peak requirements of 
storage capacity, FCI opts for short-term hiring of covered godowns as well as Cover & Plinth  (CAP) for storage of 
foodgrains which is also a scientific method for storage of foodgrains.  As on 30.06.2018, the Storage capacity 
(Covered and CAP) of 381.06 lakh MTs is available with  Food Corporation of India and 474.92 Lakh MTs is 
available with State agencies for Central Pool stock of foodgrains. As a result, about 855.98 Lakh tonnes of 
capacity is available for storage of Central Pool sto ck of foodgrains against which 650.53 Lakh MTs stocks are 
stored as on 30.06.2018. 
 
5.2 The State/UT wise information on the storage facility owned and hired by FCI for storage of stocks  as on 
30.11.2019, as furnished by FCI, is given as under: 
 
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA  
State-wise Number of Storage available with FCI as on September,  2019.   
SL. 
NO. 
REGION/U.T. COVERED 
FCI 
OWNED 
HIRED   
STATE 
GOVT. 
CWC SWC PEG PWS 
2010 
SILO PRIVATE 
ARTIES 
TOTAL 
HIRED 
TOTAL 
          
1 Bihar 13 1 8 23 24 4 0 3 63 76 
2 Jharkhand 6 0 2 11 21 0 0 1 35 41 
3 Odisha 21 0 6 18 0 0 0 0 24 45 
4 West Bengal 23 1 4 0 0 0 0 5 10 33 
5 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 10 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 13 
6 Assam 20 1 3 4 1 0 0 11 20 40 
7 Manipur 5 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 
8 Nagaland 5 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 

35 
 
9 
Meghalaya 3 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 6 
Mizoram 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 
Tripura 6 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 8 
10 Delhi 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 
11 Haryana 34 35 18 35 126 1 1 0 216 250 
12 
Himachal 
Pradesh 7 5 3 0 3 0 0 0 11 18 
13 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 16 1 0 0 15 0 0 0 16 32 
14 Punjab 121 2 25 238 181 0 3 8 457 578 
15 Rajasthan 36 0 25 56 14 8 0 2 105 141 
16 Utter Pradesh 52 0 23 129 62 0 0 0 214 266 
17 Uttrakhand 4 3 5 6 1 0 0 0 15 19 
18 
Andhra 
Pradesh 25 8 7 30 5 0 0 0 50 75 
19 Karnataka 22 0 6 27 12 1 1 0 47 69 
20 Kerala 23 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 3 26 
21 Tamilnadu 14 0 15 19 9 0 2 0 45 59 
22 Telangana 11 0 8 53 7 0 0 0 68 79 
23 Chhattisgarh 20 0 3 26 5 0 0 0 34 54 
24 Gujarat 14 3 13 0 3 1 0 0 20 34 
25 
Madhya 
Pradesh 24 0 2 1 29 0 0 0 32 56 
26 Maharashtra 13 0 12 23 27 12 1 0 75 88 
 
Grand Total 561 64 191 702 546 27 8 32 1570 2131 
 
5.3  Pointing out   the inadequacy of the  storage capacity, the  Committee enquired  from FCI a bout the 
measures taken to address the gap, the CMD, FCI during evidence  before the Committee on 16.03.2020, 
submitted as follows: 

36 
 
“The biggest problem today is like this .  When I ask some private entrepreneur to build godowns 
under PPP model, or shift in the cropping pattern which has happened earlier, there is no 
guarantee for him.  It is an open -ended procurement. There is thinking at some level.  We have 
sufficient storage space right now.  It is just that every year, we are adding 20 million tonnes.   For 
PDS, we require about 60 million tonnes and we are requiring 80 million tonnes.  These 20 million 
tonnes are the problem.   If these 20 million tonnes are not procured, we have sufficient space.” 
 
(ii)  Region- wise  availability of storage capacity 
5.4 Storage capacity available with FCI is concentrated mainly in the procuring hub located in the 
Northern Zone which has about 69% of the total available storage capacity. The Southern Zone has about 
12%, Western Zone has about 9%, Eastern Zone has only about 8% and North -Eastern Zone has less than 
2% of the total available storage capacity. Around 70% of the storage capacity is concentrated in 7 major 
procuring St ates i.e. Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh, while about 8% storage capacity is available in the four newly emerging procuring States of 
Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand and West Bengal.  
 
(iii) Storage Capacity vis-à-vis Central Pool Stock  
 
5.5  The FCI  through their power point presentation made before the Committee on 16.03.2020 informed the 
availability of storage capacity as on 1st January of each  of the following years  as under:  
 
 (Figures in LMT) 
Year  
Total Storage Capacity  Stock in Central Pool  
FCI  State Agency Grand 
Total  Rice Wheat Total  
2014 376.71 379.18 755.89 303.19 280.47 583.66 
2015  373.81 351.12 724.93 231.30 251.13 482.43 
2016  359.25 452.84 812.09 260.25 237.88 498.13 
2017  351.89 424.34 776.23 297.01 137.47 434.48 
2018  359.85 365.54 725.39 332.52 195.62 528.14 
2019  390.04 358.58 748.62 336.60 271.21 637.81 
2020  405.15 350.89 756.04 423.99 327.96 751.95 
(P.7, PPT 16.03.20) 
(iv)  Utilization of the Storage Capacity 

37 
 
5.6 The storage capacity available with FCI and the percentage utilization during last five years (During Peak 
Season) as furnished by FCI is as under: 
(Figures in Lakh Tonnes) 
Position as on 
Covered CAP Grand 
Total 
%age 
utilization Owned Hired Total Owned Hired Total 
30.06.2015 127.40 217.90 345.30 26.02 1.68 27.70 373.00 82% 
30.06.2016 128.13 207.10 335.23 26.02 0.66 26.68 361.91 77% 
30.06.2017 128.23 209.29 337.52 26.02 0.00 26.02 363.54 82% 
30.06.2018 128.42 226.62 355.04 26.02 0.00 26.02 381.06 88% 
30.06.2019 127.33 252.17 379.50 26.02 1.79 27.81 407.31 92% 
 
(v) Capacity Utilization of Depots/Godowns 
5.7 The information on Depots/Godowns owned by FCI and those hired by it from other agencies with the 
capacity utilisation is as follows: 
 
Depots/Godowns 
of 
Total number of 
Godowns/Depots 
owned 
Total Capacity Capacity 
utilized by FCI 
Hiring 
Charges 
FCI 561 127.53 80% - 
CWC 191 31.23 90% 
Rs. 
4.68/Bag/Mont
h 
SWC 702 89.60 91% -do- 
Port Authority - - - - 
PEG* 546 114.12 95% 
Rs. 
5.73/Qtl./Mont
h* 
Others (State 
Govt.+Silos+Pvt. 
Parties+PWS 
Scheme) 
131 16.73 97%  
Total 2131 379.21 89%  

38 
 
 
*The godowns under PEG Scheme are hiring through Open Tender Process. The All India weighted 
average rate is 5.73/Qtl/Month  
5.8 With regard to the ownership of godowns, the CMD, FCI during the deposition before the Committee o n 
14.10.2019 submitted as under:  
“80 per cent of the godowns are either Central warehousing or State warehousing, or FCI warehousing. 
1800 गोडाउन हमारे हैं, 10 per cent is of Private Public Partnership.  We hire ten per cent of it temporarily, 
for two years, which is called, private warehousing. Eighty per cent of the godowns where the grain is 
stored is in the public sector only” 
 
5.9 With regard to the process of hiring godowns by FCI, the following information has been submitted to the 
Committee:   
“An assessment for the requirement of storage capacity is done on the basis of allotment, 
procurement/ potential of procurement, inflow/ o utflow of food grains. Preference is given to the 
CWC/ SWCs while hiring of storage capacity. Storage worthiness of the godowns to be hired is also 
examined for scientific storage of food grains. While hiring bigger godowns (with capacity 25,000 
MT and abo ve), railway siding facility within the godown or goods -head nearby is preferred.At 
present, godowns are being hired under PWS (Private Warehousing Scheme) basis - Under PWS 
Godowns are hired by FCI from Pvt. Party on lease/lease with services through open tender 
enquiry. Hiring period is 2+1 years. Consuming regions have been advised to hire Storage capacity 
equivalent up to 1 year of PDS requirement.” 
 
(vi) Monitoring mechanism for Godowns 
5.10 With regard to the mechanism in place for monitoring Depots/ Godowns owned and hired, FCI submitted 
as follows:  
“Godowns are hired by FCI on the basis of storage gap. General Managers (Region) have been 
allotted the DoP to hire/hired the godowns as per storage capacity requirement of their respective 
regions in such a way that capacities hired do not remain vacant. During the periodic inspection any 
shortcomings/lacuna observed are pointed out for corrective measures.  
Manager (QC), FCI inspects 33% of stocks (1/3 rd of stocks) in a month. AGM(QC) inspect 5% to 
10% of  stocks quarterly. Both Monthly Inspection Reports(MIR) of Manager (QC) and Squad 
Inspection Reports (SIR) of AGM (QC) are scrutinized at District/ Regional level and discrepancies 
if any noticed are brought to the knowledge of Head of storage agency (Hire d godown) for taking 
remedial action.” 
 
B.  Schemes for Construction of Godowns 
5.11 With regard to various schemes available for construction of godowns  for storage of stocks,  the FCI 
furnished inter alia the following information:  
i. Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme:  Under this Scheme, which was 
formulated in 2008, storage capacity is created by private parties, Central Warehousing Corporation 
(CWC) and State Government Agencies for guaranteed hiring by Food Corporation of India (FCI). A 
capacity of 143.83 Lakh MT (LMT) has been created as on 30.06.2020. Under this scheme, no 

39 
 
funds are allocated by Government for construction of godowns and full investment is done by the 
private parties/CWC/State Agencies. After a godown is constructed and taken over by FCI, storage 
charges are paid to the investor for the guaranteed period of 9/10 years irrespective of the quantum 
of foodgrains stored. 
ii.Central Sector Scheme:  This scheme is implemented in the North Eastern States along with 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Kerala. Funds are released by the Government to FCI and also 
directly to the State Governments for construction of godowns. This scheme is operational from 
2017-18 to 2021 -22. A total capacity of 53,125 MT has been completed by FCI (45,870 MT) and  
State Governments (7,255 MT) from 01.04.2017 up to 31.07.2020. 
iii.Construction of Steel Silos:  In addition to conventional godowns,  Government of India, in 2016, 
has also approved an action plan for construction of steel silos in the country for a capacity o f 100 
LMT in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode for modernizing storage infrastructure and improving 
shelf life of stored foodgrains. Against this, as on 30.06.2020, steel silos of 8.25 LMT capacity have 
been created. 
iv.Cover and Plinth (CAP) hiring schem e: Government of India has approved a Scheme for 
construction of 90 LMT of CAP in PPP mode as temporary storage facilities for accommodating the 
wheat stocks for Rabi Marketing Season (RMS) 2020-21. ..”  
 
5.12 The  details of  PEG Scheme as furnished by FCI in their background note is as under:  
   “… under the PEG scheme, FCI gives a guarantee of 10 years to private investors and 9 years to 
CWC/SWCs/State Agencies. A capacity of 160.26 Lakh MTs as on 30.06.2018 has been approved 
for construction of godow ns in 22 states, out of which a capacity of 150.98 Lakh MTs has been 
sanctioned for construction. A capacity of 141.37 lakh MT has been completed and a capacity of 
6.87 lakh MT is under construction.”  
 
C    Silos – Modern Storage system 
5.13  The Committee was informed that Steel Silo storage with bulk handling facility is highly mechanized and 
modernized way of storing of foodgrains in bulk. It ensures better preservation of foodgrains and enhances its 
shelf life. If foodgrains are stored in Silos  and transported in bulk, losses due to theft, pilferage and transportation 
would be negligible compared to foodgrains storage in bags in conventional warehouses. The FCI informed that 
since land availability in existing FCI godowns is scarce, it would be prudent to shift to storage of foodgrains in 
Silos as it requires approximately 1/3rd land as compared to conventional storage warehouses. Moreover, Silos 
can be operated round the clock which would bring in flexibility and would improve overall efficiency . As such, 
construction of Silos and utilization of Silos for storing and transportation of foodgrains in bulk would be beneficial 
to the nation as a whole besides also creating an efficient Food Supply Chain Management System. The FCI has 
therefore planned to modernize its storage facilities by construction of modern steel Silos on a PPP mode.  
 
  (i)  Storage Capacity under Silos 
5.14 While pointing out that world wide it is accepted that silos are the  best form to store food grains , the 
Committee sought to know the silo storage capacity created o ut of the targeted creation of 100 million tones, 
it was informed that at present, FCI has steel silos of 5.5 LMT capacity. The linkages of base and field 
depots for Circuit I & II and size of storage capacity as submitted by the FCI is given below: 
 

40 
 
Year Selection of Silo Operator 
(LMT) Silo Completion (LMT) 
2016-17 36.25 LMT (Phase – 
1) 5 LMT 
2017-18 29.00 LMT (Phase – 
2) 15 LMT 
2018-19 34.75 LMT (Phase – 
3) 30 LMT 
2019-20 
 
50 LMT 
Total 100 LMT 100 LMT 
5.15 The FCI further informed that t his includes 91.25 LMT of wheat silos and 8.75 LMT of Rice Silos. 
FCI is to construct 29 LMT of Silos, CWC 2.50 LMT and State Governments 68.50 LMT of Silos.  As per 
action plan, FCI was to ensure selection of silo operator for 18 LMT capacity in the year 2016 -17.  Against 
this, selection of silo operators for construction of 2.5 LMT for 6 locations have been completed and 
agreement signed with the selected silo operators. These silos have been proposed under the VGF  scheme 
of DEA and against a permissible 20% VGF, premium has been obtained for 5 locations. 25000 MT silo at 
Kotkapura has been put to use in RMS 2017 -18. However, contract for one location Whitefield (Karnataka) 
has been terminated.Tenders for 13.5 LMT o f silos capacity under the Non VGF mode have been awarded 
for all 26 locations. Concession Agreement has been signed for all the locations. Tenders were floated for 
selection of Independent Engineer & Auditor (IE&A) to oversee/supervise setting up of silos  at 26 locations 
on DBFOO basis on 11.01.2017. However, contract for four locations i.e. Rohtak (Haryana), Rangapani, 
Dankuni, Macheda (West Bengal) have been terminated. Appointment of Independent Engineer & Auditor 
(IE&A) has also been done after receivi ng of consent from the concessionaire of respective location. With 
regard to completion of 5 LMT of silo capacity in the year 2016 -17, 4.5 LMT was completed. Further 1.75 
LMT silos have been completed in 2017-18. 
 
 (ii)  Status of Silo Construction 
5.16 State wise status of construction of Silos as furnished by FCI is as follows: 
 (Fig. In LMT)  
Agency State Complete
d 
Under 
Implemen-
tation 
Awarded Tendered Approved Total 
FCI 
Assam 0 0.5 0 0 0 0.5 
Bihar 0 6 0 0 1 7 
Delhi 0 0.5 0 0 0 0.5 
Gujarat 0 2.5 0.5# 0 0 3 

41 
 
Haryana 0 3 0 0 0 3 
Maharashtra 0 0.5 0 0 0 0.5 
Punjab 1.25^ 3 0 0 10.5 14.75 
Uttar Pradesh 0 4.5 0.5 0 1 6 
West Bengal 0 0.5 0 4.5 1 6 
Total 1.25 21 1 4.5 13.5 41.25 
CWC Punjab 0 0 0 0.5 0 0.5 
State Govt. 
Haryana 0 0 0 0 6.5 6.5 
Madhya Pradesh 4.5 0 0 0 0 4.5 
Punjab 1.5 0 15.5 0 11.5 28.5 
Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 1.5 0 1.5 
Total 6 0 15.5 1.5 18 41 
Grand Total 7.25 21 16.5 6.5 31.5 82.75* 
^  Operationalization of 2 location (Barnala & Patiala) having capacity of 1 LMT without railway siding has 
 commenced.  
#  1 location (Surat) having capacity of 0.5 LMT has been terminated. 
*  In addition 15.10 LMT Rice Silos to be taken up depending on outcome of pilot project of Kaimur  & Buxar. 
 
5.17 During the briefing held on 14.10.2019, the Chairman and Managing Director, FCI further elaborated on 
this issue as under: 
"Sir is very right. We have actually done very badly. When we tender, in retrospect, in hindsight, it 
appears now that land and r ailway sidings were very difficult to get. We put a compulsory condition 
saying that ऱैंडयही पर रहना चाहहए, रेऱवे साइट के बगऱ में रहना चाहहए।  Big companies enter bids – 
Adani, NCML, whic h is owned by Shri Prem Watsa, who have not been able to move one inch 
because the chunk of  land and siding was not available. So, we are changing the model. Even for 
silos, the word you used, Madam, is 'hub and spoke‟, we are coming up with a model called 
roadside silos because the earlier model had failed."  
 
5.18 Regarding construction of silos  in PPP models, the representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) submitted during evidence as below : 
 "PPP models are there, Madam. But it was linked with the railway sidings. Now in Delhi, if I 
want 1.5 kilometres length of a narrow strip o f railway sidings for mechanizing it, it is not going 
to happen. We are not getting the land." 

42 
 
 
(iii)    Creation of Silos under“Hub and Spoke” Model 
5.19   During evidence before the Committee, the CMD, FCI submitted on this issue as under: 
“Even for silos, the word you used, Madam, is 'hub and spoke‟, we are coming up with a model 
called roadside silos because the earlier model had failed."  
 
5.20 Elaborating further on this issue , a representative of FCI during the evidence held on 18.03.2020 
submitted as follows:   
“What we have decided is to move on a fast track. What we have said is that we will have hub and 
spoke system where in the hub we have various silos. Then smaller silos can be around. Right 
now, we are focused on big silos. If this also can come in Committ ee‟s recommendations, it will 
help FCI to fast track it. Even on silos, basically we were operating on a very high scale. What we 
are saying is that their scale should be reduced. Most of the Members of Parliament have asked us 
to consider it. Instead of two lakh MTs, a huge size, we should bring it down to 50. In some places it 
could come to even 25 MT. Then these are standalone silos and the operations can be in 
customized transport mode with road transport as well as railways.  
 
D. Storage under Cover and Plinth (CAP)  
5.21 With regard to  the storage under Cover and Plinth (CAP ), the Committee was informed that  the 
Government of India  had set up a High Level Committee (HLC) in August 2014 to suggest restructuring  of FCI 
with a view to improve its operational efficiency and financial management and  to suggest  interalia the c ost 
effective models for storage and movement of grains and integration of supply chain of foodgrains in the country. 
The HLC had  recommended that Covered and plinth (CAP) storage should be gradually phased out with no grain 
stock remaining in CAP for mor e than 3 months and Silo bag technology and conventional storages where ever 
possible should replace CAP. The FCI further informed that a s per the recommendations of HLC, the hired CAP 
capacity of 1.94 LMT was dehired and the feasibility study for construction of silos has been conducted in all such 
FSDs where railway siding is available. These silos will be constructed on available vacant land & after 
considering dismantling of CAP or EoL or near EoL capacity 
 
E. Maintenance of Depots and Godowns : 
5.22 With regard to details of maintenance of Depots and Godowns of FCI and the amount spent on their 
maintenance, during the last five years, FCI submitted as under: 
“Food Corporation of India has dedicated Engineering wing for maintenance of Food Storage 
godown. At each Regional Office, AGMs have been posted with supporting staff to undertake 
maintenance of godown from maintenance funds.The amount spent on maintenance of FCI during 
last five years is as follows: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year 
Amount spent on 
Annual R epair 
&Maintenance 
Operations 
Amount spent on 
Minor Capital 
Work (MCW) 
Amount spent on 
Concrete  road (CC Road) 
 

43 
 
(AR&MO) 
2014-15 121.58 22.53 37.79 
2015-16 159.26 48.46 49.23 
2016-17 143.94 42.27 46.05 
2017-18 123.44 27.23 45.39 
2018-19 119.57 13.68 56.66 
 
Storage Construction Plan  
5.23 The Committee was informed that with regard to the Storage Construction Plan for the year 2019 -20, it 
has been planned to augment storage capacity by 25,000 MT with a financial target of 45.00 crores. Works at 8 
locations for a capacity of 57,790 MT are in progress/to commence shortly. An expenditure o f Rs 5.41 crore has 
been incurred upto 31.07.2019. The details of the target, progress and completion of the capacity  are as under : 
     
(Fig. in MT) 
States No. of 
Centers 
Name of 
Centre 
Targeted 
Capacity 
Capacity 
under 
Progress 
Works to  
commenc
e    shortly 
Capacity 
completed 
during 
2018-19 
Assam 02 Dhemaji/ Junai 20000 20000 - - 
Kokrajhar -  15000 - 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
02 Roing - 1120 - - 
Aalo - 1670 - - 
Manipur 
 
05 Churachandpur 2500 2500 - - 
Tamenglong - 5000 - - 
Thoubal    2500 
Imphal East    10000 
Bishnupur    4600 
Meghalaya 01 Baghmara 2500 2500 - - 
Mizoram 01 Sairang - - 10000 - 
Total 11  25,000 32,790 25000 17,100 
 
 
5.24 Regarding the expansion of the stor age capacity in the North East,  the Committee was informed that it 
has been planned to augment storage capacity of 2240 MT with a financial target of Rs. 4.00 crore. Work for 
6,220 MT capacity godown at Mandi (3340 MT), Palampur (2240 MT) and Recongpeo (640 MT) are in progress. 
Besides, at Dumka ph -II, Itkhori and Pode yahaat work is likely to commence shortly. An expenditure of Rs. 1.72 
crore has been incurred upto 31.07.2019 .The details of  the target, progress and completion of the capacity  are 
as under:- 
 
 
 

44 
 
(Fig. in MT) 
State 
No. of 
Center
s 
Name of 
Centre 
Target
ed 
Capaci
ty 
Capacity 
under 
Progress 
Land 
identified and 
work to 
commence 
shortly 
Capacity 
completed 
during 2018-
19 
Kerala 2 Angadipuram    5000 
  West Hill    10000 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
4 Mandi  3340 - - 
Recongpeo  640 - - 
Palampur 2240 2240 - - 
  Kangra    3340 
Jharkhan
d 
3 Dumka Ph-II   15000 - 
Itkhori   10000 - 
Podeyahaat   10000 - 
 9  2240 6,220 35000 18,340 
 
Outsourcing of stocking operations  
 
5.25 In a written reply to the query as to whether FCI has outsourced its stocking operations, the FCI  informed 
as follows:  
 
“The Operation of movement of the stocks for storage & its liquidation for further movement to other 
Regions have been outsourced and the operation are carried out through appointing Handling & 
Transport Contractor/ Transport Contractor/ Handling Contractor. 
 
As on 30.09.2019, FCI is having a total number of 2131 depots across the country, out of which.  
561 are owned depots and 1570 are hired depots.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
 
CHAPTER - VI 
MOVEMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD GRAINS 
 
A.  Movement of Food Grains 
6.1 One of the major functions of FCI is to move foodgrains from producing and surplus States to  the 
consuming /deficit States. With regard to movement of food grains, the FCI in the back ground note , sated as 
follows:  
 
“It is a common knowledge that movement of foodgrains plays a very important role in the working 
of FCI as well as in fulfilling the objectives of Food Policy and National Food Security Act.  The FCI 
is effectively optimising movement of foodgrain s in association with Railways while minimizing cost. 
FCI undertakes movement of food grains in order to:  
 Evacuate stocks from surplus regions 
 Meet the requirements of deficit regions for NFSA/ TPDS and Other Schemes  
 Create buffer stocks in deficit regions.”  
 
B.  Modes of Movement of Foodgrains 
6.2 On being enquired about quantum of yearly movement of food grains , infrastructure associated with such 
movement andthe modes through which food grains are moved across the country, the FCI informed as follows:  
“On an average 40 to 42 million tonnes of food grains are transported by FCI across the country in a 
year. FCI undertakes massive movement operation of food grains all over the country encompassing 
around 1906 FCI owned & hired depots/Silos, 557 rail-heads (owned by Indian Railways and others) 
and 98 FCI own sidings.   Movement of food grains is undertaken by Rail, Road and Waterways. 
Around 85% of stocks are moved by rail to different parts of the country. Inter -State movement by 
road is mainl y undertaken in those parts of the country which are not connected by rail. A small 
quantity is also moved by ocean vessels to Lakshadweep and A&N Islands as well as through coastal 
shipping and riverine movement to Kerala/Agartala (Tripura).                                                                                             
 
The FCI has 98 own Rail sidings, where foodgrain rakes are placed directly at FCI depots. Other than 
that, foodgrain stocks are transported „to and fro‟ from the nearest rail -heads of Indian Railways.  
Movement Plan is prepared on monthly basis keeping in view:  
 
 Quantity available in surplus regions 
 Quantity required by deficit regions 
 Likely procurement 
 Vacant storage capacity both in consuming as well as procuring regions  
 Monthly allotment/ off take of food grains” 
 

46 
 
6.3 Explaining the logistics involved in movement of food grains, the  CMD, FCI deposing before the 
Committee on 14.10.2019, submitted as follows :  
“..the best way to understand FCI is that we are a large logis tic exercise. Even today, we are storing 
about 70 million tonnes of food grains .Our transport expenses are about Rs. 10,000 crore for 
transporting food grains all across India .One redeeming feature is that out of Rs. 10,000 crore, 
Rs.8,500 crore goes to the Indian railways only. About 85% of the transport is through train.”   
 
6.4 Reiterating the Railways as being the primary mode for transportation of food grains,  the CMD, FCI 
deposing before the Committee on 16.03.2020, submitted as under: 
 “About 85 per cent of the transport of food grains is done by the Indian railways. Except in the hilly 
tracks of the North east, Himachal Pradesh etc., it is done by the railways only.”  
 
6.5 The CMD, FCI, terming the movement of the food grains as the largest l ogistics exercise in the world, 
submitted as follows: 
“I do not think there is a body like FCI anywhere in the world and anybody which is transporting 60 
million tonnes in a year. It is the largest logistics exercise in the world” 
 
C.   Quantum of Food Grains  moved through Rail and Road 
6.6 The  quantity of food grains moved through rail and road modes of transport during the last  five years as 
provided by FCI is as follows : 
( in  LMT) 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  Quantum of Food grains moved through Coastal and Riverine Mode 
6.7 With regard to movement of food grains through multi modal and riverine mode, FCI submitted as follows:    
“FCI has been exploring the feasibility of moving food grains through multimodal costal/ riverine 
mode so as to supplement rail/road movement particu larly for North Eastern States and Kerala and 
has made the following achievements: 
 
 
Period Rail Road Total 
2013-14 392.44 55.37 447.81 
2014-15 409.32 57.82 467.14 
2015-16 330.98 53.51 384.49 
2016-17 350.05 59.93 409.98 
2017-18                     353.20 67.04 420.24 

47 
 
  
  (in LMT) 
Year 
Multimodal 
Riverine 
Movement from                          
Ex-WB to 
Tripura  
Multimodal 
Riverine 
Movement 
from                           
Ex-AP to 
Tripura  
Multimodal Coastal 
Movement from        
Ex-AP to Kerala                            
2013-14 0 0 12778 
2014-15 1880 10000 97754 
2015-16 7811 0 18677 
2016-17 2267 0 13915 
2017-18 0 0 0 
2018-19 0 0 45132 
2019-20  (Data upto Feb‟20) 55554 
 
6.8 The Committee was also informed  that i n addition, food grains are also moved from Karnataka to 
Lakshadweep and Andhra Pradesh to Andaman & Nicobar Islands in small quantities.Riverine movement was 
initiated during the mega block in NE as temporary measure in order to position sufficient stock in Tripura and 
dispensed with after gauge conversion of MG line to BG in North -East as transporting food grains via riverine 
movement was costlier than the rail movement. Matter regarding movement of food grains through Inland 
Waterways was also been taken up with IWAI for details of identified routes for movement of food grains, 
estimated freight etc. but same could not be mater ialized due to high transportation cost as FCI‟s surplus food 
grain regions such as Punjab & Haryana have no access to National Waterways and Inland waterways, being 
operational at limited centers. Further, the states around National waterways are consumin g states and fed from 
surplus states which are not connected to National waterways. The movement through NW -1 will require 
additional handling and transportation which will lead to increase in cost and make riverine movement 
uneconomical. Further, CONCOR h ad also shown interest for transporting food grains from Varanasi to Tripura. 
While examining the said proposal of CONCOR, cost of movement through IWT (Inland water Transport) was 
found much higher in comparison to existing rail movement and CONCOR had re quested to grant subsidy from 
concerned Ministry to bring its rate at par with transport cost of FCI. Later on CONCOR had agreed to undertake 
movement at the same cost of Conventional rail/road movement after getting financial aid from IWAI, to which 
approval was conveyed. However, no quantity was dispatched due to low draft available for such movement at 
Varanasi so far. As soon as the draft will be sufficient for moving Vessel from Varanasi, riverine movement will be 
undertaken. 
 
E.  Movement from SurplusRegions 
6.9 With regard to the surplus regions from where the food grains are moved to deficit areas,  the FCI stated 
as follows:  

48 
 
“Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh are the surplus States in terms of wheat procurement vis-
a-vis their own consumption. Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh/ Telengana, Chhattisgarh and 
Odisha are surplus States in terms of rice procurement vis -à-vis their own consumption. Surplus 
stocks of wheat and rice available in these States are moved to deficit Sta tes to meet the 
requirements under NFSA/ TPDS and other schemes as well as to create buffer stocks.”   
 
6.10 Explaining the changes witnessed in the procurement trends in the last decade FCI informed as under:    
“ About a decade back, nearly 90% of stocks were moved Ex-North mainly from Punjab & Haryana, 
which has now come down to 72% due to increase in procurement of rice in Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha & West Bengal and wheat in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan.”  
 
F. Coordination with Railways 
6.11 The Department has stated that in order to increase the co -ordination between Railways and FCI, 
coordination committees at Zonal and Regional levels have also been formed. The matter related with 
improvement of basic infrastructure facilities at railheads, supply of rakes, levying of demurrage charges, 
upgradation of infrastructure etc. are being taken up in JCC meeting at respective levels. Due to the regular 
interactions between Railways and FCI, the compliance of loading plan of FCI has impr oved and issues related to 
penal charges by Railways, infrastructure development at Railway goodsheds are being sorted out. The 
availability of rakes have improved through the mechanism of these Coordination Committees, incurrence of 
demurrage charges has reduced. 
 
6.12 Referring to unused lands lying across the railway lines where encroachment takes place, Committee 
sought to know whether the same can be used for building godowns/silos by having a Joint Venture with 
Railways, CMD FCI appearing before the Committee on 16.03.2020 submitted as follows:  
“There is a central public sector called Central Railside Warehouse Corporation, which is also the 
subsidiary of the Central Warehousing Corporation. That corporation is doing this work. There are 
various issues which have co me up. The procurement areas are in Punjab and Haryana. It is only 
in about six or eight states that the procurement takes place and in others, there is very minimum 
procurement. Rice and wheat together are in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Chhattisgar h, 
UP, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, and Punj ab. These the only States where the maximum 
procurement takes place.” 
 
G. Multimodal Transport Movement 
6.13 With regard to initiatives taken to use multimodal transport, FCI stated as follows : 
“Recently, an initiative has been undertaken for Containerized Multimodal Coastal movement 
through CONCOR from identified centers of Punjab to Kerala via Cochin, Quilon etc. for a period of 
three (3) months on Pilot Basis. In this regard, Punjab region has been instruct ed to initiate 
Containerized Multimodal Coastal movement through CONCOR from designated depots of Punjab 
to the designated depots of Kerala, Karnataka & Tamil -Nadu, if found economical on cost benefit 
analysis in comparison with conventional movement of ra kes. Accordingly, 12 rakes (25000 MT 
approx.) have been moved from Punjab to Karnataka using this mode under Pilot project.”  
6.14 Furnishing the data on movement of foodgrains undertaken through multimodal transport, FCI submitted 
as follows: 

49 
 
“FCI has been  exploring the feasibility of moving food grains through multimodal costal/ riverine 
mode so as to supplement rail/road movement particularly for North Eastern States and Kerala and 
has made the following achievements: 
 
(a) During 2013-14, 2014 -15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, 12778 MT, 97754 MT, 18677 MT 
and 13915 MT Rice moved from Andhra Pradesh to Kerala  through multi -modal 
coastal movement.  
(b) FCI moved 10,000 MT of raw rice (as a pilot project) through multimodal riverine 
movement from Andhra Pradesh to Tripura (NE ) via Ashuganj Port in Bangladesh 
during 2014-15.   
(c) FCI moved 9691 MT and 2267 MT Raw Rice during 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 
respectively through multimodal riverine movement from West Bengal to Tripura (NE) 
via Ashuganj Port in Bangladesh.” 
 
H. Containerized Movement: 
6.15 With respect to containerized movement, FCI submitted as follows: 
“FCI has initiated containerized movement of foodgrains on certain routes through CONCOR 
wherein it is found to be economical in comparison to conventional Railway rakes. In 2 016-17, 13 
such containerized movement was undertaken which led to freight savings of around Rs.44 lakhs. 
In 2017-18, 134 containerized rakes moved with freight savings of Rs. 662 lakhs. In 2018 -19, 167 
containerized rakes moved with freight savings of Rs. 796 lakhs. During 2019-20 (upto Feb‟20), 279 
containerized rakes have been moved with approx. freight savings of Rs. 546 lakhs. MTF was also 
prepared for engaging Private operators for containerized movement. Though tenders were floated 
by Punjab & Haryana region many times, but no response was received except for one in Haryana. 
The rates quoted by the single bidder i.e. CONCOR was found economical for only one   route i.e. 
Ex PassinaKalan to FSD Rourkela.” 
 
I. Long Route Road Transportation: 
6.16 Another initiative taken to diversify the traditional mode of transportat ion of food grain is to opt for  long 
route transportation by road, Furnishing the details of the steps taken in this regard on experimental basis , FCI 
stated as follows :  
 “Ex Punjab  (depots under DO Ludhiana & Patiala) to Maharashtra (Bhiwandi  & Vashi) 
respectively. 
 Ex Haryana (depots under Hissar, Fatehabad, Cheeka, Assandh) to Gujarat (CWC Surat, 
Mehsana, Palanpur & Wadhwan), respectively. 
 Movement to be done, if found economical on cost benefit analysis in comparison with 
conventional movement of rakes.  
 Period of contract will be for one year and quantity to be moved around 5000 MT/ month per 
receiving centre on least cost basis. 
 
Accordingly, directions were given to Punjab & Haryana for floating tender using existing MTF 
for RTCs. Movement have also been recently started from Ex Haryana to Gujarat using this 
mode.” 
 

50 
 
J. Bulk Movement: 
6.17 FCI has stated that it has also  been moving food grains in bulk using specialized wagons being operated 
by AdaniAgri Logistics Ltd.  from silos in procuring region to silos in consuming region i.e. Ex -Punjab, Dagru to 
Malur in Karnataka and to Madhukurai&Elavur in Tamil Nadu and Ex - Haryana, Pehowa road to Taloja in 
Maharashtra.  The total quantity moved during last five years is as follows:  
(Fig. In LMT) 
Period Total 
2015-16 1.05 
2016-17 2.88 
2017-18 2.40 
2018-19 2.01 
2019-20 (uptoFeb‟20) 1.83 
 
6.18 The total no. of rakes dispatched during last five years are as follows: 
Period Rakes 
Dispatched 
2013-14 13944 
2014-15 14231 
2015-16 11577 
2016-17 12078 
2017-18 11985 
 
6.19 Explaining the primacy of rail transportation in movement of food grains, FCI, submitted as follows:  
“From the above it can be seen that FCI is taking various initiatives for increasing movement using 
waterways. However, the fact remains that rail movement is still much cheaper and economical 
mode for transportation of foodgrains.” 
 
K. Cost efficiency in storage and movement  
6.20 With regard to the steps taken to increase the cost efficiency in storage and movement of food grains, 
FCI submitted as follows:  
 “Movement in FCI is being done on least cost basis considering the cost economics whether it is rail, 
road or waterways. Accordingly, FCI has undertaken transportation of foodgrains where it was found to 

51 
 
be operationally feasible and economically viable.  The total quantity moved during last five years is as 
follows: 
        (Fig. In LMT) 
Period Rail Container Road Waterways Total 
2015-16 330.71 ….. 53.51 0.27 384.49 
2016-17 349.60 0.28 59.93 0.16 409.97 
2017-18 350.43 2.77 67.04 0.00 420.24 
2018-19 299.87 3.46 79.3 0.46 383.09 
2019-20                
(upto Feb‟20) 265.81 5.72 86.05 0.54 358.12 
 
  

52 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
A. Turnover of FCI 
7.1 FCI is constituted under the Food Corporation Act,  1964 as a trading organization.  The financial 
performance of the Corporation for the last 5 years  has been as  under: 
(Rs. In crore) 
 
Year Purchase Sales 
Realisation 
Subsidy 
on Food 
Grains 
Total 
(Sale + Subsidy) 
2012-13 1,01,923.28 39,849.73 80,563.18 1,20,412.91 
2013-14 1,03,947.80 38,356.90 89,492.14 1,27,849.04 
2014-15 1,06,804.21 29,757.01 1,05,007.02 1,34,764.03 
2015-16 1,16,508.52 29,286.94 1,02,425.07 1,31,712.01 
2016-17 1,11,375.61 22,114.78 1,09,135.93 1,31,250.71 
2017-18 1,20,469.13 18,035.20 1,16,281.69 1,34,316.89 
 
B. Operational Costand Budget 
 
7.2 The total operational cost  and budget of FCI during the last 5 years , as furnished to the Committee, is as 
under :  
Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
 
2018-19 
(RE) 
2019-20 
(BE) 
Acquisition 
Cost of Sales 
            
Wheat 40353 49482 47332 41247 51069 52977 
Rice 63955 55552 57793 64976 69626 73108 
Coasegrains 15 15 0 0 0 0 
Sub-Total 104323 105049 105125 106223 120695 126085 
Operational             

53 
 
Costs of FCI 
Freight 8925 8031 8117 8671 8993 9768 
Handling 4635 4052 2454 3391 4178 4437 
Storage 3312 2786 3235 3610 4355 5201 
Interest for FCI 
operations 
8230 8581 6894 8873 13492 14036 
Shortages 823 293 333 381 428 419 
Admin 
Overheads 
1496 1452 1969 1763 2106 2847 
Total 
Operating 
Costs 
27421 25195 23002 26689 33552 36708 
Carry-Over 
charges paid 
3018 1450 2926 1000 2025 3292 
Total Budget 
of FCI 
134762 131694 131053 133912 156272 166085 
Sales 29755 29269 21917 17630 24485 25157 
Subsidy 105007 102425 109136 116282 131787 140928 
  
C. Details of Sales, Subsidy on Foodgrains, Receipts and other income 
7.3 The sales, subsidy on foodgrains, receipts, other income etc., for the year 2018-19 as furnished by FCI is 
as follows:  
 
Particulars Amount in Lakh Detail 
Sale 1803519.69 Foodgrains issued to State Govt at the 
Central Issue prices or any other pre -
decided rate by the Govt of India (GOI) & 
under tender sale as per  Reserve Price 
fixed by GoI. 
Subsidy on 
Foodgrains 
11628168.50 The difference between the Economic 
cost and the sale realized reimbursed by 
the GOI as food subsidy 
Other Receipts 22128.59 Represents the excess/deficit on the other 

54 
 
operation undertaken by  the corporation 
(like pulse operation) not routed through 
normal subsidy 
Other Income 211741.55 Represents the claim/recoveries against 
railways, contractors, miller, State Govt 
and others Also include various income 
arising in the normal course of operations 
undertaken. 
Accretion(Decreti
on) in inventories 
1184768.95 Represents Increase in stock -in-hand at 
the end of the year from beginning of the 
year. 
Total  14850327.28  
 
7.4 As informed to the Committee, the sources of finance of FCI are as follows :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl.No. Particulars Rate of Interest Amount 
(Rs. in Crore) 
1. Equity Share Capital (including Working 
Capital-Rs. 1984 crore) 
- 3,462.58 
2. Debt   
 a. Cash Credit 9.08% 9,495.00 
 b.  (i) Long Term Bonds (Issued in 2013) 8.62% 300.00 
      (ii) Long Term Bonds (Issued in 2013) 8.80% 4,700.00 
      (iii) Long Term Bonds (Issued in 
2014) 
9.95% 8,000.00 
     (iv) Long Term Bonds( issued in 2019) 8.95% 2,737.70 
3. Ways and Means Advance (WMA)/ 
Unsecured Short Term 
STL-7.90% to 
8.40% WMA-
7.40% 
50,000.00 
4. National Small Saving Fund(NSSF) 8.40% to 8.80% 191,000.00 

55 
 
 
D. Subsidy 
7.5The logistics cost for FCI are broken down into two components: (i) Distribution cost which involves all physical 
activities and considered part of FCI‟s „economic cost and (ii) Buffer cost which includes the financing cost of the food 
grains held. In a  written reply to a query asto the details  of the total procurement, total off-take, distribution cost, buffer 
cost and total gross subsidy during the past five years,  the FCI submitted as follows:  
 
(i) ELEMENTS OF SUBSIDY 
Sl 
N
o. 
 Particulars  2015-16 2016-17 
 
2017-18 
 
2018-19 
(Unaudited) 
2019-20 
(RE) 
  
Qty Amt. Qty Amt. Qty Amt. Qty Amt. Qty Amt. 
A 
Total 
procurement 
Cost           
 
Wheat 267.
37 
48,442.
88 
224.
58 
42,035.
35 
240.
92 
46,402.
85 
280.
72 
56,236.
49 
280.
37 
60,322.
00 
 
Rice 245.
35 
66,928.
92 
232.
56 
65,292.
81 
259.
49 
72,568.
16 
249.
80 
75,062.
05 
266.
91 
84,197.
00 
 
Total 512.
72 
115,371
.80 
457.
14 
107,328
.16 
500.
41 
118,971
.01 
530.
52 
131,298
.54 
547.
28 
144,519
.00 
 
Increase/Decr
ease Over 
Previous 
Year    
(8,043.6
4)  
11,642.
85  
12,327.
53  
13,220.
46 
B Total Offtake 
          
 
Wheat 279.
05 
18,568.
00 
257.
98 
13,338.
00 
218.
03 
7,736.0
0 
278.
86 
20,758.
00 
268.
45 
21,108.
00 
 
Rice 211.
85 
10,698.
00 
216.
26 
8,579.0
0 
234.
35 
9,894.0
0 
221.
60 
10,000.
00 
223.
27 
10,512.
00 
 
Total 490.
90 
29,266.
00 
474.
24 
21,917.
00 
452.
38 
17,630.
00 
500.
46 
30,758.
00 
491.
72 
31,620.
00 
 
Increase/Decr
ease Over 
Previous 
Year    
(7,349.0
0)  
(4,287.0
0)  
13,128.
00  
862.00 

56 
 
C Distribution 
Cost  
20,546.
00  
18,700.
00  
20,753.
00  
23,431.
00  
30,720.
00 
 
Increase/Decr
ease Over 
Previous 
Year 
   
(1,846.0
0)  
2,053.0
0  
2,678.0
0  
7,289.0
0 
D  
(i) Buffer Cost 
 
4,649.0
0  
4,302.0
0  
5,936.0
0  
6,984.0
0  
9,968.0
0 
(ii) Carry-Over 
charges paid  
1,450.0
0  
2,926.0
0  
1,000.0
0  
2,001.0
0  
4,691.0
0 
 
Total Buffer 
Cost  
6,099.0
0  
7,228.0
0  
6,936.0
0  
8,985.0
0  
14,659.
00 
 
Increase/Decr
ease Over 
Previous 
Year 
   
1,129.0
0  
(292.00) 
 
2,049.0
0  
5,674.0
0 
 
E Total  Gross 
Subsidy  
102,425
.00  
109,136
.00  
116,282
.00  
120,352
.00  
138,667
.00 
 
Increase/Decr
ease Over 
Previous 
Year    
6,711.0
0  
7,146.0
0  
4,070.0
0  
18,315.
00 
The Operational cost of FCI increased from 2017 -18 onwards due to increase in interest cost as FCI is receiving less 
Subsidy” 
 
 (ii) Economic cost of Wheat 
7.6   The break up of the “economic cost” of Wheat, as furnished by the FCI in a written reply, is as follows: 
 
YEAR 2017-18 2018-19 (RE) 2019-20(BE) 
MSP (Rs. Per Qtl.) 1,625.00 1,735.00 1,840.00 
  (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage 
1 Pooled cost of 
grain 
1,587.90 69% 1,684.24 69% 1,771.78 71% 
2 Procurement Inci. 303.91 13% 317.67 13% 304.92 12% 

57 
 
2a Statutory charges 128.35 6% 69.55 3% 76.28 3% 
2b Gunny Cost 75.55 3% 93.55 4% 102.95 4% 
2c Others 100.01 4% 154.57 6% 125.69 5% 
3 Acquisition Cost 
(1+2) 
1891.81 82% 2001.91 82% 2076.70 83% 
4 Freight 152.46 7% 136.06 6% 144.14 6% 
5 Interest  114.99 5% 157.78 6% 138.10 5% 
6 Handling charges 62.88 3% 65.86 3% 64.56 2% 
7 Storage charges 45.13 2% 41.12 2% 41.00 2% 
8 Administrative 
expenses 
32.70 1% 33.20 1% 41.44 2% 
9 Operational 
Losses 
-2.05 0% -0.70 0% -0.27 0% 
Economic cost 2,297.92 100% 2,435.23 100% 2,505.67 100% 
 
(iii) Economic cost of Rice 
7.7  The  break up of the “economic cost” of  Rice as furnished by the FCI in a written reply, is as follows: 
YEAR 2017-18 2018-19 (RE) 2019-20(BE) 
MSP (Rs/ Qtl.) 1,550.00 1,750.00 1,850.00 
Paddy Grade A 
(Rs/Qtl) 
1590.00 1,770.00 1,870.00 
  (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage (Rs./Qtl.) Percentage 
1 Pooled cost of 
grain 
2,291.03 70% 2,500.98 72% 2,631.20 73% 
2 Procurement 
Inci. 
481.55 15% 423.49 12% 439.54 12% 
2a Statutory 
charges 
99.79 3% 90.17 2.7% 93.70 2.5% 
2b Gunny Cost 120.28 4% 114.15 3.3% 125.51 3.5% 

58 
 
2c Others 261.48 8% 219.17 6% 220.33 6% 
3 Acquisition Cost 
(1+2) 
2772.58 85% 2924.47 84% 3070.74 85% 
4 Freight 184.45 6% 164.06 5% 167.88 5% 
5 Interest  168.42 5% 230.55 7% 204.26 6% 
6 Handling 
charges 
62.88 2% 65.82 2% 64.60 2% 
7 Storage 
charges 
45.13 1% 41.12 1% 41.00 1% 
8 Administrative 
expenses 
32.70 1% 33.18 1% 41.46 1s% 
9 Operational 
Losses 
14.15 0% 13.74 0% 11.97 0% 
Economic cost 3,280.31 100% 3,472.94 100% 3,601.91 100% 
 
 E. Short term loans  
7.8 The Government sanctioned loan of Rs. 65,000 Crore to FCI from National Small Saving Funds (NSSF) 
in 2017 -18.  During the same year FCI had made short term borrowings of Rs. 82376.48 Crore from Banks.  
Furnishing the purpose of the loan ,D/o F&PD, in a written reply stated as follows :  
  
“Purpose of providing NSSF Loans 
 
The Central Issue Price (CIP) of wheat and rice are fixed by the Department of Food & Public Distribut ion 
(DFPD) does not cover the total cost incurred in procurement, storage, movement and distribution of 
these foodgrains for which the Government of India is required to make adequate budgetary provision in 
the Union Budget in the form of food subsidy. If adequate budgetary provision is not there, it results in 
creation of Government Receivables for FCI. Till the Government clears its dues of FCI, the outstanding 
receivables are financed through short term/ long term loans. The Department of Economic Affair s, 
Ministry of Finance has therefore provided NSSF loan of Rs. 65,000 crore during FY 2017 -18 against its 
dues payable to FCI. 
 
The NSSF loans of Rs. 65,000 crore sanctioned to FCI during FY 2017 -18 were book adjustments, with 
no cash release. These loans were sanctioned for reversal of subsidy released to FCI and converting 
them into NSSF loans or for rollover/ recovery of previous NSSF loans/ Ways and Means Advance 
released to FCI. Details of loans sanctioned to FCI from NSSF are as under:  
 

59 
 
 
FY 
Sanctioned  
(Rs. In crore) 
Mode of loan sanction (Book adjustments) 
2017-18 
25,000 
For rollover of NSSF loans (Rs. 14,000 crore), recovery 
of Ways & Means Advance (Rs. 8,088.54 crore) & 
reversal of subsidy allocations (Rs. 2919.46 crore) 
40,000 Reversal of subsidy released to FCI 
Total 65,000  
 
7.9 In written replies to queries (i)  the purpose of taking short term advances and loans from banks and (ii) 
the current repayment status of the short-term borrowings, D/o F&PD  submitted as under :  
“Short term loans (STL) from banks are taken to meet working capital requirement and cash flow 
mismatch. Funds requirement is seasonal in nature. There is higher payout during peak Rabi and Kharif 
marketing seasons. Subsidy installments released to FCI do not alw ays match fund requirement during 
procurement season. Hence, the shortfall is financed through short term loans from banks. On release of 
funds by the Government, STLs are repaid by FCI. 
 
As on 30.10.2019, STL outstanding is Rs. 4,700 crore. These loans ar e due for repayment in the month 
of November 2019.” 
 
7.10 With regard the outstanding short term loans of FCI as on March 2020, D/o F&PD submitted that :  
“Outstanding short term loans of Food corporation of India as on 31.03.2020 stand at Rs.40,700 crore . ” 
 
F. Components of Food Subsidy 
7.11  The Subsidy payment to FCI is done by the G ovt. of India (GOI) as per the circulars issued by Deptt of 
Food & Public Distribution( DFPD)  from time to time. The s ubsidy is calculated by FCI  as per the provisions of 
these circulars.  The subsidy is paid by the government of India.  As per the guidelines,  95% of subsidy claim are 
submitted and balance 5% subsidy is released after audited accounts are laid before the Parliament. The FCI 
submits quarterly subsidy claim to DFPD before the beginning of quarter and DFPD is to release subsidy by 10 th 
day of the first month of quarter.There are three components of Food Subsidy to FCI:  
1. Consumer Subsidy:  Difference between Economic cost and Central Is sue Price is called Consumer 
Subsidy.  Economic cost comprises of pooled cost of foodgrains, procurement incidentals consisting of 
statutory charges, gunny cost, labour, transportation, storage, interest etc. and distribution cost consisting 
of freight, ha ndling, storage interest etc. The difference between economic cost and sales realisation on 
CIP is reimbursed to FCI in the form of “Consumer Subsidy.” 
 
2. Buffer Subsidy : The Food Corporation of India has to maintain buffer stocks as prescribed by GoI 
(presently stock equivalent to 4 months allocation) as a measure of food security to guard against scarcity 
of foodgrains. This stock enables the Government to intervene effec tively to curb the rising trend of prices 

60 
 
of foodgrainsin the market. Cost of carrying buffer stock is part of food subsidy. Carrying charges for 
buffer comprises of elements like freight, storage and interest charges allocated on this stock as per 
norms. In addition, in view of recommendation of Economic Reforms Committee, the carryover charges 
paid to State Agencies by FCI are also reimbursed as part of buffer subsidy. 
 
3 Losses:In the process of procurement, storage and distribution of foodgrains certain transit and storage 
losses also occur because of multiple handling, transportation and long storage. These shortages are 
written off after following due process and procedures. All such written off loses are reimbursed to FCI as 
part of Subsidy. 
 
7.12 In a written reply to queries on (i)  the total food subsidy burden on the Government of India on account of 
procurement and distribution of food grains by FCI for the present financial year; (ii)  percentage of the food 
subsidy bill is still pending for alloc ation; and , (iii)  details of the last five years‟ food subsidy bill and budgetary 
allocations against the said demand, D/o F&PD replied as under :  
 “Government of India (GoI) allots food subsidy on the basis of sales of foodgrains instead of procurement  
and distribution cost of FCI. For the year 2020 -21 (BE), the subsidy is Rs. 141781 Crore. The subsidy 
allocation for 2020 -21 is Rs 77982.54 cr. Now for the year 45% of food subsidy bill is still pending for 
allocation. The figures of total expenditure & allocation by GOI on account of food subsidy is as under: 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Particulars 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-
20(RE) 
 
2020-
21(BE) 
Food 
Subsidy 
expenditure 
for the year 
109600.39 116501.01 120447.17 138667.00 141781.00 
 
Total 
Allocation 
of Fund 
78334.61 61981.69 70098.00 75000.00 77982.54 
 
Total 
Allocation 
of Fund in 
% 
71.47% 53.20% 58.20% 54.09% 55.00 
 
 
G. Issue related to MSP,  Subsidy and its sharing between Centre and States 
7.13 Explaining the subsidy of foodgrains, the CMD, FCI during evidence before the Committee submitted as 
follows:  

61 
 
 “The Purchase price is fixed by the Government. It says that you have to procure wheat at Rs. 
18.40 Then they say that you have to sell it at Rs. 3 per kilogram. This Rs.15.40 is the subsidy. We 
are doing the job of farmers‟ security and food security.”    
 
7.14 In response toa query as to the price at which food grains are issues to PDS beneficiaries,  the CMD, FCI  
during evidence, informed the Committee as under :  
“The price is Re.1 for cross grain, Rs.2 for wheat and Rs.3 for rice.  The States also sell like that.  In fact, in 
my State of Karnataka, the price is zero which means Rs.3 are also subsidized.  They give more rice than 
what is given under NFSA.  The State has a highest subsidy budget.”  
 
7.15 Responding to  the Committee‟s query whether the subsidy comes from both    Centre and States,  the 
CMD, FCI deposing before the Committee  clarified as follows: 
“No. It is only from the Centre. One of the biggest things about this NFSA and even earlier , historically, is 
that it is the Central Government which spends the money for the last so many years. The distribution is 
by the State Government.” 
 
7.16 Responding to a query as to who bears the loss when the procurement price is Rs.18 and selling price is 
Rs.3, the CMD, FCI stated during briefing as under:  
 "That gap of Rs. 15 is given by the Central Government. No. we do not come in between. They are 
giving to the people what they procure. This is called de -centralised procurement. The State 
Governments procure and they distribute but the gap from the Central Government directly goes to 
them."  
 
7.17 With regard to percent of subsidy borne by the Centre, the Chairman, FCI deposing before the Committee 
on 14.10.19 stated as follows :  
“90 per cent of it is borne by the Central Government.”  
7.18  Responding to a query as to what is the 10 percent that is not borne  by the Central Government ,  the 
CMD, FCI deposing before the Committee on 14.10.2019 clarified as under: 
“That Rs. 3 is the 10 per cent. That Rs. 3 has to be paid by the State Government. In some States they 
give at no cost. It depends on the State. The entire cost of food subsidy in India is larg ely, at least 90 per 
cent, is borne by the Central Government.” 
 
7.19 Clarifying on the  comparative “Issue Price” of food grains before (during PDS regime) and after coming 
into existence of national food security Act, 2013 (NFSA), the CMD,  FCI deposing be fore the Committee on 
14.10.2019 stated that: 
“Before the Food Security Act, the issue price from Central Government was Rs. 5.65 for wheat and 
approximately Rs. 6 for rice. When the National Food Security Act came in, the prices crashed. It is only 
on that account that they have got the all figures. We are losing Rs. 9,800 crore.”  
 
7.20 Elaborating further on the subject, the CMD, FCI submitted as under : 

62 
 
“Before the National Food Security Act there was a public distribution system. This was in 2013.  We used 
to give wheat to BPL card holders at Rs. 5.65 and rice slightly more. Once the NFA came in, price of rice 
came down to Rs. 3 from Rs. 6 and odd and wheat came down to Rs. 2. So, the additional subsidy 
burden just on account of brining down the prices came to Rs. 9,800 crore. “ 
 
7.21 Explaining the total subsidy and its increase due to upward revision of MSP, the CMD of FCI deposing 
before the Committee on 16.03.2020 submitted as follows: 
“In terms of subsidy, it would be between Rs. 1.25 lakh crore to  Rs. 1.50 lakh crore. The MSP, for 
example, for wheat is Rs. 19.25. While we supply to the State Governments at Rs.2, Rs. 17.25 is the 
subsidy component which the Government of India pays to FCI. This is on MSP. If you load transport 
and other economic costs, it adds to much more. The paddy price is Rs. 18.30 for Grade A; 67 per cent 
of it becomes rice and the economic cost comes to Rs. 36 -37.  FCI supplies it at Rs. 3 to the States. 
So, Rs. 33 is the subsidy given by the Central Government.‟ 
 
7.22 With reg ard to specific query as to the total subsidy given by the Central Government, the CMD, FCI 
stated as under: 
“ Last year, it was Rs. 1,38,000 crore.  MSP goes up every year.   So, every year it goes up too. “  
 
7.23  With regard to subsidyand the  dispute pe nding with World Trade Organisation (WTO),  the CMD of  FCI 
deposing before the Committee on 16.03.2020 stated as follows :  
“This MSP is called output subsidy.  We exported in 2004. We are still fighting the battle at WTO “ 
 
7.24  In response toa query as to why we are fighting the battle at WTO, FCI CMD  submitted as under : 
“It is output subsidy. Minimum support price is output subsidy. You can give front ended, in put 
subsidy, not back ended. it is not allowed. That is the case of developed countries and others. It is 
going on for the last 15 years “  
 
7.25 With regard to co mpetitiveness of Indian rice and wheat in terms of cost vis-a- vis  international cost, the 
CMD  deposing before the Committee on 16.03.2020  submitted  as under : 
“Today, the production cost of rice is Rs. 27.85; Rs. 18.30 is the paddy price; 67 per cent of paddy 
becomes rice and so it is Rs. 27.85. Our open market price is Rs. 22.50 which is five rupees less than 
the procurement price. But the international price of rice is Rs. 17 and the price of wheat is Rs.14. So, 
we have requested and imposed an impor t duty of 40 per cent to ensure that wheat does not come to 
India.” 
 
7.26  In response to a query on relation between quantity and value of foodgrains, foodstuff and gunnies,  it was 
explained that though the quantity of foodgrains, etc. was decreased during 2018-19 as compared to 2017 -18, its 
value was increased due to increase in weighted average rate of acquisition consequent upon hike  in MSP and 
other procurement incidents. However, in the statement the MSP quoted has not been used in calculation o f value 
instead Acquired rate has been quoted. In written reply to queries – (i)  the  difference between MSP and acquired 

63 
 
rate, (ii)  Why is the acquired rate higher; and , (iii)  What are the other charges added to the acquired rate, FCI 
submitted as under :  
“ Before the sowing, during each Rabi/ Kharif crop season Government of India announces the minimum 
support price (MSP) for various crops on the basis of the recommendations of the commission of Agricultural 
Costs and Prices (CACP). CACP while recomm ending the MSP take cases of various factors including the 
following: 
1) Demand and supply 
2) Cost of production 
3) Price trends in the market, both domestic and international 
4) Inter-crop price parity 
5) Terms of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture 
6) A minimum of 50 percent as the margin over cost of production; and 
7) Likely implications of MSP on consumers of that product” 
 
7.27 The Committee was further informed that i t may be noted that cost of production is an important factor 
that goes as an input in determination of MSP, but it is certainly not the only factor that determines MSP. CACP 
also takes into consideration the cost of various agricultural inputs and the reasonable margin for the farmers for 
their produce.Acquisition Cost is inclusive of MSP a nnounce by GOI & procurement incidentals. It consists of the 
following: 
1. MSP 
2. Statutory Charges 
3. Mandi Labor Charges 
4. Driage, Commission to Societies or Arthyia Charges 
5. Custody and Maintenance Charges 
6. Interest Charges 
7. Milling Charges 
8. Administrative charges  
9. Cost of 1 Qtls of Paddy 
10. Cost of 1 Qtls of Rice 
11. Cost of Gunny  
 
7.28  Elaborating further, a representative of FCI during evidence informed the Committee as under: 
“Madam, there has been an increase of 7 to 8 per cent increase in MSP each year.  Last year the  wheat 
price was Rs.1840 per quintal and this year, it has been Rs.1925 per quintal.  The RMS 2020 -21 will 
commence from 1 st of April.  In some of the States it will commence from 3 rd week of March.  There is an 
enhancement of Rs.85, which comes to roughly  6-7 per cent enhancement.  Besides, the operation as 
such has not come down.  DCP States have increased and they are procuring but rice is coming to FCI.  
Whatever wheat is being procured, is being taken over by the FCI.  FCI‟s function of receiving the s tocks 
and transporting them has not reduced.  In the consuming States, which have become DCP, the 
procurement has increased and thus transportation has come down to some extent.  Now, we are moving 
around 29 billion.  We used to move around 35 billion.  Th at is only a part of the job.  The proportion for 
which the fund is required or the interest burden is coming has rather gone up with the huge procurement 
of food grains.  We are now procuring around 800 lakh MT when we used to procure around 650 lakh MT.  
Our requirement of food grains under NFS and other welfare scheme is roughly around 600 lakh MT.  
Each and every year there has been an escalation of 200 lakh MT, roughly we are adding 20 million tonne 
of food grains every year.” 

64 
 
 
H. Diversification of Crops 
7.29 On being enquired by the Committee about the crop diversification, the  CMD FCI, deposing before the 
Committee  on 16.03.2020 submitted that: 
“I would tell you a bit of history. FCI from 1964 has been in this area of procuring wheat and rice.  The  
farmers‟ psychology in many areas is that they are very secure about rice and wheat because they know 
FCI is a very efficient and evolved.  For example, in Telangana five years back the procurement or rice 
was 35 lakh tonnes.  Today, we are procuring 70 l akh tonnes.  Wherever irrigation comes, it has become 
a very comfort crop.  So, it is a big problem for FCI also because tomorrow if this access stock is spoiled, 
it will be on my shoulders.  This is a very serious problem for FCI and because of open -ended 
procurement; we are not allowed to stop.  Whatever comes has to be accepted.On MSP, it is a very valid 
point.  The high -level Committee which I mentioned last time, Mr. Shanta Kumar‟s Committee also talks 
about crop diversification, crop rotation and givi ng good MSP to the other crops and also the mechanism 
to procure.  The problem is that MSP is being given to the other crops but the efficiency of say, NAFED 
and other procuring agencies is not as effective as FCI.  So, that efficiency has to grow.  The MS P is 
given to a basket of 26 crops but procurement efficiency is not so high.  
 
7.30 Stressing the need for diversification of crops in view of the ballooning surplus stocks of rice and wheat,  
the CMD, FCI, deposing before the Committee  on 16.03.2020  submitted that :  
“Last year the production of wheat and rice was 216 million tonnes and in terms of whole consumption, if 
all Indians include the bread and the cakes, everything and we do not need more th an biscuits etc., we do 
not need more than 170-180 million tonnes. So, we need to diversify. Crop diversification is a must. “  
 
7.31  In response to  Committee‟s observation that farmers needs to be sufficiently incentivized to diversify their 
crops,  the CMD of  FCI deposing before the Committee    submitted that: 
 “There is a proposal to give an incentive to farmers for shifting rice, wheat to oilseeds, pulses and millets.  
It has to take shape in the Ministry of Agriculture.  That is the only way it can be done.  If a farmer is 
getting „x‟ as profit or whatever minus something in millets, that minus has to be compensated by the 
Government in some form or the other.  That has to be done.  We are the strongest advocates of crop 
diversification and crop rotation. “  
 
I. Equity Infusion  
7.32    Referring to the general information about a proposal to infuse Rs. 6,500 crore equity in FCI to shore up its 
authorized capital from Rs. 3,500 crore to Rs. 10,000 crore to help FCI to enhance its borrowing capacity an d 
raise more money through bonds to take care of its procurement operations, Committee sought the details from 
FCI.  The Chairmen FCI, appearing before the Committee on 16.03.2020, informed the Committee  as under :  
“Regarding the issue of equity, recently Rs. 1,000 crore was infused and on the fund requirement for FCI‟s 
operation, the ED (Finance) will explain in detail. In terms of subsidy, it would be between Rs. 1.25 lakh 
crore to Rs. 1.50 lakh crore. The MSP, for example, for wheat is Rs. 19.25 . While we supply to the State 
Governments at Rs.2, Rs. 17.25 is the subsidy component which the Government of India pays to FCI. 
This is on MSP. If you load transport and other economic costs, it adds to much more. The paddy price is 
Rs. 18.30 for Grade A ; 67 per cent of it becomes rice and the economic cost comes to Rs. 36 -37.  FCI 
supplies it at Rs. 3 to the States. So, Rs. 33 is the subsidy given by the Central Government.”  

65 
 
7.33 Adding further, the CMD submitted as follows :  
 “For all these operations,  apart from bonds, we have Government funding in the form of loans. We have 
short-term credit. The Government gives us ways and means funding. If not in the form of subsidy, the 
Government gives us loan. Essentially, till today, we have not had any cash fl ow problems.  On the bond 
issue, the ED (Finance) will explain the details. He has got Rs. 40,000 crore worth bonds issued over a 
period. He will talk about NSSF also…” 
 7.34 Explaining the Committee as to why the FCI needs money, a representative of FCI, appearing before the 
Committee submitted as under :  
“FCI needs money for two things. The first is for subsidy which means our expenditure is more than the 
issue price; Rs. 37 is roughly the cost of rice whereas Go vernment issues at Rs. 3.  So, the differential is 
the subsidy to be provided by the Government of India. For the last three -four years, it is given in two 
parts: partly by subsidy and partly through loan from NSSF. Today, what is outstanding is almost Rs.  2.54 
lakh crore.” 
 
7.35   In response to a query as to whether only arrears have been  set off by this loan, the representative of FCI  
appearing before the Committee on 16.03.2020 stated – 
            “Yes, madam‟. We are maintaining a huge stock.  Our ye ar end stock is in the range of 86,000 crore to 
90,000 crore.  It is because we do not have any internal generation of fund.  It should be funded by equity.  
The Government has agreed to give partly, Rs.5000 crore equity and has also guaranteed to issue bo nds 
to the tune of Rs.45,000 crore.  Out of Rs.45,000 crore, we have issued Rs.29,000 crores bonds and our 
plan is to issue Rs 8,000 crore bond every year for the next two years.  These are almost 10 -15 years 
Government guaranteed bonds.  We are using this  money for storing food grains.  All this interest is 
passed through the subsidy.” 
 
7.36  In response toa query as to who pays the interest, the representative  of FCI  deposing before the 
Committee on 16.03.2020 submitted as under :  
                     “It will be on FCI only.That is huge burden‟‟  
 
7.37 With regard to the expected stock balance as on 01.04.2020, a rep of FCI deposing before the Committee 
on 16.03.2020 submitted as follows :  
“You have raised one point and wanted to know that on 1.4.2020 what would be the stock balance.  
Whatever we have projected, we will have a stock balance of 237 lakh MT of wheat and 408 lakh MT of 
rice.  Total position will be around 646 lakh MT whereas the stocking down is 210 lakh MT as on 
1/4/2010. The stocking down is on the lower side because wheat procurement will start and therefore, 
there will be less requirement of it.  In the process, we have roughly 436 lakh tonne excess of food 
grains, which is roughly 44 million as on 1.4.2020.  This is the projected figure.” 
 
 
 
 
 

66 
 
          CHAPTER VIII 
LOSSES AND DAMAGES OF STOCKS 
A. Storage Losses 
8.1 Replying to a query on the preservation and storage losses , the CMD, FCI deposing before the 
Committee on 14.10.2020 submitted as under :  
“One shocking thing is that there is no storage loss in FCI. We, in fact, have storage gain.”  
8.2   The details on storage and transit losses and   also damages to the foodgrains since the year 2013-14, 
as furnished by FCI, are given as under:  
(Figures in %) 
YEAR STORAGE 
l 
TRANSIT HANDLING 
COST per MT 
(Rs) 
DAMAGES 
2013-14 0.17 0.46 192.53 0.05 
2014-15 -0.01 0.43 186.56 0.04 
2015-16 -0.08 0.30 180.58 0.01 
2016-17 -0.11 0.30 167.76 0.02 
2017-18 -0.12 0.25 155.55 0.006 
2018-19 -0.12 0.28 157.56 0.01 
(-) indicates gain  
8.3  Responding to the Committee‟s query bout  the basis of  the above figures,  the  following clarifications 
were given :  
“These are recorded and audited figures. Our storage losses were 0.7. -02 means it is a gain. Wheat 
increases weight because it absorbs moisture and rice loses moisture. We do not have storage loss. You 
were referring to the vigilance cases etc. But there is no storage loss.”  
 
8.4     Replying to a query about the  losses arising  out of  prolonged storage of food grains and also due to 
inadequate storage, a representative of  FCI appearing before the Committee on 16.03.20, submitted as follows:  
“it is no t because of longer period of storage. On an average we store it for two years. Damage to 
foodgrains never happen for reasons of longer period of storage. It has happened only where there have 
been some leakage problems or for any other extraneous reasons. “ 
8.5  Elaborating further, the CMD, FCI submitted  during evidence as under as follows:  
“the loss in percentage is .005 per cent. 1930 metric tonnes were lost when we are having 60 million Metric 
Tonnes. Over a period of time, in the last 10 or 12 years, a lot of efficiency and scientific storing has come 
in. Even in open, what we call as cap,  the storage losses are minimal. What is worrying now is that since 
we are accumulating 20 million every year it could get spoiled. It is a bigger worry with regard to storage 

67 
 
loss. There is an interesting phenomenon. In rice we lose weight and in wheat we  gain weight. Wheat 
absorbs moisture. “ 
 
8.6  Responding to the Committee‟s query as to the loss of food grains every year due to storage, the 
CMD,during deposition on 16.03.2020,informed the Committee as under :  
“it is 1920 up to 1.3.2020. This year, rig ht now, the stock position is 64 million tonnes. The loss is 
1930 tonnes only which comes, in financial terms, to a few crores.” 
8.7  Furnishing the backlog data on the losses, the CMD, FCI submitted as under :  
“we can give the backlog figures as well. In  2014-15 it was 18,847 tonnes. Over a period of last 10 to 15 
years there is an image that FCI is not storing and it is actually a continuation of that. Actually, FCI and State 
Governments have become, I am not saying very effective, fairly effective in storage. “ 
8.8  In response to a query regarding the quantum of food grains damaged in FCI‟s own godowns as well as the 
rented private godowns during the last five years, the FCI submitted the following information:  
 
(in MTS)  
YEAR FCI CWC SWC 
Private Godowns  
TOTAL ARDC PEG 
2014-15 8596.53 188.42 10028.33 29.10 5.28 18847.66 
2015-16 2938.01 66.81 104.71 0 6.15 3115.68 
2016-17 661.63 8077.72 11.91 0.01 24.30 8775.57 
2017-18 1050.01 25.39 22.67 1526.45 38.97 2663.49 
2018-19 1566.05 2650.15 963.77 2.06 31.34 5213.37 
2019-20 
(as on 
29.02.2020) 
254.63 705.02 965.66 0 5.05 1930.36 
TOTAL 15066.86 11713.51 12097.05 1557.62 111.09 40546.13 
 
8.9 Replying to another query regarding storage losses due to reasons such as: loss in moisture, 
prolonged storage, poor texture of gunnies, accentuated by use of iron hooks ,improper storage 
practices, the FCI  stated that the Moisture Loss & Prolonged Storage period are the most 
contributory factor of Storage Loss in FCI . As per information submitted to the Committee , the  
Storage Loss for the last 5 years has been as under. 
   
Year 
Percentage 
of Loss in 
Wheat 
Percentage 
of Loss in 
Rice 
Percentage of 
Loss in 
Wheat+ Rice 
   

68 
 
2014-15 -0.36 0.29 -0.01 
2015-16 -0.31 0.18 -0.08 
2016-17 -0.43 0.23 -0.11 
2017-18 -0.45 0.16 -0.12 
2018-19 -0.49 0.19 -0.14 
2019-20(till 
Feb‟20) -0.43 0.22 -0.09 
 
    
B.     Steps taken to overcome the Losses 
8.10     Regarding the steps undertaken to overcome the storage losses, the FCI has stated  that the 
following steps have been undertaken to overcome storage losses: 
 Storage Losses are reviewed during every MPR meeting and are monitored at HQ level 
regularly. EDs (Zone)/GMs(R) are instructed to intensify inspections of depots showing 
higher trend of storage losses. 
 Covered storage capacity has been added so that foodgrains can be stored in scientific 
covered storage and CAP storage can be avoided. 
 Periodical prophylactic and curative treatment of stocks is undertaken to keep the stocks 
Pest-Free. 
   
 
  

69 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
COMPUTERIZATION AND MODERNIZATION  
 
A. Depot Online System  
9.1 The Committee was informed that as per directions of the Ministry, the  FCI has implemented the Depot 
Online System (DOS) Application to automate all the operations at FCI Depots with the vision to transform the 
food supply chain management through innovative use of Technology for ensuring transparency, reliability and 
efficiency of procurement, storage and distribution operations. The objectives of the project include 
standardization and automation of depot level processes, efficiency improvement in management of food grains 
storage and distribution, enablement of real time m onitoring of operations, timely data reporting, data based 
decision support system and effective planning and optimization of administrative work. 
 
9.2 The key  benefits expected from implementation of Depot Online System as stated by FCI, are as follows 
:   
 “Process streamlining and increasing efficiency by integrated view of end -to-end processes, use of 
workflow, notification and alerts 
 Better coordination between depots and district/regional offices of FCI through integrated system  
 Reduce redundancy in processes by capturing data at the source and in real time 
 Reduce weigh bridge data manipulation by integrating LWB and automatically read data  
 Free up manpower from laborious data collation and report preparation  
 Leverage IT as decision support systems to handle dynamic nature of business 
 KPI driven dashboard for the top management 
 Align with „Digital India‟ vision for transformation of food distribution supply chain in India”  
 
9.3 In addition to above, the DOS Application provides reports at various levels for monitoring and decision 
making process such as:  
a. All standard reports in-use (175) at various levels have been made available. There are 71 Divisional - 
level primary reports, viz. IR -L (5), Movement (1 2), Procurement (6), PV (4), Quality (17), Sales (4), 
Stocks (8), and Storage (15). There are 104 secondary/other reports also available in the system.  
b. These reports contain data according to the user-role/access.  
The scopes have been defined in the syste m to provide customized output for 
Ministry/HQ/Zone/Region/District/Depot levels.  For Example, the Ministry, FCI HQ shall get country -
level reports.  
 
9.4 As informed to the Committee, the c urrent status of implementation of Depot Online System (DOS) in F CI is 
as follows: 
“a. Depot Online System ( DOS) has been considered as Go Live w.e.f. 1st  Dec‟18 and is 
currently operational at 533 FCI Depots.  
b.  Depot Online System (DOS) has been made operational at 144 CWC Depots.” 
 

70 
 
 
B. Implementation of DOS in CWC and SWC Godowns 
9.5 The Committee was  informed  that  Depot Online System (DOS) was to be implemented in all FCI Hired 
Depotsincluding CWC, SWCs as per the RFP. For such implementation,the entire cost for software has already 
been borne by FCI and the ot her costs of implementation, including manpower, hardware, training etc. are to be 
borne by the respective agencies only.   As such, DOS has been implemented in all CWC depots hired by FCI. 
The SWCs are yet to come on -board on DOS. Considering special requ irements, CWC has implemented their 
own WMSwhich is now to be integrated with the DOS. Similarly, many SWCs have their own WMS applications 
which need integration in the DOS. 
 
9.6 With regard to the current status of integration, the Committee was informed that  several discussions had 
been held among CWC and FCI teams along with the System Integrators of the respective applications. It has 
evolved that the major decision is to finalize the data interchange between the two applications. The integration 
is a long drawn process and is expected to take around six months‟ time.  DOS can be implemented on As -Is 
basis in SWC godowns having no WMS or SWC  godowns that want to implement DOS in two months‟ time.  
 
9.7 During the evidence the representatives of the Ministry of Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution 
further stated as under: 
"We are ready to give our software; they have to develo p their own way of monitoring. It will work. W e 
would also request the Committee to also give the recommendation in t his regard." 
 
C. E –Governance initiatives  
9.8   With regard to the progress on key e- Governance issues,  the FCI stated as follows:  
I. Progress on key e-Governance Initiatives  
a. Integration of DOS with FEAST : After development ofweb services for the integration of DOS with 
FEAST, the joint testing by NIC and SI and the User Acceptance Testing  (UAT) by FCI, the build of 
DOS has been put in production environment by the SI of DOS. 
b. Integration of DOS with NPP : F CI approved the revised BRD submitted by SI based on the latest 
technical document from NIC obtained on 18 th November, 2019. As per the approval of Change 
Request (CR) committee, in the meeting held on 19 th December, 2019,SI is expected to start delivery 
of web-services by 28th February, 2020 and the integration is expected to stabilize by 15 th April, 2020. 
c. Development of National Dashboard in DOS : NIC has already developed a dashboard with data 
(collected p eriodically) from IRRS. For development of the samein DOS, as per the approval of CR 
committee, in the meeting held on 19th December, 2019. 
The SI of DOS has submitted the Dashboard to FCI on 14 th February, 2020, for which the UAT is 
underway. 
d. Implementation of DOS in SWCs:- 
i. DOS will be implemented on AS-IS basis as decided in the meeting dated 17th  January, 2020. 
ii. SWCs have been requested to:- 
a. Ensure all their godowns hired by FCI are brought online on DOS by 1 st  April, 2020. 
b. Modalities and action plan for the same has also been shared with all concerned. 

71 
 
c. The progress of implementation of DOS at SWCsis being regularly monitored through meetings 
with GM (IT) of FCI Zonal Offices, so that the timelines may be adhered to.  
d. Governance structure has been put in place by most SWCs.  Also, filled –in static and dynamic 
data templates received for provisioning of depots in DOS application, have been shared by 
most SWCs. 
 
D. Food & Essential Commodities Assurance & Security Target (FEAST) 
9.9  It is stated that Food & Essential Commodities Assurance & Security Target (FEAST) application 
was developed by NIC for managing the Supply Chain of Public Distribution System and has been implemented, 
either partially or fully across 16 States / UTs. The PDS largely depend s upon issuance of food stocks from the 
FCI Depots. State Govt./UTs submit Indents/Requests to FCI depending upon the allocation and the amount 
paid by the State Govt./UT . FCI issues a Release Order (RO) to the representatives of State Govt./UT who in 
turn lift the stocks from FCI Depots, for further disbursal in PDS. The integration of FEAST to DOS will ensure 
transmission of indent related information from FEAST to DOS and then the Release Order related information 
from DOS to FEAST.  
 
9.10 During examina tion of the subject, the Committee was informed that t he testing of the integration was  
underway  at that time which was expected to be completed by 30.11.2019 and stabilization by 31.12.2019.  
 
  

72 
 
 
CHAPTER -X 
QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
 
10.1 As per the Annual Report 2017-18, food grains which do not conform to FSSAI norms and further cannot 
be reconditioned for normal issue are considered as „Non -issuable‟. The non-issuable foodgrains classified under 
various categories are disposed off as per the procedure. 
10.2   The Committee desired to know about the quantity of non-issuable food grains disposed of during the last 
5 years and the amount earned by FCI on this account. In response, the FCI furnished the following information:  
     
(Qty. in MT, Value in Rs.) 
 Commodity  Wheat Rice  Paddy Total 
Year Qty Value Qty Value Qty Value Qty Value 
2014-15 6274.774 35597617.41 18236.025 141680155.01 11.189 11793.00 24521.988 177289565.42 
2015-16 1594.320 7214105.91 2142.924 10831271.62 -- -- 3737.244 18045377.53 
2016-17 4845.978 53048410.05 2665.077 29011723.04 -- -- 7511.055 82060133.09 
2017-18 36.517 211125.17 759.098 1566947.28 -- -- 795.615 1778072.45 
2018-19 * 1496.104 10154590.00 2363.050 14930340.86 -- -- 3859.154 25084930.86 
*2018-19 
provisional 
          
10.3  With regard to  the  mechanism  adopted in disposing of the „non -issuable‟ food grains and  the  agency 
designated for such disposal,  the FCI submitted as under: 
“Non-issuable food grains are disposed through open tender enquiry system to the registered parties. The 
agency entrusted with the task of disposal of non -issuable stock is the custodian of the stocks i.e. FCI or 
State Govt. Agencies.” 
 
10.4        On being enquired about the agency responsible for determining the standard /quality of foodgrains that 
are no longer safe for human consumption and about the process/method of disposal of such food grains,  the 
FCI in a written reply submitted as follows :  
“Technical committee viz. District Categorization Committee determines food grain sto cks as non -
issuable as per the Standard Operating Procedure . These food grains are categorized into Feed -I, 
Feed-II, Feed-III, Industrial use, Manure and Dumping categories on the basis of sound grains present.  
 
                    Damaged Wheat/ Rice Categorization:  

73 
 
 
Sl 
No. 
Particular of 
Wheat/rice 
Percentage of sound grains other than foreign and 
damaged foodgrains 
1 Feed-I 
(i) Sound grains 85% to less than 95% in case of rice 
and 94% in case of wheat. 
(ii) Weevilled grains alone exceeding 10% by count. 
(iii) Uric Acid content alone found exceeding 100 mg. per 
Kg. 
2 Feed-I Sound grains 70% to less than 85% 
3 Feed-I Sound grains 55% to less than 70% 
4 Industrial Use 
(i) Sound grains 30% to less than 55% 
(ii) Contaminated with poisonous chemicals and 
fertilizers.  
5 Manure use Sound grains 10% to less than 30% 
 
These foodgrains are disposed off as per the respective category through open tender enquiry 
system.  Reserve price for tender sale of all damaged food grains are fixed as under:  
 
A Feed-I 60% of MSP of the crop year for wheat 
  60% of derived MSP of the crop year for rice 
B Feed-II 50% of MSP of the crop year for wheat 
  50% of derived MSP of the crop year for rice 
C Feed-III 40% of MSP of the crop year for wheat 
  40% of derived MSP of the crop year for rice 
D Industrial 30% of MSP of the crop year for wheat 
 Use 30% of derived MSP of the crop year for rice 
E Manure 10% of MSP of the crop year for wheat 
  10 % of derived MSP of the crop year for rice 
( 
10.5   In a written response to a query as to whether FCI is in a position to dispose  of old grains, stated as 
follows :  

74 
 
 
 “FCI follows the principle of FIFO i.e. First In & First Out and plan liquidation of older crop year stocks on 
top priority.  Due to which, FCI does not hold stocks of more than 2 years old. The food grains are 
categorized into issuable and non -issuable categories and as long as the food grains are in issuable 
category, they  are issued through normal channel to PDS/OWS or sold through Open Market Sale 
Scheme (OMSS). Only the food grains which are declared as non -issuable are sold through auction to 
registered manufacturer who can utilize it for cattle feed, poultry feed, manure etc.” 
 
10.6  In response to a query as to whether the godowns are managed scientifically and the stock of food grains 
are  being marked by year of the produce,  the FCI submitted as under :  
“As regards construction of godowns, the same are being constructed scientifically as per BIS norms and 
also CPWD specifications for safe storage of food grains. Further in order to ensure safe storage of food 
grains, all major components of godowns such a s roofing, flooring, Railway sidings, roads, street light, 
weighbridge etc. are being maintained/ repaired regularly on day to day maintenance basis to up keep the 
warehouses through sanctioned funds by FCI.  
 
Yes, FCI stores food grains under Covered and CAP storage and has scientific  preservation system. 
Foodgrain stock in storage is periodically inspected.  An on -going programme sees that both prophylactic 
and curative treatment is done  periodically and adequately by qualified trained and experienced 
personnel. The bags are kept on proper dunnage material to facilitate aeration. Foodgrain stocks are 
stored in gunnies with crop-year i.e. year of produce printed clearly on them. In the case of Custom Milled 
Rice (CMR), rice bags are attached with a rexin sl ip with details of crop year. FCI also stores foodgrains 
in vertical storage godowns i.e. silo bins and scientific preservation practices followed. In silo bins crop 
year wise stock is maintained.” 
 
10.7    With regard to the quality checks in procurement , the FCI, as informed to the Committee,  has taken the 
following measures:  
“FCI has entered into an Agreement with CFTRI, Mysuru which has been selected among the premier 
Government Research Institutes for providing consultancy services in modernizing FCI laboratories. The 
CNP Project Agreement has been signed by both the parties. 
Fresh Tender was floated on 10.12.2018 for the supply of major Laboratory equipment regarding which 
the Technical Bid was opened on 03.01.2019 & Technical evaluation of bid docume nt is being done by 
Technical Evaluation Committee. 
In the FY 2017 -18 Rs. 35,00,000/ - was allocated to IFS Gurugram which couldn‟t be unitized by IFS, 
Gurugram during that FY. Hence, in the FY – 2018-19, a total budget of Rs. 33,00,000/ - has been 
allocated to IFS Lab & Rs. 2,00,565/ - to Electrical Division, FCI, Hqrs for the modernization of QC Lab at 
IFS, Gurugram. Further, in FY 2017 -18 and amount of Rs. 10,50,000/ - was given to CFTRI, Mysuru as 
50% advance of the total consultancy fees. 
Samples of foodgr ains procured & stored in FCI godowns are periodically referred to FSSAI notifies 
NABL accredited Labs for quality checks. In the current FY 2018 -19 from 01.04.2018 to 31.12.2018, 2679 
samples of foodgrains from different godowns of FCI across the India we re sent for quality checks out of 
which results of 2386 samples have been received and found conforming to FSSR 2011 specifications.  

75 
 
With a view to introduce mechanized process for quality checking, 30 Computerised Rice Analysers 
(Annadarpan SMART) develop ed by Centre for Development of Advance Computing (CDAC), Kolkata 
were made available in 30 locations of 07 major procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh during KMS 2017 -18 and rice 
acceptance at these locations were carried out through CRA. 
In the ongoing KMS i.e. 2018 -19 these CRAs have been shifted to bigger centers and rice acceptance is 
being carried out through CRA. 
In the FY 2016 -17 & 2017 -18, 30 nos. of Annadarpan SMART units were  purchased for CDAC -Kolkata 
for an amount of Rs. 65,69,474/-“ 
 
 10.8   In response to queries as to whether the quality checks of food grains is carried out by any third party  
and  also whether the designated agencies are  well  equipped with the requisite expertise for this purpose, the 
FCI submitted as under: 
 
“Yes, quality checks of foodgrains are carried out by third party. Samples of foodgrains procured & 
stored in FCI godowns are periodically referred to FSSAI notified NABL  accredited labs for quality 
checks. In FY 2018 -19, 3810 samples of food grains from different godowns of FCI across the India 
were sent for quality checks which were found conforming to FSSR 2011 specifications. In the current 
FY 2019-20 from 01.04.2019 t o 30.09.2019, 3262 samples of food grains from different godowns of 
FCI across the India were sent for quality checks and found conforming to FSSR 2011 specifications.”  
 
10.9 Regarding technology innovation for checking the quality of pulses, food  grains that FCI procures, the 
department stated as below: 
"As of now, we have not come across any technology innovated for checking the quality of pulses, wheat, 
parboiled rice &  paddy. In case of Raw Rice, CRA developed by CDAC (Kolkata) are made available in 
29 locations of 07 major procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, 
Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh during KMS 2017-18 & 2018-19 and  rice acceptance at these 
locations was carried out through CRA. For in the KMS 2019 -20 also, rice acceptance at these centers is 
being carried out through CRAs.Since specifications followed by FCI are mostly physical in nature, there 
is no readymade machine av ailable to check all these parameters. As per the available information, no 
such proven technology exists in advanced countries through which we can do analysis of foodgrain as 
per the specification followed by FCI. For this reason only we are undertaking R&D efforts is already 
brought out under 16(i) to develop a suitable machine for this purpose."  
 
 
 

76 
 
CHAPTER-XI 
VIGILANCE SYSTEM 
 
11.1  As informed to the Committee,  the function of their Vigilance Division of FCI are both punitive as well as 
preventive. For preventive vigilance, surprise checks/ regular checks are carried out from time to time and based 
on the findings of the squads, ad visories are issued to the Operating Divisions to put in place instructions/ 
circulars to plug loopholes in procedures so as to minimize/eliminate scope of manipulation by unscrupulous 
stakeholders. Necessary action for fixation of responsibility on the de linquents is taken at 
Regional/Zonal/Headquarter level whenever irregularities come to the notice of Vigilance Division.  
 
11.2 As per the figures available in the Annual Report 2017 -18 of the Corporation indicating the position as on 
1st April 2018, there  were 64 Major and 753 Minor Vigilance proceedings initiated and 74 Major and 742 Minor 
Vigilance proceedings disposed of at Regional/ Zonal/ Headquarter level.  The status of vigilance cases as on 30 
September, 2019 as submitted by the FCI  is as under:- 
 
Status of Vigilance Cases from 2017-18 to 2019-20 [Till Sep-19] 
Year 
Major Cases Minor Cases 
Opening 
Balance Initiated Disposed Closing 
Balance 
Opening 
Balance Initiated Disposed 
2017-18 156 64 74 146 187 753 742 
2018-19 146 92 112 126 198 736 706 
2019-20 
(Upto 
30.09.19) 
126 48 37 137 228 326 399 
 
11.3 The Committee was informed that  the following Preventive Vigilance measures were taken to streamline the 
operation of food procurement in the country:- 
(i)  In order to eliminate subjectivity in the  physical and visual analysis of quality parameters in 
respect of rice, each of the refraction has been pictorially depicted and introduced to the 
field functionaries of FCI and put up in public domain. This has provided a ready visual 
reference for the personnel involved to ascertain the quality of rice being procured.  
(ii) The process of appeal and grievance redressal mechanism was reviewed and also had 
given a face lift recently so as to bring more transparency in procuringfoodgrains stocks. 
The benefits will be:- 
(a) Prevention of any possible harassment of rice millers/foodgrainsuppliers and 
brings transparency at the time of foodgrain acceptance at field level.  
(b) Specifies the authorities and prescribes the time period of the appeals. 
(c) In case of wrong rejection, the concerned employee will be liable for a punitive 
action. 

77 
 
(iii) Emphasis is being laid on introduction of Good Laboratory Practices in respect of Quality 
Control (QC) labs. 
(iv) Emphasis is on identity -blind/coding system, for fair analysis of QC sample s of food 
grains. The advantage of this system is that the sample lots are coded /decoded by 
dedicated employees who are responsible to get them transported to the concerned 
office for further verification. This eliminates the possibility of manipulation b y any other 
party during the transit period.  
(v) Making Senior Management Functionaries responsible for effective Supervision & 
Control in QC functions. 
(vi) Introduction of Online issue of Acceptance Note to the suppliers of foodgrains 
(Rice/Wheat/Paddy). This helps in recording and maintaining a central database of the 
foodgrains and the suppliers at the time of procurement itself.  
 
11.4 FCI informed that  for timely finalization of such cases, regular review meetings are conducted with the 
subordinate o ffices through Video Conferencing. Further, regular follow -up of pending cases is done through 
letters, emails, and telephonic calls. Advisories in connection to the CVC / Ministry guidelines have also been 
issued on regular basis for finalization of cases  on timely basis.  Brief description on measures taken in various 
spheres of FCI operations to prevent recurrence of adverse incidents is given below: - 
 
A. Preventive measures in Procurement: 
• Through periodical checks and surveys, it is ensured that the Minimum Support Price (MSP) payments 
to the farmers and payments to State Govts. and its Agencies are made within the stipulated timeframe 
through e-payment system. 
• Pictorial depiction of quality parameters in rice is introduced to field functionaries and also put up in 
public domain as a ready visual reference to bring accuracy in analysis of rice quality.  
• Regular Inspections and test checks of the procurement reports are made to ensure conformity as per 
GOI specifications. In case of any deviation, responsibility fixation is done on the delinquents. 
• Process Audit is done for tagging of mandis/mills to depots. 
• Online issue of A -Note (Acceptance Note) to the foodgrains suppliers has been introduced to capture 
real-time and accurate information. 
• Identity-blind/ Coding system for marking samples of foodgrains is implemented to ensure unbiased 
analysis of foodgrain quality. 
• Computerized Rice Analyzers (Annadarpan Smart) have been installed at 30 locations of 07 major 
procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Utt ar Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and 
Andhra Pradesh. The said regions carry out rice acceptance operations using these analyzers.  
 
B. Preventive measures in Storage and Contracts: 
• All tenders are being floated through Open Tender Enquiry and E -Tendering process through Central 
Public Procurement Portal of Govt. of India. 

78 
 
• In order to bring in greater transparency and minimizing the possibility of subjectivity and discretion, the 
MTF‟s (Model Tender Form) of HTC/TC, RTC, VTS and PWS are being rev iewed and amended from 
time to time. 
•  GRC (Grievance Redressal Committee) is constituted at Zonal Level to address the grievances of the 
Contractor. 
• Clear cut norms have been formulated for working out storage gap and subsequently hiring of godowns.  
• Sensitive Districts have been identified on the basis of specific parameters and are constantly reviewed 
from time to time. This has been reviewed vide Circular No. 1/2019 dated 18.01.2019.  
• GPS enabled VTS (Vehicle Tracking System) to monitor the movement of Trucks / Vehicles on real time 
basis is being implemented in the concerned Regions at Pan India level as per the direction of Ministry.  
 
C. Preventive measures in Transportation/Movement: 
• E-tendering and tender results are published on FCI website as w ell as on GOI website for enabling 
ease of access, prompt dissemination of information and transparency.  
• Assessment of transit losses is made based on the trend reports. Cases of abnormal transit losses call 
for fixation of responsibility. Responsibility in case of abnormal Transit losses is invariably fixed. 
• Independent Consignment Certification Squad (ICCS) is deputed at the time of loading and unloading of 
foodgrains moved through Railways. 
 
D. Preventive measures in Distribution: 
• Stock quality is verified by Joint Sampling at the time of issue to the State Govt. Agency. 
• Open Market Sale of Foodgrains is done only through e-auction.  
 
E. Preventive measures in matters related to Labour: 
• Regular review of handling cost is done. Investigation is mandatorily  done by the regions in case of 
depot involving high handling costs. 
• Making investigation necessary for Regions / Zones in cases where Department labourers and Direct 
Payment System (DPS) labourers earn monthly wages of more than 1 Lakh and 50,000 respecti vely. 
• Process of installation of Aadhar Number based Biometric Attendance Machines for departmentalized 
labour is also initiated alongwith initiation of CCTV Cameras to prevent proxy labour. 
 
  

79 
 
 
CHAPTER-XII 
AUDIT OBSERVATIONS OF C&AG 
12.1 The FCI informed to the Committee that d uring the period of 2015-2019, two performance and three 
Commercial Audit reports were given by the  C&AG. The observations given by the C&AG in these reports pertain 
to the functioning of FCI, States as well as the  Department of Foo d and Public Distribution. The major issues 
covered in the reports include the  incidental charges, commission to societies, suboptimal utili zation of Silos, 
management of gunny bags and road transport contracts etc. 
12.2  As per t he background note furnished to the Committee , the Audit paras in C&AG reports related to the 
year 2015 are still pending  for settlement with FCI.  Most of the se paras relate to the Procurement Departme nt 
regarding avoidable payment/expenditure. When asked to explain the rea sons for pendency,  the FCI in a written 
submission stated as under:  
“In the C&AG Report 31 of 2015, total 44 paras/sub -paras related to FCI was raised by the Audit. 
All the paras/sub-parashave been replied by FCI. 8 paras/sub-paras have been settled by the Audit. 
30 are under process/examination in the Ministry/C&AG. One para with 6 sub -paras has been 
referred back by Ministry to the FCI for effecting the recovery.. ….. 
 
12.3  As per the background note furnished to the Committee, some  audit paras also relate to dues to  be paid 
to FCI by many PSUs. When asked about the  total amount due to FCI from CPSUs as per the Audit paras, FCI in 
a written reply stated as under: 
 “(i) As per Audit para: 
   Particulars     Amount (Rs.in Crore) 
  Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSUs)   69.54 
 (ii) Present Status: 
 Total amount due to FCI from CPSUs i.e. MMTC, STC & PEC as per records for export of wheat 
during the period 2012-2014 is as under:  
S.No. CPSU Amount (In Rs.) 
1. MMTC 92,18,84,969/- 
2. STC 6,64,53,196/- 
3. PEC 6,65,26,854/- 
 TOTAL 1,05,48,65,019/- 
 
Regular persuasion is done for realization of dues. The amount is however, yet to be 
received from CPSUs.  The matter regarding settlement of claim of MMTC has been 
referred to MoCAF& PD for taking up with AMRCD whereas the matter of STC and PEC is 
being pursued.” 
 

80 
 
12.4 In response to Committee‟s query on the status of the pendency of C&AG paras and the steps  
taken/proposed to be taken by  FCI to settle them at the earliest,  the FCI in a written reply stated as under: 
“During last 7 years, the Audit has raised 6 audit reports consisting of 113 audit paras/sub -paras. 
All the paras have been replied by FCI. 12 Paras/sub -parashave been settled by Audit. 89 paras 
relating to sub -paras are  under process/examination in Ministry/C&AG.12 paras/sub -paras have 
been referred back to FCI for revised reply/recovery/further details, details of which are as under:  
   OVERALL SUMMARY OF C&AG AUDIT PARAS 
Sl. No. Report No. Coverage 
Period 
Paras 
raised 
Paras with 
Ministry/ C&AG 
Para 
closed 
Para pending for 
reply 
1 13 of 2013 2011-12 1 0 0 1 
2 21 of 2015 2013-14 1 1 0 0 
3 31 of 2015 2009-14 44 30 8 6 
4 15 of 2016 2014-15 4 3 0 1 
5 18 of 2017 2015-16 54 51 3 0 
6 4 of 2018 2016-17 9 4 1 4 
Total 113 89 12 12 
 
  

81 
 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
FCI - Overview 
1. The Committee note that Food Corporation of India(FCI) is a public sector undertaking which was 
established  by the „Food Corporation s Act, 1964‟.  It came into existence on 1 st January, 1965. The FCI is 
functioning under the administrative control of the Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Government of India.  The functions of the FCI 
primarily consist of procu rement, storage, movement and distribution of food grains on behalf  of the 
Central Government.  The food grains are procured at Minimum Support Price(MSP) and are distributed at 
Central Issue Price (CIP).  The Committee observe that during the long journey  since 1964, the FCI has 
been performing their mandated functions across the country.  The Committee have made a 
comprehensive examination of the FCI as an organization and touched upon many issues pertaining to 
the management of the organization and those  related to its functions in the areas of procurement, 
storage,  movement and distribution of foodgrains and also  maintenance of buffer stocks with due 
regard to ensure  food security in the country.   The Committee also observe that the Government of India 
had set up a High Level Committee (HLC) in August 2014  under the Chairmanship of  Shri Shanta Kumar  
to suggest restructuring of FCI with a view to improve its operational efficiency and financial 
management and suggesting   measures for overall improvement  in management of foodgrains by FCI; 
reorienting the role and functions of FCI in MSP operations, storage and distribution of foodgrains and 
food security systems of the country; and also to suggest cost effective models for storage and 
movement of grains and integration of supply chain of foodgrains in the country. The HLC in their report 
had given major recommendations on key issues related to  procurement, public distribution system , 
national food security act , stocking and movement,  buffer stocking operations and l iquidation policy, 
labour, direct subsidy to farmers, end to end computerization and the new face of FCI.   The Committee on 
Public Undertakings while examining FCI  in detail  have made an indepth analaysis  of the 
recommendations of HLC also and found that very fruitful and concrete suggestions had been given  by 
the HLC for improvement in the functioning of FCI.  The Committee endorse the suggestions of HLC and 
expect the Government to take conclusive action thereon  for the benefit of the gener al public.  The 
Committee, on examination of various aspects of the functioning of FCI as has been narrated in Part -I of 
this Report have given their observations and recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs and are 
hopeful that these will be implement ed by the FCI and the Government in right perspective so as to bring 
about significant improvements in the functioning of the Corporation so that the benefits of the 
Government‟s policy reaches to the poorest of poor and marginalized sections of the societ y in a fruitful 
manner. 
 
Board of Directors of FCI 
2. The Committee note that as per section 7(1)of the Food Corporations Act 1964, the Board of FCI 
shall consist of 12 Directors namely–(a) Chairman (b) t hree Directors  representing  Ministries of (i) Food 
(ii) Finance, and (iii) Co -operation (c) Managing Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) 
(d) Managing Director, FCI and (e) Six other Directors. As per clause (2) of section 7 of the Act, all the 
directors of the Corporation, except MD, CWC, shall be appointed by the Central Government. The 
Committee however observe that as against the mandatory strength of 12 members, only nine members 
were actually in position as on 31 December 2019 in the Board of the Corporation. The Committee was not 
apprised about the specific reasons for the vacant positions in the Board and also about the action taken 
or proposed to be taken to fill up these vacancies.  The Committee therefore desire the Ministry and  FCI 

82 
 
to furnish a detailed note on (a) reasons for occurrence of vacancies of three Directors in the Board with 
the date of occurrence of these vacancies and action taken so far for filling up these vacant positions.  
The Committee, after taking into accou nt the fact that vacant positions in the Board will definitely have 
impact on its effective functioning, strongly recommend that the vacancies in the Board be filled up 
immediately as per the provisions of section 7 of the Food Corporations Act  in a time bound manner 
without further delay. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of 
three months.  
 
3. The Committee‟s analysis furthe r reveals that section 7(1) of the Act clearly provides for 
mandatory representation of  three separate Ministries viz. (i) Food (ii) Finance and (iii) Co -operation by 
appointing one Director each from these Ministries in the Board of FCI.  The Committee however observe 
that against the norm of one official Director representing each of these  Ministries, the Board of FCI in 
fact  has two officers -{(AS &FA) and JS (P&FCI)} -from the same Ministry viz.  Ministry of Consumer 
affairs, Food and Public Distribution and none from the Ministry of Finance has been appointed in the 
Board which is appare ntly in violation of the provisions of section 7 of the Food Corporations Act, 1964. 
The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the circumstances in which two officers from one 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Consumer affairs, Food and Public Distribut ion have been appointed on the Board 
of FCI and also the reasons for not making any appointment from the Ministry of Finance on the Board 
despite the mandatory requirement thereof. The Committee therefore recommend that immediate steps 
be taken by the Gove rnment to set right the representation of each three Ministries in the Board of FCI in 
the same ratio as has been provided in the Food Corporations Act, 1964.  The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken in the matter within a period of three months. 
 
4. The Committee note that the section 7(1) of the Food Corporations Act inter-alia provides that in 
addition to the Chairman of FCI and other members, the Managing Director of FCI shall also be  a member 
in  the  Board of Directors of FCI. The Committee,  however, observe that the present composition of the 
Board of Directors does not include the Managing Director of FCI. The Committee are of the firm view  
that the provisions of the Food Corporations Act, being mandatory, are necessarily to be complied wi th. 
The Committee therefore recommend that the composition of the Board be restructured by including the 
Managing Director of FCI in the Board in compliance of the provisions of the Food Corporations Act.  
 
5. The Committee observe that as per the DPE guide lines issued vide OM No. 9(15)/2012 -GM dated 
31st July 2013, non -official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs are to be drawn from, among others, 
professionals of repute having more than 15 years of domain experience in fields relevant to the 
company‟s area of operation and also from persons of eminence with proven track record from Industry, 
Business or Agriculture or Management. Further, the DPE OM No. 18(6)/91 -GM dated 16.03.1992 and OM 
No. 18(6)/200-GM dated 26.11.2001 interalia provides that at least one third of the Directors on the Board 
of a PSE should be non -official and in the case of listed companies headed by the executive Chairman, at 
least half of the Directors should be independent Directors.  The Committee found that though the FCI‟s 
Board struc ture give sufficient scope for appointment of independent directors, yet the present 
composition of the Board neither conform to the DPE guidelines nor the mandatory provisions of the 
Food Corporations Act. The  Committee found that two non -functional Directors on Board at present  are 
retired civil servants and apparently there is no professional expert on the  board as an Independent 
Director.  The Committee observe that engaging at Board level the management experts and 
professionals having domain expert ise will bring qualitative changes in the functioning of the 
corporation. This is also much more necessary in a organization like FCI which is performing multi -

83 
 
faceted functions where banking upon only on retired civil servants in the Board will deprive th e FCI of 
the domain expertise of the professionals. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the 
professionals with proven track record in the areas of agriculture, food sciences,procurement, logistics, 
storage, etc. should  be appointed as non - official directors in the Board of FCI and the  present 
composition of the Board may  be restructured taking into account the mandatory provisions of the Food 
Corporations Act and the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises(DPE) from time to  
time.  
 
6. The Committee also note that the representation  to two major producing states -Punjab and 
Madhya Pradesh were given by appointing officers from these States in the Board with a view to ensure 
that the Board has the benefit of field level situati ons. The Committee, however observe that no specific 
criteria has been laid down for determining the representation to the States in the Board.  As informed to 
the Committee, the criteria laid down by DPE for appointment at Board level are applicable for 
representing officers from the States and Principal Secretary of any major food producing States could be 
appointed in Board of Directors of FCI. The Committee while agreeing with the FCI‟s need for having two 
representatives from major food producing States on its Board to have the benefit of field level situations, 
recommend that rotational representation of the major food grains producing States of  Wheat as well as 
those of Paddy(Rice)  be given in the Board of FCI so that all major States are represente d in the Board 
turn-by-turn which will facilitate the FCI in taking sound operational decisions.  
 
7. The Committee observe that the Executive Committee (EC)  of the Food Corporation of India 
which is competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the Corporation, consists of three 
official and one non -official director.  The Committee is of the considered view that since the Executive 
Committee is competent to deal with almost all matters of the Corporation, at least  the non -official 
director should be  drawn from professionals with sound domain knowledge and requisite expertise in 
the areas of procurement, storage,  preservation, logistics, etc. The Committee therefore recommend 
accordingly and hope that the appointments of members in Executive  committee of FCI will be made 
accordingly. 
 
Human Resource Management 
8. The Committee express their satisfaction that against a sanctioned staff strength of 42038, the FCI 
is managing with only 21181 employees which is  almost 50% of its sanctioned strength.  The Committee 
was informed that the FCI got conducted a study by M/s Mckinsey & Co. on staffing norms and the 
sanctioned strength of FCI was revised on the basis of its report.  The FCI further informed to the 
Committee that the manpower trainin g is given from time to time to ensure that the employees are 
competent for handling the current and future needs of the company.  The FCI has also got conducted HR 
audit by third party for audit of identified HR Policies, processes and systems of FCI, ben chmarking of HR 
policies with leading practices from similar/comparable private sector and public sector companies.  
Further, the Human Resource management System(HRMS) is being implemented in FCI for full 
automation of its Human Resource System. The Commi ttee while appreciating the various initiatives 
taken by FCI to enhance its organizational efficiency with reduced manpower, hope that FCI through 
these initiatives will be able to successfully deliver better results in the areas of their mandated 
operations and will also ensure that the performance/delivery of results does not get effected on account 
of shortage of manpower in the organisation. 
 

84 
 
9. The Committee observe that the FCI is engaged in undertaking different types of works like 
procurement, storage, transportation and distribution of food grains across the country.  In a organization 
like FCI, the posting/deployment of employees at one particular location for longer period may not be 
desirable in the overall interest of the organization.  The Comm ittee therefore desire that a structured 
transfer policy not only need to be put in place but also the same need to be religiously implemented in a 
transparent and indiscriminatory manner.  The policy so made should be given wide publicity among 
employees with a view to make them aware well in advance about their transfer from a particular place 
after a certain period of time.  The Committee therefore recommend accordingly and hope that the FCI will 
soon come out with the well structured posting and transfe r policy with scientifically defined mechanism 
of its implementation alongwith the consequential action against the defiant employees.  
 
10. The Committee observe that there is a general tendency in the Officers appointed on deputation 
for over-stay in the borrowing organizations.  The Committee during examination of the subject desire to 
ascertain as to the adherence of the CVC guidelines in the matters related to  deputation, transfers and 
postings of the Officials in FCI   and also about the instances wh en Officers appointed on deputation in 
FCI over stayed beyond the period prescribed in the  guidelines. The FCI though informed to the 
Committee that they follow the guidelines  but did not elaborate further on the issue. The Committee 
therefore desire the  Government to furnish the  details of officials who over -stayed beyond the stipulated 
deputation tenures in FCI during the last 10 years indicating the portfolios held by them during the period 
of their deputation along with the reasons for overstay.   T he Committee are of the considered view that 
the principles laid down in the guidelines on the subject need to be strictly followed particularly in a 
organization like FCI where the officers handle sensitive portfolios and therefore strongly recommend 
that the deputation tenure of the officials should not be extended beyond the prescribed period. The 
Committee are hopeful that the Government will act upon the recommendation of the Committee in letter 
and spirit with a view to set a high standard of moral values in the organization. 
Labour Management 
11. The Committee note that the FCI engages large number of labourers for loading and unloading of 
food grains. The Labourers deployed by FCI are in three categories viz. (i) Departmental Labour (ii) Direct 
Payment System (DPS) Labour and (iii) No -work No-pay(NWNP) Labour.  As informed to the Committee, 
presently there are about 11350 Departmental Labour, 19953 number of DPS labour and about 6705 
number of NWNP Labour engaged with FCI. Apart from this, there are about one lakh contract labourers 
hired through various contractors employed  by FCI.  The Committee was informed that the sanctioned 
strength of the Departmental and DPS labourers was fixed in 2007 whereas that of NWNP labourers was 
fixed in the year 2010 -11.  Thereafter rationalization process of labour strength have been done on  the 
basis of exemption notification dated 06.07.2016 and 26.06.2018 issued under section 31 of CL(R&A) Act 
by the Ministry of Labour in respect of already notified 226 depots.  The exemption initially granted vide 
notification dated 06.07.2016 had been ef fective for two years i.e. upto 05.07.2018 and thereafter it was 
extended first upto 05.07.2020 and then again for another two years i.e. upto 05 July, 2022. Consequent 
upon the issue of exemption notification, the contract labourers shall continue to work  in the exempted 
depots.  The Committee was further informed that  the Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench 
directed Government of India to decide the de -notification of all the notified depots within 6 months. The 
time limit of 6 months has elapsed long  back.  In the meantime Hon‟ble High Court Kerala at Ernakulam 
directed Ministry of labour to consider the de -notification of Kollam depot after obtaining comments of 
FCI. As informed to the Committee, the proposal for de -notification of Kollam depot along with the other 
notified depots has been sent to the Ministry of Labour through the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution vide letter No. IR(L)/31(10)/2004/Vol.III dated 02.07.2018 followed by reminders 
dated 25/26.10.2018, 21/22.02.201 9, 02/03.04.2019, 23.05.2019 & 08.07.2019, but decision is still awaited.  

85 
 
The Committee‟s analysis of the comparative costs of different categories of labourers reveal that  the 
cost of contractual labourers is much less than the designated categories of labourers.  The engagement 
of contractual labourers for loading and unloading of food grains at depots and other locations will be 
effectively materialized only when the depots are de -notified but unfortunately, the Ministry of Labour has 
not taken final a ction for de -notification despite lapse of two years period. The Committee therefore 
strongly recommend the Government to immediately take action for de -notification of the depots of FCI 
so as to achieve the cost efficiency in the labour management.  
 
12. The Committee note that the wage bill of Departmental labour, DPS Labour and NWNP Labour has 
been gradually reduced from Rs. 337238.76 lakh in 2014 -15 to Rs. 216133.33 lakh i.e. a reduction of about 
40% in the wage bill over a period of five years.  The Co mmittee was informed that the Hon'ble High 
Court, Nagpur Bench had passed an order giving liberty to the Corporation to implement its policy of 
change in the scheme of incentives.  In compliance to the above order,  FCI Headquarter  sent a detailed 
proposal  to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  for effecting changes in the 
service benefits of Departmental Labour and Direct Payment  System (DPS) Labour for approv al so that 
further course of action can be initiated by FCI towards making the necessary reforms.  The FCI proposed 
the altered service conditions such as (i) Non -inclusion of incentives for computation of CPF (ii) Non -
inclusion of incentive for computation of Gratuity (iii) Non - inclusion of HRA elements for computation o f 
Incentive and OTA (iv) No payment of „A‟ Area rates to DPS labour working in „B‟ and „C‟ Area, and  (v) 
Consideration of Mandal as Handling Labour.  The Committee also note that the proposal with regard to 
declaration of Departmental Labour system as Dyi ng Cadre has been approved by the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution on 03.01.2020 and the same has been communicated to 
field offices vide Circular No.1/2020 dated 08.01.2020 with the instruction that there will be no further 
induction under this  Departmental Labour system. The Committee are hopeful that all these measures 
proposed to be taken by FCI will lead to substantial reduction in the cost on account of Department 
Labourer.  The Committee however observe that in view of the declaration of Departmental Labour 
System as dying cadre, the FCI will be heavily dependent on other categories of designated and 
contractual labourers.  The Committee therefore recommend that in the changed scenario, a well -defined 
policy for engagement o f such labourers for performing various types of jobs at different locations in the 
country be framed so as to make the system of engagement of labourers as transparent and cost 
effective.   
 
Procurement of Foodgrains 
13. The Committee note that the Government of India enacted the National Food Security Act(NFSA), 
2013 which inter alia legally entitles upto 75% of the rural population and 15% of the urban population to 
receive subsidized food grains under Targeted Public Di stribution System. The Government policy of 
procurement of food grains has broad objectives of ensuring Minimum Support Price(MSP) to the farmers 
and availability of food grains to the weaker sections at affordable prices. It is also to ensure effective 
market intervention thereby keeping the prices under check and also adding to the overall food security 
of the country. The MSP is announced by the Government of India at the beginning of the sowing season 
of crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agriculture Costs and Prices 
(CACP) which determines the MSP based on the input costs and margin to farmers.  The FCI, the nodal 
central agency of the Govt. of India, alongwith other State Government agencies undertakes procurement 
of wheat and paddy under Price Support Scheme.  The Committee observe that the objective of the food 
grains procurement by Government agencies is thus to ensure that farmers get remunerative prices for 
their produce and do not have to resort to distress sale to loc al vendors who exploit the farmers by 
offering very low price. The Committee while taking note of the significant role of FCI in achieving the 

86 
 
objectives of the Food Policy of Government of India through procurement and distribution of foodgrains, 
express their hope that the Corporation will keep on making sustained efforts for bringing about 
improvements in their processes so as to deliver better results in future with a view to take the benefits of 
the policy of the Government to the doorstep of the intended beneficiaries of poor class of population. 
 
14. The Committee further note that there are two types of procurement viz. the Centralized 
Procurement System (Non-DCP) and the Decentralized Procurement System (DCP). Under the Centralized 
Procurement (Non-DCP), the procurement of food grains in the Central Pool are undertaken either by FCI 
directly or State Government agencies procure the food grains and handover the stocks to FCI for 
storage and subsequent issue against Government of India allocations in t he same State or movement of 
surplus stocks to other States. The cost of the food grains procured by State agencies is reimbursed by 
FCI as soon as the stocks are delivered to FCI as per cost -sheets issued by Government of India.  Under 
the Decentralized P rocurement (DCP), the State Government itself undertakes direct purchase of 
paddy/rice and wheat and also stores and distributes these food grains under NFSA and other welfare 
schemes. The Central Government undertakes to meet the entire expenditure incurr ed by the State 
Governments on the procurement operations as per the approved costing. With regard to the pace of 
decentralization of procurement activities, the Committee has been informed that the procurement 
activities had been decentralized to the Stat e Governments and as many as 16 States procure rice and 
about 4 to 6 States procure wheat and in such cases, FCI‟s activities start after the State Governments 
handover the excess stock to FCI.  The Committee thus observe that the present emphasis of the 
Government is to handover the procurement operations of wheat and rice to States that have gained 
sufficient experience and have created reasonable infrastructure for procurement and move on to help 
those States where farmers suffer from distress sales at p rices much below MSP and are dominated by 
small holdings like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam, etc.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Government should provide all necessary assistance to the relatively inexperienced 
States and also the North-Eastern States with a view to strengthen  their infrastructure and  increase their 
potential to enable them to progressively increase  their procurement activities.  
 
15. The Committee further note that the procurement of wheat at MSP which w as 283.35 LMT in 2010 -
11 has gone up to 341.32 LMT in 2018 -19 while the procurement of rice at MSP which was 341.198 LMT in 
2010-11 has gone to 443.30 LMT in 2018 -19.  The allotment to States which had been 241 LMT of wheat in 
the year 2014-15 has gone to 246 LMT in the year 2019 -20 but the allotment of rice which was 373 LMT in 
the year 2014 -15 has come down to 331 LMT in the year 2019 -20.  The Committee are happy to note that 
procurement from Eastern States during Kharif Marketing Season i.e. KMS which ha d been 65.97 LMT in 
2016-17 has gone up to 86.34 LMT(as on 06.07.2020) in 2019 -20.  The Committee also feel satisfaction 
over the fact that the constant efforts made by the Corporation has resulted in reduction of procurement 
of Beyond Rejection Limit(BRL)  stocks by 86.84% i.e. from 15586 MT during the year 2013 -14 to 2107 MT 
during the year 2016-17.  The BRL stocks further reduced to 1936 MT in 2017 -18 which constitutes 0.005% 
of the total procured quantity in that year.  The Committee also note that FCI h as put in place well 
established monitoring mechanism for the procurement activities which includes joint inspection of food 
grain stocks, online procurement monitoring System(OPMS), analysis of samples in quality control 
laboratories, regular inspection o f Fair Price Shops and Godowns etc.  The Committee are hopeful that 
the FCI will bring more systemic improvements in their processes of procurement and other related 
activities by extensive use of information technology tools to minimize the possibilities of aberrations 
which may creep in the system on account of human intervention. 
 

87 
 
Future Role of FCI 
16. The Committee observe that the procurement of food grains  by FCI has gradually decreased over 
a period of time and as informed,  the FCI now procures on ly 2% of paddy and 12% of wheat out of the 
total procurement done for the central pool. As such, the role of FCI in procurement has substantially 
minimized and it will further shrink with the more and more States opting for the Decentralized 
Procurement (DCP) System. The Committee therefore urge that in view of its gradual decreasing share in 
the procurement domain, the FCI should now focus and concentrate more on the effective storage and 
distribution management system for making available better quality f ood grains to the poor families and 
other intended beneficiaries through optimum utilization of their resources.  
 
Buffer stocks and Excess stocks 
17. The Committee note that the Food Corporation of India has to maintain buffer stocks as 
prescribed by the Government of India as a measure of food security to guard against scarcity of food 
grains.  The buffer stock is presently equivalent to 4 months allocation.  This stock enables the 
Government to intervene effectively to curb rising trend of crisis of foodg rains in the market. Thus, two 
types of stocks are maintained.  The first is operational stock which are required for month to month 
distribution to the intended beneficiaries under Targeted Public Distribution System(TPDS) and Other 
Welfare schemes(OWS).  The second is the Strategic Reserve which is required by the Government only 
to maintain and renew the stocks unless foodgrains are drawn from it in case of crisis situation such as 
abnormal shortfall in production of foodgrains in the country or natural calamity and in such a case, the 
procurement will be required to be higher in the next season to the extent of drawal from the Strategic 
Reserve.  The Committee however observe that during evidence, it was brought before the notice of the 
Committee that as  per norm of 2014 for having 23 million tonnes of buffer stock, presently it is about 64 
million tons resulting in 40 million tonnes of excess stock.  With regard to the disposal of excess stocks, 
the Committee was informed that Open Market Sale Scheme(Domestic) [OMSS(D)] Policy is formulated for 
every fiscal year to offload excess stock of wheat and rice which is above buffer stock in norms in the 
open market.  There is a Committee constituted by the Government consisting of Secretary(Expenditure), 
Secretary(Food and Public Distribution), Secretary(Consumer Affairs) and Secretary, Department of 
Commerce to recommend quantity and price at which foodgrain stocks in excess of buffer and strategic 
norms are to be offloaded.  With regard to the sale of excess st ocks of foodgrains through OMSS(D), the 
Committee note that annual sale of excess stock had been 71.88 LMT in the year 2015 -16, 47.45 LMT in 
2016-17, 19.12 LMT in 2017 -18, 90.30 LMT in 2018 -19 and 52.48 LMT in 2019 -20.  The Committee were also 
given to und erstand that various proposals are being moved in the Government about liquidation of 
excess stocks but the details of these proposals were not elaborated.  The Committee observe that norms 
for buffer stock have been fixed taking into account the primary o bjective of maintaining food security to 
guard against scarcity of food grains which may occur for various reasons but at the same time 
maintenance of large quantity of excess stocks over and above the fixed norms for buffer stock entails 
heavy cost to the  Corporation.   The Committee appreciate Government policy to procure the foodgrains 
at MSP without any cap to allow the farmers to sell their produce to the Government organisation and 
save them from distress sale to local venders at lower rates.  The Com mittee however desire that the 
Government should prepare a detailed plan for liquidation of excess stocks in time so that the financial 
burden on the Government is reduced to maximum extent. 
 
Storage Facilities and Capacity Utilization 
18. The Committee no te that over a period of time, the quantum of procurement of foodgrains has 
gone up and it has necessitated the requirement of additional storage capacities.  As informed to the 

88 
 
Committee, the FCI opts for short-term hiring of covered godowns as well as Cov er & Plinth(CAP) to meet 
the short-term peak requirements of storage capacity.     The Committee‟s analysis reveals that the  total 
storage capacity owned by the  FCI was 387.40 LMT, 373.00 LMT, 361.91 LMT, 363.54 LMT, 381.06 LMT 
and 407.34 LMT during the year 2014 -15, 2015 -16, 2016 -17, 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20  respectively.   
Further, as on 1 st July 2020, the storage capacity with State agencies was 471.24 LMT. Thus, against the 
total available capacity of 878.58 LMT, 812.94 LMT of stocks of central pool were stored.  The Committee 
also note that out of total number of 2131 storage available as on 30.11.2019, 561 is owned by FCI and 
1572 is hired by FCI.  It was revealed during the examination of the subject that it is the excess 
procurement which necessitate additional storage facility but nevertheless once the foodgrains are 
procured, these are required to be safely preserved till its distribution/sale.  The Committee observe that 
Cover & Plinth(CAP) storage facility is relatively not safe for storage of foodgrains for long duration and 
therefore the Committee desire that CAP system  of storage need to be phased out.  The Committee note 
that various schemes for construction of godowns for storage of stocks are (i) Private Enterpreneurs 
Guarantee Scheme (PEG)  (ii)  Central Sector Scheme  (iii) Construction of Steel Silos and (iv) Cove r and 
Plinth(CAP) Hiring Scheme.  Under PEG Scheme, storage capacity is created by private parties, Central 
Warehousing Corporation and State Government agencies and the FCI gives guarantee of 10 years for 
hiring to private investors and 9 years to CWC/SWC s/State Agencies.  Under the Central Sector Scheme, 
the storage capacity is created by FCI in North -Eastern States alongwith Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand 
and Kerala.  The construction of Steel Silos is to be done in Public Private Partnership(PPP) Model.  T he 
Committee hope that efforts will be made by all the stakeholders to create the storage capacity under the 
respective scheme and will achieve the target within the prescribed time period.  
Construction of Silos : Hub and Spoke model 
19. The Committee note  that Steel Silo storage is highly mechanized and modernized way of storing 
of foodgrains in bulk.  It ensures better preservation of foodgrains and enhances its shelf life. If 
foodgrains are stored in Silos and transported in bulk, losses due to theft, pi lferage and transportation 
would be negligible compared to foodgrains storage in bags in conventional warehouses. The FCI 
informed that since land availability in existing FCI godowns is scarce, it would be prudent to shift to 
storage of foodgrains in Silo s as it requires approximately 1/3rd land as compared to conventional 
storage warehouses. Moreover, Silos can be operated round the clock which would bring in flexibility and 
would improve overall efficiency. As such, construction of Silos and utilization of Silos for storing and 
transportation of foodgrains in bulk would be beneficial to the nation as a whole besides also creating an 
efficient Food Supply Chain Management System. The  FCI has  therefore planned to modernize its 
storage facilities by constr uction of modern steel Silos on a PPP mode . The Committee note that as 
against the target set in 2016 for creating 100 LMT silo capacity, FCI could create only 8.25 LMT even after 
four years which is just 8.25% of the target fixed. The silos were construct ed in Punjab and Madhya 
Pradesh. The reasons attributed by FCI to their poor achievement is lack of availability of land and railway 
sidings which were made compulsory in the tender floated for the purpose. The Committee were informed 
that many big investors who showed interest to invest in silo construction could not move ahead because 
of these constraints. Since the earlier model failed, the Committee learn that FCI is changing its existing 
model under which silos are constructed on 'Hub and Spoke' model where in various silos are connected 
by road to a mother silo which will have rail connectivity. The Committee are of the opinion that setting up 
of smaller size silos near to the procurement and consumption locations will immensely reduce the 
transport cost of FCI as it will help in avoiding procuring grains at one location and sending them to the 
silo located at distant place and again bringing the foodgrains back  for distribution under various welfare 
schemes  to the same  areas from  where these goodgr ains were actually  procured.  The Committee are 
of the view that this “to and fro” movements not only create  a lot of logistic issues but also cast heavily 
on the Government in terms transportation charges and therefore these could be effectively reduced if 
the localised small silos are constructed and then integrated to the main silos  under hub and spoke 

89 
 
model. The Committee therefore recommend that immediate steps be taken to prepare a comprehensive 
scheme for creation of the Silos network on Hub and Spoke model throughout the country in a time 
bound manner.  
 
Movement and Distribution of Foodgrains 
20. The Committee note that one of the major functions of FCI is to move food grains from surplus 
producing states to consuming / deficit states.  The proper and planned movement of food grains ensures 
(i) evacuation of stocks from surplus regions, (ii) meet the requirements of deficit regions for NFSA/ TDPS 
and other schemes, and (iii) create buffer stocks in deficit regions. The Committee further note that 
Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh are the surplus States in terms of wheat procurem ent vis -à-vis 
their own consumption. Similarly, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh/Telengana, Chhatisgarh and Odisha 
are surplus States in terms of rice procurement vis-à-vis their own consumption. Surplus stocks of wheat 
and rice in these states are moved to  deficit States to meet the requirements under NFSA/ TDPS and 
other schemes as well as to create buffer stocks.  There are various modes of transport for movement of 
food grains viz. (i) Multimodal Transport movement, (ii) Containerized movement, (iii) Lon g Route Road 
Transportation, (iv) Bulk Movement, etc.  The movement under these are undertaken through road, rail, 
coastal or riverine mode.  Under the Multimodal Transport Movement, FCI has undertaken a Pilot project 
of containerized multimodal coastal mo vement of 25000 MTs of food grains from Punjab to Karnataka. 
Similarly, under the same pilot project, movement of food grains by CONCOR from identified centres of 
Punjab to Kerala viz Cochin, Quilon, etc. and also to Tamil Nadu is being taken up to make a cost-benefit 
analysis in comparison with the conventional movement of rakes. The Committee learn that FCI has taken 
several initiatives for increasing movement using waterways also. However, the fact remains that rail 
movement is much cheaper and economica l mode for movement of food grains.  About 85% of the FCI‟s 
movement takes place through rail. FCI spends about Rs. 10,000 crore annually for transporting food 
grains all across India, out of which Rs. 8,500 Crore goes to the Indian Railways alone. The Com mittee 
recommend  the Government to get  an independent study conducted  on the movement -cost economics 
taking into account the operational feasibility and economical viability  of the major modes/routes of 
transport so as to minimize the transportation co sts and to reduce the financial  burden on public 
exchequer. The Committee  would also like to be apprised of the outcome of the pilot projects undertaken 
to determine the cost economics of the containerized costal movement from Punjab to  down south in 
Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.  
 
Formation of Joint Venture with Railway CPSUs 
21. The Committee note that investors - both domestic and foreign - are willing to invest in creation of 
modern storage infrastructure had to withdraw for want of land and rail way sidings. The Committee also 
note that FCI transports 85% of food grains through rail mode as it is the cheapest option. The Committee 
learn that FCI and the Department of Food and Public Distribution have not succeeded in convincing 
railways to give va cant land near the railway sidings to create storage infrastructure. The Committee 
recommend that the Government should explore the possibility of forming a Joint Venture with the 
Railways for undertaking the business of movement of foodgrains as such type  of arrangement will be 
beneficial for FCI as well as Railways.  The Committee may be apprised of the precise action taken by the 
Government in this regard.  
 
Financial Performance 

90 
 
22. The Committee note that FCI is a „No Profit No Loss‟ organization and i s a 100% subsidized 
Corporation. As such, the commercial practices applied to other CSPUs set up with profit motives and 
adding value to its shareholders cannot be applied to FCI. The objective of the Government is not to make 
profit by procuring food grains at a lower cost and selling it at a higher price. The  stated objectives of the 
government is to (i) provide remunerative production cost to farmers by ensuring payment of Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) (ii) provide foodgrain to public at large at subsidiz ed price and (iii) maintain buffer 
stock and strategic reserve of foodgrain for the country. FCI executes Government welfare programs and 
fulfils it social objectives and thus is not a profit oriented entity. In case all the provisions of the 
Companies Act are made applicable to FCI, it may materially impact the subsidy calculation and will have 
financial implications on Government of India. The Corporation is governed under Food Corporation Act 
1964 and many provisions of the Companies Act 2013 are not app lied to it and some additions/ deletions/ 
modifications have been done in the financial statements of FCI in consultation with C&AG keeping in 
view the Act and the special nature of operations entrusted to FCI. 
23. The Committee note that the sources of fi nance of FCI are mainly through equity share capital, 
cash credit constituting long term bonds, ways and means advance (WMA)/ unsecured short term 
advances and the National Small Saving Fund. The total budget of FCI constitutes Sales and Subsidy. The 
budget of FCI was Rs. 134762 crore during 2014 -15, Rs. 131694 Crore during 2015 -16, Rs. 131053 Crore 
during 2016 -17, 133912 Crore during 2017 -18, Rs. 156272 Crore during 2018 -19 and Rs. 166085 Crore 
during 2019-20. There is no consistency in the sales figures.  However, the subsidy has been constantly 
rising since 2015 -16.  The subsidy  was Rs, 102425 Crore during 2015 -16, Rs. 109136 Crore during 2016 -
17, Rs. 116282 Crore during 2017 -18, Rs. 131787 during 2018 -19, Rs. 140928 during 2019 -20. There are 
three components of subsidy viz. consumer subsidy, buffer subsidy and losses. The rise in subsidy as 
explained by FCI is due to the increase in MSP every year. The Committee note that the MSP of wheat that 
was Rs. 1120 per quintal in 2010 -11 has gone up to Rs. 1840 p er quintal in 2018 -19 indicating a rise in 
64.3% over a period of 9 years. Similarly, MSP of common paddy that was Rs. 1000 per quintal in 2010 -11 
has increased to Rs. 1750 per quintal indicating an increase of 75% over the same period. The increase is 
also due to storage charges on the stock held in excess to the stocking norms. For instance, the 
Committee observed that as against stock holding norms of 276 LMT of wheat and 135 LMT of rice, FCI 
held wheat stock of 458 LMT and rice stocks of 354 LMT by the end of March 2020. 
24. The Committee further note that the Government sanctioned a loan of Rs. 65,000 Crore to FCI 
from National Small Saving Funds (NSSF) in 2017 -18. During the same year FCI had made short term 
borrowing of Rs. 82376.48 Crore from Banks. FCI explained that the Rs. 65,000 Crore sanctioned to FCI 
during 2017-18 were book adjustments with no cash release. These loans were sanctioned for reversal of 
subsidy released to FCI and converting them into NSSF loans or for rollover/ recovery of previo us NSSF 
loans/ WMAs released to FCI. Similarly the Short term loans (STL) from banks was taken to meet working 
capital requirement and cash flow mismatch. The Committee note that as on 30 October 2019, FCI had an 
outstanding short term loans (STL) of Rs. 4,700 Crore that rose to  Rs. 40,700 Crore as on 31 March 2020. 
 
Fixation of economic cost of foodgrains 
25. The Committee note that the “economic cost” of foodgrains comprises of (i) pooled cost of 
foodgrains (ii) procurement incidentals consisting of statutory charges, gunny cost and others (iii) freight 
(iv) interest (v) handling charges (vi) storage charges (vii) administrative expenses and (viii) operational 
losses. The difference between Economic Cost and Central Issue Price is reimbursed to FCI in  the form of 
“Subsidy.”  The Committee‟s  analysis of the  data furnished by FCI reveals that the MSP of wheat per 
quintal during 2017-18 was Rs. 1625 per quintal. The Acquisition Cost of Wheat during the same year was 
Rs. 1891 per quintal which included Rs . 1587.90 of pooled cost of wheat and Rs. 303.91 on procurement 
incidentals. The distribution cost of wheat was Rs. 406.11 per quintal.  Thus, the Economic Cost of wheat 

91 
 
was Rs. 2297.92 per quint al during 2017-18 against MSP of  Rs. 1625 per quintal.  Similarly, the economic 
cost of wheat during 2018 -19 was Rs. 2505.67 against an MSP of Rs. 1735 declared by the 
Government.  Further, an analysis of data on the Economic Cost of rice reveals that that the economic 
cost of Rice during 2017 -18 was Rs. 3280.31 aga inst and MSP of Rs. 1550 per quintal.  Similarly, the 
Economic Cost of rice during 2018 -19 was Rs. 3472.94 against an MSP of Rs. 1750 per quintal.  The 
Committee express their apprehension that the norms adopted for calculation of the procurement 
incidentals, distribution costs for ascertaining the economic cost of wheat and rice apparently are on the 
higher side and therefore the Government is bearing expenditure in the form of Subsidy almost two times 
more than the MSP declared for rice and one and a half  times more than the MSP of the wheat.  The 
Committee therefore strongly recommend that the entire mechanism and the system of costing under 
different Heads as Acquisition cost and Distribution cost of the foodgrains need to be thoroughly 
reviewed with a view to reduce substantially the financial burden on public exchequer. 
26. The Committee are also surprised to note that the pooled cost of rice fixed for determination of 
Economic Cost of rice is almost one and a half times more than the MSP declared.  Whi le the costing has 
been made for all services involved right from the stage of procurement to the stage of distribution such 
as statutory charges, gunny cost, freight, interest, handling charges, storage charges, administrative 
expenses and operational los ses etc., the Committee are not able to comprehend as to why then the 
pooled cost is separately shown one and a half times more than the MSP.  The Committee therefore 
desire the Government to explain the reasons for adopting such method of costing and also  to take 
corrective measures if the costing system is deficient on any accounts.   
 
Losses on  account of damages, storage and transit 
27. The Committee note that about 15066.86 MTS of food grains were damaged in FCI‟s own godowns 
during the period from 201 4-15 to 29 February 2020.  The damages during the same period in CWC 
godowns and SWC godowns were 11713.51 MTS and 12097.05 MTS respectively.  As informed to the 
Committee, there are no losses on account of rodents and also on account of storage. As per su bmission 
of FCI, there is a storage gain of 0.12 % during 2018 -19 due to the fact that wheat gains weight as it 
absorbs moisture and rice loses moisture.  The Committee however note that the losses on account of 
transit are 0.28% and in terms of money, FCI  is losing annually about Rs. 300 crores due to this. The 
reasons for transit losses are stated to be on account of multiple handling, poor texture of gunnies, 
accentuated  use of iron hooks, poor quality wagons, en -route pilferages, inadequate security at  rail 
points, etc. The Committee while taking note of the various measures taken to prevent the losses on 
account of damages, storage and transit, express their opinion that the annual financial loss of Rs. 300 
crores on account of transit alone is really worrisome.  The Committee therefore recommend that 
concrete steps need to taken to strengthen the storage and transport management system in such a way 
as to minimize losses on these accounts.   
 
Quality checks of foodgrains 
28. The Committee note that with a view to introduce mechanized process for quality checking, FCI 
has purchased 30 Computerized Rice Analysers (Annadarpan SMART) developed by Centre for 
Development of Advance Computing (CDAC), Kolkata and made it available to 30 locations of 07 major 
procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra 
Pradesh during Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) 2017 -18 and rice acceptance at these location were 
carried out through Computerized Rice Analysers (CRA).  During KMS 2018 -19, the CRAs were shifted to 
bigger centres and rice acceptance were carried out through it. The Committee note that FCI has entered 
into an agreement with CFTRI, Mysuru for providing consultancy services for moderniz ing FCI 

92 
 
laboratories. The CNP Agreement was signed by both the parties and fresh tender was floated on 
10.12.2018 for supply of major laboratory equipment regarding which the technical bid was opened on 
03.01.2019 and technical evaluation was being done by  the Technical Evaluation Committee. The 
Committee further learn that funds allocated for modernization of its lab at Gurugram could not be utilized 
and hence the remaining budget was allocated for modernisation of QC Lab at IFS Gurugram.  The 
Committee are in agreement with the view of FCI that there is no proven technology even in the advanced 
countries to check the quality of foodgrains and the present CRA technology having its limitations. Yet 
the Committee feel that quality of such huge quantities of f ood grains cannot be ensured through 
physical human inspection but can only be ensured by quality checks through technological intervention. 
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in the agreement signed with CFTRI, Mysuru. The 
Committee recommend that the modernization of FCI labs need to be taken up on priority and a suitable 
technology need to be developed for the purpose to ensure the effective quality checks of foodgrains so 
as to make available the better quality food stuffs to the intende d beneficiaries including poor families in 
the country. 
 
Reducing the quantum of Non-issuable food grains 
29. The Committee note that foodgrains that do not conform to  FSSAI norms and further cannot be 
reconditioned for normal issue are considered as 'non-issuable' and are classified under various 
categories such as Feed I, II, III, Industrial Use, Manure and are disposed off through tender enquiry 
system after fixing reserve price.  The Committee also note that scientific management and preservation 
of stock of food grains minimizes the quantum of non -issuable food grains. Besides, quality checks in 
procurement are also undertaken to ensure that anything below the specified quality are not accepted in 
the Central Pool and quality checks of foodgrains a lso done by third parties. Samples of foodgrains 
procured & stored in FCI godowns are periodically referred to FSSAI notified NABL accredited labs for 
quality checks.  However, despite, so many measures taken, the Committee note that 6274.774 MTs of 
wheat was found non-issuable during 2014-15 and 4845.978 MTs during 2016 -17. Similarly 18236.025 MTs 
of Rice was found non -issuable during 2014 -15.  The Committee do not understand how foodgrains 
become non-issuable especially when so many measures and quality c hecks are being undertaken from 
time to time for ensuring quality and the stocks are being disposed off on the principle of First  In& First 
Out (FIFO) and planned liquidation of older crop year stocks being done by FCI on top priority. Although 
the data r eflects considerable reduction in non -issuable foodgrains during 2017 -18, the quantum of non -
issuable foodgrains had increased during 2018 -19.  The Committee would like to be apprised in detail 
about the reasons for such situation and urge the FCI to effec tively manage the stocks of the foodgrains 
so that quantum of non -issuable foodgrains are minimized.  The Committee further desire the FCI to 
develop a scientific system to achieve this objective. 
 
Computerization and Modernization of Depots 
30. The Committee note that 561 Depots/Godowns are owned by FCI, 191 D epots/Godowns are owned 
by the Central Warehousing Corporation and 702 Depots/Godowns are owned by the State Warehousing 
Corporations. FCI has implemented the Depot Online System (DOS) Application to automate all the 
operations at FCI Depots with the vision to transform the food supply chain management through 
innovative use of technology for ensuring transparency, reliability and efficiency in their procurement, 
storage and distribution operations. The other objectives of the project include standardization and 
automation of depots level processes, enablement of real time monitoring of operations, timely data 
reporting, data based decision support system and effective planning and optimization of adm inistrative 
works.  Further FCI is also implementing Food & Essential Commodities Assurance & Security Target  

93 
 
(FEAST) application of NIC for managing the supply chain of Public Distribution System across 16 
States/UTs. They also plan to integrate FEAST to DOS that will ensure transmission of indent related 
information from FEAST to Depot Online System (DOS) and then the Release Order related information 
from DOS to FEAST. Similarly, the CWC has implemented WMS application in its Depots that need to be 
integrated with DOS.  The Committee however learn that the DOS is currently operational in only 533 FCI 
Depots and 144 CWC Depots. As per the information  furnished to the Committee,  all SWC godowns 
hired by FCI were to be brought online on DOS by the 1 st of April 2020  but the updated status of actual 
progress made in this regard is not known.  The Committee observe that the online computerized system  
will ensure that the Government has the real time data/information on the quantity of availability of 
foodgrains in the stocks in their Depots/Godowns which will help in taking timely and quick decisions on 
various related issues. The Committee are thus of the considered view that unless all the 
Depots/Godowns are fully computerized and modernized, the main objec tives of implementing Depot 
Online System by FCI will not be materialized.  The Committee therefore recommend the Government to 
expedite  not only the computerization and modernization processes in all the Depots/Godowns of FCI, 
CWC and SWCs but also the i ntegration work  of DOS with FEAST in a time bound manner preferably 
within 6 months‟ time so that the intended benefits of the  online foodgrain management system could be 
fully achieved  at the country level in near future. 
 
Incentivising Crop Diversification 
31. The Committee note that the procurement of wheat and rice is open ended which implies that 
whatever comes from the farmers for sale has to be procured at Minimum Support Price(MSP).  The larger 
quantity of procurement definitely results in higher  financial burden  on the Government in the form of 
subsidy. As per the data furnished to the Committee, every year the procurement is nearly 40 LMT higher 
than the buffer stocking norms which increases the expenditure on storage costs.  Also, due to exces s 
stocks, there are chances of the stocks getting spoiled. As per estimation submitted before the 
Committee, approximately Rs. 2 lakh crore excess stocks are there and therefore it is high time for giving 
a serious thinking by the Government for promoting cultivation of other commercial crops by 
incentivizing the farmers.  The other aspect is that rice and wheat being water guzzling crops, their 
cultivation adversely impacts the water table in the wheat and rice producing areas. The Committee 
however note t hat apart from the involvement of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution (CAF&PD), for the fixation of MSP and incentivising cultivation of oilseeds, pulses, millets 
and commercial crops, the Ministry of Agriculture also needs to be  consulted and taken into confidence 
for ensuring MSP to farmers on alternate crops other than rice and wheat. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government in consultation with both the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution and the Ministry of Agriculture needs to explore for developing a suitable programme 
for incentivising cultivation of crops like millet, oilseeds, pulses and other commercial crops.  
 
 VIGILANCE CASES 
32. The Committee note that as on 30 September 2019, there are 37 Major  and 155 Minor vigilance 
cases pending with FCI. The number of cases reported every year are enormously high considering that 
in 2017 alone 64 major cases and 753 minor cases were reported . In 2018-19, there were 92 major and 736 
minor cases reported. And as on 30 September 2019, 48 major and 326 minor cases were reported. The 
Committee note that although FCI has tried to quickly dispose off many cases every year, yet the number 
of fresh ca ses reported every year are surprisingly very high. One of the reasons for recurrence of the 
cases could be either FCI taking a lenient view while disposing of the cases or sufficient harsher 
punishment not being levied on the charged officer. This is subs tantiated by the fact that more than 800 

94 
 
fresh cases are being reported by FCI every year.  Such unpleasant scenario is despite FCI taking many 
preventive measures for non -occurrence of such cases in matters related to procurement, storage, 
contracts, transportation/ movement, distribution and on labour issues. The Committee understand that 
incidence of corruption/ malpractice are high as FCI is a large organisation with about 21,000 staff and 
about 38,000 number of Departmental Labour with most of its acti vities having direct staff and public 
interface. The Committee are of the view that such high incidence of corruption in FCI not only reflects a 
bad reputation about the organisation but also raises apprehensions on the efforts made by the 
Government to fi ght corruption. The Committee rec ommend that there should be zero leniency and zero 
tolerance on corruption and incidence of malpractice/ corruption should be dealt strictly, meting with 
harsher punishment  to deter officials in repeating the offence. 
 
Settlement of Audit Paras and Dues from CPSUs 
33. The Committee note that during 2015 -16, two performance and three Commercial Audit reports 
were issued by C&AG. The major observations pertained to serious issues  such as incidental charges, 
commission to soc ieties, suboptimal utilisation of silos, management of gunny bags and road transport 
contracts, etc.  The Committee however noted that C&AG had raised nearly 113 paras on FCI in their 
reports between 2013 to 2018. Out of the 113 paras raised, only 12 paras  have been closed and 89 paras 
are pending with the Ministry and the C&AG. 12 paras are still pending reply of FCI.  The Committee is of 
the view that the number of audit paras reflects the commission, ommissions and violations on the part of 
the organisation that has to be rectified/ streamlined at the earliest. The Committee further note that out 
of the 44 paras raised by C&AG during 2015, 30 paras are still pending with the Ministry & C&AG and 6 
paras are still pending reply from FCI.  Similarly out of t he 54 paras raised by C&AG during 2017, 51 are 
still pending with the Ministry.  This reflects slackness and non -seriousness of the FCI/ Ministry on the 
observations of the C&AG.  The Committee strongly recommend expediting settlement of pending audit 
paras of C&AG preferably within 03 months. 
 
34. The Committee further note that dues amounting to Rs. 92.18  Crore from MMTC, Rs. 6.64 Crore 
from STC and Rs. 6.65 Crore from PEC are pending payment to FCI despite regular persuasion by the 
Corporation. The dues relate to export of wheat during the period  2012 to 2014.  As per the reply 
furnished by FCI, the matter regarding settlement of claim of MMTC has been referred to the Ministry of 
CAF&PD while the matter of STC and PEC is being pursued.  The Committee recommend that all out 
efforts be made to recov er or settle the pending dues of Rs. 105.40 Crore from the concerned CPSUs that 
has been pending since the last 6-8 years and FCI is might be losing huge interest on it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
7 January, 2021                  Chairperson 
17 Pausha, 1942 (S)                                              Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

95 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2019-2020) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 14 th October 2019 from 1435 hrs to  
1600 hrs in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi   -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari            - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal -  Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad                -           Additional Director 
                           
 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
 3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
5. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
6. Shri Janardan Mishra 
7. Prof. Saugata Roy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8.  Mohd. Ali Khan 
9.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
10.  Shri Mahesh Poddar 
11.  Shri A.K. Selvaraj 

96 
 
 REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, t he Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and representatives of 
the Food Corporation of India to the sitting convened to have  a briefing on the subject 'Food Corporation of India.'  
She then drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding maintaining 
confidentiality of evidence tendered before the Parliamentary Committees.  
 
3. The CMD, 'Food Corporation of India'  and other senior officers first introduced themselves to the 
Committee and then gave a power point presentation on the subject highlighting their mandate, organisational 
structure, operations, policy framework, procurement policy, zer o loss on account of storage capacity and MSP of 
Wheat/Rice, Procurement vis -a-vis requirements, stock position in Central Pool, measures for improving 
performance, sources of Finance, reduction in transit and handling losses, etc. 
 
 4. Thereafter, the Chairperson sought information on the vacancies in the Board of Directors, applicability of 
Corporate Governance Guidelines, rationale of appointing two members from State Governments, criteria 
involved in their selection, measures taken to fill -up the vacanc ies in the Board, norms for holding minimum 
number of meetings of the Board in a year, reasons for managing the corporation with 50 per - cent of its staff 
strength, justification for huge sanctioned labour strength, mechanism involved in engagement of labo urers, 
devising of process for compliance of labour laws, the number of registered Unions/ Associations, details of court 
cases pending, recommendations made by the High level committee constituted by the Government on FCI and 
the status of its implementat ion, details of pending vigilance cases and concrete measures taken to finalise the 
cases, measures taken to prevent their recurrence, online feedback mechanism or helpline for registering 
grievances/ complaints from contractors, labourers, farmers in dist ress and general public, status of pending Audit 
paras and steps taken to settle them, etc.  The Chairperson, also sought information on the shares of Centre and 
State governments in food subsidies, investments in logistics made by Food Corporation of India, godowns/sheds 
under construction by FCI, involvement of private sector in construction and maintenance of godowns , 
mechanism to clean -up  the godowns and their management, evolve new methodology for identification of old 
stock of foodgrains, mechanisms  used for marking the produce and efficient utilisation of the green waste that is 
generated by Food Corporation of India .  She also sought clarifications on the decentralised procurement and its 
impact on the Food Corporation of India, viability of a Cent re-State Co-operation model for effective management, 
comparative analysis of food distribution and procurement system of India with those in other countries, etc.   
5. Members, thereafter, raised several queries on problems faced by farmers across the coun try during 
procurement, role played by FCI in procurement and distribution of food grains, problems faced by FCI during 
storage of food grains, distress sale of food grains, diversion of excess storage from Food Corporation of India, 
charging for gunny bag s, malpractices in Food Corporation of India and measures adopted by FCI to counter 
     1. Shri D.V. Prasad                         -       CMD 
     2. Shri B.S. Mohapatra                   -        Executive Director (F) 
     3. Shri C.L. Ram                             -        Executive Director (P&R) 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar                         -         Executive Director (IA) 
5. Shri Sudeep Singh                     -         Executive Director (QC) 

97 
 
them.  They also sought information on monitoring mechanism for inspection and management of godowns, 
weighing machines installed at godowns, method adopted for weighing fo odgrains, land acquisition issues faced 
by Food Corporation of India for construction of godowns, utilisation of railways spare land for building of 
godowns, Hub and Spoke model for divisional offices, accounting procedure adopted by Food Corporation of 
India as a no profit-no loss corporation, taking steps for reducing transportation cost , etc.   
  
6. The representatives of the Food Corporation of India clarified some issues on which information was 
readily available with them.  In respect of points for wh ich information was not readily available, the Chairperson 
directed that written replies may be furnished to the Committee Secretariat by 30 October, 2019.   
  
7. The Committee also decided to take up some major Public Sector Undertakings of strategic impo rtance 
for detailed examination, if required, in future. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
  

98 
 
APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2019-2020) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 16 th March 2020 from 1510 Hrs. to  
1600 Hrs. in Committee Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
      
 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. 
4. 
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
5. Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
Prof. Saugata Roy 
Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
Shri Ravneet Singh 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
13. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
14. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
 
 

99 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                  -         Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal          - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou               - - Additional Director 
4. Shri G.C. Prasad                - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA (FCI) 
1 Shri D.V. Prasad   - Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri Sanjiv Kumar        -  Executive Director (Procurement) 
3. Shri B.S. Mohapatra            -  Executive Director (Finance) 
4. Shri Ajay Kumar         - Executive Director (Internal Audit) 
 
2. At the outset, t he Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and representatives of 
the Food Corporation of India to the sitting convened to have evidence on the subject 'Food Corporation of India.'  
She then drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions  by the Speaker' regarding maintaining 
confidentiality of evidence tendered before the Parliamentary Committees.  
 
3. The CMD, 'Food Corporation of India'  and other senior officers first introduced themselves to the 
Committee and then gave a power point presentation on the subject highlighting their mandate, organizational 
structure, operations, policy framework, procurement policy, zero loss on account of storage capacity and MSP of 
Wheat/Rice, Procurement vis -a-vis requirements, stock position in Central Pool, measures for improving 
performance, sources of Finance, reduction in transit and handling losses, etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson sought inform ation whether FCI is having sufficient powers to undertake its 
functions effectively as per the FCI Act 1964. The Chairperson raised the point that since the procurement, 
storage, movement and distribution of food grains have been gradually decentralized b y the Government of India, 
by giving the responsibility of procurement, storage and distribution to more and more State Governments through 
a mode of decentralized procurement scheme what role does FCI have in the future management of Food 
Security in the country and in spite of overall less procurement and less quantum of distribution, the overall 
expenditure has still remained the same. The Chairperson, also sought information on  infusion of Rs. 6,500 crore 
equity in FCI to shore up its authorized capital  from Rs. 3,500 crore to Rs. 10,000 crore, the expansion of 
activities planned to be undertaken with the enhanced capital, status of the vigilance cases pending with FCI and 
what concrete action has been taken to prevent their recurrence.  
5. Members, ther eafter, raised several queries on status of stocks with FCI, percentage of covered and 
uncovered storage, quantum of grains that is going to be procured going forward, how much of the food subsidy is 

100 
 
still pending with the government, shortage of funds dur ing procurement season, how much grain is lost every 
year because of poor storage facilities, procurement of perishable items, procurement of millets, public private 
participation in building storage facilities, crop diversification for farming and procure ment ,shift in cropping 
patterns, MSP and output subsidy, auction of excess stocks and ethanol blending of excess grains.   
 
6. The representatives of the Food Corporation of India clarified some issues on which information was 
readily available with them.  In respect of points for which information was not readily available, the Chairperson 
directed that written replies may be furnished to the Committee within a week.    
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
  

101 
 
APPENDIX-III 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2019-2020) 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 18 th March 2020 from 1520 Hrs. to  
1640 Hrs. in Committee Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                  -         Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal          - Director 
3. Shri Khakhai Zou                - Additional Director 
4. Shri G.C. Prasad                - Additional Director 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Kunwar Danish Ali 
 3. 
 4. 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
5. Shri Janardan Mishra 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Dr. Anil Jain 

102 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) & FCI 
 
1. Shri Edwin Kulbhushan   - Additional Secretary, Policy & FCI 
2. Shri Gudey Srinivas     -  Additional Secretary, DF&PD 
3. Shri S. Jagannathan           -  Joint Secretary, DF&PD 
4. Shri Piush Kumar Gupta     - Chief Vigilance Officer, FCI 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and representatives of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Food & Public Dis tribution) & Food 
Corporation of India to the sitting convened to have evidence on the subject 'Food Corporation of India.'  She then 
drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding maintaining confidentiality of 
evidence tendered before the Parliamentary Committees. 
 
3. The Additional Secretary (Policy and FCI), Department of Food and Public Distribution and other senior 
officers first introduced themselves to the Committee and then gave a power point presentation on th e subject 
highlighting their mandate, organizational structure, operations, budgeting, funding, policy framework, 
procurement policy, depot online system, capacity utilization, etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson sought information regarding the replies furnished by Department and asked 
why FCI is unable to fully comply with the guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises as the Corporation has 
been framed under the provisions of Food  Corporation Act, 1964. The Committee also asked whether the 
applicability of other provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 have been examined by the Department, so that the 
Corporation could re -orient their functions in broader perspective. The Chairperson also enquired about the 
advantages or disadvantages if the Companies Act is made applicable to FCI.  
 
5. The Committee also raised queries regarding provision for grievance redressal online mechanism for 
registration and tracking of complaints/grievances f rom workers, farmers and other stakeholders, the number of 
households which have been considered eligible under Antyodaya Anna Yojana and Priority Household Scheme 
and getting benefit of these schemes for the last three years. The Committee would also like  to know as being the 
administrative Ministry, how often they are holding meetings with FCI Management and also what system is being 
followed for assessing the performance of FCI. 
 
6. Members, thereafter, raised several queries on status of stocks with FCI , percentage of covered and 
uncovered storage, quantum of grains that is going to be procured going forward, how much of the food subsidy is 
still pending with the government, shortage of funds during procurement season, how much grain is lost every 
year b ecause of poor storage facilities, procurement of perishable items, procurement of millets, public private 
participation in building storage facilities, crop diversification for farming and procurement ,shift in cropping 
patterns, MSP and output subsidy, auction of excess stocks and ethanol blending of excess grains.   

103 
 
 
7. The representatives the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution  (Department of Food & 
Public Distribution) & Food Corporation of India  clarified some issues on which information was readily available 
with them.  In respect of points for which information was not readily available, the Chairperson directed that 
written replies may be furnished to the Committee within a week.    
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/---------------------/ 
 

104 
 
APPENDIX IV 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021)   
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 7 th January, 2021 from 1210 Hrs. to  
1310 Hrs. in Committee Room „3‟, Ground Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension (New Building), 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
     2. 
     3. 
     4. 
     5. 
Shri Arjunlal Meena 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
Prof. Saugata Roy 
Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
6. 
7. 
8. 
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. 
10. 
11. 
 
 
Shri Prasanna Acharya 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
 
 

105 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED (NTPC) 
 
          ****                                                           ****                                                                **** 
         ****                                                          ****                                                                  **** 
2. At the outset, t he Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
about the agenda for the sitting.  As a first agenda item, the Chairperson proposed for consideration and adoption 
of the draft reports on the following subjects:- 
           (i)     Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
 (ii)    Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) 
 (iii)    Food Corporation of India (FCI) 
 (iv)    Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
 (v)     NBCC (India) Limited 
(vi) Action taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second 
Report (16th LS) of the Committee on Public U ndertakings on “Financing of Renewable Energy Projects by Indian 
Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (based on Performance Audit Report No.12 of 2015)”.  
(vii)    Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tw enty-fourth 
Report (16th LS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Review of Loss Making CPSUs”.  
   
3.  The Committee then considered the aforesaid draft reports and adopted it without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized th e Chairperson to finalize the report on the basis of 
factual verification by the concerned Ministry/Department and consider for presenting the reports to Hon‟ble 
Speaker since Parliament is not in session. 
 
(The representatives of NTPC were then called in) 
 
4. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
5. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
6. ****                                                      ****                                                **** 
7. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri R.C. Tiwari         -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda                 - Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad - Additional Director 
 

106 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 