i
 
 
1
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NBCC (INDIA) LIMITED
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2021
-
22
)
 
 
FIFTEENTH
 
REPORT
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 


ii
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT
 
 
 
   
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
(2021
-
22)
 
 
 
             
(SEVENTEENTH 
LOK
 
SABHA)
 
 
 
 
NBCC (INDIA) LIMITED
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommen
dations 
contained in the Fifth
 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
on NBCC 
(India) Limited
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
 
24 
March, 2022
 
Laid i
n Rajya Sabha on 24 
March, 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
March, 2022/ Chaitra
, 19
43(Saka
)
 
 
 


iii
 
 
CPU No. 1036
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs
...... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (.....Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi
-
110 002.
 
 
 
 
 

iv
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
PAGE
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021
-
22)
 
          
IV
 
INTRODUCTION
 
V
 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT
 
1
 
CHAPTER 
II
   
Observations/
Recommendations which have been 
accepted 
by the Government
 
  
15
 
CHAPTER III  
Observations/Recomme
ndations which the Committee do     
not desire to pursue in view of the Government Replies
 
  
64
 
CHAPTE
R 
IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
    
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
and which require reiteration
 
  
65
 
CHAPTER 
V  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
      
Government has furnished interim replies
 
 
  
66
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
 
I.
 
Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 
16
 
Februa
ry,
 
2022
.                       63
 
 
II.
 
Analysis of the 
Action Taken by the Government
 
 
on the Observations/
Recommendation contained in the 
 
Ninth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings on 
 
New India Assurance Company Limited.
   
                                        
            
65
 
 
 

v
 
 
C
OMPOSITION OF
 
COMMITTEE
 
ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (202
1
-
22
)
 
 
*Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar    
 
 
-
 
       
Chairperson
 
 
Members
 
Lok Sabha
 
 
2.   
 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
 
3.    
Dr.
 
Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
 
4
.   
 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
 
5
.   
 
Smt. K. Kanimozhi
 
6
.   
 
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
 
7.   
 
Shri Arjunlal Meena
 
8.  
  
Shri Janardan Mishra 
 
9.   
 
Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
 
11.  Shri
 
Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 
 
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh
 
Bittu
 
 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
14.  Shri 
Uday Pratap Singh 
 
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
16.  
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
 
17.  Shri Anil Desai
 
18.  
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain
 
19. 
 
Shri 
Om Prakash Mathur
 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
 
 
21.  Shri 
K.C. Ramamurthy
 
22.  Shri M. 
Shanmugam
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar appointed as Chairperson, COPU w
.
e
.
f
.
 
13 August, 2021 
vice 
Smt 
Meenakashi Lekhi appointed as Minister
 
on 07 July, 2021
.
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri R.C. Tiwari
 
           
-
        
 
Additional Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri 
 
G.C. Prasad
 
           
-
         
Additional Director
 
 
3.
 
Smt. Mriganka Achal
 
-
        
  
Deputy Secretary
 
4.
 
Shri Haokip Kakai
          
   
  
-
        
  
Executive Officer
 

vi
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifteenth Report 
on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the 
Fift
h Re
port of the Committee on Public Undertakings (
17
th
 
Lok Sabha) on
 
“NBCC 
(India) Limited”.
 
 
2.
 
The 
Fifth 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings
 
(17
th
 
Lok Sabha)
 
was 
presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on
 
24 March, 2021
. 
The 
Action taken Replies to all the 37 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on 19 August, 2021.
 
 
3.
 
The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on
       
16 February
, 2022
.
 
The minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix
-
I.
 
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 
Fifth 
Report of the 
Committee (17
th
 
Lok Sabha
) is 
given in A
ppendix 
-
II
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Ne
w Delhi
;
 
             
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR
 
 
  
 
22
 
March
,
 
20
22
 
       
Chairperson,
 
   
01 Chaitra
, 1943
(S)
 
Committee on Public Undertakings.
 
 
 
 
 
 

1
 
 
CHAPTER   I
 
 
 
D R A F T     R E P O R T
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2020
-
21) on “
NBCC (India) Limited
” 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on the 29
th 
 
January 2021.
 
 
2.
 
The Report contained Thirty
-
seven Observations/Recommendations. Action 
Taken notes have been received from the Government i
n respect of all the Thirty
-
seven 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:
 
 
(i)
 
Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II)
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 
27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.1 and 36.2.                                                                          
 
(Total 31)
 
 
(ii)
 
Observations / Recommendations w
hich the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III)
 
 
Sl. Nos. 22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
                                        
(Total 1)
 
 
 
(iii)
 
Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV)
 
 
Sl. Nos. 3, 7, 24, 25, and 30      
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 
(Total 5)
 
 
(iv)
 
Observations / Recommendations to which the Government have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil    
 
      
                                                         
 
 
(Total 0)
 
 
3.
 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs to furnish 
Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Repor
t within three months of the presentation of 
the Report to Parliament.
 
 
4. 
 
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs.
 
 
 
 
 

2
 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 
 
(Recommendation 
Serial No. 3)
 
 
5. 
 
The Committee in their Fifth Report had recommended the following with regard 
to the Board of Directors in NBCC (India) Limited:
-
 
 
"
The Committee note that the Board of NBCC comprises the sanctioned posts of 
4 Functional Directors, 2 Gov
ernment Nominee Directors and 6 Independent 
Directors. The Committee however observe that out of the 6 posts of 
Independent Directors, only one post has been filled
-
up and 5 posts are 
remaining vacant for more than a year. Regarding the large number of vac
ancies 
of the Independent Directors, the Committee was informed that the position of 
Independent Directors of the company got vacant due to completion of their 
tenures on 15 June 2019 and that requests had been made from time to time to 
the administrative 
Ministry for appointment of requisite number of Independent 
Directors including one Woman Independent Director on the Board of the 
Company. The Committee observe that though one Independent Woman 
Director has been appointed with effect from 1st August 2019
, the appointment of 
other Independent Directors are however yet to be made. The Committee 
observe that as per the guidelines issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises vide their OM 
No.18(6)/91
-
GM d
ated 16.03.1992, a panel of suitable persons who could be 
considered for appointment of non
-
official part time Directors on the Boards of 
PSEs is to be be maintained centrally by the Department of Public Enterprises 
and this panel is to be be prepared in c
onsultation with PESB and the Secretary 
of the concerned administrative Ministry. This Committee also in their Fourth 
Report (Twelfth Lok Sabha) had expressed their opinion that shortage of non
-
official Directors on the Board deprives the Undertaking of ex
pert guidance of 
seasoned professionals and technocrats and the Committee had therefore 
recommended in the said Report that the strength of non
-
official Directors in 
PSUs should be brought to the level stipulated in the guidelines without further 
loss of t
ime. The Committee strongly feel that Independent Directors act as a 
guide to the Company for bringing improvement in the corporate credibility and 
standards of governance. They also help the Company in bringing Independent 
judgment and act as a bridge bet
ween management and shareholders by 
encouraging the implementation of the principles of corporate governance 
ensuring accountability and transparency in the functioning of the Company and 
persuading for various mandatory disclosures. Taking into account th
e important 
role and significant contributions by Independent Directors, the Committee are of 
the strong view that vacancies of Independent Directors on the Board should not 
be left unfilled for long period of time as has happened in this case. The 
Committ
ee do not find any plausible explanation for non
-
filling of the vacancies of 
Independent Directors in NBCC for such a long period particularly when the 73 
DPE is expected to maintain a panel of suitable persons for such appointments. 
The Committee are of t
he definite opinion that since the tenure of the Directors 

3
 
 
was already known, the Government should have processed the appointment to 
these posts in advance so that the new incumbents could have taken up the 
posts immediately after these were vacated. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the vacant posts of Independent Directors be filled up by the 
Government immediately without any further loss of time and guidelines of DPE 
be scrupulously followed in the appointment of Directors on the Board 
of the 
Company. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter 
within a period of three months".
 
 
6. 
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as follows:
-
 
 
"
NBCC (India) Limited is a Government own
ed enterprise, the power to appoint 
functional/ Official, Part
-
time Directors/ non
-
Official Part
-
time Directors 
(Independent Directors) vests with the Government of India. The appointments of 
Directors are made by the Appointment Committee of Cabinet (ACC)
 
on 
recommendations of Administrative Ministry, i.e., Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs.
 
 
After vacancy of the position of Independent Directors due to completion of 
tenure of six (6) Independent Directors, requests have already been made by 
NBCC to th
e Administrative Ministry, i.e., Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) through various letter correspondence dated February 24, 2021, 
December 2, 2020, November 2, 2020, October 7, 2020, August 27, 2020, May 
23, 2020, February 25, 2020, February 7,
 
2020 November 7, 2019, October 21, 
2019; August 27, 2019; July 26, 2019; February 18, 2019 and January 02, 2019 
for appointment of requisite number of independent Directors (including one
-
Woman Independent Director) on the Board of the Company. Further, N
ational 
Stock Exchange (NSE) and BSE India Limited (BSE) sought clarification several 
times and levied penalty due to non
-
compliance on Composition of Board and 
constitution of Statutory Committees (Audit Committee and Nomination & 
Remuneration Committee).
 
In view of the above, NBCC duly clarified to NSE and 
BSE  several times and submitted reply that being a Government owned 
enterprise, the power to appoint functional/ Official, Part
-
time Directors/ non
-
Official Part
-
time Directors (Independent Directors) 
vests with the Government of 
India. The appointments of directors are made by the ACC on recommendations 
of Administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. Further, the 
same was informed to Administrative Ministry also".
 
 
7.
 
The Committee in their report had observed that out of the 06 posts of 
Independent Directors on the Board of NBCC, only 01 was filled up and had 
recommended to expedite the filling
-
up of all the vacant posts without any further 
loss of time.  However, as p
er the reply furnished by NBCC, now all the 06 posts 
of Independent Directors are lying vacant. Surprisingly, the Ministry of Housing 

4
 
 
and Urban Affairs despite being reminded by NBCC about 14 times during the last 
02 years does not seem to have taken any s
erious step to fill
-
up the vacant posts. 
Even the post of woman Director that is mandatory  to be filled up as per 
Companies Act 2013 and SEBI (LODR) Regulations has also not been filled up by 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  As informed to the 
Committee, the 
National Stock Exchange(NSE) and the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) had levied 
penalty on NBCC for non compliance of Companies Act in composition of the 
Board and also in constitution of Statutory Committees like Audit Committee and 
Nomination 
& Remuneration Committee.  The Committee express their 
displeasure over the approach of the Ministry for not taking any concrete action 
to fill
-
up the posts of Independent Directors in NBCC despite the imposition of 
penalty by NSE and BSE for non
-
complianc
e. The Committee take  serious  note 
of this situation and desire the Ministry to furnish an explanatory note on this 
issue. The Committee re
-
emphasize 
the need to set high standards of corporate 
governance in government owned companies and expects the Adm
inistrative 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and ACC to ensure compliance 
of the statutory Board norms by NBCC (India) Limited
.
 
 
PERFORMANCE   IN OVERSEAS PROJECTS
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 5 and 14)
 
8. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Re
port, had recommended the following with regard 
to the Performance of its overseas projects of NBCC (India) Ltd.:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC's core activities comprises three distinct 
verticals viz. (i) Project Management Consultancy (PMC), (ii) Engineering 
Procurement and Construction (EPC), and; (iii) Real Estate Development (RED). 
NBCCs PMC business consists 
of a wide range of management and consultancy 
services in civil construction projects and infrastructure projects. The 
Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) business involves project 
conceptualization, feasibility studies, detailed project report
s, design engineering, 
procurement and expeditious execution of projects. The NBCC entered the real 
estate segment in 1988 and has executed several commercial and residential 
projects. The NBCC has also started its global operations since 1997 and the 
Comp
any has executed diverse and complex projects in countries like Libya, 
Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, Mauritius, Turkey and Botswana. Presently, the 
Company has its presence in Maldives, Mauritius, Republic of Niger, Dubai and 
Seychelles where it is impleme
nting various projects. The Committee further 
observe that the NBCC have secured overseas projects in the several African 

5
 
 
countries namely Gambia, Liberia, Malawi, Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and 
Zambia but these projects are yet to start. The total value of
 
these projects is 
approximately Rs. 2,000 crore. The Committee are glad to note that NBCC has 
completed 24 overseas projects in different foreign countries during the period 
from 1994 to 2016. The Committee’s analysis of the overseas projects of NBCC 
sinc
e 2017 in Mauritius, Dubai, Niger, Seychelles, Gambia, Liberia, Malawi, 
Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and Zambia have been awarded to the NBCC 
through nomination from the Governments. The Committee observe that NBCC 
itself has admitted that they are facing the
 
challenges in the global market like 
regulatory variations, logistic challenges, need of strong financial and technical 
credentials as well as certified professionals, requirement of experience in 
international working system, shortage of skilled workforc
e etc. The NBCC, as 
informed to the Committee, is targeting African countries, Middle
-
East countries, 
CIS countries, Indian Ocean countries and SAARC countries to achieve its future 
objectives in international markets. The Committee feel that in the presen
t age of 
sharp competition among rival players for securing orders, the business will 
sustain only on the basis of better execution at competitive price and therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend that NBCC has to develop and enrich their 
core competen
ce to provide better quality services in lesser time and competitive 
cost than their competitors in the international market so that the NBCC could be 
able to secure the overseas projects with their own strength and capabilities by 
participating in the glo
bal tender process rather than being dependent on the 
government nomination for these international projects. ".
 
 
 
9. 
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have 
stated as follows:
-
 
 
"After Amendment in GFR
-
2017, the proje
cts secured on nomination basis have 
reduced considerably and NBCC is participating in the bids invited by Ministries 
/Departments /Institutions amongst CPSE/PSU.
 
 
Further to showcase company’s own strength and capabilities, NBCC’s recent 
overseas project 
namely 
–
 
MGICC, Niger and Supreme Court Building, Mauritius 
has been completed well ahead before the schedule time and with
-
in stipulated 
cost.
 
 
This has provided an edge and excellent credentials for exploring further 
business opportunities in overseas ma
rket.".
 
 
 
10.
 
With regard to completion of stressed projects of NBCC (India) Ltd., the 
Committee in their Fifth Report recommended as follows;
 
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC have successfully executed diverse and 
complex projects in countries like Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, Mauritius, 

6
 
 
Turkey and Botswana.  Presently, the Company has its presence in Maldives, 
Mauritius, Republic of Nig
er, Dubai and Seychelles where it is implementing 
various projects.  The Company has also secured overseas projects in several 
African countries like Gambia, Liberia, Malawi, Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and 
Zambia but these projects are yet to start.  The to
tal value of these projects is 
approximately Rs.2,000Crore.  The Committee note that the NBCC has 
generated turnover of Rs.2,000Crore. The Committee note that the NBCC has 
generated turnover of Rs.363.71 Crore from the International projects undertaken 
dur
ing the period from 2014
-
2019.  The Committee also note from the details 
furnished that many overseas projects of NBCC were scheduled for completion 
before or during the year 2020.  Some of them are (i) construction of Mahatma 
Gandhi International Conventi
on Centre at Niamey, Niger that was scheduled to 
be completed by 31 October 2019 with a value of Rs. 392 Crore, (ii) New 
Supreme Court Building, Port Louis, Mauritius that was scheduled to be 
completed by 24 December 2019, (iii) Social Housing at Dagotiere
 
and Mare 
Tabac, Mauritius that was scheduled for completion by 8 February 2020, and (iv) 
construction of Indian pavilion at Dubai World Expo that was scheduled to be 
completed by 31 August 2020 with a value of Rs.232.70 Crore.  The Committee 
further note 
that there are about 8 projects secured in Africa but yet to start as in 
some cases the soil and topographical survey, alternate land 
confirmation/allotment are awaited from the host countries.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the status of t
hese projects which were 
scheduled for completion before or during the year 2020.  The Committee 
recommends that NBCC should make a mark in the global markets and to 
achieve this goal, the Company should deliver the projects in time with better
-
quality exe
cution without any cost over
-
run".
 
 
11.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
 
"NBCC has already submitted the DPR of the mentioned projects secured in 
Africa to Ministry
 
of External Affairs (MEA). Further, NBCC is pursuingwith the 
Ministry of External Affairs to take forward these projects of MGCC in 8 countries 
in Africa.
 
 
NBCC has been making constant efforts to secure business in Overseas 
markets; and through this sust
ained efforts, NBCC is in discussion with Govt. of 
Maldives for theproject of 2,000 Social Housing at Hulhumale, Male, Maldives 
(costing approx. US$ 130 million), which is in final stages of approvals.
 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted 
for future compliance".
 
 
12. 
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed happiness on the 
point that NBCC had secured and executed a number of overseas projects in 
different foreign countries valuing about Rs. 2000 crore.  However, the Committee 

7
 
 
had observed that most of these projects were secured on government’s 
nomination rather than the Company’s own competence and strength.  The 
Committee had recommended NBCC to develop and enrich its core competence 
to provide better quality services in less
er time and competitive cost than their 
competitors in the international market in order to secure more overseas projects 
through open global tender process on its own strength and capabilities. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action tak
en reply have stated that 
after the amendment in GFR
-
2017, the projects secured on nomination basis have 
reduced considerably and NBCC to showcase its own strength and capabilities 
has completed the MGICC, Niger and Supreme Court Building, Mauritius projec
t 
well ahead of the scheduled time within the stipulated cost. The Committee, 
however, find from the reply that NBCC in support of its contention has neither 
furnished any fresh list of overseas projects obtained by it through open 
competitive bidding nor 
has stated to have taken any concrete steps by its 
Company to enrich its core competence in order to procure international 
business. Besides, NBCC has also not given the status of the overseas projects 
that were scheduled for completion during the last one
 
year  and the status of the 
overseas projects that could not start for various reasons in the past. 
Surprisingly, it is showcasing only two projects like MGICC, Niger and Supreme 
Court Building, Mauritius project which were obtained through government’s 
n
omination. In the absence of any tangible overseas business, the Committee are 
unable to make any estimate of the capabilities of NBCC in securing overseas 
projects on its own merit. The Committee, therefore, once again stress upon 
NBCC to develop and enri
ch its core competence to provide better quality 
services in lesser time and competitive cost than their competitors in the 
international market in
 
order to secure overseas projects on its own strength and 
capabilities to make a mark in global markets.
 
 
 
 

8
 
 
PHYSICAL  PERFORMANCE
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 6)
 
 
13.
 
With regards to the Physical Performance of the Company, the Committee, in 
their Fifth Report, had recommended the following to NBCC:
-
 
 
"The Committee’s analysis of the information submitted to them
 
about completion 
of the major projects of the value of Rs.50 crore each during the last 03 years 
reveals that the NBCC had completed 12 such projects in 2016
-
17, 25 projects in 
2017
-
18 and 24 projects during 2018
-
19. The Committee observe that there were 
164 ongoing projects of NBCC comprising 152 PMC projects, 7 EPC projects 
and 5 Real Estate projects. With regard to the due dates of completion of these 
164 ongoing projects, the Committee observe that 124 projects were scheduled 
to be completed before Sep
tember 2020 and 30 projects are to be completed by 
November 2020, 05 projects are on hold, there is a court case in one project and 
03 projects are under maintenance while in case of one project, the likely date of 
completion has not been indicated. The Co
mmittee hope that 154 ongoing 
projects which were tagged with the completion dates will be completed by 
NBCC as per the scheduled dates and expect that necessary steps will be taken 
to expedite sorting out the issues in respect of the remaining 10 projects
 
which 
do not have the completion dates for various reasons. The Committee may be 
apprised of the actual progress made in all these projects so far and also the 
steps taken to resolve the issues involved".
 
 
 
14. 
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
in their Action Taken reply, have 
stated as follows:
-
 
 
"The commitments were made in Nov’2019 and thereafter due to outbreak of 
Covid
-
19 pandemic, construction works of majority of the projects got affected 
and timeline have been disrupted. Extension of ti
me has been given to all 
contractors due to impact of pandemic in line with Govt. of India guidelines in this 
regard. The progress in respect of 10 projects which were on hold for long time 
due to various reasons is enclosed herewith in Annexure
-
I".
 
 
15.
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed their hope for timely 
completion of 154 projects of NBCC that were scheduled for completion before 
November 2020 and also for expeditious sorting out the issues in respect of 10 
other ongoing projects  f
or which completion dates were not fixed for various 
reasons.  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply 
have stated that due to outbreak of Covid
-
19 pandemic, construction works of 

9
 
 
majority of the projects got affected and time
line has been disrupted and 
extension of time was given to all contractors in line with Government of India 
guidelines.  The Committee, however, find that the list of pending ongoing 
projects indicating the revised timeline fixed by the Government has not 
been 
furnished in the reply furnished by the Ministry.  In the absence of project
-
wise 
revised timeline of completion of project, the Committee is unable to make an 
assessment of the progress made in the 154 projects.  The Committee emphasize 
the  Ministry
 
to continuously monitor all the pending projects of NBCC and 
expedite their completion within the revised timeline. The measures taken by the 
Ministry to expedite the completion of the projects and the revised timeline fixed 
by the Government on each of t
he 154 ongoing project in view of the outbreak of 
Covid
-
19 pandemic may also be furnished for the information of the Committee.
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 7 and 30)
 
 
16. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Report, had recommended the following with regard 
to t
he Physical Performance of NBCC (India) Ltd.:
-
 
 
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC had undertaken 185 projects during the 
period from the year 2014
-
19 and presently the Company has an order book of 
approximately Rs. 80,000 crore besides an international ord
er book of Rs. 2,000 
crore.  During examination of the subject, the Committee had found that the 
average rate of completion of project  of NBCC had been only Rs. 4000 crore per 
year and therefore had desired to know from NBCC the action plan for 
completing
 
the huge order book of Rs. 80,000 crore in a definite time frame.  The 
Committee was informed that execution of the works depends on the availability 
of incumbrance
-
free land, availability of funds from clients and getting statutory 
clearances from variou
s government bodies.  The major redevelopment projects 
of GPRA at New Delhi (Nauroji Nagar, Sarojini Nagar, Netaji Nagar) valuing 
more than Rs.30,000 crore are held up due to various petitions filed in the 
Hon’ble NGT and Hon’ble High Court of Delhi.  Furt
her, major projects of SDMC, 
New Delhi, WTC, Guwahati, DDA projects at Sanjay Lake, TrilokPuri, New Delhi, 
redevelopment projects of Railway Stations at various places in the country could 
not kick off due to various reasons. The Committee are of the opini
on that cost 
and time overrun for whatsoever reasons do leave its impact on the credentials 
of the Company and therefore, sustained efforts needs to be made to sort out 
various issues in a definite time frame.  The Committee feel that securing order is 
onl
y the beginning of the race and the real test lies in successful execution of the 
contacts to the satisfaction of the clients in the fixed timeline.  The huge order 
book of Rs.80,000 crore in domestic market and Rs.2,000 crore in international 

10
 
 
market while
 
on one side gives a great satisfaction for being able to secure such 
gigantic work order but on the other side it thrust upon the NBCC a greater 
responsibility to effectively encounter the challenges and meet the expectations 
of the clients by successfull
y executing these projects in the scheduled time.  The 
Committee therefore strongly recommends the NBCC to come out with a 
structured plan of action to timely deal with the complexities of the various issues 
involved including expediting the disposal of th
e pending court cases so that the 
projects could start early and completed within the allocated time
-
frame".
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have 
stated as follows:
-
 
 
"Timely execution of projects is prime fo
cus area of the company as on date. 
There are various complexities which are unique to each project which is being 
handled by structured action plan.
 
 
Re
-
organizing the major areas of execution is done at CMD/Directors level. 
System improvements in operati
ons are being reviewed periodically by a 
committee formed for the purpose. The standardization of brands/ makes for 
various materials and incorporation of advanced/new materials& faster 
construction technologies are also under implementation. The company i
s also 
executing major projects on EPC mode to avoid time & cost over runs.
 
 
There are numerous mandatory statutory approvals like building layout 
approval, tree cutting permission, AAI approval, permission from transportation 
department etc. before initia
tion of a project.
 
 
Time and efforts required for departmental clearance is an issue which results in 
overall delay in starting of project on ground. It is suggested that single
-
window 
clearance for the entire process may be developed at appropriate level 
for 
simplification and ease of doing business. This integrated approach under one 
roof will avoid unnecessary delays in starting project and will also help in 
managing the cost of construction".
 
 
 
18. 
 
The Committee, in Para 30 of their Fifth Report, had 
also recommended the 
following with regard to the Physical Performance of NBCC (India) Ltd.:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that under the redevelopment projects especially the 7 
GPRA colonies, AIIMS, etc., the NBCC is facing difficulties in getting timely 
clear
ances and statutory approvals related to environmental, tree cutting, NGT, 
etc. and as a result, these projects are getting unduly delayed.   The Committee 
therefore recommends the Government for opening up of a grievance cell or a 
single window system at 
the Central level to address the challenges/problems 
that may occur while obtaining the statutory clearances /approvals".
 

11
 
 
 
19. 
 
The NBCC in their Action Taken reply, have stated that the 
Observation/Recommendation pertains to the Government.
 
 
 
20.
 
The 
Committee in their original report had expressed apprehension over 
the timely completion of the projects considering the fact that NBCC had a huge 
order book of approximately Rs. 80,000 crore besides an international order book 
of Rs. 2000 crore while its 
average rate of completion of projects was only Rs. 
4000 crore per year. The Committee had therefore recommended NBCC to come 
out with a structured plan of action to time deal with the complexities of various 
issues involved including expediting the dispos
al of pending court cases so that 
projects could start early and are completed withing the time
-
frame. The Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs in their reply while apprising the Committee of 
various problems faced by it including mandatory statutory appr
ovals had 
suggested opening of a single
-
window clearance system under one roof for 
avoiding unnecessary delays in starting of projects and helping in managing cost 
of construction.  Surprisingly, in reply to another recommendation of the 
Committee as given
 
in Para 30 of the Original report for opening up a single 
window system at the Central level to address the challenges/ problems occuring 
in obtaining statutory clearances/ approvals, it is observed that the Ministry 
instead of taking any concrete action 
has casually stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee pertains to the Government.  The Committee 
express their serious concern over such callous approach of the Ministry in 
addressing such an important issue dealing with avoidable hassles in obtaini
ng 
mandatory statutory clearances and approvals that could be effectively 
addressed through a single window system.  The Committee, therefore, once 
again strongly emphasize the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for opening 
of the single window system a
t the Central level to expedite addressing the issue 
of undue delays/ hassles in obtaining various statutory clearances/ approvals in 
projects.
 
 
 
 

12
 
 
INCREASING GLOBAL PRESENCE
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 15 and 16)
 
 
21.
 
With regard to increasing global prese
nce, the Committee in their original Report 
had commented as below;
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC faces several challenges in global market.  
As per NBCC, one of the major challenges that it faces is the huge shortage of 
Indian Skilled technicians in th
e construction sector and most of younger 
generations not showing much interest in working overseas construction projects.  
The other major challenge stated to be faced by NBCC is that in many countries, 
the Company doesn’t have physical presence due to wh
ich there is difficulty in 
gathering the data, local conditions, logistics etc.  NBCC is making efforts to join 
hands with Indian PSUs for the purpose which is certainly a good option in the 
opinion of the Committee.  The contention of NBCC about the huge 
shortage of 
Indian skilled technicians and younger generation not willing to work overseas 
does not seem plausible in the wake of such a high demand for employment in 
the domestic and international job markets.  The young generation is known for 
the dream 
it nourishes to work abroad. The Committee therefore recommend that 
for fetching better talents in adequate number for their overseas projects, NBCC 
need to publicise the job opportunities in these projects through electronic and 
print media all over the c
ountry in all major languages and if considered 
necessary, the deployment in international projects should be incentivized with 
country specific exclusive compensation packages to the employees".
 
 
22.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their 
Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
"The recommendations of the Committee have been noted; in case of expert & 
talented people, the customized country specific recruitment will be made with 
adequate publicizing on local
, international and social media platforms. To attract 
better talent, country specific compensation package will be offered with help of 
local Indian Embassies".
 
 
23.
 
The Committee in their original Report had also commented as follows;
 
"The Committee note
 
that in line with the Central Government’s initiative towards 
Skill India Mission, NBCC has given certificates to 1400 construction workers 
who have been equipped with a new set of skills in tune with changing face of the 
country’s construction sector.  O
n completion of the Recognition to Prior Learning 
programme under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PMKVY) in collaboration 
with CSDCI and CII, the certificates are awarded by officials of NBCC, CSDCI 
and CII. The Committee while appreciating the initiat
ive taken by NBCC in 
equipping many people with new set of skills in the construction sector and 
awarding certificates would like to know as to how many of these trained people 

13
 
 
have been gainfully employed in the construction sector in domestic and 
oversea
s projects.  The Committee feels that such skill development 
programmes should be synchronized in such a way that the trained personnel 
are able to secure gainful employment immediately after their training course is 
completed".
 
 
 
24.
 
The Ministry of Housi
ng and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
"The employability of all these 2700 workers at the project sites has gone up with 
the certification of their skill sets though the skill India program. 
Based on the 
level of their certification (level 
-
1, Level 
–
 
2) they are being considered for higher 
level jobs (from semi
-
skilled to skilled and from skilled to highly skilled) in the 
same project sites or at other project sites. Since they are now having
 
a 
certificate issued by the Government of India, their acceptability in overseas 
market has also gone up".
 
 
25.
 
In order to tackle the challenges of huge shortage of Indian Skilled 
technicians in NBCC’s overseas construction projects, the Committee had 
re
commended for publicizing of job opportunities through electronic & print 
media all over the country in all major languages and if necessary, the 
incentivisation of  deployment in international projects with country specific 
exclusive compensation packages
 
to the employees. Further, the Committee had 
stressed upon skill development initiatives and had desired syncronization of 
development programmes in such a way that the trained personnel under PMKVY 
are able to secure gainful employment immediately after 
their training course is 
completed.  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply 
have stated that the recommendations of the Committee have been noted and 
specific steps would be taken to attract better talent including offering o
f specific 
compensation package with the help of local Indian Embassies. The Ministry has 
further stated that the employability of workers at project sites overseas has gone 
up with certification of their skils through the skill India program and based on 
their level of certification, workers are being considered for higher level jobs 
overseas. The Committee, however, find the replies of the Ministry too general in 
nature as results have not been quantified.  Further, no figures have been 
indicated to indic
ate how many of the workers trained under PMKVY actually 

14
 
 
secured jobs in NBCC project overseas. The intent of the Committee’s 
recommendation was to fill the huge gap between demand and supply in NBCC's 
overseas projects which was suffering due to lack of s
killed workers.  The 
Committee have their apprehension that unless workers trained under PMKVY 
and awarded with certificates from NBCC, CSDCI and CII are not provided jobs on 
priority in NBCC’s overseas project, the skill development initiatives undertaken
 
by NBCC will not yield fruitful results in future.
 
NBCC'S ROLE AS LAND MANAGEMENT AGENCY
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 24  and  25)
 
 
26. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Report, had recommended the following with regard 
to NBCC's role as Land Management Agency
.:
-
 
 
"The Committee note that NBCC has been designated by the Government of 
India as Land Management Agency (LMA) vide the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) OM dated 7 September 2016 for disposal of movable and 
immovable assets of sick/loss making CPS
Us.  The DPE vide its OM dated 14 
June 2018 issued guidelines for time bound closure of sick/loss making CPSUs 
and disposal of their movable and immovable assets wherein NBCC and EPIL 
were suggested as LMA.  As per these guidelines, LMA is to be nominated 
by 
the Administrative Ministry/Department/Board of the CPSUs concerned to 
manage, maintain and assist in disposal of their assets.  The main role of NBCC 
as LMA would be to (i) identify, manage, maintain and, if required, engage 
security agency for the wat
ch and ward of the assets on contract basis for the 
CPSUs against payment.  (ii)  to validate the information provided by CPSUs 
regarding the land/immovable assets,  (iii) examination of current land use, FAR 
and the land use as per the local laws applicab
le in that area (iv) valuation of 
land on the basis of applicable circle rates,  (v) work out the reserve price of land 
(vi) assess the use of land for affordable housing and shall ascertain from the 
MoHUA about any such requirement of land for affordable 
housing so that such 
land can be transferred as per guidelines of MoHUA,  (vii) disposing off the land 
after assessing the requirement of land for affordable housing by MoHUA,  (viii)  
to submit its recommendations about the further course of action regard
ing 
properties which could not be disposed during the bidding.  NBCC informed that 
it had written letters to 75 loss making CPSUs which were under closure on the 
basis of information gathered from various sources including websites.  However, 
24 CPSUs deni
ed and 8 CPSUs were considering appointing NBCC as LMA.  As 
per the information furnished to the Committee, NBCC was appointed LMA by 14 
CPSUs and has disposed off 19 land parcels of 6 CPSUs measuring about 486 
acres at a value of about 870 crores.  NBCC f
urther informed that as per the DPE 
guidelines, LMA is entitled to land management fee which would be 0.5% of the 

15
 
 
value realized from disposal of assets subject to a maximum Rs. 1 Crore.  The 
Committee however note that till date NBCC has received just Rs.
2.06 crore as 
LMA including advance which constitutes only 0.23% of the value of assets 
disposed.  The Committee construes from the replies furnished by NBCC and 
MoHUA that the task to act as LMA was imposed upon NBCC by the 
Government but simultaneously i
t was not made mandatory on the part of the 
loss making CPSUs to appoint NBCC as their Land Management Agency.  
Further, it is not clear whether NBCC was consulted before being designated as 
LMA for the loss making CPSUs.  It is also not clear as to why NB
CC is not 
designated as LMA by the Government for disposal of excess/unused land of 
profit making CPSUs.  The Committee would like clarification on these issues".
 
 
27.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above 
Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
"In the DPE guidelines dated 14.06.2018 para 2 (iv) NBCC and EPIL has been 
suggested as LMA by DPE vide its guidelines dated 14.06.2018 and LMA shall 
be nominated by the administrative Ministry/ Department/ the Board
 
of the CPSE 
under closure to manage, maintain and assist in disposal of land.
 
 
The question regarding appointment of NBCC as LMA for loss making CPSEs or 
disposal of excess/unused land of profit making CPSEs pertains to Government 
of India. Further, NBCC 
is ready to take up all such project including 
monetization of assets, for Government bodies and CPSEs".
 
 
 
28. 
 
The Committee, in Para 25 of their Fifth Report, had also recommended the 
following with regard to NBCC's role as Land Management Agency.:
-
 
 
"Th
e Committee further observe that NBCC after undertaking so many functions 
as LMA for so many years could earn only Rs.2.06 Crore so far which is not even 
0.05% of the entitled value of the land disposed off which it was supposed to get 
as per the DPE guide
lines.  In carrying out its functions as LMA, NBCC might 
have incurred some expenditure too on engagement of its manpower, logistics, 
coordination work, etc.  Taking all these factors in view, the Committee is also 
apprehensive if the o.23% that NBCC recei
ved as LMA or the 0.5% land 
management fee as fixed by the Government is comparable to similar functions 
of LMA in the private sector.  The Committee would like to be informed on these 
issues to assess the net gains of NBCC while performing as LMA.  The 
Co
mmittee may also be apprised about the status of disposal of movable and 
immovable assets of the remaining 8 loss making CPSUs that have appointed 
NBCC as LMA".
 
 
29.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recomm
endation has stated as follows:
-
 
 

16
 
 
"NBCC has received LMA fee of Rs. 2.50 Cr. as on 19.07.2021. Status of 
disposal of immovable assets of the remaining 8 loss making CPSUs that have 
appointed NBCC as LMA is at 
Annexure 
-
 
II
. Responsibility of disposal of 
mo
vable assets of CPSEs has not been assigned to NBCC".
 
 
 
30.
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed apprehension on 
NBCC being imposed the task of Land Management Agency (LMA) to manage, 
maintain and assist in disposal of land assets of loss m
aking CPSUs;  and sought 
clarification on (i) whether NBCC was consulted before being appointed as the 
Land Management Agency (LMA) for loss making CPSUs? And, (ii) why NBCC 
was not designated as LMA for disposal of excess/ unused land of profit making 
CPS
Us?  The Committee had also expressed their apprehension on NBCC 
entitled to 0.5% of the value realized from disposal of assets as LMA fee subject 
to a capping of Rs. 1 crore that resulted in NBCC earning only Rs. 2.06 crore as 
LMA fee  from 6 CPSUs which 
was just 0.23% of the entitled value of land 
disposed off by NBCC. The Committee had  sharply reacted to such action of the 
Government as NBCC had to engage its manpower, logistics, financial resources 
and coordination efforts to discharge its function as 
LMA and fixing LMA of 0.5% 
subject to capping of Rs. 1 crore was not comparable to similar functions in the 
private sector. The Committee find from the replies of the Ministry that the 
Government is silent on the clarifications sought by the Committee on w
hich a 
categorical response was expected from the Government.  The Committee 
understand that if CPSUs need to function on commercial lines, imposing tasks 
on CPSUs without proper analysis of the resources that would be consumed and 
imposing limits on antic
ipated gains that are not comparable to their counterparts 
in the private sector will only put further strain on the resources of the CPSUs.  
The Committee desire a categorical reply on the apprehensions and clarifications 
sought by it and also desire to b
e informed of the total LMA fee received from all 
the 14 loss making CPSUs that had appointed NBCC as their Land Management 
Agency.
 
 
 

17
 
 
PAYMENTS TO CONTRACTORS
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 26)
 
 
31. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Report, had recommended the 
following with regard 
to Third Party Payments as under.:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC has adopted several measures in its 
tendering process to ensure transparency, accountability and timely payments to 
its contractors and third parties.  As informed 
to the Committee, all works above 
25 lakh are being invited through e
-
tendering system in the NBCC and all tenders 
for works valuing Rs.50 Crore and above are invited on EPC mode.  Tender 
documents are prepared by Tender Formation Committee (TFC) at the zo
nal 
level and after approval by the concerned Regional Business Group (RBG) / 
Strategic Business Group Head is sent to CPG for inviting tender.   Independent 
responsibilities of TFC at the zonal level and Tender Scrutiny Committee (TSC) 
at HO level have be
en defined in the Works Manual.  Integrity Pact has been 
adopted in the Company.  Independent External Monitors (IEMs) have been 
appointed in consultation with CVC who closely monitors the tendering 
processes and review the tenders periodically and deals w
ith all complaints and 
corruption issues.  Similarly, mechanism has been put in place for release of 
payment to contractors and third parties.  As per the General Conditions of 
Contract (GCC) of NBCC, the contractor shall become entitled to payment only 
af
ter NBCC has received the corresponding payment(s) from the client/owner for 
the work done by the contractor.  On a query regarding delay in payments to third 
parties/contractors, the Ministry in their written replies informed that the major 
reasons for no
n
-
payment or delay in payment is due to non
-
realization of dues 
from clients, non
-
submission of documents such as insurance policy, challans, 
non
-
fulfillment of taxation requirements such as non
-
deposition of GST returns, 
etc.  To further smoothen the paym
ents to contractors in current scenario, regular 
letters are being written to clients along with physical follow
-
up by NBCC officials 
for realization of dues from clients by setting down the observations raised by 
them and the results for the same have sta
rted to come.  The Committee was 
also informed that a grievance portal has been developed for contractors and 
consultants where they can login directly and register their complaints.  The 
Committee are however shocked to note that despite all mechanisms pu
t in 
place, as on 9 March 2020, the payment of an amount of Rs.1184 Crores are 
pending to be paid to the Contractors.  The Committee feels that this is a huge 
liability on the Company. The Committee is apprehensive as to how NBCC would 
be able to clear the
 
dues/payments to the contractors especially when the net 
profit of the Company as per the audited results of 2019
-
20 is now only Rs.79.86 
crores.  Nevertheless, the payments have to be made to the contractors for the 
work done once it is established that 
they have fulfilling all their contractual 
liabilities.  The Committee would therefore recommend that NBCC, in this 
scenario, should work out a time bound plan to settle these payments so that this 
huge liability on the part of NBCC is cleared at the earli
est".  
 

18
 
 
 
32.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
"Major outstanding liabilities to contractors are in those projects where client has 
not released the corresponding pay
ment. It is to mention that clients like ESIC, 
Government of Haryana for Medical College Mewat, NTPC etc. are not releasing 
outstanding dues payment against the work done by NBCC. In this regard, efforts 
made by NBCC to realize these major outstanding paym
ents and resolve the 
issues.
 
 
Even after taking up the matter at the highest level with the client, some issues 
are lingering on due to which level has been raised and matter taken up through 
MoHUA and also at the level of Hon’ble Minister.  Though Arbitra
tor appointed by 
PMA has given award in favour of NBCC against NTPC in 3 cases of dispute in 
Barh, Farakka & Mouda. NTPC is still delaying payment and violating the basic 
principles of Arbitration which has been taken up by Secretary, MoHUA with 
Secretary 
(Power).
 
 
As per our General condition of contract Clause No. 23.2“contractor shall 
become entitled to payment only after NBCC has received the corresponding 
payment(s) from the client/Owner for the work done by the contractor”. 
Accordingly, once the payme
nt will be received from the Clients, the same shall 
be released to the contractors".
 
 
33.
 
The Committee had observed that NBCC’s profit during 2019
-
20 was only 
Rs. 79.86 crore while an amount of Rs. 1184 crore outstanding on the part of 
NBCC is to be paid
 
to contractors.  The Committee in their original report while 
expressing their concern had recommended to work out a time bound plan to 
settle these payments so that this huge liability on the part of NBCC could be 
cleared at the earliest.  The Ministry o
f Housing and Urban Affairs in their action 
taken reply have stated that the outstanding liabilities to contractors are in those 
projects where client has not released the corresponding payment.  Some of the 
clients who had defaulted payments were ESIC and
 
NTPC. The Ministry also 
informed that the matter related to outstanding payments by NTPC was taken up 
with Permanent Machinery of Arbitration(PMA) and although the Arbitrator 
appointed by the PMA had given award in favour of NBCC against NTPC in 3 
cases, 
NTPC was delaying payment in violation of the basic principles of 
Arbitration. The Committee do not understand how  NTPC could refuse to make 

19
 
 
the payments especially when the matter was resolved in PMA and the Arbitrator 
has asked NTPC to make the payments
 
to NBCC.  The Committee express their 
apprehension whether the award and decision in the PMA are binding on the 
concerned CPSUs and Ministries/Departments. If so, NTPC should have made the 
payments of CPSUs unless it had made an appeal.  The Committee des
ire NBCC 
to take up the matter at the highest level to realize all its outstanding payments. 
The Committee also desire to be informed about the total outstanding payments 
of NBCC to contractors as on 31
st
 
January 2022 and the steps taken by the 
Ministry to
 
settle those payments.
 
 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 34)
 
 
34. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Report, had recommended the following with regard 
to Assets created under Corporate Social Responsibility activities:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that NBCC has volunteered to associate itself with 
Swatch Bharat Abhiyan and constructed community and public toilets at 30 
locations of Municipal Corporations of Delhi (NDMC, EDMC and SDMC) and 100 
nos. of Bio toilets at Schools for
 
Girls students in the States of Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, West Bengal, Tripura, Assam and Uttrakhand.  As informed to the 
Committee, the NBCC works with communities near its operations to implement 
a range of programs that positively impact in their lives
 
and contribute in areas 
such as health, education, nutrition, empowerment, infrastructure development 
and local employment.  During 2018
-
19, the major achievements of NBCC under 
CSR activities had been (i) Conservation, Restoration and Development of 
Pura
na Qila  (ii) Sahara Hostel for War Windows of the Indian Navy at 
VasantKunj, New Delhi  (iii) Construction of Saink Rest House (SRH) at Betul, 
Madhya Pradesh  (iv)  Education scholarship for tribal girl students at Kalinga 
Institute of Social Sciences, Bh
ubaneswar  (v)  Allocation of CSR Funds for 
‘Swachh Bharat Kosh’ set up by the Central Government of India (vi) 
Construction of Gramalayas including Sewerage & Sanitation facilities at village 
Harchandpur, Haryana  (vii) Construction of CC Road and U Drain
 
from Shankar 
Nagar Crossing to Ganeshpur Police Station, Basti, Uttar Pradesh.  The 
Committee observe that the projects of NBCC are spread all over the country 
and therefore after taking into account the nature of the operations of the 
Company and its imp
act on the inhabitants in the surrounding areas, the 
Committee desire that the NBCC should proactively take up CSR projects for the 
benefit of the people and their families living in nearby areas of the operational 
projects of the Company.  The Committee f
urther recommend that the NBCC 

20
 
 
should not only spend CSR funds to fulfill the minimum obligations as laid down 
in the Companies Act, 2013 for CSR activities but also should take up more and 
more CSR activities on their own keeping in view the requirements 
of the 
communities/families living near by the construction sites especially the poor and 
from the marginalized sections of the society.  The Committee also desire that 
the maintenance of the physical assets like community and public toilets 
constructed in
 
the MCD area and also in the schools must be maintained 
properly to ensure that these are in usable condition for time to time.  The 
Committee would therefore like the NBCC to apprise them of the measures taken 
for maintenance of the toilets constructed b
y them under Swachh Bharat 
Abhiyan".
 
 
35.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as follows:
-
 
 
"Any asset created by CSR Project / Activity is handed over to the concerned 
Govt. Authori
ty for its use and upkeep.
 
 
NBCC has time and again taken up the matter with MCD regarding the 
maintenance of the toilets constructed under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan but no 
efforts have been taken by MCD to maintain the public toilets to be in usable 
condition
".
 
 
 
36
.
 
The Committee in their original report had desired that the maintenance of 
the physical assets like community and public toilets constructed in the MCD 
area and also in the schools must be maintained properly to ensure that these are 
in usable con
dition.  The Committee had desired to be appraised of the measures 
taken up by NBCC for maintenance of toilets constructed by them under Swachh 
Bharat Abhiyan. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken 
reply have stated that any asset
 
constructed under CSR project/ activity is 
handed over to the concerned government authority for its use and upkeep. 
However, despite NBCC taking up the matter with MCD for maintenance of toilets 
constructed under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, no efforts have be
en taken up by 
MCD to maintain the public toilets to be in usable condition. The Committee 
observe that such irresponsible attitude on the part of any agency towards non
-
maintenance of public assets is a drain on public money and is against the 
objectives 
under which CSR activities are undertaken for the public.  The 
Committee desire NBCC to explore the option of maintaining of such assets on 

21
 
 
their own funding or maintenance charges for certain period for upkeep of toilets 
constructed under Swachh Bharat Ab
hiyan so that their efforts on construction of 
toilets does not become a wasteful exercise and expenditure.
 
 
EXPEDITING THE SETTLEMENT OF PENDING C&AG AUDIT PARAS
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 36.1 & 36.2)
 
 
37. 
 
The Committee, in their Fifth Report of 17 Lok
 
Sabha had recommended the 
following with regard to expediting settlement of pending C&AG Audit Paras:
-
 
 
(i)
 
"The Committee observe that as informed by NBCC till 2017, C&AG audit 
team was directly conducting transaction audit of Regional Business Groups 
(RBGs)/Strategic Business Groups (SBGs) and Inspection Report was sent to 
the respective RBGs/SBGs with a copy to CMD/Director (Finance) of NBCC.  
The replies to the Inspection reports were directly submitted by the respective 
RBG/SBG office to the C&AG te
am for settlement.  After August 2017, new 
modalities were introduced whereby the Internal Audit Division (IAD) at Head 
Office will coordinate with the transaction audit of NBCC.  IAD will coordinate with 
RBGs/SBGs/Divisions at Head Office for onwards subm
ission of replies to 
outstanding transaction audit paras to C&AG office.  Accordingly, reconciliation of 
old outstanding paras was done with CAG office by IAD.  Total outstanding paras 
in NBCC as on 1
st
 
April 2019 were 296.  Out of this 143 were settled/tr
ansferred 
by CAG during ACM in April 2019.  So there was a balance of 153 audit paras 
and 17 audit paras were added for transaction audit during 2017
-
18 taking the 
total number of outstanding paras to 170 as on 31
st
 
August, 2019.  The 
Committee noted that 
out of the 170 pending audit paras, 23 paras relate to 
excess payment/under or delayed recovery from contractor, 20 paras relate to 
discrepancies in tendering procedures, 19 paras relate to delay in execution of 
work and 11 paras relate to non
-
levying/shor
t imposition of LD on contractor 
while 39 are miscellaneous issues.  As per the latest written response furnished 
to the Committee by NBCC, they have furnished replies to 140 audit paras to 
C&AG office and remaining 30 paras are being pursued with the conc
erned 
Departments/RBGs/SBGs".
 
 
(ii)
 
"During the course of evidence, it was admitted that currently there were 
about 170 audit pending paras and NBCC expected to settle another 100 paras 
in the one
-
to
-
one meeting scheduled with C&AG in the last week of Marc
h or the 
first week of April 2020.  The Committee note that even before the new 
modalities were introduced after 2017, the number of pending audit paras were 
296 which considerably huge. In the opinion of the Committee, the number of 
audit paras reflects t
he number of violations/non
-
compliance of rules and 
procedures by the Company.  So more number of audit paras are not a healthy 
sign.  The Committee therefore recommends that NBCC should vigorously 

22
 
 
pursue these pending audit paras with the concerned Depart
ments/RBGs/SBGs 
and get them settled with the C&AG at the earliest".
 
 
38.
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, on the 
above Recommendation has stated as below:
-
 
 
"The matter for settlement of outstanding CAG IR paras was r
igorously taken up 
with CAG, MAB
-
Infrastructure office by NBCC Internal Audit Division. Despite 
Covid
-
19 lockdown during April
-
May,2020 Principal Director, MAB
-
 
Infrastructure, 
CAG agreed to review the replies and accordingly discussions were held on the 
o
utstanding paras and replies through VC/Tele
-
conferencing and 111 nos. paras 
were settled by CAG office (including 17 nos. of paras transferred to NBCC for 
settlement through Management).
 
 
Subsequently in September, 2020 on request of NBCC, Audit Committee
 
of CAG 
was also convened whereby total 43 nos. of paras were settled by CAG office 
(including 27.5 nos. transferred to NBCC for settlement through Management).
 
 
Thus, out of 170 nos. of outstanding paras total 156 nos. of paras were removed 
from CAG recor
ds and only 14 nos. of paras from the list of old paras are left 
outstanding.
 
 
Meanwhile, during the course of audit for FY 2019
-
20 &2020
-
21, 73 no. of CAG 
IR paras have been issued by CAG team.
 
 
As on date, 85 no. of IR paras (including 10 old paras) are 
outstanding with CAG 
out of which replies to 28 paras have been submitted to CAG office and rigorous 
follow up is being done with RBG/SBGs offices for submission of replies for 
balance paras.
 
 
Further, it is pertain to inform here that in last 2 years, 301
 
nos. of Paras have 
been settled through CAG office".
 
 
 
39.
 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that NBCC has taken up the matter of 
pending audit paras with C&
AG and have got a large number of Audit Paras 
settled expeditiously. The Committee are informed that as on date, 81 Nos. of IR 
Paras including 71 Paras issued by C&AG team during the course of Audit for 
financial years 2019
-
20 and 2020
-
21 are pending.  The
 
Committee hope that these 
paras will also be settled expeditiously with regular follow
-
up with C&AG.
 
 
*****
 
 
 

23
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
NBCC
-
Overview
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
 
 
 
The Committee 
note that NBCC (India) Limited was founded in the year 1960.  It 
is a ‘Navratna’ Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) functioning under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  The NBCC is 
listed with the Bombay S
tock Exchange (BSE) and National Stock Exchange (NSE).  The 
Company is operating across three major domains viz. (i) Project Management 
Consultancy (PMC) (ii) Engineering Procurement & Construction (EPC) and Real Estate 
Development (RED).  Presently, it ha
s four operating subsidiaries viz. NBCC Services 
Limited, Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL), HSCC (India) Limited and 
NBCC DWC LLC.  The Company has also three operating Joint Ventures viz. NBCC MHG, 
NBCC
-
AB and Real Estate Development and C
onstruction Corporation of Rajasthan 
Limited (REDCCR).  The Committee observe that NBCC’s business in PMC segment 
consists of a wide range of management and consultancy services in two areas namely 
(a) Civil Construction Projects and (b) Infrastructure Pro
jects).  The Civil Construction 
Projects includes Residential and Commercial Complexes, Re
-
development of Colonies, 
Hospitals, Educational Institutions, Infrastructure Works for Security Personnel and 
border.  The Infrastructure Projects includes Roads, Wa
ter Supply Systems, Storm 
Water Drainage Systems, Water Storage Solutions, Solid waste Management Schemes.  
This segment includes re
-
development projects on a self
-
financing model also.  NBCC’s 
PMC services entail implementation of the projects from concep
t to commissioning, 
ensuring competitiveness on the basic guidelines of cost, quality and time.  PMC 
services also offer maintenance of projects.  The Engineering Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) segment encapsulates detailed design engineering, procurem
ent 
and expeditious execution of projects. The NBCC’s EPC business has been in 
infrastructure segment, executing a diverse range of projects like chimneys, cooling 
towers, coal handling plants, roads, metro elevated tracks, TV towers, airports, runways 
etc
.  The EPC services include project conceptualization, feasibility studies, detailed 
project reports, engineering, tender specifications and various packages covering basic 
and detailed engineering, review of projects, procurement, construction drawings, 
c
ommissioning and testing and handing over of project to clients in ready
-
to
-
use and in 
functional condition.  The NBCC entered the Real Estate Development (RED) segment in 
1988 and has executed several commercial and residential projects.  The growth in 
In
dian economy has driven demand for real estate across all categories particularly 
housing and commercial segments.  The development and management of real estate 
sector has emerged as a critical and crucial part of the larger Indian
 
construction 
business s
pace.  The Committee expects that NBCC will make sustained efforts not only 

24
 
 
to secure large number of commercial and residential projects in domestic as well as 
global markets but also set an exemplary global standard in construction, execution and 
deliver
y of these projects in terms of cost incurred, quality maintained and time spent.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
 
 
2.
 
The Committee also observe that NBCC has started its global operation since the 
year 1997.  The Company has executed diverse and complex proje
cts in countries like 
Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, Mauritius, Dubai, Seychelles etc. where it is 
implementing various projects.  The NBCC has secured projects in several African 
countries like Niger, Uganda, Malawi, Zambia, Liberia, Gambia, Burkina
 
Faso, Togo and 
Gabon.  The total value of these projects is approximately Rs.2,000crore.  NBCC had 
received an in
-
principle approval from the Department of Commerce, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry, Government of India for conceptualizing, designing and
 
construction of “India Pavilion” at the World Expo 2020 to be held in Dubai from 
October 2020 to April 2021.  The Committee are happy to note that since 2004, the 
Company has been receiving ‘Excellent’ rating by the Department of Public Enterprises 
and ha
s been certified with the status of ‘Great Place to Work’ by the renowned Great 
Place
-
to
-
Work Institute.  In the present report, the Committee have touched upon 
many important issues and have given their observations/ recommendations and hope 
that these wi
ll be implemented in right perspective by the NBCC so as to improve the 
functioning and performance of the Company.  The Committee hopes that NBCC will 
establish itself globally as a leading brand name in the construction sector and will also 
continue to w
ork for the betterment of the society and the public at large with special 
focus on the poor families.
 
 
Reply of the Government 
to Recommendations Serial No. 1 and 2
 
 
NBCC has secured various projects in domestic as well as overseas market amounting 
to app
rox. Rs. 12,800 crore in FY 2019
-
20.
 
 
NBCC is also very proud to share its successful overseas journey and representing Govt. 
of India in many countries as Project Management Consultants. NBCC ventured into 
Overseas Operations in the year 1977, executing 
commercial projects, residential 
projects and other diverse nature in countries like Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, 
Mauritius, Turkey, and Botswana. Due to NBCC’s sustained efforts, presently, the 
Company has its presence in Mauritius, Maldives and D
ubai. Besides above projects, a 
project of 2,000 Social Housing at Hulhumale, Male, Maldives (costing approx. US$ 130 
million) is in final stages of approvals.
 
 
NBCC has gone extra mile in setting global standards in construction, execution and 
delivery in
 
all of our projects in terms of cost incurred, quality maintained and time 
spent. Dubai World Expo building & Supreme Court building in Mauritius are some of 
the examples.NBCC will definitely strive to establish itself globally as a leading brand 

25
 
 
name in 
the construction sector and will also continue to work for the betterment of the 
society and the public at large with special focus on t
he economically weaker sections 
of the society.
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.0
1.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
 
 
3.
 
The Committee further notes that one of the nominee Government Directors 
of NBCC was holding Directorship in five other Companies which is in sharp contrast 
of the norms and guidelines on Corporate Governance issued
 
by the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE).   The DPE guidelines dated 19 September 1984 clearly 
provides that an officer should not have too many directorships on the Boards of 
Public Enterprises so that he can do adequate justice to his role as a Gov
ernment 
Director and also that the directorships held by each Joint Secretary could be kept 
down by having Directors/Deputy Secretaries on the Boards of smaller enterprises. 
The aforesaid guidelines issued by the DPE is in line with the observation of the 
Committee that nominee Director of a Company should not be holding directorship 
of too many other Companies.  The Committee has not been provided with any 
plausible explanation as to why one Officer of the government should hold 
Directorship in so many pub
lic undertakings at a time.  The Committee therefore 
strongly recommends that the Ministry needs to immediately review such 
appointments and ensure that the appointment of officials of the Ministries as 
Directors in the CPSUs is strictly in accordance with
 
the DPE guidelines.  The 
Committee further recommend that the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
should also develop a system for (i) collecting information on regular intervals say in 
each six months from all Ministries/Departments about the appointm
ents of 
Government Directors made by them in the CPSUs under their administrative control 
and; (ii) taking timely corrective action for rectification of aberrations noticed in this 
regard.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
NBCC (India) Limited being a Government ow
ned enterprise, the power to appoint 
functional/ Official, Part
-
time Directors/ non
-
Official Part
-
time Directors (Independent 
Directors) vests with the Government of India. The appointments of Government 
Nominee Directors are made by the Administrative Min
istry i.e. Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs.
 
 
Further, pursuance to the provisions of section 165 of the Companies Act, 2013, “No 
person, after the commencement of this Act, shall hold office as a director, including 
any alternate directorship, in mor
e than twenty companies at the same time.”
 
 

26
 
 
Provided that the maximum number of public companies in which a person can be 
appointed as a director shall not exceed ten.
 
 
As per the regulation 17 of SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015, “A person shall not be a 
Director in more than eight listed entities with effect from April 1, 2019 and in not more 
than seven listed entities with effect from April 1, 2020.”
 
 
Accordingly, in consideration of above provisions, none of the Directors of NBCC 
including Govt. Nominee
 
Directors, hold directorship in more than the prescribed 
statutory limit.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Physical Performance
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
 
 
4.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC’s core 
activities comprises three distinct 
verticals viz. (i) Project Management Consultancy (PMC),  (ii) Engineering 
Procurement and Construction (EPC), and ; (iii) Real Estate Development (RED), 
NBCCs PMC business consists of a wide range of management and cons
ultancy 
services in civil construction projects and infrastructure projects.  The Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) business involves project conceptualization, 
feasibility studies, detailed project reports, design engineering, procurement an
d 
expeditious execution of projects.  The NBCC entered the real estate segment in 
1988 and has executed several commercial and residential projects.  The NBCC has 
also started its global operations since 1997 and the Company has executed diverse 
and comple
x projects in countries like Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, 
Mauritius, Turkey and Botswana.  Presently, the Company has its presence in 
Maldives, Mauritius, Republic of Niger, Dubai and Seychelles where it is 
implementing various projects.  The Commi
ttee further observe that the NBCC have 
secured overseas projects in the several African countries namely Gambia, Liberia, 
Malawi, Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and Zambia but these projects are yet to start.  
The total value of these projects is approximately
 
Rs. 2,000 crore.  The Committee 
are glad to note that NBCC has completed 24 overseas projects in different foreign 
countries during the period from 1994 to 2016.  The Committee’s analysis of the 
overseas projects of NBCC since 2017 in Mauritius, Dubai, Ni
ger, Seychelles, 
Gambia, Liberia, Malawi, Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and Zambia have been awarded 
to the NBCC through nomination from the Governments.  The committee observe 
that NBCC itself has admitted that they are facing the challenges in the global 
mar
ket like r
egulatory variations, logistic 
challenges, need of strong financial and 
technical credentials as well as certified professionals, requirement of experience in 
international working system, shortage of skilled workforce etc.  The NBCC, as 
informed
 
to the Committee, is targeting African countries. Middle
-
East countries, CIS 
countries, Indian Ocean countries and SAARC countries to achieve its future 

27
 
 
objectives in international markets.  The Committee feel that in the present age of 
sharp competition 
among rival players for securing orders, the business will sustain 
only on the basis of better execution at competitive price and therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that NBCC has to develop and enrich their core 
competence to provide better qualit
y services in lesser time and competitive cost 
than their competitors in the international
 
market so that the NBCC could be able to 
secure the overseas projects with their own strength and capabilities by participating 
in the global tender process rather t
han being dependent on the government 
nomination for these international projects.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
After Amendment in GFR
-
2017, the projects secured on nomination basis have reduced 
considerably and NBCC is participating in the bids invited by Mi
nistries /Departments 
/Institutions amongst CPSE/PSU. 
 
 
Further to showcase company’s own strength and capabilities, NBCC’s recent overseas 
project namely 
–
 
MGICC, Niger and Supreme Court Building, Mauritius has been 
completed well ahead before the schedul
e time and with
-
in stipulated cost.
 
 
This has provided an edge and excellent credentials for exploring further
 
business 
opportunities in overseas market
.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
 
Comments of the 
Committee
 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
 
 
5.
 
The Committee’s analysis of the information submitted to them about 
completion of the major projects of the value of Rs.50 crore each during the last 03 
years reveal
s that the NBCC had completed 12 such projects in 2016
-
17, 25 projects 
in 2017
-
18 and 24 projects during 2018
-
19.  The Committee observe that there 
were 164 ongoing projects of NBCC comprising 152 PMC projects, 7 EPC projects 
and 5 Real Estate Projects.  W
ith regard to the due dates of completion of these 164 
ongoing projects, the Committee observe that 124 projects were scheduled to be 
completed before September 2020 and 30 projects are to be completed by 
November’ 2020, 05 projects are on hold, there is a
 
court case in one project and 03 
projects are under maintenance while in case of one project, the likely date of 
completion has not been indicated.  The Committee hope that 154 ongoing projects 
which were tagged with the completion dates will be completed
 
by NBCC as per the 

28
 
 
scheduled dates and expects that necessary steps will be taken to expedite sorting 
out the issues in respect of the remaining 10 projects which do not have the 
completion dates for various reasons.  The Committee may be apprised of the 
actual 
progress made in all these projects so far and also the steps taken to resolve the 
issues involved.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The commitments were made in Nov’2019 and thereafter due to outbreakof Covid
-
19 
pandemic, construction works of majority o
f the projects got affected and timeline have 
been disrupted. Extension of time has been given to all contractors due to impact of 
pandemic in line with Govt. of India guidelines in this regard. The progress in respect of 
10 projects which were on hold for
 
long time due to various reasons is enclosed 
herewith in 
Annexure
-
I.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 15 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Financial Performance
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
 
 
6.
 
The Committee observe that the authorized capital of the NBCC which was 
Rs.120 crore in the year 2014
-
15 has been increased to Rs.200 crore in the year 2018
-
19.  The NBCC is listed with the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) and Nat
ional Stock 
Exchange (NSE) and it has consistently paid dividends to the shareholders during the 
last so many years.  It is also observed that out of the profit before tax (PBT) of 
Rs.558.46 crore earned in the year 2018
-
19, NBCC paid Rs. 191.53 crore as I
ncome Tax 
to the Government.  The Company had also an operating margin of Rs.561.70 crore 
with the net fixed asset of Rs. 72 crore and net worth of Rs.1564.81 crore in the year 
2018
-
19.  Further, the Company had reserves and surplus of Rs.1384.81 crore in 
the 
year 2018
-
19.  The Committee’s analysis of the financial position of the Company 
reveals that the Company is maintaining good financial health and maintaining its 
profitability consistently.  The Committee however observes that the real sector is going
 
through a phase of slow down and its impact will be felt in the business operations of 
NBCC also.  Admittedly, NBCC is not able to launch new projects on the acquired land 
parcels as these are not feasible and profitable to start new projects due to slow 
down 
in the real estate market as large value of household inventories is pending with NBCC.  
The Committee however observe that the NBCC should take this as an opportunity 
based on their long established credentials and reputation in the market as admitte
dly 

29
 
 
they have been able to deliver the projects at the time when most of the developers 
had failed to timely complete the projects and therefore NBCC should take all necessary 
steps to grab more and more projects taking advantage of the present scenario an
d 
execute them with all seriousness for timely delivery to the clients.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Considering the subdued sentiments prevailing in Real Estate, NBCC has taken a 
conscious & informed decision of not taking up real estate projects on its land
 
parcels 
just to improve its top line. However, considering the factual position and feasibility 
decision has been taken to develop selective land parcels which have potential and the 
inventory when developed on these land parcels can be disposed off in ma
rket with 
reasonable profit/ returns on investment and that too with relative ease. 
 
 
Residential Project at Patna (Phase
-
II) is being started, considering the response &
 
sale 
price of Phase
-
I inventory and another residential project for development has b
een 
identified on land parcel purchased from Air India at Coimbatore. In addition to 
above,monetization plan is being worked out for land parcels at Govindpuram, 
Ghaziabad, Noida, Jaipur, and Alwar. 
 
 
As regards, purchasing of new land parcels this aspect 
is put on hold considering the 
present commitments and unsold inventory. Once the liquidity position of Real Estate 
Vertical improves, decision shall be taken to go in for enhancing the land bank after 
evaluating all available options.
 
(Ministry of Housing
 
& Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
 
7.
 
The Committee observe that nearly 95% of the turnover of the NBCC is coming 
from the Project Management Consultancy (PMC) segment.  It is observed that the 
turnover of NBCC in PMC segment had been steadily increasing till 2016
-
17 and 
thereafter it declined
 
to Rs.5339.32 crore in 2017
-
18 and picked up again to Rs.6331.61 
crore in 2018
-
19 but it declined again by about 24% to Rs.4807.21 crore in 2019
-
20.   
However, Profit Before Tax (PBT) which was Rs.581.17 crore against the turnover of 
Rs.5339.32 crore in 2
017
-
18declined by almost Rs.200 crore to the level of Rs.383.75 
crore in 2018
-
19 when the turnover increased by almost Rs.1000 crore to reach the 
level of Rs.6331.61 crore.  Further, both the turnover and PBT in the segment of PMC 
has gone down to the leve
l of Rs.4807.21 crore and Rs.219.98 crore respectively in the 
year 2019
-
20.   The Committee is concerned to note the sharp decline in the turnover 
to the extent of Rs.1500 crore in 2019
-
20 and decline of almost Rs.165 crore in PBT in 
the PMC segment during
 
the year 2019
-
20.  Taking into account the fact that PMC 
segment constitutes almost 95% of the total business of the NBCC, the Committee find 
that the huge decline in the turnover and PBT in this segment is an alarming signal to 

30
 
 
management of the NBCC.  T
he Committee therefore urge the NBCC to have an in 
depth introspection for the reasons for such huge decline in turnover and profit in the 
PMC segment and take all remedial  measures to reverse the trend in the current 
financial year so as to increase the 
profitability and credibility of the Company.  The 
Committee would like to know the precise action taken by the NBCC in this regard.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Redevelopment of Nauroji Nagar valuing Rs. 2,694 Crore could be started after the 
vacation of 
stay by Hon’ble High Court/ National Green Tribunal (NGT) in February 2020 
but in March 2020 due to outbreak of Covid
-
19 pandemic, work again came to a 
standstill, which affected turnover. In case of Redevelopment of Sarojini Nagar &Netaji 
Nagar total valu
ing Rs. 18,960 Crore, all statutory approvals have been obtained except 
for Tree cutting/ Transplantation approval from Forest Dept, GNCTD for some parts of 
the project. NBCC is constantly pursuing with the authorities for expediting approval 
and expect to
 
start these works expeditiously which will improve the top
-
line and 
bottom
-
line of the Company.
 
 
The balance work of Amrapali Projects in Noida/ Gr. Noida of Rs. 8,500 Crore approx. 
were awarded during the Financial Year 20
-
21 which will further add to th
e top line of 
the Company  in next 3 years.  
 
 
Along with these major projects, NBCC has various high value projects on PAN India 
basis which are in progress. Some of these projects are IIM Sambalpur, Odisha; IIT
-
Mandi, Himachal Pradesh;International Exhib
ition cumConvention center at 
PragatiMaidan, New Delhi; IIT, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha; IIM Vishakhapatnam; AIIMS, 
Deogarh, Jharkhand; AIIMS, Bilaspur, Himachal Pradesh; Bharat Vandana Park, East 
Delhi Hub Karkardooma;Border fencing works in NER etc.
 
(Ministry 
of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
 
 
8.
 
The Committee’s analysis of the financial performance of the Company during 
the last five years reveal that the audited financial results as posted on t
he official 
website of NBCC indicate the sharp decline in income, PBT and PAT of the Company 
in the financial year 2019
-
20.  Thus, the profitability and turnover of the Company 
decreased not only in PMC segment but the overall turnover, profit before tad a
nd 
profit after tax of the NBCC in all segments have shown sharp decline during the 
year 2019
-
20.  Thus, the profitability and turnover of the Company has decreased 
not only in PMC segment but the overall turnover, profit before tax and profit after 
tax of
 
the NBCC in all segments have shown sharp decline during the year 2019
-
20.  
The Committee observe that the overall turnover of the Company has gone down 
from Rs.7141.60 crore in 2018
-
19 to Rs.5179.71 crore in 2019
-
20, thus registering a 

31
 
 
decline of approxi
mately 27%.  The profit after Tax which is posted as Rs.79.86 
crore in 2019
-
20 against Rs.384.11 crore in the year 2018
-
29 has shown a major 
decline to the extent of 79%.  The decline in revenue during 2019
-
20 is spread 
across all segments namely PMC, EPC 
and RED.  The Committee feels that the 
Company should seriously analyses the various factors responsible for such huge 
decline in various segments that affected its performance and profits and revise their 
strategy to encounter the negative trends without 
any delay.  The Committee have 
no doubt that the steep decline of 79% in the profits of the Company during 2019
-
20 is a warning bell to the Company that if key issues related to its performance are 
not addressed in time, the Company may run into rough weat
her in the future.  The 
Committee therefore strongly recommend the NBCC to immediately chalk out a 
structured plan for gearing up their machineries to speed up the execution of the 
projects so that adequate revenue is generatedand the profitability ratio g
ets 
improved particularly when the Company is having a huge order book of Rs.80,000 
crore in domestic market.  
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
A Standing Committee of Sr. level official across the disciplines have been formed to 
look into various issues of cont
ract management and to suggest the systemic 
improvement required for smooth operations of the Company.  Some of the action 
points implemented/ under implementation are as under:
-
 
1
)
 
Executions of works are being done through EPC tender against percentage
 
rate
 
tender.  
 
2
)
 
F
ocus
ed approach on reducingthe bottlenecks in timely 
award of work for timely 
start of work on ground.
 
3
)
 
Contractual action 
against
 
non
-
performing contractors
/ vendors
.
 
4
)
 
Increased
focus on the quality 
assurance. Further, 
quality control units have 
been 
setup under each RBG/SBG/Zones
 
to implement and review the quality of projects
.
 
5
)
 
Advanced Construction
technology 
are being
 
adopted for speeding up the works
 
at 
site
 
and GRIHA/LEED norms 
have been incorporated
 
in all major projects
.
 
6) Structure of the 
RBG/SBGsalongwith role and responsibility of officials have been 
revamped. Zonal In
-
charge has been nominated for all projects; whowill be primarily 
focusing on progress & quality of works. CGM/ED will be responsible for overall 
performance/execution of th
e contract. This will streamlinethe operations with clear 
responsibility and accountability during the course of execution of works.
 
7) Necessary amendments havebeen undertakenin GCC/ Works Manual addressing the 
bottlenecks in contract operationsand facili
tating smooth completion of works. 
 
8) Sub
-
Delegation of Powers has also been suitably amended aiding in faster decision 
making.
 
9) An important reason for reduction of profit level is amendment in GFR
-
2017. Now 
most of the worksare secured in competition 
and NBCC has to quote lower fees to 
get the works.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 

32
 
 
Performance Or Subsidiaries And Joint Ventures of NBCC
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
 
 
9.
 
The Committee note that as on 
September 2019, NBCC had 8 subsidiaries and 
had formed Joint Ventures (JV) with 3 Companies.  The subsidiaries are (i) NBCC 
Services Limited (NSL), (ii)  NBCC Engineering & Consultancy (NECL), (iii) NBCC 
International Limited (NEL), (iv) NBCC Environment E
ngineering Limited (NEEL), (v) 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL), (vi) HSCC (India) Limited (HSCC), 
(vii) NBCC DWC LLC, and (viii) NBCC Gulf LLC (OMAN).  Out of these eight subsidiaries, 
only four are under operation and two subsidiaries viz
. NECL and OMAN have been 
approved by the Board of closure.  The other two subsidiaries viz. NIL and NEEL have 
been approved by DIPAM and the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs for closure.  The 
Committee observe that the three JVs in which NBCC owns 50% 
ownership interest, the 
share of NBCC is very marginal.  In the Joint Venture NBCC
-
MHG, it is only 0.09% of 
total comprehensive income i.e. Rs.30.82 lakh.  Similarly, in Joint Venture NBCC
-
AB, the 
Company had to share a loss of Rs. 0.08 lakh.  In the JV Re
al Estate Development & 
Construction Corporation of Rajasthan Limited (REDCC) the percentage share of total 
comprehensive income is only 0.02% i.e. only Rs.6.78 lakh.  The net profit of HSCL has 
declined from 35.76 Crores in 2017
-
18 to Rs.34.29 Crores in 2
018
-
19.  Similarly the 
Joint Venture NBCC
-
AB made ‘NIL’ profits since the year 2015
-
16.  Likewise, another 
Joint Venture namely Jamal NBCC International (PTY) Ltd. In which NBCC has 49% 
share holding, was dissolved in the year 2018
-
19.  The Committee also 
note that in 
another Joint Venture NBCC
-
RKMillen, its land was acquired by the Government of West 
Bengal and it could not take off and there is a legal case between the co
-
ventures.  
Furthermore, the share of NBCC in the total income of the JVs is like Rs.
30.82 lakh in 
NBCC
-
MHG, Rs.6.78 ;aljom REDCC and Rs.0.08 lakh in NBCC
-
AB in the year 2018
-
19.  
The Committee thus observes that NBCC have not gained from these JVs and if the 
overall expenditure on establishment and management of these JVs is taken into 
ac
count, the NBCC does not appear to be very well placed in terms of any gain from 
these JVs.   The Committee therefore recommends that the NBCC should review its 
participation in these JVs in terms of the business being generated, expenditure 
incurred, prof
it earned and the assets and liabilities owned and take suitable decision in 
the business interest of the Company.  The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in the matter.
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
 
 
10. 
The Committee observes that as per the in
formation given to them, the NBCC 
monitors the performance of their subsidiaries and Joint Ventures through their 
membership in the Board, Board meetings, and regular review meetings and through 
Group Governance Unit/Committee as per the SEBI Circular.  Th
e Committee notes that 
despite adopting all these measures, the performance of the Subsidiaries and Joint 
Ventures of NBCC has not shown any significant improvement.  Four of the Company’s 

33
 
 
subsidiaries have closed down, one subsidiary viz. NIL that was for
med in 2017 to carry 
out the business in overseas countries earned just Rs.3 lakh.  On the other hand, one 
JV was dissolved and another could not take off.  The present three operational JVs are 
not contributing much to the Company’s profit.  The Committee
 
recommends that the 
performance of the Subsidiaries and Joint Ventures should be continuously monitored.  
The Committee is of the view that forming of subsidiaries in House Keeping and 
Maintenance Sectors may be explored by NBCC which would fetch a good b
usiness for 
the Company in the long term.  The Committee recommends that the performance 
parameters of the expected partner companies need to be carefully analyzed before 
entering into new JVs in future and formation of Joint Ventures should be only with 
t
hose Companies which have a sound track record of business and profitability.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government to Recommendations Serial No. 11 and 12
 
 
The Company has total eight (8) subsidiaries in which six(6) are wholly 
owned subsidiaries (100%) namely :
 
1
.
 
NBCC
 
Services Limited (NSL),
 
2
.
 
NBCC Engineerin
g & Consultancy Limited (NECL) 
–
 
under closure
 
3
.
 
NBCC Internat
ional Limited (NIL)
-
 
under closure
 
4
.
 
NBCC Environm
ent Engineering Limited (NEEL) 
-
 
under closure
 
5
.
 
HSCC (India) Limited
, 
and
 
6
.
 
NBCC DWC
-
LLC (a foreign subsidiary)
, 
 
 
One (1) is subsidiary (51%) i.e.
 
 
7
.
 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL)
 
 
One (1) foreign subsidiary namely 
 
 
8
.
 
NBCC Gulf LLC, Oman where NBCC is holding 70% equity.
 
 
And JV Company
 
9
.
 
Real Estate Development and Construction Corporation of 
Rajasthan Ltd
. 
(
REDCCOR
)
 
10
.
 
NBCC MHG
-
JV
 
11
.
 
NBCC
-
AB JV
 
12
.
 
NBCC RK  Millen JV
 
 
Considering the performances and productivities of subsidiaries, NBCC’s Board has 
decided to close four subsidiaries, namely, NBCC Engineering & Consultancy Limited 
(NECL), NBCC Internatio
nal Limited (NIL), NBCC Environment Engineering Limited 
(NEEL) and NBCC Gulf LLC.
 

34
 
 
 
NIL and NEEL are being closed through merger with NBCC; and NECL and NBCC Gulf 
LLC are closing through liquidation process. Further, the closure processes of all 
aforesaid f
our subsidiaries areunderway.
 
 
Further, the remaining four subsidiaries i.e. NSL, HSCL, HSCC and NBCC DWC LLC have 
booked profit after tax of Rs. 412.98 Lakh, Rs. 4,420 Lakh, Rs. 3,763 Lakh and Rs. 
567.71 Lakh respectively in FY 2019
-
20.
 
 
It is also mentio
ned that aforesaid all subsidiaries have been paid dividend to its 
shareholders in FY 2019
-
20.
 
 
Further, NBCC has a Joint Venture with the Government of Rajasthan in the name of 
the ‘Real Estate Development and Construction Corporation of Rajasthan Ltd’, w
here 
both the parties hold 50% of the issued share capital.
 
 
The financials of the subsidiaries & JVs are also placed before Audit Committee of NBCC 
and Group Governance Committee of the Company also monitors the performance and 
business development of the
 
subsidiaries.  
 
 
While formulation of JV is a business decision taken by the Company for exploring new 
business avenues; the recommendation of the committee on performance parameters 
while entering into new JVs have been noted, for future compliance.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Completion of Stressed Projects
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
 
 
11.
 
The Committee observe that major competitors of NBCC in the private sector are 
L&T, Ahluwalia Projects, Naga
rjuna Construction Corporation in the EPC segment; 
Hospitech, Feedback Ventures Pvt Ltd. in the PMC segment and DLF, Unitech, JP 
Infratech and Amrapali in the Real Estate segment.  The Committee however note that 
certain housing/constructions projects of t
he major private players have been stressed, 
unfinished or stalled for various reasons.  The Committee are glad to note that the 
NBCC has been involved in fulfilling the housing needs of the public at large whose 
dreams of owning a house have been shattere
d due to the stressed projects of the 
leading private companies viz. Amrapali, Unitech and JaypeeInfratech.  As informed to 
the Committee, the NBCC has been directed to submit proposal for completion of 16 
stalled / unfinished projects of Amrapali having a
 
total of approximately 46,000 units.  
The NBCC will be the PMC for the project and will be paid PMC fees @8% and all funds 
will be provided to NBCC through various mechanisms as per court directions.  The 
NBCC is expected to earn Rs.619.33 Crore on accoun
t of PMC fees from category A and 

35
 
 
B of the Amrapali projects at NOIDA and GNIDA.  Similarly, in the case of 
JaypeeInfratech Limited which is under insolvency process under IBC code, NBCC 
informed that the NCLT Principal Bench Delhi on 3
rd
 
March 2020 has ap
proved the 
Resolution Plan submitted by NBCC with some modifications & directions.  NBCC intends 
to get amendments on these points from NCALT.  The Government of India has 
extended their timely support in providing necessary approvals for submitting the 
re
solution plan and subsequent revisions.  In case of Unitech, the Government on the 
directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court has nominated NBCC to take up the 
construction of unfinished projects of Unitech as a Project Management Consultancy 
(PMC).The Commit
tee hope that the NBCC will take up the execution works of these 
stressed projects on priority basis which would not only enhance the revenue earnings 
of the company but will also serve the greater purpose of providing quality homes to 
the long awaiting bu
yers within reasonable time frame.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
After obtaining the approval from Ld. Court Receiver, tenders for stalled project of 
Amrapali Group were called for all the 24 residential Projects and awarded to different 
executing agencies. Ou
t of 24 projects, 2 projects namely Eden & Castel have already 
been completed by NBCC and handed over to the Ld. Court Receiver/RWA and the work 
is in progress in remaining 22 projects at various locations. Regarding one commercial 
Project Tech Park, the a
pproval is awaited.
 
 
Court has permitted NBCC to go
-
ahead for sale of unsold inventories vide its order 
dated 02.11.2020 and NBCC is in process of engaging channel partner for immediate 
start of sale for ready to move
-
in as well as under
-
construction inven
tories.
 
 
NBCC has launched the sale of unsold 49 units at various projects. A virtual sale draw 
program was held on 14.06.2021, in the presence of Ld. CourtReceiver and only 20 
units out of 49 units has been sold out which is 40.80% of the total launched u
nits in
-
spite of keeping lesser rates as compared to the prevailing market rates.The total 
residential units in all the projects are approximately 46,575 nos. and residual unsold 
inventory includes 5,229 residential units & 560 commercial units, which are 
available 
for sale in less preferable locations, at different floors/towers/sizes in the same projects 
and very scattered in Noida & Gr. Noida.
 
 
NBCC is in the process of appointing Channel Partners for sale of inventory.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affai
rs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Increasing Global Presence
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
 
 
12.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC have successfully executed diverse and 

36
 
 
complex projects in countries like Libya, Iraq, Yemen, Nepal, Maldives, 
Mauritius, 
Turkey and Botswana.  Presently, the Company has its presence in Maldives, Mauritius, 
Republic of Niger, Dubai and Seychelles where it is implementing various projects.  The 
Company has also secured overseas projects in several African countries
 
like Gambia, 
Liberia, Malawi, Gabon, Togo, Burkina Faso and Zambia but these projects are yet to 
start.  The total value of these projects is approximately Rs.2,000Crore.  The Committee 
note that the NBCC has generated turnover of Rs.2,000Crore. The Commi
ttee note that 
the NBCC has generated turnover of Rs.363.71 Crore from the International projects 
undertaken during the period from 2014
-
2019.  The Committee also note from the 
details furnished that many overseas projects of NBCC were scheduled for comple
tion 
before or during the year 2020.  Some of them are (i) construction of Mahatma Gandhi 
International Convention Centre at Niamey, Niger that was scheduled to be completed 
by 31 October 2019 with a value of Rs. 392 Crore, (ii) New Supreme Court Building,
 
Port Louis, Mauritius that was scheduled to be completed by 24 December 2019, (iii) 
Social Housing at Dagotiere and Mare Tabac, Mauritius that was scheduled for 
completion by 8 February 2020, and (iv) construction of Indian pavilion at Dubai World 
Expo th
at was scheduled to be completed by 31 August 2020 with a value of Rs.232.70 
Crore.  The Committee further note that there are about 8 projects secured in Africa but 
yet to start as in some cases the soil and topographical survey, alternate land 
confirmati
on/allotment are awaited from the host countries.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the status of these projects which were scheduled for completion 
before or during the year 2020.  The Committee recommends that NBCC should make a 
mark in the 
global markets and to achieve this goal, the Company should deliver the 
projects in time with better
-
quality execution without any cost over
-
run.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC has already submitted the DPR of the mentioned projects secured in Africa to 
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA). Further, NBCC is pursuing
 
with the Ministry of
 
External Affairs to take forward these projects of MGCC in 8 countries in Africa. 
 
 
NBCC has been making constant efforts to secure business in Overseas markets; and 
through
 
this sustained efforts, NBCC is in discussion with Govt. of Maldives for the
 
project of 2,000 Social Housing at Hulhumale, Male, Maldives (costing approx. US$ 130 
million), which is in final stages of approvals.
 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have 
been noted for future compliance.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 

37
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)
 
 
13.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC
 
faces several challenges in global market.  As 
per NBCC, one of the major challenges that it faces is the huge shortage of Indian 
Skilled technicians in the construction sector and most of younger generations not 
showing much interest in working overseas 
construction projects.  The other major 
challenge stated to be faced by NBCC is that in many countries, the Company doesn’t 
have physical presence due to which there is difficulty in gathering the data, local 
conditions, logistics etc.  NBCC is making effo
rts to join hands with Indian PSUs for the 
purpose which is certainly a good option in the opinion of the Committee.  The 
contention of NBCC about the huge shortage of Indian skilled technicians and younger 
generation not willing to work overseas does not 
seem plausible in the wake of such a 
high demand for employment in the domestic and international job markets.  The 
young generation is known for the dream it nourishes to work abroad. The Committee 
therefore recommend that for fetching better talents in a
dequate number for their 
overseas projects, NBCC need to publicise the job opportunities in these projects 
through electronic and print media all over the country in all major languages and if 
considered necessary, the deployment in international projects 
should be incentivized 
with country specific exclusive compensation packages to the employees.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted; in case of expert & talented 
people, the customized country specific recruitment
 
will be made with 
adequatepublicizing on local, international and social media platforms. To attract better 
talent, country specific compensation package will be offered with help of local Indian 
Embassies.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 
181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16)
 
 
14.
 
The Committee note that in line with the Central Government’s initiative towards 
Skill India Mission, NBCC has 
given certificates to 1400 construction workers who have 
been equipped with a new set of skills in tune with changing face of the country’s 
construction sector.  On completion of the Recognition to Prior Learning programme 
under Pradhan
 
Mantri
 
Kaushal
 
Vika
sYojna (PMKVY) in collaboration with CSDCI and CII, 
the certificates are awarded by officials of NBCC, CSDCI and CII. The Committee while 

38
 
 
appreciating the initiative taken by NBCC in equipping many people with new set of 
skills in the construction sector a
nd awarding certificates would like to know as to how 
many of these trained people have been gainfully employed in the construction sector 
in domestic and overseas projects.  The Committee feels that such skill development 
programmes should be synchronized
 
in such a way that the trained personnel are able 
to secure gainful employment immediately after their training course is completed.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The employability of all these 2700 workers at the project sites has gone up with the 
certificat
ion of their skill sets though the skill India program. Based on the level of their 
certification (level 
-
1, Level 
–
 
2) they are being considered for higher level jobs (from 
semi
-
skilled to skilled and from skilled to highly skilled) in the same project si
tes or at 
other project sites. Since they are now having a certificate issued by the Government of 
India, their acceptability in overseas market has also gone up.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Comments of
 
the Committee
 
(Please see para 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Human Resource Management
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17)
 
 
15.
 
The Committee was informed that the talent pool of NBCC comprises of some of 
the best talents across engineering, construction, architecture, project management 
and other faculties and the average age of employees in the Company is 43 years.   
The young wo
rkforce of the Company brings new thinking, energy and dynamism in the 
operation of the Company.  As informed to the Committee, the NBCC was recognized in 
July, 2019 as a great place to work and training of 2940 man days were given under 
Company’s undergoi
ng Skill Development initiative.  The Committee observe that there 
were 1847 regular employees in the strength of the NBCC during the year 2019 and out 
of this 313 belong to SC, 62 belongs to ST and 29 employees belong to Differently 
Abled categories.  Wit
h regard to the recruitment of employees during the year 2018
-
19, the Committee observe that NBCC has recruited total 110 persons during the year 
2018
-
19 which comprises in 92 persons in Group A, 01 person in Group B and 17 
persons in Group C.  The recruit
ed employees in different categories were 46 in General 
category, 36 in OBC, 20 in SC and 08 in ST category which reflects that the reservation 
regulations in recruitment of employees are complied with.   The Committee express 
their satisfaction that the N
BCC has been complying with the rules and regulations 
pertaining to the recruitment of reserved category candidates and hope that they will 
keep on making regular induction of human resources of different levels so that young 

39
 
 
professionals engaged at early
 
stage acquire experience and develop required expertise 
to devote their best at later years in the Organization.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As recommended by the Committee, NBCC shall continue to comply with the rules and 
regulations pertaining to the recr
uitment of reserved category candidates and will keep 
on making regular induction of human resources of different levels so that young 
professionals engaged at early stage acquire experience and develop required expertise 
to devote their best at later year
s in the Organization.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18)
 
 
16.
 
The Committee observe that there are 133 women employees at different levels 
the NBCC.  The Group
-
wise strength of wo
men employees is 88 in Group A, 17 in Group 
B and 28 in Group C.  As informed to the Committee, the Company has in place a policy 
on prevention, prohibition and redressal of sexual harassment of women at workplace 
in line with the requirements of the Sexua
l harassment of Women at the Workplace 
(Prevention, Prohibition &
 
Redressal) Act, 2013.  An internal Committee has been set up 
to redress complaints received regarding sexual harassment which functions in 
accordance with the model code of conduct developed
 
by National Commission for 
Woman/Ministry of Woman and Child Development.  The Committee has also been 
informed that no case was filed with regard to the sexual harassment of women 
employees in NBCC during the year 2018
-
19.  The Committee are happy to not
e that 
adequate safeguard mechanism in accordance with the legal requirements has been put 
in place by NBCC to protect their women employees at workplace from any incident of 
sexual harassment and also to get investigated appropriately the reported case in
 
this 
regard.  The Committee are glad to know that no such case was reported during the 
year 2018
-
19 and hope that the NBCC will keep on making their endeavours to provide 
safe and secure environment for their women employees and ensure that they are well 
protected at workplace.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As recommended by the Committee, NBCC shall strive to provide safe and secure 
environment to all women employees at work place. 
 
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2
021)
 
 
 
 

40
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19)
 
 
17.
 
The Committee observe that the Company has maintained cordial industrial 
relations in the organization and provide comprehensive welfare facilities to its 
employees to take care of their health, efficiency, economic
 
betterment so that they 
could give their best at the workplace.  The employees’ participation is also ensured 
through information sharing on a regular basis for seeking their support, suggestions 
and cooperation and thus, the Company has been able to main
tain healthy, cordial and 
harmonious industrial relations at all levels.  The Committee appreciated the generous 
approach of NBCC towards their employees not only for their betterment but also to 
ensure harmonio
us industrial relations in the o
rganisation w
hich in turn increase the 
productivity and output of the Company.  The Committee hope that NBCC will continue 
its pragmatic and advanced human relations approach to garner the best support from 
their employees to take the organization to the new heights.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As recommended by the committee, NBCC shall continue its pragmatic and advanced 
human relations approach to garner the best support from their employees to take the 
organization to the new heights.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Aff
airs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20)
 
 
18.
 
The Committee note that the NBCC created 783 posts during the last 05 years 
and thus provided employment opportunities to the talented people in the sector.  The 
year
-
wise 
creation of the posts indicate that the posts created were 307 in 2015
-
16, 
138 in 2016
-
17, 134 in 2017
-
18, 182 in 2018
-
19 and 22 in 2019
-
20.  The Committee 
also observe that NBCC has given certificates to 1400 construction workers who have 
been equipped wi
th new set of skills.  Further, with regard to the plan for employment 
generation in future, the Committee was informed that NBCC had already drawn a 
comprehensive strategic plan on the manpower planning from the year 2016
-
17 to 
2021
-
22 based on the assess
ment of the expansion of activities, retirements and exit, 
addition of new subsidiaries etc.  The Committee while expressing their satisfaction on 
the planning done in advance for engagement of manpower in successive years, 
recommend that the requirements 
need to be reassessed from time to time based on 
the new developments in the sector and also the increasing use of latest technology in 
the construction sector.  The Committee therefore urge the NBCC to make regular 
induction of employees at different leve
ls based on the actual requirements, provide 
them skill training and acquaintances with latest technology, put in place well defined 
career growth plan and make a provision to incentivize the excellent performance of 
employees from time to time.
 

41
 
 
 
Reply of 
the Government
 
 
As recommended by the committee, NBCC shall work towards making regular induction 
of employees at different levels based on the actual requirements, provide them skill 
training and acquaintances with latest technology, put in place well def
ined career 
growth plan and make a provision to incentivize the excellent performance of 
employees from time to time.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21)
 
19.
 
The Committee was also 
informed that approximately 17810 employees were 
working under the contractors of NBCC.  The Committee observe that there are various 
labour laws and regulations for governing the working conditions, payment of wages, 
safety and security at work place, soc
ial security, compensation in accidents, welfare 
measures etc.  Although the contract workers are not in direct employment of the NBCC 
yet it is a vicarious liability on the part of the Company to ensure that the provision of 
all Labour Laws and regulation
s are scrupulously followed by the Contractors in respect 
of the labourers engaged by them at different sites.  The Committee therefore 
recommends that NBCC should develop some mechanism to ensure the strict and 
honest compliance of the Labour Laws and oth
er related regulations by the Contractors 
to safeguard the interest of the labourers.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
NBCC has incorporated the necessaryregulations and statutory provision in its 
GCC wherein all necessary checks and balances are being defined a
nd they are 
monitored for compliance. However, we have taken the observation of committee in a 
right spirit and working to strengthen our internal mechanism in the Company’s ERP to 
ensure the compliance of the Labour Laws such as CLA, BoCW, PF Act, ESI Act
, 
Employee Compensation Act etc. We are committed to ensure the strict and honest 
compliance of the Labour Laws and other related regulations by the Contractors to 
safeguard the interest of the labourer.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2
/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
 
 

42
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23)
 
 
20.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC allocates 1% of PAT towards R&D budget 
annually.  The Committee are however dismayed to note that the total R&D budget 
allocation of NBCC for the period of 5 
year between 2014
-
2019 was only Rs.16.21 
Crores and the actual expenditure was meager Rs. 7.11 Crores.  When queried about 
the low expenditure under R&D, the Company stated that the deficit in expenditure 
as compared to the budget provision for R&D activit
ies was due to the fact that R&D 
work is a long time consuming process.  Secondly, they are striving hard for receipt 
of appropriate fresh research proposals for sponsorship from the reputed research 
organization.  Further, most of the sponsored research p
rojects have long duration 
ranging from 3
-
5 years and there is a provision of release of grant/installment with 
respect to progress of the research work.  Accordingly in the unfinished sponsored 
research projects, the expenditure to be incurred shall have 
to be carried over to the 
next financial years.  Hence, NBCC expects that the expenditure on R&D will increase 
in future with the boost in R&D activities.  The DPE guidelines encourage CPSUs to 
take
-
up R&D activities and there is no ceiling of 1% as conten
ded by NBCC. Rather, 
in MoUs signed between CPSUs and Administrative Ministries/Departments, 5% 
weightage out of 50% for non
-
financial parameters has been earmarked for R&D 
activities.  The guidelines of DPE further provide the rationale behind R&D activit
ies 
that the changed business environment is highly competitive markets, the rapid pace 
of change in technology, stringent emission norms, quality control criteria heightened 
expectations and demands of customers, lace of transfer of technology and know
-
ho
w from competitors, etc. R&D activities by CPSUs can result in substantial 
increases in market share and competitiveness.  They would help to increase 
profitability and reduce costs.  Focussed R&D programs; combined with new 
international partnerships, can
 
help to address global issues such as climate change, 
health, energy, food security and poverty alleviation.  The Committee also find it 
rather surprising that NBCC is not receiving fresh proposals for sponsorship from the 
reputed research organizations e
specially when there is so much emphasis of the 
Government on ‘Skill Development’ and ‘Make in India’ programmes.  The Committee 
recommends that R&D allocation and expenditure of NBCC be enhanced 
appropriately and more focus on innovative technologies be m
ade and for this 
purpose, the NBCC should tie up with reputed Research Institutes.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC has tied up with reputed research Institutes viz.  IIT Roorkee, CBRI Roorkee, 
Thapar Institutes of Tech.  and   receiving fresh proposals from these institutes with 
focus on innovative and  sustainability technology.  However, the recommendations of 
t
he Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 

43
 
 
Payments to Contractors
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26)
 
 
21.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC has adopted several measures in its te
ndering 
process to ensure transparency, accountability and timely payments to its contractors 
and third parties.  As informed to the Committee, all works above 25 lakh are being 
invited through e
-
tendering system in the NBCC and all tenders for works valui
ng Rs.50 
Crore and above are invited on EPC mode.  Tender documents are prepared by Tender 
Formation Committee (TFC) at the zonal level and after approval by the concerned 
Regional Business Group (RBG) / Strategic Business Group Head is sent to CPG for 
inv
iting tender.   Independent responsibilities of TFC at the zonal level and Tender 
Scrutiny Committee (TSC) at HO level have been defined in the Works Manual.  
Integrity Pact has been adopted in the Company.  Independent External Monitors 
(IEMs) have been a
ppointed in consultation with CVC who closely monitors the 
tendering processes and review the tenders periodically and deals with all complaints 
and corruption issues.  Similarly, mechanism has been put in place for release of 
payment to contractors and th
ird parties.  As per the General Conditions of Contract 
(GCC) of NBCC, the contractor shall become entitled to payment only after NBCC has 
received the corresponding payment(s) from the client/owner for the work done by the 
contractor.  On a query regardin
g delay in payments to third parties/contractors, the 
Ministry in their written replies informed that the major reasons for non
-
payment or 
delay in payment is due to non
-
realization of dues from clients, non
-
submission of 
documents such as insurance policy
, challans, non
-
fulfillment of taxation requirements 
such as non
-
deposition of GST returns, etc.  To further smoothen the payments to 
contractors in current scenario, regular letters are being written to clients along with 
physical follow
-
up by NBCC offici
als for realization of dues from clients by setting down 
the observations raised by them and the results for the same have started to come.  
The Committee was also informed that a grievance portal has been developed for 
contractors and consultants where th
ey can login directly and register their complaints.  
The Committee are however shocked to note that despite all mechanisms put in place, 
as on 9 March 2020, the payment of an amount of Rs.1184 Crores are pending to be 
paid to the Contractors.  The Committ
ee feels that this is a huge liability on the 
Company.
 
The Committee is apprehensive as to how NBCC would be able to clear the 
dues/payments to the contractors especially when the net profit of the Company as per 
the audited results of 2019
-
20 is now only 
Rs.79.86 crores.  Nevertheless, the 
payments have to be made to the contractors for the work done once it is established 
that they have fulfilling all their contractual
 
liabilities.  The Committee would therefore 
recommend that NBCC, in this scenario, shou
ld work out a time bound plan to settle 
these payments so that this huge liability on the part of NBCC is cleared at the earliest.  
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Major outstanding liabilities to contractors are in those projects where client has not 
released 
the corresponding payment. It is to mention that clients like ESIC, Government 

44
 
 
of Haryana for Medical College Mewat, NTPC etc. are not releasing outstanding dues 
payment against the work done by NBCC. In this regard, efforts made by NBCC to 
realize these m
ajor outstanding payments and resolve the issues.
 
 
Even after taking up the matter at the highest level with the client, some issues are 
lingering on due to which level has been raised and matter taken up through 
MoHUAand also at the level of Hon’ble Minis
ter.  Though Arbitrator appointed by PMA 
has given award in favour of NBCC against NTPC in 3 cases of dispute in Barh, 
Farakka&Mouda. NTPC is still delaying payment and violating the basic principles of 
Arbitration which has been taken up by Secretary, MoH
UA with Secretary (Power).
 
 
As per our General condition ofcontract Clause No. 23.2“contractor shall become 
entitled to payment only after NBCC has received the corresponding payment(s) from 
the client/Owner for the work done by the contractor”. Accordingl
y, once the payment 
will be received from the Clients, the same shall be released to the contractors.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 33 of Chapter I of the 
Report)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27)
 
 
22.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC had taken up a sewer work in Jammu and 
Srinagar but due to the closure of the JNNURM scheme and later its merging with 
AMRUT scheme, the NBCC was unable to get funds on these projec
ts.  As informed by 
NBCC, the revised sanction cost for both the projects is Rs.288.2 Crore out of which 
work amounting to Rs.195.30 Crore has been completed.  Now a balance amount of 
Rs.46.95 Crore is required to complete the comprehensive sewer scheme wo
rk of 
Jammu and another Rs.61.20 Crore is required to complete the comprehensive sewer 
scheme work in Srinagar.  The Committee learns that earlier when J&K was ruled by 
the state government, NBCC officials had met with the Deputy Chief Minister and it was 
suggested that the funding for the work may be borne by the State Government.  
However, since there is no state Government now, the project has been stopped due to 
lack of funds.  NBCC have sent letter for approval of the project and CMD
-
NBCC has 
also held
 
meetings in Jammu.  Keeping in view the importance and necessity of the 
sewer project for the people of J&K, the Committee recommends the Government to 
provide fund of Rs.107.15 Crore for completion of the unfinished sewer project in 
Jammu and Srinagar
.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Initially the Sewer projects of Jammu and Srinagar was funded under JNNURM 

45
 
 
scheme but after closing of JNNURM scheme in the year 2014; the Govt. of J&K give 
sanction of balance work under Languishing schemew.e.f 25.02.2019. Under 
l
anguishing scheme, sanction of Rs. 35.95 Crore accorded for Jammu and   Rs. 
42.35 crore accorded for Srinagar. The work is in progress in both the cities and in 
Jammu city the work is near completion.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Redevelopment Projects
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28)
 
 
23.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC has been entrusted with the 
redevelopment work of governmental properties.  Some of the key projects in the 
redevelopment included General 
Pool Residential Accommodation Complex at New 
Moti Bagh, New Delhi which was completed in a phased manner from May, 2009 to 
March, 2012 at a cost of Rs.523.41 crore.  The ongoing redevelopment of Kidwai 
Nagar East, New Delhi is spread over a area of 86 acr
es for an approximate cost of 
Rs.5298 crore.  The NBCC has also been appointed as implementing agency for 
redevelopment of three GPRA colonies in Delhi namely Sarojini Nagar, Netaji Nagar 
and Nauroji Nagar at a total cost of Rs.25000 crore.  The Company ha
s taken up the 
redevelopment work of the existing Pragati Maidan Complex into a world class state
-
of
-
the
-
art integrated Exhibition
-
cum
-
Convention Centre at a cost of approximately Rs. 
2500 crore, redevelopment of AIIMS Western Campus and Ayurvigyan Nagar, 
New 
Delhi for constructing 3000 flats at a cost Rs.5828 crore.  As informed to the 
Committee, the NBCC has adopted self
-
sustaining model in these redevelopment 
projects where no government funding is required and.  The Committee also observe 
that the NBCC 
has shown its willingness to undertake redevelopment works of old 
Railway Stations such as Varansi, Jaipur, JKota, SaraiRohilla, Thane, Margo (Goa), 
Bhubaneswar, Lucknow, Tirupati and Puducherry on global standards.  The NBCC has 
also taken the redevelopme
nt model of self
-
revenue generation outside Delhi to 
other states such as Rajasthan (Jaipur), Odisha (Bhubaneswar), Maharashtra 
(Wadala Mumbai) and NER states like Tripura (Agartala).  Further, renovation work 
at PuranaQila, lighting works at Red Fort and 
renovation of Historic Victoria Memorial 
& Indian Museum in Kolkata are few such examples.  The Committee observes that 
NBCC has huge opportunities in the redevelopment of residential and commercial 
properties and may capitalize on these opportunities by s
ecuring more and more 
projects because the self
-
sustaining model looks quite attractive and is definitely 
beneficial to all stake holders.  The Committee expect that NBCC will focus on this 
segment of their business more vigorously and take initiatives of 
offering their expert 
services to the government and other owners of the properties for its redevelopment 
on a concrete and sound self
-
sustaining business model.
 
 

46
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC is currently doing Redevelopment of 3 GPRA colony
-
 
Nauroji 
Nagar, Netaji Nagar 
and Sarojini Nagar, with total sanctioned cost of Rs 24,682 Cr including 30 years of 
O&M. Further NBCC is doing another redevelopment project of Railway 
-
 
Redevelopment of Gomti Nagar Railway Station with estimated cost of construction 
as 
Rs 360 Cr.
 
These redevelopment projects are based on self
-
sustaining model which have their own 
challenges. 
 
 
Challenges: 
 
1
)
 
In Re
-
development projects one of the major challenges is to get the buildings 
vacated and shifting of services/utilities. The enc
roachments existing for years are 
difficult to be removed.
 
2
)
 
Real Estate market is quite volatile and its volatility adversely affects the sales 
realization as well as planned revenue which is backbone to fund these projects. 
 
3
)
 
It is observed that maintaining
 
the positive cash
-
flow is quite difficult in initial stages 
on these projects which affect the progress. Initially infusion of seed money of 
approx.
 
20
-
25% of cost of the project is very vital to start project preparatory works, 
design, and drawing, payme
nt of fees to statutory authorities and mobilization of 
site. 
 
4
)
 
Normally the sale realization is based on achievement of certain stages i.e. 
Construction Linked Payment Plan. It is observed that there is a gap in sales 
realization and expenditure incurred a
t site in the beginning and it tapers down 
towards end/completion of project. 
 
5
)
 
In order to make these self
-
sustaining businesses model more robust and successful, 
provision of initial fund support of 20
-
 
25% from client/Ministry may be kept in the 
agreemen
t to kick off the project smoothly. This initial investment may however be 
recovered from the project once the construction work starts in full swing and there 
is sufficient realization from sales/marketing. 
 
 
Further there should be provision of joint mee
ting of various stake holders /ministries 
every quarterly to address various issues which affects the progress on these projects 
given the complex nature of these projects.
 
 
In addition to above, NBCC is exploring the self
-
revenue generation model for 
deve
lopment of various land parcels for AIIMS, Government of Andhra Pradesh, and 
Government of Karnataka among others.  
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
 
 

47
 
 
Diversification And Opportunities
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.
 
No. 29)
 
 
24.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC intends to diversity in various areas in 
future.  Some of those areas are (i) contributing in execution of stalled and stopped 
projects of realtors who are under financial stress,  (ii) entering into collaborat
ion / 
joint venture as a co
-
developer/implementing agency for PMC, project branding, 
sales, marketing on the licensed land owned by the private firms or government 
agencies  (iii)  taking of large scale EPC projects on PPP models,  (iv) commercial 
exploita
tion of surplus land available with CPSUs / Government Departments for their 
revival / modernization (NAWADCO, Air India, etc.)  (v) expansion of its 
redevelopment projects from Delhi to other parts of the country,  (vi)  heritage 
restoration work, etc.   
When Committee sought information on NBCC’s role in smart 
cities and construction of housing projects under affordable housing schemes, NBCC 
stated that it is not playing any active role in smart cities but will enter soon in this 
area with their work in R
aipur smart city.  The Ministry however informed that NBCC 
should engage in work of smart cities on their own strength instead of the 
government engaging it.  The Committee is in agreement with the views of the 
Ministry.  The Committee is in agreement with
 
the views of the Ministry.  The 
Committee believe that with the slowdown in Real Estate market, the returns on 
investing in Real Estate have significantly dropped in last few years and the trend of  
demand for investment purposes has been declining very f
ast.  The Committee 
therefore are of the opinion that the NBCC needs to diversify its activities and in this 
regard, the expansion of its redevelopment projects in Delhi and other parts of the 
country, taking up large scale EPC projects on PPP models, taki
ng up of projects of 
affordable housing schemes and venturing into smart city projects on its own 
strength would be gainful and will provide a strong financial base to the Company.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC is exploring / envisaging redevelopment proj
ects in various parts of Country and 
some of the Major upcoming projects are following:
-
 

 
MAP Housing for Eastern Naval Command Vishakhapatnam 
 

 
Twin Tower Project, Bengaluru
 

 
DelhiJal Board Redevelopment Project at Delhi
 

 
Redevelopment of Hemisphere propertie
s in Delhi and other locations
 
NBCC is also interacting with Srinagar Smart City Limited for infrastructural 
development works at Srinagar i.e. Water Supply, Sewerage, Roads, Housing etc. 
 
 
The above projects are being pursued on the strength and credentia
l of NBCC.
 
NBCC is also taking initiative in other sectors namely Aviation, Warehouse, Solar & 
Hydro Power Infrastructure, Irrigation works such as Canal lining etc.   
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 

48
 
 
Environmental Concerns And Waste Management System
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31)
 
 
25.
 
The Committee observe that the construction activities by its very nature, 
generate a lot of dust and demolition waste.  The Committee was informed that the 
focus of NBCC 
is to minimize pollution and achieve zero waste emission during its 
construction activities.  The NBCC intends to achieve this through recycling of 
construction and demolition waste which could be reused in the construction process 
and the initiative in th
is regard has been taken in the project of redevelopment of 
Kidwai Nagar East, New Delhi.  Besides this, the NBCC has also taken up the measures 
like (i) prohibition of grinding and cutting of building materials in open area  (ii)  
prohibition of carrying 
construction materials in uncovered vehicles  (iii)  providing Wind 
Breaker of appropriate height (iv) putting in place water sprinkling system  (v) covering 
loose soil, sand, construction and demolition waste or other construction materials and 
(vi) adequ
ate dust mitigation system during excavation of soil.  The Committee 
appreciates the measures taken by NBCC to address the environmental concerns during 
their construction activities and hope that these measures will be effectively taken at all 
constructio
n sites of NBCC to keep the environment cleaner and healthier for all the 
inhabitants in the surroundings.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As recommended by the Committee, NBCC shall continue to take measures to address 
the environmental concerns during construc
tion activities at all construction sites of 
NBCC to keep the environment cleaner and healthier for all the inhabitants in the 
surroundings.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32)
 
 
26.
 
The Committee observe that waste management is a critical component in the 
construction sector.  Huge quantities of demolition waste as well as some quantity of 
construction waste are generated in each project.  The Committee was informed that 
NBCC, with 
regard to the projects in Delhi, has made it mandatory for the contractor 
to transport and deposit all the demolition waste at a recognized construction and 
demolition waste managem
ent facility within Delhi/NCR. 
Further, the contract 
document also makes it
 
mandatory for the construction contractor to procure and 
utilize various recycled products in the construction activities like bricks, aggregate, 
kerb stones, paver blocks etc. from the same recycling facility commensurate with 
the quantity of C&D waste a
nd thus, the entire C&D waste will be utilized in the 
project itself and nothing will remain to become a burden on environment and 

49
 
 
g
overnment dumping facilities.  
The Committee are happy to note that reasonable 
measures for management of construction and d
emolition waste have been taken by 
NBCC in their c
onstruction projects in Delhi. 
The Committee observes that 
construction and demolition waste are major contributors to the environmental 
pollution in the surroundings and therefore recommend that the 
measures of 
construction and demolition waste management system launched in Delhi needs to 
be replicated in all projects of NBCC at different locations in the country and abroad.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
It is apprised to committee that NBCC has made it 
mandatory for its architects and 
consultants to design the
 
project in such a
 
manner
 
as to optimize utilization of 
products made from recycled C&D waste and compute
 
the quantities for their 
utilization in various items in
 
construction. Moreover, contractors
 
have been directed 
to execute the project in such a manner that the quantity of products made from 
recycled C&D waste be necessarily used in construction. In case the contractor fails 
to use
 
the specified quantity of 'products made from recycled C&D waste
', a
 
penalty 
of Rs. 250 per MT of the shortfall will be levied on the
 
contractor. The necessary 
amendments have been made in NBCC GCC (General Conditions of Contract).
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33)
 
 
27.
 
The Committee observe that the NBCC aims to establish a systematic waste 
management system with stipulated techniques.  It includes (i) Organized Collection 
and Segregation of Waste  (ii)  Organic Waste Compactors (OWC) and
 
(iii) Recyclable 
waste to be recycled at site or compacted and outsourced to external agencies.  As per 
the system, segregation of municipal solid waste (MSW) will be encouraged at source 
itself by provision of separate wet/dry bins in each unit and provi
sion of dedicated 
garbage collection bins both in basements and public areas and these segregated 
garbage is to be treated as per the MSW Rules, 2016.  Biodegradable waste is proposed 
to be treated and the resultant manure will be used for green belt 
devel
opment/gardening and the balance manure will be supplied for gardening and 
development of neighboring cities.  For recyclable waste, dedicated recycle plants will 
be installed at sites for plastic and paper waste and in case of excess demand, waste 
compact
ors will be installed at dedicated locations on sites and the recyclable waste will 
be collected here and outsourced for recycling to selective external agencies.   Further, 
there will be no transportation of liquid waste and solid waste from the site to l
andfills 
which will reduce the burden on the civic infrastructure of local bodies.  The Committee 
are glad to know the various systemic mechanisms being planned by NBCC to introduce 
to effectively deal with the solid waste and liquid waste and express thei
r hope that 
these measures will be translated into action very soon so that not only the aim of zero 

50
 
 
waste emission is achieved successfully by NBCC but also a better ambience and 
environment friendly atmosphere is created for the inhabitants in the locali
ties.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
As recommended by the committee, NBCC shall continue its efforts towards establishing 
a systematic waste management system with the aim of zero waste emission and also 
for better ambience and environment friendly atmosphere f
or the inhabitants in the 
localities.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34)
 
 
28.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC has volunteered to associate 
itself with 
Swatch Bharat Abhiyan and constructed community and public toilets at 30 locations of 
Municipal Corporations of Delhi (NDMC, EDMC and SDMC) and 100 nos. of Bio toilets at 
Schools for Girls students in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Wes
t Bengal, 
Tripura, Assam and Uttrakhand.  As informed to the Committee, the NBCC works with 
communities near its operations to implement a range of programs that positively 
impact in their lives and contribute in areas such as health, education, nutrition,
 
empowerment, infrastructure development and local employment.  During 2018
-
19, the 
major achievements of NBCC under CSR activities had been (i) Conservation, 
Restoration and Development of Purana
 
Qila  (ii) Sahara Hostel for War Windows of the 
Indian Navy
 
at Vasant
 
Kunj, New Delhi  (iii) Construction of Saink Rest House (SRH) at 
Betul, Madhya Pradesh  (iv)  Education scholarship for tribal girl students at Kalinga 
Institute of Social Sciences, Bhubaneswar  (v)  Allocation of CSR Funds for ‘Swachh 
Bharat Ko
sh’ set up by the Central Government of India (vi) Construction of Gramalayas 
including Sewerage & Sanitation facilities at village Harchandpur, Haryana  (vii) 
Construction of CC Road and U Drain from Shankar Nagar Crossing to Ganeshpur Police 
Station, Bas
ti, Uttar Pradesh.  The Committee observe that the projects of NBCC are 
spread all over the country and therefore after taking into account the nature of the 
operations of the Company and its impact on the inhabitants in the surrounding areas, 
the Committe
e desire that the NBCC should proactively take up CSR projects for the 
benefit of the people and their families living in nearby areas of the operational projects 
of the Company.  The Committee further recommend that the NBCC should not only 
spend CSR fund
s to fulfill the minimum obligations as laid down in the Companies Act, 
2013 for CSR activities but also should take up more and more CSR activities on their 
own keeping in view the requirements of the communities/families living near by the 
construction s
ites especially the poor and from the marginalized sections of the society.  
The Committee also desire that the maintenance of the physical assets like community 
and public toilets constructed in the MCD area and also in the schools must be 

51
 
 
maintained prop
erly to ensure that these are in usable condition for time to time.  The 
Committee would therefore like the NBCC to apprise them of the measures taken for 
maintenance of the toilets constructed by them under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Any asset created by CSR Project / Activity is handed over to the concerned Govt. 
Authority for its use and upkeep. 
 
 
NBCC has time and again taken up the matter with MCD regarding the maintenance 
of the toilets constructed under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 
but no efforts have been 
taken by MCD to maintain the public toilets to be in usable condition.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 36 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35)
 
 
29.
 
The Committee however glad to note that the NBCC has incurred actual 
expenditure more than the mandatory CSR budget during the last five years as is 
evident that against the mandatory requirement of CSR expenditure of Rs.42
9.87 lakh 
in 2014
-
15, 487.96 lakh in 2015
-
16, 773.66 lakh in 2016
-
17, 876.42 lakh in 2017
-
18 
and 950.96 lakh in 2018
-
19, the NBCC incurred actual expenditure of Rs.435.44 lakh, 
870.54 lakh, 873.46 lakh, 895.61 lakh and 978.58 lakh respectively during these
 
years.  
The Committee while expressing their great satisfaction on the overall expenditure 
incurred by NBCC much more than the mandatory requirement during the last five 
years, expect the NBCC to take up more CSR activities on education, health and shelte
r 
of poor families so that the benefit of CSR activities reach the most deserving and 
needy class of people who are otherwise deprived of basic facilities.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC CSR Div. has been guided by the various guidelines issued by DPE from
 
time to 
time and the common theme identified each year.
 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance and NBCC will 
continue to ensure that the benefit of CSR activities reach the most deserving and 
needy class of people who are 
otherwise deprived of basic facilities.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 

52
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36.1)
 
 
30.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC informed that till 2017, C&AG audit team was 
directly conducting tra
nsaction audit of Regional Business Groups (RBGs)/Strategic 
Business Groups (SBGs) and Inspection Report was sent to the respective RBGs/SBGs 
with a copy to CMD/Director (Finance) of NBCC.  The replies to the Inspection reports 
were directly submitted by t
he respective RBG/SBG office to the C&AG team for 
settlement.  After August 2017, new modalities were introduced whereby the Internal 
Audit Division (IAD) at Head Office will coordinate with the transaction audit of NBCC.  
IAD will coordinate with RBGs/SBG
s/Divisions at Head Office for onwards submission of 
replies to outstanding transaction audit paras to C&AG office.  Accordingly, 
reconciliation of old outstanding paras was done with CAG office by IAD.  Total 
outstanding paras in NBCC as on 1
st
 
April 2019 were 296.  Out of this 143 were 
settled/transferred by CAG during aCM in April 2019.  So there was a balance of 150 
audit paras and 17 audit paras were added for transaction audit during 2017
-
18 taking 
the total number of outstanding paras to 1
70 as on 31
st
 
August, 2019.  The Committee 
noted that out of the 170 pending audit paras, 23 paras relate to excess payment/under 
or delayed recovery from contractor, 20 paras relate to discrepancies in tendering 
procedures, 19 paras relate to delay in exe
cution of work and 11 paras relate to non
-
levying/short imposition of LD on contractor while 39 are miscellaneous issues.  As per 
the latest written response furnished to the Committee by NBCC, they have furnished 
replies to 140 audit paras to C&AG office 
and remaining 30 paras are being pursued 
with the concerned Departments/RBGs/SBGs.
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36.2)
 
31s.
 
During the course of evidence, it was admitted that currently there were about 
160 audit pending paras and NBCC expected to settle anoth
er 100 paras in the one
-
to
-
one meeting scheduled with C&AG in the last week of March or the first week of April 
2020.  The Committee note that even before the new modalities were introduced after 
2017, the number of pending audit paras were 296 which consi
derably huge. In the 
opinion of the Committee, the number of audit paras reflects the number of 
violations/non
-
compliance of rules and procedures by the Company.  So more number 
of audit paras are not a healthy sign.  The Committee therefore recommends tha
t NBCC 
should vigorously pursue these pending audit paras with the concerned 
Departments/RBGs/SBGs and get them settled with the C&AG at the earliest.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
to Recommendations S. No. 36.1 and 36.2
 
 
The matter for settlement of outstandi
ng CAG IR paras was rigorously taken up with 
CAG, MAB
-
Infrastructure office by NBCC Internal Audit Division. Despite Covid
-
19 
lockdown during April
-
May,2020 Principal Director, MAB
-
 
Infrastructure, CAG agreed to 
review the replies and accordingly discussio
ns were held on the outstanding paras and 

53
 
 
replies through VC/Tele
-
conferencing and 116 nos. paras were settled by CAG office 
(including 20 nos. of paras transferred to NBCC for settlement through Management).
 
Subsequently in September, 2020 on request of N
BCC, Audit Committee of CAG was 
also convened whereby total 44 nos. of paras were settled by CAG office (including 
27nos. transferred to NBCC for settlement through Management).
 
 
Thus, out of 170 nos. of outstanding paras total 160 nos. of paras were remov
ed from 
CAG records and only 10nos. of paras from the list of old paras are left outstanding.
 
 
Meanwhile, during the course of audit for FY 2019
-
20 &2020
-
21, 71 no. of CAG IR 
paras have been issued by CAG team. 
 
 
As on date, 81
 
no. of IR paras (including 1
0 old paras) are outstanding with CAG out of 
which replies to 20 paras have been submitted to CAG office and rigorous follow up is 
being done with RBG/SBGs offices for submission of replies for balance paras.
 
 
Further, it is pertain to inform here that in 
last 2 years, 308 nos. of Paras have been 
settled through CAG office.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 39 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
 
 

54
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
 
 
Capacity Building And Research & Development (R&D)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22)
 
 
 
The Committee note that the (i) Monolithic Concrete 
Construction System Using 
Aluminium Form Work, (ii) Monilithic Concrete Construction System using Plastic 
Aluminium Formwork, and (iii)  Industrialized 3
-
S System using Cellular Light Weight 
Concrete Slabs & Precast Columns (Pre
-
Cast/Prefab) have been prop
osed for 
implementation by NBCC.  The adoption of these three technologies will result in faster 
& better quality of construction and reduction of pollution from dust emitting from 
construction sites due to use of offsite manufactured concrete elements/mem
bers, 
eliminating the traditional brick mortar on
-
site construction activities.  In the past, NBCC 
constructed and is also presently executing various projects with technologies like 
Composite Steel Structures, Pre
-
Cast, Pre
-
Stressed Technology and Mechani
zed, Co
-
Polymer Based Rainwater Harvesting Structure, etc.  The Committee have further been 
informed that NBCC has signed MoU with (i) Hungary based Gremound Engineering 
Limited for adoption of a non
-
tectonic system that employs a unique concrete 
technolog
y for faster construction of mass housing projects (ii) Polish firm named Bollis 
S.A in order to bring in highly energy efficient ETICS Technology solution to India and 
its neighbouring countries for its adoption in construction of Green Buildings and (iii
) 
FortumOyj, a Finland Company for developing electric, vehicle charging infrastructure in 
all upcoming NBCC construction projects across India.  The broad scope was to 
enhance capacity building through mutual collaboration.  However, during the course of 
its implementation, it was observed that due to several factors such as non proven / 
certified technologies, high cost of supply & installations and clients acceptance, these 
technologies could not be infused in NBCC projects.  Moreover, NBCC informed that
 
all 
the three MoUs
 
/ MoBE have expired and due to 
aforesaid reasons, NBCC did not 
extend its validity.  The Company has further informed that it has formed “Centre for 
Innovation & R&D” division in collaboration with IIT Roorkee in the year 2014 to look 
a
fter R&D activities.  Thus, NBCC adopted an approach of collaborative R&D for 
capacity building to carry out R&D activities.  Accordingly, they have sponsored 
research projects to IITs and
 
premier research organizations and till date 19 projects 
have been 
sponsored.  The MoU was signed with IIT Roorkee on 7
th
 
November, 2014 
for establishing a R&D centre on “Sustainable Civil Infrastructure” at their Greater Noida 
Extension Campus for undertaking Research projects, training of NBCC Engineers etc.  
Further, M
oU has been extended for next 5 years. It was also informed that IIT 
Roorkee has 15
-
20 projects in which two are in advance stage and expected to be 
patented.  The Committee are unable to comprehend as to why the validity of the MoU 
signed for enhanced cap
acity building has not been extended.  The Committee also 

55
 
 
desire to be apprised about the status of 15
-
20 projects of IIT Roorkee.
 
 
The Committee hope that the induction of new technology will on one side reduce the 
cost and time in accomplishment of the p
roject and on other side will strengthen the 
structure with better interior and exterior finishing.  The Committee would like the 
NBCC to increasingly use the best global technology in their projects and for this 
purpose may collaborate with global leaders
 
in this field.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Some of 
global
ly acclaimed
 
technologies are being used in projects to reduce the cost 
and time
;
 
and
 
to
 
improve the
 
overall
 
quality
 
of finishes
.  
Some of the new/ advanced 
technologies implemented by NBCC are as und
er: 
 

 
PT Slab & Beam for thinner section & Long
er
 
span
 
length.
 

 
Composite 
Steel
 
Structure
 

 
Monolithic Concrete Construction system using aluminum formwork
 

 
Light Gauge steel Framed (LGSF) structures 
 

 
Prefab
/ 
Pre
-
engineered Structures
 
and materials
 

 
Construction
 
of basement with Diaphragm Walls
 

 
P
olymer based Rain Water Harvesting Structures.
 

 
Di
-
Grid System , Deck Slab and with Precast Partition
 

 
Fly Ash concrete
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
 

56
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Board of Directors
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
 
 
1.
 
The Committee note that the Board of NBCC comprises the 
sanctioned posts 
of 4 Functional Directors, 2 Government Nominee Directors and 6 Independent 
Directors.  The Committee however observe that out of the 6 posts of Independent 
Directors, only one post has been filled
-
up and 5 posts are remaining vacant for 
m
ore than a year.  Regarding the large number of vacancies of the Independent 
Directors, the Committee was informed that the position of Independent Directors of 
the company got vacant due to completion of their tenures on 15 June 2019 and 
that requests had
 
been made from time to time to the administrative Ministry for 
appointment of requisite number of Independent Directors including one Woman 
Independent Director on the Board of the Company.  The Committee observes that 
though one Independent Woman Directo
r has been appointed with effect from 1
st
 
August 2019, the appointment of other Independent Directors are however yet to be 
made.  The Committee observe that as per the guidelines issued by the Department 
of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries
 
and Public Enterprises vide their 
OM No. 18(6)/91
-
GM dated 16.03.1992, a panel of suitable persons who could be 
considered for appointment of non
-
official part time Directors on the Boards of PSEs 
is to be maintained centrally by the Department of Public 
Enterprises and this panel 
is to be prepared in consultation with PESB and the Secretary of the concerned 
administrative Ministry.  This Committee also in their Fourth Report (Twelfth Lok 
Sabha) had expressed their opinion that shortage of non
-
official Dir
ectors on the 
Board deprives the Undertaking of expert guidance of seasoned professionals and 
technocrats and the Committee had therefore recommended in the said Report that 
the strength of non
-
official Directors in PSUs should be brought to the level 
stip
ulated in the guidelines without further loss of time.  The Committee strongly 
feels that Independent Directors act as a guide to the Company for bringing 
improvement in the corporate credibility and standards of governance.  They also 
help the Company in 
bringing Independent judgement and act as a bridge between 
management and shareholders by encouraging the implementation of the principles 
of corporate governance ensuring accountability and transparency in the functioning 
of the Company and persuading for
 
various mandatory disclosures.  Taking into 
account the important role and significant contributions by Independent Directors, 
the Committee is of the strong view that vacancies of Independent Directors on the 
Board should not be left unfilled for long pe
riod of time as has happened in this 
case.  The Committee do not find any plausible explanation for non
-
filling of the 
vacancies of Independent Directors in NBCC for
 
such a long period particularly when 

57
 
 
the DPE is expected to maintain a panel of suitable p
ersons for such appointments.  
The Committee are of the definite opinion that since the tenure of the Directors was 
already known, the Government should have processed the appointment to these 
posts in advance so that the new incumbents could have taken up
 
the posts 
immediately after these were vacated.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the vacant posts of Independent Directors be filled up by the 
Government immediately without any further loss of time and guidelines of DPE be 
scrupulously
 
followed in the appointment of Directors on the Board of the Company.  
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of 
three months. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC (India) Limited is a Government owned enterprise, the p
ower to appoint 
functional/ Official, Part
-
time Directors/ non
-
Official Part
-
time Directors (Independent 
Directors) vests with the Government of India. The appointments of Directors aremade 
by the Appointment Committee of Cabinet (ACC) on recommendations o
fAdministrative 
Ministry, i.e., Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.
 
 
After vacancy of the position of Independent Directors due to completion of tenure of 
six (6) Independent Directors, requests have already been made by NBCC to the 
Administrative 
Ministry, i.e., Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) through 
various letter correspondence dated February 24, 2021, December 2, 2020, November 
2, 2020, October 7, 2020, August 27, 2020, May 23, 2020, February 25, 2020, February 
7, 2020 November 7,
 
2019, October 21, 2019; August 27, 2019; July 26, 2019; 
February 18, 2019 and January 02, 2019 for appointment of requisite number of 
independent Directors (including one
-
Woman Independent Director) on the Board of 
the Company. Further, National Stock Exc
hange (NSE) and BSE India Limited (BSE) 
sought clarification several times and levied penalty due to non
-
compliance on 
Composition of Board and constitution of Statutory Committees (Audit Committee and 
Nomination & Remuneration Committee). In view of the a
bove, NBCC duly clarified to 
NSE and BSE  several times and submitted reply that being a Government owned 
enterprise, the power to appoint functional/ Official, Part
-
time Directors/ non
-
Official 
Part
-
time Directors (Independent Directors) vests with the Go
vernment of India. The 
appointments of directors are made by the ACC on recommendations ofAdministrative 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. Further, the same was informed to 
Administrative Ministry also.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affai
rs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
 

58
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
 
 
2.
 
The Committee observe that NBCC had undertaken 185 projects during the 
period from the year 2014
-
19 a
nd presently the Company has an order book of 
approximately Rs. 80,000 crore besides an international order book of Rs. 2,000 crore.  
During examination of the subject, the Committee had found that the average rate of 
completion of project  of NBCC had bee
n only Rs. 4000 crore per year and therefore 
had desired to know from NBCC the action plan for completing the huge order book of 
Rs. 80,000 crore in a definite time frame.  The Committee was informed that execution 
of the works depends on the availability 
of incumbrance
-
free land, availability of funds 
from clients and getting statutory clearances from various government bodies.  The 
major redevelopment projects of GPRA at New Delhi (Nauroji Nagar, Sarojini Nagar, 
Netaji Nagar) valuing more than Rs.30,000 c
rore are held up due to various petitions 
filed in the Hon’ble NGT and Hon’ble High Court of Delhi.  Further, major projects of 
SDMC, New Delhi, WTC, Guwahati, DDA projects at Sanjay Lake, Trilok
 
Puri, New Delhi, 
redevelopment projects of Railway Stations 
at various places in the country could not 
kick off due to various reasons. The Committee are of the opinion that cost and time 
overrun for whatsoever reasons do leave its impact on the credentials of the Company 
and therefore, sustained efforts needs to b
e made to sort out various issues in a 
definite time frame.  The Committee feel that securing order is only the beginning of 
the race and the real test lies in successful execution of the contacts to the satisfaction 
of the clients in the fixed timeline.  
The huge order book of Rs.80,000 crore in domestic 
market and Rs.2,000 crore in international market while on one side gives a great 
satisfaction for being able to secure such gigantic work order but on the other side it 
thrust upon the NBCC a greater resp
onsibility to effectively encounter the challenges 
and meet the expectations of the clients by successfully executing these projects in the 
scheduled time.  The Committee therefore strongly recommends the NBCC to come out 
with a structured plan of action t
o timely deal with the complexities of the various 
issues involved including expediting the disposal of the pending court cases so that the 
projects could start early and completed within the allocated time
-
frame.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Timely execution
 
of projects is prime focus area of the company as on date. There are 
various complexities which are unique to each project which is being handled by 
structured action plan.
 
 
Re
-
organizing the major areas of execution is done at CMD/Directors level. System
 
improvements in operations are
 
being reviewed periodically by a committee formed for 
the purpose. The standardization of brands/ makes for various materials and 
incorporation of advanced/new materials& faster construction technologies
 
are also 
under imple
mentation. The company is also executing major projects on EPC mode to 
avoid time & cost over runs.
 
 

59
 
 
There are numerous mandatory statutory approvals like building layout approval, tree 
cutting permission, AAI approval, permission from transportation depar
tment etc. 
before initiation of a project.
 
 
Time and efforts required for departmental clearance is an issue which results in overall 
delay in starting of project on ground. It is suggested that single
-
window clearance for 
the entire process may be 
developed at appropriate level for simplification and ease of 
doing business. This integrated approach under one roof will avoid unnecessary delays 
in starting project and will also help in
 
managing the cost of construction.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Af
fairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
NBCC’s Role As A Land Management Agency
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24)
 
 
3.
 
The Committee note that NBCC has been designated by the Government of India 
as Land Management Agency (LMA) vide the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
OM dated 7 September 2016 for disposal of movable and immovable assets of sick/loss 
making CPSUs.  T
he DPE vide its OM dated 14 June 2018 issued guidelines for time 
bound closure of sick/loss making CPSUs and disposal of their movable and immovable 
assets wherein NBCC and EPIL were suggested as LMA.  As per these guidelines, LMA is 
to be nominated by the
 
Administrative Ministry/Department/Board of the CPSUs 
concerned to manage, maintain and assist in disposal of their assets.  The main role of 
NBCC as LMA would be to (i) identify, manage, maintain and, if required, engage 
security agency for the watch and
 
ward of the assets on contract basis for the CPSUs 
against payment.  (ii)  to validate the information provided by CPSUs regarding the 
land/immovable assets,  (iii) examination of current land use, FAR and the land use as 
per the local laws applicable in 
that area (iv) valuation of land on the basis of applicable 
circle rates,  (v) work out the reserve price of land (vi) assess the use of land for 
affordable housing and shall ascertain from the MoHUA about any such requirement of 
land for affordable housin
g so that such land can be transferred as per guidelines of 
MoHUA,  (vii) disposing off the land after assessing the requirement of land for 
affordable housing by MoHUA,  (viii)  to submit its recommendations about the further 
course of action regarding pr
operties which could not be disposed during the bidding.  
NBCC informed that it had written letters to 75 loss making CPSUs which were under 
closure on the basis of information gathered from various sources including websites.  
However, 24 CPSUs denied and
 
8 CPSUs were considering appointing NBCC as LMA.  As 
per the information furnished to the Committee, NBCC was appointed LMA by 14 CPSUs 

60
 
 
and has disposed off 19 land parcels of 6 CPSUs measuring about 486 acres at a value 
of about 870 crores.  NBCC further
 
informed that as per the DPE guidelines, LMA is 
entitled to land management fee which would be 0.5% of the value realized from 
disposal of assets subject to a maximum Rs. 1 Crore.  The Committee however note 
that till date NBCC has received just Rs.2.06 c
rore as LMA including advance which 
constitutes only 0.23% of the value of assets disposed.  The Committee construes from 
the replies furnished by NBCC and MoHUA that the task to act as LMA was imposed 
upon NBCC by the
 
Government but simultaneously it was 
not made mandatory on the 
part of the loss making CPSUs to appoint NBCC as their Land Management Agency.  
Further, it is not clear whether NBCC was consulted before being designated as LMA for 
the loss making CPSUs.  It is also not clear as to why NBCC is 
not designated as LMA by 
the Government for disposal of excess/unused land of profit making CPSUs.  The 
Committee would like clarification on these issues.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
In the DPE guidelines dated 14.06.2018 para 2 (iv) NBCC and EPIL has been
 
suggested 
as LMA by DPE vide its guidelines dated 14.06.2018 and LMA shall be nominated by the 
administrative Ministry/ Department/ the Board of the CPSE under closure to manage, 
maintain and assist in disposal of land. 
 
 
The question regarding 
appointment of NBCC as LMA for loss making CPSEs or 
disposal of excess/unused land of profit making CPSEs pertains to Government of 
India. Further, NBCC is ready to take up all such project including monetization of 
assets, for Government bodies and CPSEs.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25)
 
 
4.
 
The Committee further observe that NBCC after undertaking so many 
functions as LMA for so many years could earn only Rs.2.06 Crore so far wh
ich is not 
even 0.05% of the entitled value of the land disposed off which it was supposed to 
get as per the DPE guidelines.  In carrying out its functions as LMA, NBCC might 
have incurred some expenditure too on engagement of its manpower, logistics, 
coor
dination work, etc.  Taking all these factors in view, the Committee is also 
apprehensive if the o.23% that NBCC received as LMA or the 0.5% land management 
fee as fixed by the Government is comparable to similar functions of LMA in the 
private sector.  Th
e Committee would like to be informed on these issues to assess 
the net gains of NBCC while performing as LMA.  The Committee may also be 
apprised about the status of disposal of movable and immovable assets of the 
remaining 8 loss making CPSUs that have a
ppointed NBCC as LMA.
 
 
 

61
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
NBCC has received LMA fee of Rs. 2.50 Cr. as on 19.07.2021.
 
 
Status of disposal of immovable assets of the remaining 8 loss making CPSUs that have 
appointed NBCC as LMA is at 
Annexure 
-
II
. Responsibility of 
disposal of movable 
assets of CPSEs has not been assigned to NBCC.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30)
 
 
5.
 
The Committee observe that under the redevelopment projects especially the
 
7 
GPRA colonies, AIIMS, etc., the NBCC is facing difficulties in getting timely clearances 
and statutory approvals related to environmental, tree cutting, NGT, etc. and as a 
result, these projects are getting unduly delayed.   The Committee therefore 
reco
mmends the Government for opening up of a grievance cell or a single window 
system at the Central level to address the challenges/problems that may occur while 
obtaining the statutory clearances /approvals.
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Pertains to Government.
 
(Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs)
 
(O.M.No. 181/2/1
-
PU/2020 Dated 29.01.2021)
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
 
 

62
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
NIL
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
New Delhi
;
 
             
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR
 
 
 
 
 
22
 
March
,
 
20
22
 
       
Chairperson,
 
   
01 Chaitra
, 1943
(S)
 
Committee on 
Public Undertakings
 

63
 
 
APPENDIX
-
III
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY
-
 
THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2021
-
2022)
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16
th 
February, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 
 
1630  hrs. in Committee room ‘D’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
 
 
-
    
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
 
       
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri R.C. Tiwari                
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Srinivasulu Gunda     
-
 
Director
 
3.
 
4.       
Shri G.C. Prasad        
     
-
           
Additional Director
 
Mriganka Achal               
-
            
Deputy Secretary
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, t
he Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the three 
draft Action Taken 
Reports and to have briefing on the subject ‘Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
(IFCI) Limited’ in connection with its comprehensive examination.  The three draft action 
taken reports pertained to :
-
 
(i
)      
****                   
         
****                                ****
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
2.
 
Shri Arjunlal Meena
 
3.
 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao
 
4.
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
5.
 
Shri 
Anil Desai
 
6.
 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain
 
7.
 
Shri Om Prakash Mathur
 
8.
 
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 

64
 
 
(ii)    
   
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
 
of the Committee contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on
 
Public 
 
Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on NBCC (India) Limit
ed.
 
 
(iii)    
****                            ****                                ****
 
 
 
3.   The Committee considered these draft action taken reports and adopted it without 
any changes/ modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairperson t
o 
finalize the report on the basis of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministry/Department and consider for presenting the reports to Parliament in the coming 
session.
 
4.
 
The Committee Secretariat then made a Power
-
point Presentation on the major 
issu
es related to the agenda of the sitting.
 
                  
 
 
(The representatives of IFCI Limited were then called in)
 
 
 
5.
       
****                             ****                            ****
 
6.
 
****                           ****                  
           
****
 
7.
 
****                           ****                             ****
 
8.
 
****                          ****                              ****
 
9.
 
****                         ****                                 ****
 
 
The Committee then ad
journed.
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.)
 
 
(
-----------
)
 
 
 

65
 
 
APPENDIX 
-
 
II
 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction)
 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recomm
endations 
contained in the Fifth
 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2020
-
21) on
 
NBCC (India) Limited
 
 
I
 
Total number of recommendations 
 
                  
37
 
 
lI
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
 
[ 
vide
 
Recommendations at  Sl. Nos.
 
1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
 
20, 21,  
23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
31, 32, 33
, 34, 35, 36.1 and 
36.2
 
]
   
 
 
   
Total           
-
   
31
 
 
 
 
 
    
Percentage 
–
 
83.78
 
 
lII
 
Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies.                         
 
[ 
vide
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.
 
22
]
 
 
    
Total           
-
   
01
 
 
 
    
Percentage 
–
  
2.70
 
 
  
IV
 
Observations/Recommendations 
in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration.
 
 
[ 
vide
 
Recommendation at Sl. No.
 
3, 7, 24, 25 and 
30
]
 
 
    
Total           
-
   
05
 
 
 
 
   
Percentage 
–
 
13.51
 
 
   
V
 
Observations/Recommendations to 
which the 
Government has furnished interim replies.
 
 
      
Total           
-
   
Nil
 
 
 
    
Percentage 
–
   
N.A.
 
 
 
 
 
 