i 
 
12 
    
 
 
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS FOOD AND PUBLIC 
DISTRIBUTION  
(DEPARMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2021-22) 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
    (2021-22) 
 
 
               (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA 
 
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Third Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Food Corporation of India] 
 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4 February, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 February, 2022  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2022/ Magha, 1943(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  


iii 
 
 
 
CPU No. 1027 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs…… 
 
 
 
© 2022 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in              
Lok Sabha (…. Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi- 110002.  

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)           IV 
INTRODUCTION V 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
  15 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do     
not desire to pursue in view of the Government Replies 
  60 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which     
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
  61 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the       
Government has furnished interim replies  
  62 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
Annexures to the reply of the Government to Recommendation (Sl.No. 1)  ……………………64 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 21st December, 2021……………….…………91 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
 Recommendations contained in the Third Report of Committee on 
 Public Undertakings on Food Corporation of India………………………………………...93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2021-22) 
 
*Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.    Shri Janardan Mishra  
9.    Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu  
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
19.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar appointed as Chairperson, COPU w.e.f. 13 August, 2021 vice Smt 
Meenakashi Lekhi appointed as Minister on 07 July, 2021. 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari            -        Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda -        Director  
3. Shri G.C. Prasad  -        Additional Director 
4. Smt. Smita Khade            -        Executive Officer 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2021 -22) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Twelfth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on “Food Corporation of India”. 
2. The Third Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2020-21) was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29 January, 2021. The Action Taken 
Replies to all the 34 Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food and Public 
Distribution) on 30 July, 2021. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on                 
21st December, 2021. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee            
(17th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
New Delhi;               SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR 
 24 January, 2022                                      Chairperson 
04 Magha, 1943 (S)          Committee on Public Undertakings

1 
 
R E P O R T 
 
CHAPTER   I 
  
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (20 20-21) on “ Food Corporation of India (FCI) " 
which was presented to Parliament on the 29th January, 20 21. It contained thirty-four 
observations/recommendations.  
 
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in res pect of all the 
thirty-four observations / recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 
                         21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34      (Total 32)
        
 
      (ii)       Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in     
       view of the Government‟s replies                     (Chapter III)
  
            
- NIL  -                                                               (Total 00)  
                                                                                  
  
   (iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government  
 have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
                                     (Chapter IV) 
  
                      Sl. No. 3                        (Total 01)
              
  (iv)  Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished interim 
 replies and final replies are still awaited                      (Chapter V) 
                                                   
            Sl. No. 20                               (Total 01)
  
    
 
 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public 
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution) to furnish Action Taken 
Notes/ Replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I 
of the Report.  They further desire that a final and comprehensive action taken Notes/ 
Replies may also be furnished within 3 months on those  
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V on which the Government 
have given interim/ incomplete information/replies. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Board of Directors of FCI 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended as follows:- 
" The Committee note that as per section 7(1)of the Food Corporations Act 1964, the 
Board of FCI shall consist of 12 Directors namely –(a) Chairman (b) three Directors  
representing  Ministries of (i) Food (ii) Finance, and (iii) Co -operation (c) Managing 
Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) (d) Managing Director, FCI 
and (e) Six other Directors. As per clause (2) of section 7 of the Act, all the directors 
of the Corporation, except MD, CWC, shall be appointed by the Central Government. 
The Committee however observe that as against the mandatory strength of 12 
members, only nine members were actually in position as on 31 December 2019 in 
the Board of the Corporation. The Committee was not apprised about the specific 
reasons for the vacant positions in the Board and also about the action taken or 
proposed to be taken to fill up these vacancies.  The Committee therefore desire the 
Ministry and  FCI to furnish a detailed note on (a) reasons for occurrence of 
vacancies of three Directors in the Board with the date of occurrence of these 
vacancies and action taken so far for filling up these vacant positions.  The 
Committee, after taking into accou nt the fact that vacant positions in the Board will 
definitely have impact on its effective functioning, strongly recommend that the 
vacancies in the Board be filled up immediately as per the provisions of section 7 of 
the Food Corporations Act in a time b ound manner without further delay. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter w ithin a period of three 
months.” 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Appointment of vacant posts of 
non-official director is under process. 
Further, it is stated that against the mandatory strength of 12 members of BoD of 
FCI, 11 posts exist in the Board of Directors of FCI as Chairman& Managing 

3 
 
Directors posts are merged a s C&MD. On 31 December 2019, 9 posts of Board of 
Directors were filled and for filling up two posts of BoD, two panels were pending in 
Department of Public Enterprises for approval for long time. 
The appointment of non -official Director is under process. F or any appointment, it is 
required to take up the matter with DPE. It is mentioned that a Data Bank is being 
maintained by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and Persons desirous of 
including their names in the data bank are required to send their resu me to 
Department of Public Enterprises after ensuring that they fulfil the criteria laid down 
by the Government in this regard.  After approval of Hon‟ble Minister a proposal is 
sent to DPE for consideration of the Search Committee. After consideration of 
Search Committee name is placed before Appointment Committee of Cabinet  (ACC) 
of Department of Personnel & Training for final appointment. This consultative 
process takes times in filling up the vacant posts.” 
  
7. The Committee while dealing with the vacant positions in the Board of 
Directors (BoD) of Food Corporation of India (FCI) had noted that as on 03.12.2019, 
out of the 12 posts, 3 posts of Directors were lying vacant on the Board of FCI. T he 
Committee had recommended that the vacancies in the Board be filled up 
immediately as per the provisions of Section 7 of the Food Corporations Act in a 
time bound manner without further delay.  The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribut ion (Department of Public Distribution)/FCI in their action taken 
reply has stated that the appointment of vacant posts of non-official director is under 
process.  On the issue of the 3 posts of Independent Directors, the Committee find 
from the replies that it is still under process since 2019.  This is despite the fact that 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) maintains a data bank of candidates and is 
aware of the vacancies arising on the Board of CPSUs from time to time.  The 
Committee fail to understand as to why appointments to the Board are delayed when 
the date of vacancy was known in advance to DPE and Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distrib ution (M/o CA, F&PD) and data bank is  also maintained. The 
Committee emphasise the Government to send in future the proposals to DPE  in 
advance so that the process of formation of Search Committee and final appointment 
to the Boards of CPSUs  are completed  in a definite time frame to avoid adverse 
impact on the  functioning of CPSUs on the account of delayed appointments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
8. In the subsequent Recommendation No. 3, the Committee had  observed and  
recommended as follows:- 

4 
 
“The Committee‟s analysis further reveals that section 7(1) of the Act clearly 
provides for mandatory representation of three separate Ministries viz. (i) Food (ii) 
Finance and (iii) Co-operation by appointing one Director each from these Ministries 
in the Board of FCI.  The Committee however observe that against the norm of one 
official Director represent ing each of these Ministries, the Board of FCI in fact  has 
two officers -{(AS &FA) and JS (P&FCI)} -from the same Ministry viz.  Ministry of 
Consumer affairs, Food and Public Distribution and none from the Ministry of 
Finance has been appointed in the Boar d which is apparently in violation of the 
provisions of section 7 of the Food Corporations Act, 1964. The Committee would 
therefore like to be apprised of the circumstances in which two officers from one 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Consumer affairs, Food and  Public Distribution have been 
appointed on the Board of FCI and also the reasons for not making any appointment 
from the Ministry of Finance on the Board despite the mandatory requirement 
thereof. The Committee therefore recommend that immediate steps be taken by the 
Government to set right the representation of each three Ministries in the Board of 
FCI in the same ratio as has been provided in the Food Corporations Act, 1964. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three 
months.”  
 
9. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“AS&FA/FA is considered as the representative of Ministry of Finance in the Ministry 
and has been appointed in the BoD of FCI.” 
 
10. The Committee had noted that even though Section 7(1) of the F CI  Act 
provides for mandatory representation of three separate Ministries viz. (i) Food (ii) 
Finance and (iii) Co -operation, the composition of Board of FCI contain ed two 
officers from the same Ministry  i.e. from the  administrative Ministry of FCI and none 
from Ministry of Finance.  This being the clear violation of the provisions contained 
in Section 7(1) of the Act, the Committee had sought for reasons for deviations and 
had recommended that immediate corrective steps be taken by the Government with 
representation from all the  three Ministries in Board of FCI. The Government in their 
response has stated that AS&FA is considered as the representative of Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) and  accordingly he has been appointe d on the BoD of FCI.  The 
Committee observe that the AS&FA of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs , Food and 
Public Distribution (M/oCA, F&PD) is engaged in the day to day administration of the 
M/oCA, F&PD and while having full time job in one Ministry, he cannot be considered 
as an officer of the other Ministry .  The intent of having a representative of the 
Ministry of Finance on the Board of FCI in the FCI Act was to make the functioning 
and decision maki ng in FCI more transparent, independent and unbiased and not to 
give any kind of flexibility to Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) or the M/oCA, 

5 
 
F&PD to undermine the independence of the Board.  The Committee in this 
background would like to know the a uthority in the Ministry who considered the 
appointment of AS&FA of the M/o CA, F & PD in the Board of FCI as representative of 
the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee deplore such logic given by the Ministry and 
desire for serious introspection by the Min istry for undermining the importance of 
the Board level appointees in the Corporation and going further in legalizing it by 
imaginary and unsound reasoning . The Committee therefore reiterate their 
recommendation for making appointments in the Board strictly as per provisions of 
FCI Act. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
11. Further, in the subsequent Recommendation No. 4, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the section 7(1) of the Food Corporations Act inter -alia 
provides that in addition to the Chairman of FCI and other members, the Managing  
Director of FCI shall also be a member in the Board of Directors of FCI. The 
Committee, however, observe that the present composition of the Board of Directors 
does not include the Managing Di rector of FCI. The Committee are of the firm view 
that the provisions of the Food Corporations Act, being mandatory, are necessarily 
to be complied with. The Committee therefore recommend that the composition of 
the Board be restructured by including the M anaging Director of FCI in the Board in 
compliance of the provisions of the Food Corporations Act.” 
 
12. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The post of Chairman and Managing Director of FCI are separate as per Food 
Corporation Act 1964 as well as FCI (Staff) Regulations 1971. 
During the year 2003, Shri V.K. Malhotra, IAS(UP:70) was appointed as Managing 
Director of FCI by DoP&T. Subsequently, in the year 2004, Shri V.K. Malhotra, 
IAS(UP:70) was reappointed as Chairma n with full additional charge of the post of 
Managing Director. Since then, all appointments as organizational head of FCI were 
done as Chairman & Managing Director by the DoP&T. 
In context of the recommendation to include the Managing Director of FCI in t he 
Board of Directors, necessary actions will be taken in case appointment to the post  
of Managing Director (MD) is made by the Competent Authority.” 
 
13. The Committee in their original Report had observed that the present 
composition of the Board of Directors (BoD) does not include the Managing Director 
of FCI and had recommended that the Board may be restructured to include the 
Managing Director of FCI in the Board in compliance with the provisions of Section 

6 
 
7(1) of the Food Corporation Act.   The Committee note from the action taken reply of 
the Ministry that the post of  Chairman and that of Managing Director of FCI are 
separate as per the Food Corporation Act, 1964 and FCI (Staff) Regulations 1971, but 
since 2004, the incumbent appointed as Chairman is given the charge of Managing 
Director also.  The Ministry has stated that t he recommendation to include the 
Managing Director of FCI in the Board  of Directors, necessary action will be taken in 
case appointment to  the post of Managing Director is made by the Competent 
Authority. 
 The Committee are not happy with the reply given by the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  (M/oCA, F&PD) whose responsibility was to 
ensure compliance of the provisions  of the FCI Act and to raise object ion to any 
appointment made by DoPT not in consonance with the FCI Act.  The Committee also 
express their apprehension  as to  how the DoPT could make such appointments 
against the provision of the Act.  The DoPT or the M /oCA, F & PD do not have the 
flexibility or the authority to change or alter the nature and Composition of Board of 
FCI.  The Committee , therefore reemphasise that the post of Chairman and the post 
of Managing Director on the Board of FCI are separate as pe r Food Corporations Act 
1964 and FCI Regulations 1971  and therefore that the appointments to both these 
posts need to be strictly as per provisions of Act. 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
14. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended as follows:- 
"The Committee observe that as per the DPE guidelines issued vide OM No. 
9(15)/2012-GM dated 31st July 2013, non -official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs 
are to be drawn from, among others, professionals of repute having more than 15 
years of domain experience in fields relevant to the company‟s area of operation and 
also from persons of eminence with proven track record from Industry, Business or 
Agriculture or Management. Further, the DPE OM No. 18(6)/91 -GM dated 
16.03.1992 and OM No. 18(6)/200 -GM dated 2 6.11.2001 inter alia provides that at 
least one third of the Directors on the Board of a PSE should be non -official and in 
the case of listed companies headed by the executive Chairman, at least half of the 
Directors should be independent Directors.  The C ommittee found that though the 
FCI‟s Board structure give sufficient scope for appointment of independent directors, 
yet the present composition of the Board neither conform to the DPE guidelines nor 
the mandatory provisions of the Food Corporation Act. Th e Committee found that 
two non -functional Directors on Board at present are retired civil servants and 
apparently there is no professional expert on the board as an Independent Director.  
The Committee observe that engaging at Board level the management ex perts and 
professionals having domain expertise  will bring qualitative changes in the 

7 
 
functioning of the corporation. This is also much more necessary in a organization 
like FCI which is performing multi -faceted functions where banking upon only on 
retired civil servants in the Board will deprive the FCI of the domain expertise of the 
professionals. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the professionals 
with proven track record in the areas of agriculture, food sciences,  procurement, 
logistics, storage, etc. should be appointed as non - official directors in the Board of 
FCI and the presen t composition of the Board may be restructured taking into 
account the mandatory provisions of the Food Corporations Act and the guidelines 
issued by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) from time to time.” 
 
15. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 “The recommendation of the Committee is noted. In this context, it is informed 
 that final appointment of non -official directors in the BoD of FCI is done by the 
 Department of Public Enterprises  (DPE) and Department of Personnel & Training  
 (DoP&T) in consultation of Department of Food & Public Distribution. This 
 Department role is limited to the recommendation of names which is taken from  the 
Data Bank of DPE. The recommendations of Committee will be placed before  the 
Competent Authority for consideration/decision in consultation with DPE.” 
 
16. The Committee  in their original Report had observed that in an organization 
like FCI which is performing multi -faceted functions, engaging at Board level the 
management experts and professionals having domain expertise may help in 
bringing qualitative changes in the fu nctioning of the Corporation. The Committee 
had therefore recommended that the professionals with proven track record in the 
areas of agriculture, food sciences, procurement, logistics, storage, etc. should be 
appointed as non- official directors in the Bo ard of FCI and the present composition 
of the Board may be restructured taking into account the mandatory provisions of 
the Food Corporation Act and the guidelines issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE).  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the 
recommendation of the Committee  had been  noted and will be placed before the 
Competent Authority for consideration/decision in consultation with DPE .  The 
Committee feel that all the appointees to the post of Independent Directors sho uld 
have a proven track record from Industry, Business or Agriculture or Management to 
make the Board more professional and independent in its functioning .  The 
Committee, therefore re-emphasise their earlier recommendation to include these 
fields/sectors and domain expertise/experience in the list of mandatory qualifications 
while calling for appointments/nominations on the Board of FCI.   
 
 

8 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 6) 
17. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee als o note that the representation to two major producing states -
Punjab and Madhya Pradesh were given by appointing officers from these States in 
the Board with a view to ensure that the Board has the benefit of field level 
situations. The Committee, however o bserve that no specific criteria has been laid 
down for determining the representation to the States in the Board.  As informed to 
the Committee, the criteria laid down by DPE for appointment at Board level are 
applicable for representing officers from the  States and Principal Secretary of any 
major food producing States could be appointed in Board of Directors of FCI. The 
Committee while agreeing with the FCI‟s need for having two representatives from 
major food producing States on its Board to have the be nefit of field level situations, 
recommend that rotational representation of the major food grains producing States 
of Wheat as well as those of Paddy  (Rice) be given in the Board of FCI so that all 
major States are represented in the Board turn -by-turn which will facilitate the FCI in 
taking sound operational decisions.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“It is stated that all the Directors are appointed by the Administrative Ministry.  
Presently 02 following Direct ors are on the Board of FCI from Wheat and Rice 
procuring states:- 
1. Shri Faiz Ahmed Kidwai, Principal Secretary, Deptt. of Food, Civil supplies & 
Consumer Protection, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh from Major Wheat procuring State. 
2. Shri Kona Sasidhar, Commis sioner & Ex -Officio Secretary of Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Civil Supplies, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh from Major Rice procuring State.” 
 
19. The Committee had observed that no specific criteria had been laid down for 
determining the representation of the  States in the Board .  T he Committee  had 
recommended that rotational representation of the major food grains producing 
States of Wheat as well as those of Paddy (Rice) be given in the Board of FCI.   The 
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the Directors are appointed by the 
Administrative Ministry and presently two Directors are on the Board of FCI from 
Wheat and Rice procuring States viz. Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh 
respectively.  The Committee however re -emphasise that all major food 
producing/procuring States be represented in the Board on rotational basis to enable 
FCI take sound operational decisions as per field situations.      
 
 
 

9 
 
Movement and Distribution of Foodgrains 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 20) 
20. Dealing with Movement and Distribution of Foodgrains, t he Committee in their Third 
Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that one of the major functions of FCI is to move food grains 
from surplus producing states to consuming / deficit states.  The proper and planned 
movement of food grains ensures (i) evacuation of stocks from surplus regions, (ii) 
meet the requirements of deficit regions for NFSA/ TDPS and other schemes, and 
(iii) create buffer s tocks in deficit regions. The Committee further note that Punjab, 
Haryana and Madhya Pradesh are the surplus States in terms of wheat procurement 
vis-à-vis their own consumption. Similarly, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra 
Pradesh/Telengana, Chhatisgarh and Odisha are surplus States in terms of rice 
procurement vis-à-vis their own consumption. Surplus stocks of wheat and rice in 
these states are moved to deficit States to meet the requirements under NFSA/ 
TDPS and other schemes as well as to create buffer stocks.  T here are various 
modes of transport for movement of food grains viz. (i) Multimodal Transport 
movement, (ii) Containerized movement, (iii) Long Route Road Transportation, (iv) 
Bulk Movement, etc.  The movement under these are undertaken through road, rail,  
coastal or riverine mode.  Under the Multimodal Transport Movement, FCI has 
undertaken a Pilot project of containerized multimodal coastal movement of 25000 
MTs of food grains from Punjab to Karnataka. Similarly, under the same pilot project, 
movement of food grains by CONCOR from identified centres of Punjab to Kerala viz 
Cochin, Quilon, etc. and also to Tamil Nadu is being taken up to make a cost -benefit 
analysis in comparison with the conventional movement of rakes. The Committee 
learn that FCI has taken several initiatives for increasing movement using waterways 
also. However, the fact remains that rail movement is much cheaper and economical 
mode for movement of food grains.  About 85% of the FCI‟s movement takes place 
through rail. FCI spends about Rs. 10,000 crore annually for transporting food grains 
all across India, out of which Rs. 8,500 Crore goes to the Indian Railways alone. The 
Committee recommend the Government to get an independent study conducted on 
the movement -cost economics taking into a ccount the operational feasib ility and 
economical viability of the major modes/routes of transport so as to minimize the 
transportation cos ts and to reduce the financial burden on p ublic exchequer. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcom e of the pilot projects 
undertaken to determine the cost economics of the containerized costal movement 
from Punjab to down south in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.” 
 
21. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“FCI has taken initiatives in exploring the feasibility of moving food grains through 
multimodal costal/ riverine mode so as to supplement rail/road movement through 
coastal movement. 
 
 

10 
 
 
            Fig. in MT 
Year Multimodal  Coastal Movement from Ex -AP to 
Kerala 
2018-19 45,132 
2019-20 55,554 
2020-21 35,776 
Total 2,79,586 
 
FCI has also initiated containerized movement of foodgrains on certain routes 
through CONCOR/ Associates wherein it is found to be economical in comparison 
to conventional Railway rakes.  
Year No. of Container 
Rakes Moved 
Freight Savings                                           
(in Rs Lakhs) 
2016-17 13 44 
2017-18 134 662 
2018-19 167 796 
2019-20 309 694 
2020-21 296 480 
Total 919 2,676 
 
 A total of twelve (12) rakes (27,912 MT) were also moved from Punjab to Karnataka 
using multimodal containerized mode under Pilot project, from March‟19 to March‟20 
on experimental basis through CONCOR. FCI floated three (3) tender enquiry for 
appointment of Multimodal Transport operators for the movement of food grains 
under Multimodal Coastal movement  from designated depots of Punjab Region to 
designated depots in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, but no bids were received 
in any of the tender enquiry.  
 
22. The Committee in their original Report had observed that 85 % of the FCI’s 
movement takes place through rail . However , FCI has taken several initiatives for 
increasing movement using waterways also  to reduce transportation cost.  The 
Committee had recommended the Government to get an independent study 
conducted on the movement -cost economics taking into account the operational 
feasibility and economic viability  of the major modes/routes of transport so as to 
minimize the transportation costs and to red uce the financial burden on public 
exchequer. The Committee had also liked to be apprised of the outcome of the pilot 

11 
 
projects undertaken to determine the cost economics of the containerized costal 
movement from Punjab to down south in Kerala, Karnataka an d Tamil Nadu.   The 
Ministry has replied that FCI has initiated containerized movement of food  grains on 
certain routes through CONCOR/ Associates wherein it is found to be economical in 
comparison to conventional Railway rakes . The Committee  however, observe that 
the Ministry has not submitted their response to the recommendation of the 
Committee for getting an independent study conducted on the movement -cost 
economics. The Committee , while  acknowledging the steps taken by the 
Government, therefore re-emphasise their earlier recommendation for getting an 
independent study conducted and submit to the Committee at the earliest  the 
outcome thereof. The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the pilot 
projects undertaken by FCI  between the period from March, 2019 to March, 2020 on 
experimental basis through CONCOR.   
 
Quality checks of food grains 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 28) 
23. The Committee in their Third Report, had observed and recommended as follows:- 
 
“ The Committee note that with a view to introduce mechanized process for quality 
checking, FCI has purchased 30 Computerized Rice Analysers (Annadarpan 
SMART) developed by Centre for Development of Advance Computing (CDAC), 
Kolkata and made it available to  30 locations of 07 major procuring regions namely 
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra 
Pradesh during Kharif Marketing Season (KMS) 2017 -18 and rice acceptance at 
these location were carried out through Computerized Rice Analysers (CRA).  During 
KMS 2018 -19, the CRAs were shifted to bigger centres and rice acceptance were 
carried out through it. The Committee note that FCI has entered into an agreement 
with CFTRI, Mysuru for providing consultancy services for moderni zing FCI 
laboratories. The CNP Agreement was signed by both the parties and fresh tender 
was floated on 10.12.2018 for supply of major laboratory equipment regarding which 
the technical bid was opened on 03.01.2019 and technical evaluation was being 
done by the Technical Evaluation Committee. The Committee further learn that funds 
allocated for modernization of its lab at Gurugram could not be utilized and hence 
the remaining budget was allocated for modernisation of QC Lab at IFS Gurugram.  
The Committee a re in agreement with the view of FCI that there is no proven 
technology even in the advanced countries to check the quality of foodgrains and the 
present CRA technology having its limitations. Yet the Committee feel that quality of 
such huge quantities of food grains cannot be ensured through physical human 
inspection but can only be ensured by quality checks through technological 
intervention. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in the 
agreement signed with CFTRI, Mysuru. The Committee recom mend that the 
modernization of FCI labs need to be taken up on priority and a suitable technology 

12 
 
need to be developed for the purpose to ensure the effective quality checks of 
foodgrains so as to make available the better quality food stuffs to the intend ed 
beneficiaries including poor families in the country.“ 
 
24. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“ All FCI Depots/District offices/Regional offices/Zonal offices are equipped to test 
the physical parameters of food grain s amples. Besides physical parameters, 
chemical parameters are also to be tested hence, FCI has set up an ultra -
modern Quality Control Lab at Institute of Food Security (IFS) Gurugram  with the 
scope of testing of  Mycotoxins, Uric Acid, residual toxicity of M alathion, 
Deltamethrin&Aluminum Phosphide so as to provide quality foodstuff to PDS 
beneficiaries.  
On similar lines, action has been initiated to modernize four more labs under 
different Zonal Offices i.e.  ZO (North), Noida/ZO (South), Chennai/ ZO (East),  
Kolkata & ZO (West), Mumbai  with the scope of testing of pesticide residues, 
mycotoxins, uric acid in food grains including level of fortificants present in fortified 
rice so as to develop in-house capability for testing the quality of  fortified rice. In this 
regard, suitable instructions have been issued to concerned zonal offices with a 
direction to take an immediate action. 
  
In order to conduct chemical testing of food grains all the FCI Regional offices have 
entered into agreement with NABL accredited  labs for testing of FSSAI parameters 
and fortificants in case of fortified rice. Samples are being sent to such third party 
labs on a regular basis for testing of quality. 
 
25. The Committee desiring examination of the subject had felt that quality of 
huge quantities of food grains cannot be ensured through physical human 
inspection but can only be ensured by quality checks through technological 
intervention. The Committee  had accordingly recommended that the modernization 
of FCI labs need s to be taken up on priority and a suitable technology need to be 
developed for the purpose to ensure the effective quality checks of food grains so as 
to make available the better quality food stuffs to the intended beneficiaries .  The 
Committee had also desired to be apprised of the progress made with regard to the 
agreement signed with CFTRI, Mysuru . The M inistry in their action taken reply has 
apprised on  measures taken by FCI for the ultra -modernisation of  Quality Control 
Lab at Institute of Food Security (IFS) Gu rugram; initiation of modernisation of four 
labs under different Zonal Offices along with agreement with NACL accredited labs 
for testing FSSAI parameters and fortificants in case of fortified rice.  The Ministry 
has however not replied to the recommendatio n of the Committee for app rising the 
progress made in the agreeme nt entered into with CFTRI, Mysu ru. The Committee 
while acknowledging various steps taken by FCI desire that the actual progress 

13 
 
made may be intimated to the Committee towards modernization of FCI laboratories 
and also the progress made in the agreement signed with CFTRI, Mys uru in line with 
the proposals made in Consulting Report of CFTRI, Mysore. 
 
Settlement of Audit Paras and Dues from CPSUs 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 33) 
26. The Committee in their Third Report, had observed and recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that during 2015 -16, two performance and three Commercial 
Audit reports were issued by C&AG. The major observations pertained to serious 
issues  such as incidental charges, commission to societies, suboptimal utilisation of 
silos, management of gunny bags and road transport contracts, etc.  The Committee 
however noted that C&AG had raised nearly 113 paras on FCI in their reports 
between 2013 to 2018. Out of th e 113 paras raised, only 12 paras have been closed 
and 89 paras are pending with the Ministry and the C&AG. 12 paras are still pending 
reply of FCI.  The Committee is of the view that the number of audit paras reflects 
the commission, ommissions and violat ions on the part of the organisation that has 
to be rectified/ streamlined at the earliest. The Committee further note that out of the 
44 paras raised by C&AG during 2015, 30 paras are still pending with the Ministry & 
C&AG and 6 paras are still pending re ply from FCI.  Similarly out of the 54 paras 
raised by C&AG during 2017, 51 are still pending with the Ministry.  This reflects 
slackness and non -seriousness of the FCI/ Ministry on the observations of the 
C&AG.  The Committee strongly recommend expediting  settlement of pending audit 
paras of C&AG preferably within 03 months.“ 
 
27. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“As against 113 Paras / Sub -Paras raised in 6 C& AG Audit Reports in the past 7 
years; as on 24th June‟2021, replies to 93 Paras / Sub -Paras had been submitted 
with the Ministry /C&AG; 12 Paras are closed.  
As regards to the pending 8 Paras / Sub -Paras, preparation of replies is under 
process and shall be submitted with the Ministry. These pending „Vetting Remarks‟ 
are forwarded to FCI for further comments / additional information / clarification are 
in their 3rd to 6th journey.“ 
 
28. The Committee in view of the pendency of large number of audit paras, had 
strongly recommended expediting settlement of pending C&AG audit paras.  The 
Ministry/FCI while giving account of 113 audit paras reported in 6 C&AG Reports in 
the past 7 years, have stated that 93 paras are submitted with the Ministry/C&AG; 12 
paras are closed; 8 paras are under process and shall be submitted with the Ministry. 
The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that virtually no progress has 
been made in settlement of Audit paras as the po sition of closure of 12 paras was 

14 
 
very well k nown to the Committee at the time of recommending for early settlement 
of these paras. The Committee therefore deplore that apparently no sincere efforts 
have been made by the FCI/Ministry to settle these Audit paras early.  The Committee 
therefore re-emphasise that FCI / Ministry may expeditiously take remedial steps to 
settle all the unsettled audit paras at the earliest and  till then the Ministry should  
weekly monitor its progress .  The Ministry should  also keep vigil to ensure that FCI 
has taken remedial/ corrective steps and should also ensure non-repetition of the 
issues flagged by the C&AG.  The action so taken may be apprised to the Committee.   
---------- 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
FCI – OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee note that Food Corporation of India (FCI) is a public sector 
undertaking which was established  by the „Food Corporations Act, 1964‟.  It came into 
existence on 1 st January, 1965. The FCI is functioning under the administrative control of 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution, Government of India.  The functions of the FCI primarily consist of 
procurement, storage, movement and distribut ion of food grains on behalf of the Central 
Government.  The food grains are procured at Minimum Support Price (MSP) and are 
distributed at Central Issue Price (CIP).  The Committee observe that during the long 
journey since 1964, the FCI has been performi ng their mandated functions across the 
country.  The Committee have made a comprehensive examination of the FCI as an 
organization and touched upon many issues pertaining to the management of the 
organization and those related to its functions in the areas  of procurement, storage,  
movement and distribution of foodgrains and also  maintenance of buffer stocks with due 
regard to ensure  food security in the country.  The Committee also observe that the 
Government of India had set up a High Level Committee (H LC) in August 2014 under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Shanta Kumar to suggest restructuring of FCI with a view to improve 
its operational efficiency and financial management and suggesting  measures for overall 
improvement in management of foodgrains by FCI; reorienting the role and functions of FCI 
in MSP operations, storage and distribution of foodgrains and food security systems of the 
country; and also to suggest cost effective models for storage and movement of grains and 
integration of supply chain of foo dgrains in the country. The HLC in their report had given 
major recommendations on key issues related to procurement, public distribution system, 
national food security act, stocking and movement, buffer stocking operations and 
liquidation policy, labour, direct subsidy to farmers, end to end computerization and the new 
face of FCI.  The Committee on Public Undertakings while examining FCI in detail have 
made an indepth analaysis of the recommendations of HLC also and found that very fruitful 
and concrete suggestions had been given by the HLC for improvement in the functioning of 
FCI.  The Committee endorse the suggestions of HLC and expect the Government to take 
conclusive action thereon for the benefit of the general public.  The Committee, on 
examination of various aspects of the functioning of FCI as has been narrated in Part -I of 
this Report have given their observations and recommendations in the succeeding 
paragraphs and are hopeful that these will be implemented by the FCI and the Government 
in right perspective so as to bring about significant improvements in the functioning of the 
Corporation so that the benefits of the Government‟s policy reaches to the poorest of poor 
and marginalized sections of the society in a fruitful manner. 
 

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India vide order dated 20.08.2014 constituted a High Level Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Shri Shanta Kumar, Hon‟ble MP (LokSabha) to recommend 
on restructuring of FCI. The HLC has submitted its report to Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 
21.01.2015. 
 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, Department of Food & Public 
Distribution vide its letter dated 19.05.2015 has intimated the Government‟s decisions on 
the recommendations of the High Level Committee (HLC) on restruc turing of FCI. 
Subsequently, Ministry of CA,F&PD vide its letter No. 14(1)/2014 -Py.I dated 02.06.2015 
has forwarded the Action Plan for implementation of acceptable recommendations of 
HLC concerning FCI. 
 
 
The status (as on 31.05.2021) of Action Plan for implementation of acceptable 
recommendations of the HLC concerning FCI is enclosed as Annexure-A. 
 
 As regards silo construction, the Recommendations of High Level Committee, 
decisions taken by GoI and Action Taken by FCI thereon are attached at Annexure-B. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Board of Directors of FCI 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
2. The Committee note that as per section 7(1)of the Food Corporations Act 1964, the 
Board of FCI shall consist of 12 Directors namely –(a) Chairman (b) t hree Directors  
representing  Ministries of (i) Food (ii) Finance, and (iii) Co -operation (c) Managing Director 
of the Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) (d) Managing Director, FCI and (e) Six 
other Directors. As per clause (2) of section 7 of the Act, all the directors of the Corporation, 
except MD, CWC, shall be appointed by the Central Government. The Committee however 
observe that as against the mandatory strength of 12 members, only nine members were 
actually in position as on 31 December 2019 in th e Board of the Corporation. The 
Committee was not apprised about the specific reasons for the vacant positions in the 
Board and also about the action taken or proposed to be taken to fill up these vacancies.  
The Committee therefore desire the Ministry and  FCI to furnish a detailed note on (a) 
reasons for occurrence of vacancies of three Directors in the Board with the date of 
occurrence of these vacancies and action taken so far for filling up these vacant positions.  
The Committee, after taking into accou nt the fact that vacant positions in the Board will 
definitely have impact on its effective functioning, strongly recommend that the vacancies in 
the Board be filled up immediately as per the provisions of section 7 of the Food 
Corporations Act  in a time bound manner without further delay. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three months.  
 
  

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. Appointment of vacant posts of non -
official director is under process. 
 
Further, it is stated that against the mandatory strength of 12 members of BoD of FCI, 11 
posts exist in the Board of Directors of FCI as Chairman& Managing Directors posts are 
merged as C&MD. On 31 December 2019, 9 posts of Board of  Directors were filled and 
for filling up two posts of BoD, two panels were pending in Department of Public 
Enterprises for approval for long time. 
 
 The appointment of non -official Director is under process. For any appointment, it 
is required to take up the matter with DPE. It is mentioned that a Data Bank is being 
maintained by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and Persons desirous of 
including their names in the data bank are required to send their resume to Department 
of Public Enterprises after e nsuring that they fulfil the criteria laid down by the 
Government in this regard.  After approval of Hon‟ble Minister a proposal is sent to DPE 
for consideration of the Search Committee. After consideration of Search Committee 
name is placed before Appointm ent Committee of Cabinet(ACC) of Department of 
Personnel & Training for final appointment. This consultative process takes times in 
filling up the vacant posts. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
3. The Committee note that the section 7(1) of the Food Corporations Act inter-alia 
provides that in addition to the Chairman of FCI and other members, the Managing Director 
of FCI shall also be  a member in  the  Board of Directors of FCI. The Committee, however, 
observe that the present composition of the Board of Directors does not in clude the 
Managing Director of FCI. The Committee are of the firm view  that the provisions of the 
Food Corporations Act, being mandatory, are necessarily to be complied with. The 
Committee therefore recommend that the composition of the Board be restructu red by 
including the Managing Director of FCI in the Board in compliance of the provisions of the 
Food Corporations Act. 
Reply of the Government 
The post of Chairman and Managing Director of FCI are separate as per Food 
Corporation Act 1964 as well as FCI (Staff) Regulations 1971. 
 
During the  year 2003, Shri V.K. Malhotra, IAS(UP:70) was appointed as Managing 
Director of FCI by DoP&T. Subsequently, in the year 2004, Shri V.K. Malhotra, 
IAS(UP:70) was reappointed as Chairman with full additional charge of th e post of 

18 
 
Managing Director. Since then, all appointments as organizational head of FCI were 
done as Chairman & Managing Director by the DoP&T. 
 
In context of the recommendation to include the Managing Director of FCI in the Board of 
Directors, necessary actions will be taken in case appointment to the post of Managing 
Director(MD) is made by the Competent Authority. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
4. The Committee observe that as per the DPE guidelines issued vide OM No. 
9(15)/2012-GM dated 31st July 2013, non -official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs are to 
be drawn from, among others, professionals of repute having more than 15 years of domain 
experience in fields relevant to the company‟s area of operation and also from persons of 
eminence with proven track record from Industry, Business or Agriculture or Management. 
Further, the DPE OM No. 18(6)/91 -GM dated 16.03.1992 and OM No. 18(6)/200 -GM dated 
26.11.2001 interalia provides that at least one third of the Directors on the Board of a PSE 
should be non -official and in the case of listed companies headed by the executive 
Chairman, at least half of the Directors should be independent Directors.  The Co mmittee 
found that though the FCI‟s Board structure give sufficient scope for appointment of 
independent directors, yet the present composition of the Board neither conform to the DPE 
guidelines nor the mandatory provisions of the Food Corporations Act. Th e Committee 
found that two non -functional Directors on Board at present are retired civil servants and 
apparently there is no professional expert on the  boa rd as an Independent Director. The 
Committee observe that engaging at Board level the management ex perts and 
professionals having domain expertise  will bring qualitative changes in the functioning of 
the corporation. This is also much more necessary in a organization like FCI which is 
performing multi-faceted functions where banking upon only on retired  civil servants in the 
Board will deprive the FCI of the domain expertise of the professionals. The Committee 
therefore strongly recommend that the professionals with proven track record in the areas 
of agriculture, food sciences,  procurement, logistics, storage, etc. should be appointed as 
non- official directors in the Board of FCI and the  present composition of the Board may  
be restructured taking into account the mandatory provisions of the Food Corporations Act 
and the guidelines issued by the Department of Public Enterprises(DPE) from time to time.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. In this context, it is informed that final 
appointment of non -official directors in the BoD of FCI is d one by the Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) and Department of Personnal & Training(DoP&T) in 
consultation of Department of Food & Public Distribution. This Department role is limited 
to the recommendation of names which is taken from the Data Bank of  DPE. The 

19 
 
recommendations of Committee will be placed before the Competent Authority for 
consideration/decision in consultation with DPE. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
5. The Committee also note that the representation  to two major producing states -
Punjab and Madhya Pradesh were given by appointing officers from these States in the 
Board with a view to ensure that the Board has the benefit of field level situations. The 
Committee, however observe that no specific criter ia has been laid down for determining 
the representation to the States in the Board.  As informed to the Committee, the criteria 
laid down by DPE for appointment at Board level are applicable for representing officers 
from the States and Principal Secretar y of any major food producing States could be 
appointed in Board of Directors of FCI. The Committee while agreeing with the FCI‟s need 
for having two representatives from major food producing States on its Board to have the 
benefit of field level situation s, recommend that rotational representation of the major f ood 
grains producing States of Wheat as well as those of Paddy(Rice)  be given in the Board of 
FCI so that all major States are represented in the Board turn -by-turn which will facilitate 
the FCI in taking sound operational decisions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is stated that all the Directors are appointed by the Administrative Ministry.  
Presently 02 following Directors are on the Board of FCI from Wheat and Rice procuring 
states:- 
1. Shri Faiz A hmed Kidwai, Principal Secretary, Deptt. of Food, Civil supplies & Consumer 
Protection, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh from Major Wheat procuring State. 
2. Shri Kona Sasidhar, Commissioner & Ex -Officio Secretary of Consumer Affairs, Food & 
Civil Supplies, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh from Major Rice procuring State. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

20 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
6. The Committee observe that the Executive Committee (EC) of the Food Corporation 
of India which is competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the 
Corporation, consists of three official and one non-official director.  The Committee is of the 
considered view that since the Executive Committee is competent to deal with almost all 
matters of the Corporation, at least  the non -official director should be  drawn from 
professionals with sound domai n knowledge and requisite expertise in the areas of 
procurement, storage,  preservation, logistics, etc. The Committee therefore recommend 
accordingly and hope that the appointments of members in Executive committee of FCI will 
be made accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and will be complied in the 
formation of next Executive Committee. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
7. The Committee express their satisfaction that against a sanctioned staff strength of 
42038, the FCI is managing with  only 21181 employees which is almost 50% of its 
sanctioned strength.  The Committee was informed that the FCI got conducted a study by 
M/s Mckinsey & Co. on staffing norms and the sanctioned strength of FCI was revised on 
the basis of its report.  The FCI further informed to the Committee that the manpo wer 
training is given from time to time to ensure that the employees are competent for handling 
the current and future needs of the company.  The FCI has also got conducted HR audit by 
third party for audit of identified HR Policies, processes and systems of FCI, benchmarking 
of HR policies with leading practices from similar/comparable private sector and public 
sector companies.  Further, the Human Resource management System  (HRMS) is being 
implemented in FCI for full automation of its Human Resource Syste m. The Committee 
while appreciating the various initiatives taken by FCI to enhance its organizational 
efficiency with reduced manpower, hope that FCI through these initiatives will be able to 
successfully deliver better results in the areas of their manda ted operations and will also 
ensure that the performance/delivery of results does not get effected on account of 
shortage of manpower in the organisation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
With regards to the observation of the committee on manpower and sanction strength, it is 
encouraging that the committee appreciated that FCI is delivering its targets even with 50% 
of the sanctioned manpower. The current sanction strength was revised on the 
recommendation of third party consultant report, since then there has b een a considerable 
reduction in manpower. 
  

21 
 
FCI has taken steps like engaging independent third party HR audit, to streamline its 
processes and to improve the efficiency/practices in the line with the best in the industry. 
  
Further, roll out of Human Resources Management System (HRMS) and its implementation 
has facilitated in the automation of HR processes. HRMS was rolled out at pilot locations 
from 09.11.2020 and across all the offices from 01.03.2021. It is a web based application 
along with custom built Andriod / iOS app to facilitate self-service for employees. 
  
FCI has also conducted a third party Sanction Strength audit last year through third party 
consultants with the intention to rationalize manpower and optimize HR efficiency. The final 
report o f the audit has been submitted by third party consultant. The audit has 
recommended rationalization of different posts and cadres to improve efficiency and 
optimize resources. The recommendations are being examined by a Senior Officers‟ 
Committee for consideration. 
  
        FCI has recruited Cat-I, Cat-II and Cat-III given as under:  
Category Posts Advertised No. of Candidates selected 
Cat-III 4102 4061 
Cat-II 330 318 
Cat-I 89 Recruitment under process. 
  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)  
 
8. The Committee observe that the FCI is engaged in undertaking different types of 
works like procurement, storage, transportation and distribution of food grains across the 
country.  In a organization like FCI, the posting/deployment of employees at one part icular 
location for longer period may not be desirable in the overall interest of the organization.  
The Committee therefore desire that a structured transfer policy not only need to be put in 
place but also the same need to be religiously implemented in a  transparent and 
indiscriminatory manner.  The policy so made should be given wide publicity among 
employees with a view to make them aware well in advance about their transfer from a 
particular place after a certain period of time.  The Committee therefor e recommend 
accordingly and hope that the FCI will soon come out with the well structured posting and 
transfer policy with scientifically defined mechanism of its implementation alongwith the 
consequential action against the defiant employees.  
 
Reply of the Government 
FCI undertakes vital operations of Procurement, storage and distribution of food grains for 
PDS across the country on behalf of the GOI. Hence, optimum utilization of available 
manpower in a transparent manner is highly necessary. Taking this  into account, FCI has 
formulated new comprehensive transfer policy guidelines  which are transparent and 
sensitive posts and periodicity have been well defined to avoid any anomaly.  

22 
 
The new transfer policy was circulated through Circular no. EP -03-2021-06 dated 
22.03.2021 and has been uploaded in FCI website i.e. www.fci.gov.in and also in HRMS. 
Apart from that it has been widely circulated to all offices of FCI through e-mail.  
           All offices have been directed to ensure compliance of transfer policy scrupulously 
and affect all transfers of employees by 30 June 2021 positively.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 9. The Committee observe that there is a general tendency in the Officers appointed on 
deputation for over-stay in the borrowing organizations.  The Committee during examination 
of the subject desire to ascertain as to the adherence of the CVC guidelines in the matters 
related to  deputation, transfers and postings of the Officials in FCI   and also about the 
instances when Officers appointed on deputation in FCI over stayed beyond the period 
prescribed in the  gui delines. The FCI though informed to the Committee that they follow 
the guidelines  but did not elaborate further on the issue. The Committee therefore desire 
the  Government to furnish the  details of officials who over -stayed beyond the stipulated 
deputation tenures in FCI during the last 10 years indicating the portfolios held by them 
during the period of their deputation along with the reasons for overstay.   The Committee 
are of the considered view that the principles laid down in the guidelines on the subject 
need to be strictly followed particularly in a organization like FCI where the officers handle 
sensitive portfolios and therefore strongly recommend that the deputation tenure of the 
officials should not be extended beyond the prescribed period. Th e Committee are hopeful 
that the Government will act upon the recommendation of the Committee in letter and spirit 
with a view to set a high standard of moral values in the organization. 
Reply of the Government 
 FCI follows the extent DOPT guidelines for deputation of the officers in/from FCI and 
as such officers are initially appointed on deputation for mutually agreed period and terms & 
conditions between lending and borrowing organization. Further, the period of deputation 
get extended with the approval of competent authority of the both organizations based on 
the requirement of the borrowing organization subject to maximum of 5 years as stipulated 
in DOPT guidelines in this reference. Further, it is to inform in last 10 years, there is no 
case of overstay on deputation of any officer in/from FCI. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
LABOUR MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
10. The Committee note that the FCI engages large number of labourers for loading and 
unloading of food grains. The Labourers deployed by FCI are in three categories viz. (i) 

23 
 
Departmental Labour (ii) Direct Payment System (DPS) Labour and (iii) No -work No -
pay(NWNP) Labour.  As informed to the Committee, presently there are about 11350 
Departmental Labour, 19953 number of DPS labour and about 6705 number of NWNP 
Labour engaged with FCI. Apart from this, there are about one lakh contract labourers hired 
through various contractors employed by FCI.  The Committee was informed that the 
sanctioned strength of the Departmental and DPS labourers was fixed in 2007 whereas that 
of NWNP l abourers was fixed in the year 2010 -11.  Thereafter rationalization process of 
labour strength have been done on the basis of exemption notification dated 06.07.2016 
and 26.06.2018 issued under section 31 of CL(R&A) Act by the Ministry of Labour in 
respect of already notified 226 depots.  The exemption initially granted vide notification 
dated 06.07.2016 had been effective for two years i.e. upto 05.07.2018 and thereafter it 
was extended first upto 05.07.2020 and then again for another two years i.e. upto 0 5 July, 
2022. Consequent upon the issue of exemption notification, the contract labourers shall 
continue to work in the exempted depots.  The Committee was further informed that  the 
Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench directed Government of India to de cide the de-
notification of all the notified depots within 6 months. The time limit of 6 months has elapsed 
long back.  In the meantime Hon‟ble High Court Kerala at Ernakulam directed Ministry of 
labour to consider the de -notification of Kollam depot after  obtaining comments of FCI. As 
informed to the Committee, the proposal for de -notification of Kollam depot alongwith the 
other notified depots has been sent to the Ministry of Labour through the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution vi de letter No. IR(L)/31(10)/2004/Vol.III 
dated 02.07.2018 followed by reminders dated 25/26.10.2018, 21/22.02.2019, 
02/03.04.2019, 23.05.2019 & 08.07.2019, but decision is still awaited.  The Committee‟s 
analysis of the comparative costs of different categories of labourers reveal that  the cost of 
contractual labourers is much less than the designated categories of labourers.  The 
engagement of contractual labourers for loading and unloading of food grains at depots and 
other locations will be effectively m aterialized only when the depots are de -notified but 
unfortunately, the Ministry of Labour has not taken final action for de -notification despite 
lapse of two years period. The Committee therefore strongly recommend the Government 
to immediately take action for de-notification of the depots of FCI so as to achieve the cost 
efficiency in the labour management.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 FCI since long has been demanding for permanent de -notification of 226 notified 
depots from the Ministry of Labour & Employment. The work in FCI depots is intermittent 
and seasonal in nature. The High Level Committee under the chairmanship of Shri Shanta 
Kumar, Hon‟ble MP(LS) had also recommended that contract labour is best suited for FCI 
considering the work in the dep ots.   Once the depots are de -notified, FCI will be able to 
deploy contract labour in the depots and will rationalize the rest of the departmentalized 
labour i.e. DLS,  DPS and NWNP. De -notification of the FCI depots will result in huge 
savings of Public Ex -chequer. The savings of Rs 600 crore has been done due to the 
Exemption granted by Ministry of Labour & Employment under Section 31 of the Contract 
Labour (R&A), Act. 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU) for permanent 
de-notification of the depots of FCI is highly solicited as the same will help in economizing 
the cost incurred by FCI in managing the labour.  
 

24 
 
 FCI has been regularly pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
through Ministry of CA, F&PD.  The proposal for de -notification of notified depots has been 
sent to Ministry of Labour through Ministry of CA,F&PD Vide letter No  
IR(L)/31(10)/2004/Vol.III dated 02.07.2018 followed by reminders dated 25/26.10.2018, 
21/22.02.2019, 02/03.04.2019, 23.05.2019, 08.07.2019, 20.09.2019 & 17.01.2020.  Ministry 
of Labour & Employment, decided to refer the matter to Central Advisory Contract Labour 
Board (CACLB) for detailed examination. Accordingly, a meeting was scheduled for 
19.03.2020 by CACLB at New Delhi . This meeting could not be held due to COVID -19 
pandemic. The next date of the meeting is yet to be fixed by the Ministry of Labour & 
Employment. A letter dated 25.06.2021 has also been issued by FCI to the Ministry of 
CA,F&PD with the request to take up the matter with the Ministry of Labour & Employment 
to expedite the matter.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
11. The Committee note that the wage bill of Departmental labour, DPS Labour and 
NWNP Labour has been gradually reduced from Rs. 337238.76 lakh in 2014 -15 to Rs. 
216133.33 lakh i.e. a reduction of about 40% in the wage bill over a period of five years.  
The Committee was informed that the Hon'ble High Court, Nagpur Bench had passed an 
order giving liberty to the Corporation to implement its policy of change in the scheme of 
incentives.  In compliance to the above order,  FCI Headquarter  sent a detailed proposa l  
to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  for effecting changes in 
the service benefits of Departmental Labour and Direct Payment System (DPS) Labour for 
approval so that further course of action can be initiated by FCI towards making the 
necessary reforms.  The FCI proposed the altered service conditions such as (i) Non -
inclusion of incentives for computation of CPF (ii) Non-inclusion of incentive for computation 
of Gratuity (iii) Non - inclusion of HRA elements for computation o f Incentive and OTA (iv) 
No payment of „A‟ Area rates to DPS labour working in „B‟ and „C‟ Area, and  (v) 
Consideration of Mandal as Handling Labour.  The Committee also note that the proposal 
with regard to declaration of Departmental Labour system as Dyi ng Cadre has been 
approved by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution on 03.01.2020 
and the same has been communicated to field offices vide Circular No.1/2020 dated 
08.01.2020 with the instruction that there will be no further induc tion under this  
Departmental Labour system. The Committee are hopeful that all these measures 
proposed to be taken by FCI will lead to substantial reduction in the cost on account of 
Department Labourer.  The Committee however observe that in view of the declaration of 
Departmental Labour System as dying cadre, the FCI will be heavily dependent on other 
categories of designated and contractual labourers.  The Committee therefore recommend 
that in the changed scenario, a well -defined policy for engagement o f such labourers for 
performing various types of jobs at different locations in the country be framed so as to 
make the system of engagement of labourers as transparent and cost effective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The proposed reforms in the service condi tions of the Departmental Labour System 
and Direct Payment System labourers will help in curtailment of labour cost. The 

25 
 
declaration of the Departmental Labour System as „Dying Cadre‟ by the Ministry of 
CA,F&PD has helped in defending court cases and ID Cases. 
 As cited above, the permanent de -notification of the FCI depots will enable FCI to 
engage contract labour in the depots. However, FCI labour will be rationalized & pooled into 
fewer depots. Being the principal employer, it will be ensured by FCI that  the various labour 
laws applicable to the Contract labour with regard to their wages, benefits and welfare are 
complied with by the contractor. Nodal Officers have been appointed at field level for 
improving the working condition of Contract Labour and to  ensure better facilities and 
provide adequate welfare provisions. Grievance Redressal Mechanism has also been 
introduced to settle the grievance of labours, if any, at the field level. 
 
 FCI is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee. The Corporation is 
also in a position to manage the contract labour keeping in view all the relevant provisions 
pertaining to the contract labour. The Contractor engaged shall make payments to t he 
contract workers as per the provisions of Minimum Wages Act, 1948, provide Welfare and 
Health facilities such as canteen/rest rooms, urinal, washing facilities, first aid etc., make 
contributions in accordance with the Employees Provident Funds & Misc. Provisions, Act, 
1952, comply with the provisions of ESIC Act and Workmen Compensation Act. FCI is 
entrusted with the work of Procurement, Movement, Storage and Distribution of food grains 
as mandated by GoI. The food grains are primarily stored in gunny b ags which are handled 
manually by labourers. In FCI depots & Rail heads the Contract labourers are engaged 
through Handling & Transport Contractor appointed by open enquiry under e -tendering 
system. Appointed Contractor provides the Contract Labour for carrying out work as per the 
scope of work in the Model Tender Form of „Handling & Transport Contract‟.  
HTC MTF in vogue already has sufficient provisions to ensure better facilities and adequate 
welfare provisions to contract labour like EPF, Minimum Wages,  ESI, Workmen 
Compensation etc. As per the Model Tender Form, the Contractor has to pay not less than 
minimum wages to Contract labourers engaged by him as per the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948. Also, Contractor has to ensure submission of EPF contribution in re spect of Contract 
Labour as per the provisions of Employees Provident Funds & Misc. Provisions Act, 1952.  
Further, there is provision in MTF for providing facilities like canteen/restrooms, urinal and 
drinking water as per CL (R&A) Act, 1970 for the Contr act labour by the Contractor. Nodal 
Officer has been appointed by FCI at field level to ensure compliance & implementation of 
various welfare provisions and facilities to Contract Labour. Also, Divisional Manager of FCI 
has been appointed as AppellateAuthority for disposal of complaints/grievances of Contract 
Labour." 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
PROCUREMENT OF FOODGRAINS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)  
12. The Committee note that the Government of India enacted the National Food 
Security Act(NFSA), 2013 which inter alia legally entitles upto 75% of the rural population 
and 15% of the urban population to receive subsidized foo d grains under Targeted Public 
Distribution System. The Government policy of procurement of food grains has broad 
objectives of ensuring Minimum Support Price  (MSP) to the farmers and availability of food 

26 
 
grains to the weaker sections at affordable prices.  It is also to ensure effective market 
intervention thereby keeping the prices under check and also adding to the overall food 
security of the country. The MSP is announced by the Government of India at the beginning 
of the sowing season of crops on the ba sis of the recommendations of the Commission for 
Agriculture Costs and Prices (CACP) which determines the MSP based on the input costs 
and margin to farmers.  The FCI, the nodal central agency of the Govt. of India, alongwith 
other State Government agencies undertakes procurement of wheat and paddy under Price 
Support Scheme.  The Committee observe that the objective of the food grains 
procurement by Government agencies is thus to ensure that farmers get remunerative 
prices for their produce and do not have  to resort to distress sale to local vendors who 
exploit the farmers by offering very low price. The Committee while taking note of the 
significant role of FCI in achieving the objectives of the Food Policy of Government of India 
through procurement and distribution of foodgrains, express their hope that the Corporation 
will keep on making sustained efforts for bringing about improvements in their processes so 
as to deliver better results in future with a view to take the benefits of the policy of the 
Government to the doorstep of the intended beneficiaries of poor class of population. 
 
Reply of the Government 
FCI is making continuous efforts in bringing improvements in its process which are 
elaborated as below: 
I. In RMS 2021-22, Haryana and Punjab also switched from indirect payment of 
MSPto direct online transfer of benefits to farmers' bank account. Now “One Nation, 
One MSP, One DBT” has been implemented across the country. 
 
II. DBT eliminated fictitious farmers and reduces the diversion and duplication of  
payment as payment is being made directly to farmer's bank account which in many 
States is linked with Aadhaar number of the farmer. 
  
III. DBT of MSP has brought in responsibility, transparency, real-time monitoring 
and reduces pilferage in the system. 
 
IV. FCI and most of the State Govts. Have developed their own Online 
Procurement System which ushers in transparency  and convenience to the farmers 
through proper registration and monitoring of actual procurement. 
V. Through e-procurement module deployed by procuring Agencies, farmers get 
latest/updated information regarding MSP declared, nearest purchase center, date of 
procurement etc. This not only has reduced the waiting period for delivery of stock 
by the farmers but also enables the farmer to deliver stock as per his convenience in 
the nearest mandi. 
 
VI. FCI and State Government agencies have adopted web services introduced 
by GOI/NIC for integration with National Food Procurement  Portal (NFPP) so that 
daily procurement data may be pushed on NFPP. 
 
VII. The State agencies have to also ensure the use of Expenditure Advance 
Transfer module (EAT) of  Public Financial Module System (PFMS)  while making 
payment, as mandated by the Ministry of Finance, GOI by integrate their online 
payment system with PFMS so as to maintain financial integrity. 

27 
 
 
VIII. Many State Govts. have integrated girdwari/crop  survey, land records with 
their portal and also introduced bio-authentication of farmers which bring more 
transparency in the system and ensure maintaining audit trail of entire operation. 
 
IX. The online procurement system has largely eliminated the procurement from 
middlemen and has resulted in better targeting of the MSP to farmers.  
 
Further, it is stated that the PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of Central 
Government and States /UTs.  While the Central Government makes allocation of food 
grains, FCI ensures adequate quantity of good quality of food grains stocks at all its base 
depots throughout the country. The responsibility of distribution of food grains under PDS 
and Other We lfare Schemes (OWS) to the targeted beneficiaries‟ rests with the State/UT 
Governments and their Agencies through their retail distributional network like Fair Price 
Shops. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
13. The Committee further note that there are two types of procurement viz. the 
Centralized Procurement System (Non -DCP) and the Decentralized Procurement System 
(DCP). Under the Centralized Procurement (Non -DCP), the procurement of food grains in 
the Central Pool are undertaken either by FCI directly or State Government agencies 
procure the food grains and handover the stocks to FCI for storage and subsequent issue 
against Government of India allocations in the same State or movement of surplus stocks 
to other States. The cost of the food grains procured by State agencies is reimbursed by 
FCI as soon as the stocks are delivered to FCI as per cost-sheets issued by Government of 
India.  Under the Decentralized Procurement (DCP), the State Government itself 
undertakes direct purchase of paddy/rice and wheat and also stores and distributes these 
food grains under NFSA and other welfare schemes. The Central Government undertakes 
to meet the entire expenditure incurred by the State Governments on the procurement 
operations as per the approved costing. With regard to the pace of decentralization of 
procurement activities, the Committee has been informed that the procurement activities 
had been decentralized to the State Governments and as many as 16 States procure rice 
and about 4 to 6 States procure wheat and in such cases, FCI‟s activities start after the 
State Governments handover the excess stock to FCI.  The Committee thus observe that 
the present emphasis of the Government is to handover the procurement operations of 
wheat and rice to States that have gained sufficient experience and have created 
reasonable infrastructure for procurement and move on to help those States where farmers 
suffer from distress sales at prices much below MSP and are dominated by small hold ings 
like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam, etc.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Government should provide all necessary assistance to the relatively 
inexperienced States and also the North -Eastern States with a view to strength en  their 
infrastructure and  increase their potential to enable them to progressively increase  their 
procurement activities.  

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
FCI has already handed over procurement operation to State Governments in Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Chh attisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh fully. FCI is participating 
in procurement operations in Punjab and Haryana on the request of concerned State 
Governments. 
FCI is procuring around 1% of paddy and 10% of wheat out of total procurement done for 
central pool. Rest of the procurement is done by State Agencies. FCI has moved towards 
focusing more on storage and movement of foodgrains. 
The list of DCP State for procurement of wheat and rice is as under: 
DCP States for Rice & Wheat 
S.No. Rice Wheat 
1 Uttarakhand Madhya Pradesh 
2 Chhattisgarh Uttarakhand 
3 Odisha Chhattisgarh 
4 Tamil Nadu Gujarat 
5 West Bengal West Bengal 
6 Kerala Bihar 
7 Karnataka Maharashtra 
8 Madhya Pradesh Punjab 
9 Andhra Pradesh Rajasthan(nine districts) 
10 Bihar  
11. Telangana  
12. Maharashtra  
13. Gujarat  
14. Andaman Nicobar  
15. Tripura  
16. Jharkhand(Six districts)  
 
On the recommendation of HLC committee, FCI moved towards the States, where farmers 
suffer from distress sales at prices much below MSP, and which are dominated by small 
holdings, like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam etc.  
Conscious and pe rsistent efforts are being made towards helping the States especially in 
the Eastern and North Eastern part of the Country to extend the benefit of MSP to the 

29 
 
farmers. To extend the benefit of MSP to the famers of Tripura, FCI has commenced 
procurement of Paddy in Tripura from KMS 2018-19.  
The procurement done during last 4 years in the Eastern States is as under 
                                                            (Fig. in LMT) 
S. No. 
  
STATES 
  
KMS 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21* 
1 Assam 0.35 1.03 2.11 1.26 
2 Bihar 7.93 9.49 13.41 23.84 
3 Jharkhand 1.46 1.55 2.58 4.27 
4 U.P. 28.74 32.33 37.90 44.78 
5 WB 22.11 27.27 33.56 27.34 
6 Tripura 0 0.18 0.14 0.11 
Total 60.59 71.85 89.70 101.6 
         *KMS 2020-21 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
The numbers of procurement centres for procurement of paddy operated during last 4 
years are as under: 
SNo. STATES KMS 
2017-18  2018-19  2019-20 2020-21* 
1 Assam 101 118 159 133 
2 Bihar 6,688 6,161 6223 6508 
3 Jharkhand 592 274 274 448 
4 Tripura 0 37 44 44 
5 UP 3,420 3,107 3,880 4453 
6 WB 19,238 27,563 30,070 28,973 
TOTAL 30,039 37,260 40,650 40,559 
*KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 

30 
 
The number of farmers benefitted are as under:- 
S.No. STATES KMS 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1 Assam 4,332 12,921 26,537 17,194 
2 Bihar 1,63,425 2,10,028 2,79,402 4,97,097 
3 Jharkhand 42,346 34,595 53,305 1,03,946 
4 U.P. 4,92,913 6,84,013 7,06,549 10,22,286 
5 WB 3,50,181 7,33,357 8,05,186 8,14,772 
6 Tripura 0 5,506 13,613 9,546 
Total 10,53,197 16,80,420 18,82,607 24,64,841 
    *KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 
Emphasis has also been given on procurement of wheat in Eastern States such as UP & 
Bihar.  
 
The details of procurement of wheat is as under: 
                                                                                                (Fig in LMT) 
States RMS 2019-20 RMS 2020-21 RMS 2021-22* 
UP 37.00 35.77 56.41 
Bihar 0.03 0.05 4.56 
*RMS 2021-22 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
 
It has been seen from above that in Bihar procurement of wheat has shown an steep 
inclined trend, 4.56 LMT wheat is procured in RMS 2021-22 as against 0.03 LMT wheat 
procured during RMS 2019-20, which indicates that farmers has shown their trust in Govt‟s 
procurement operations.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
  

31 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.15) 
 
14. The Committee further note that the procurement of wheat at MSP which was 
283.35 LMT in 2010 -11 has gone up to 341.32 LMT in 2018 -19 while the procurement of 
rice at MSP which was 341.198 LMT in 2010 -11 has gone to 443.30 LMT in 2018 -19.  The 
allotment to States which had been 241 LMT of wheat in the ye ar 2014-15 has gone to 246 
LMT in the year 2019 -20 but the allotment of rice which was 373 LMT in the year 2014 -15 
has come down to 331 LMT in the year 2019 -20.  The Committee are happy to note that 
procurement from Eastern States during Kharif Marketing Season i.e. KMS which had been 
65.97 LMT in 2016 -17 has gone up to 86.34 LMT(as on 06.07.2020) in 2019 -20.  The 
Committee also feel satisfaction over the fact that the constant efforts made by the 
Corporation has resulted in reduction of procurement of Beyo nd Rejection Limit(BRL) 
stocks by 86.84% i.e. from 15586 MT during the year 2013 -14 to 2107 MT during the year 
2016-17.  The BRL stocks further reduced to 1936 MT in 2017-18 which constitutes 0.005% 
of the total procured quantity in that year.  The Committ ee also note that FCI has put in 
place well established monitoring mechanism for the procurement activities which includes 
joint inspection of food grain stocks, online procurement monitoring System(OPMS), 
analysis of samples in quality control laboratorie s, regular inspection of Fair Price Shops 
and Godowns etc.  The Committee are hopeful that the FCI will bring more systemic 
improvements in their processes of procurement and other related activities by extensive 
use of information technology tools to mini mize the possibilities of aberrations which may 
creep in the system on account of human intervention. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to bring all states to a standardised level of automation in procurement process by 
extensive use of information technol ogy tools, minimum threshold parameters for national 
procurement standards have been identified. 
I.Online Registration of farmers: Name, Father‟s name. Address, Mobile Number, 
Aadhar number, Bank Account Details, Land details (Khata/Khasra), Self -cultivated 
or Land on rent/share cropping/contract 
II.Integration of registered farmer data with State‟s land record portal 
III.Integration of Digitized Mandi/Procurement center operations, Generation of 
buyer/seller forms, bill of sale proceeds etc. 
IV.Online payments with in tegration through Expenditure Advance Transfer (EAT) 
module of PFMS, for direct and speedy transfer of MSP to farmers.  
V.CMR/Wheat delivery Management: Auto generation of billing upon unloading of 
Acceptance note/Weight Check Memo and takeover of stocks 
VI.Data to flow through API based integration to the proposed unified GoI Portal for real 
time reporting of farmers benefitted, quantity procured and payments made.  
VII.Twenty Two (22) of these procuring states have online registration facilities for 
farmers capturing required details in their procurement portals.  
VIII.Land Records have been digitized for twelve (12) states and Eight (8) states have 
already integrated their Land Records System with Procurement Portal. 

32 
 
IX.All 23 states are doing online transfer to bank a ccounts for the MSP Procurement 
done. Thirteen (13) of these states are already making verified online payments 
through Aadhar enabled DBT or integration with PFMS. 
Further, there is a reduction in BRL stocks during the period 2016 -17 to 2020 -21. The 
details of Procurement vs. BRL (June, 21) is as under: 
CROP-YEAR 
Procurement of Rice by FCI  BRL 
%AGE 
(in LMT) (in MT) 
2016-17 251.87 2107 0.008 
2017-18 264.69 3290 0.012 
2018-19 280.17 2187 0.008 
2019-20 311.05 2999 0.010 
2020-21 
(upto 31.05.2021) 248.65 406 0.002 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
FUTURE ROLE OF FCI 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
15. The Committee observe that the procurement of food grains by FCI has gradually 
decreased over a p eriod of time and as informed, the FCI now procures only 2% of paddy 
and 12% of wheat out of the total procurement done for the central pool. As such, the role  
of FCI in procurement has substantially minimized and it will further shrink with the more 
and more States opting for the Decentralized Procurement (DCP) System. The Committee 
therefore urge that in view of its gradual decreasing share in the procurement domain, the 
FCI should now focus and concentrate more on the effective storage and distribution 
management system for making available better quality food grains to the poor families and 
other intended beneficiaries through optimum utilization of their resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
FCI has already handed over procurement operation to State Governments in Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh fully. FCI is participating 
in procurement operations in Punjab and Haryana on the  request of concerned State 
Governments. 
FCI is procuring around 1% of paddy and 10% of wheat out of total procurement done for 
central pool. Rest of the procurement is done by State Agencies. FCI has moved towards 
focusing more on storage and movement of foodgrains. 
  

33 
 
The list of DCP State for procurement of wheat and rice is as under: 
DCP States for Rice & Wheat 
S.No. Rice Wheat 
1 Uttarakhand Madhya Pradesh 
2 Chhattisgarh Uttarakhand 
3 Odisha Chhattisgarh 
4 Tamil Nadu Gujarat 
5 West Bengal West Bengal 
6 Kerala Bihar 
7 Karnataka Maharashtra 
8 Madhya Pradesh Punjab 
9 Andhra Pradesh Rajasthan(nine districts) 
10 Bihar  
11. Telangana  
12. Maharashtra  
13. Gujarat  
14. Andaman Nicobar  
15. Tripura  
16. Jharkhand(Six districts)  
 
On the recommendation of HLC committee, FCI moved towards the States, where farmers 
suffer from distress sales at prices much below MSP, and which are dominated by small 
holdings, like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam etc.  
Conscious and pe rsistent efforts are being made towards helping the States especially in 
the Eastern and North Eastern part of the Country to extend the benefit of MSP to the 
farmers. To extend the benefit of MSP to the famers of Tripura, FCI has commenced 
procurement of Paddy in Tripura from KMS 2018-19.  
The procurement done during last 4 years in the Eastern States is as under 
             
  

34 
 
                                                     (Fig. in LMT) 
S. No. 
  
STATES 
  
KMS 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21* 
1 Assam 0.35 1.03 2.11 1.26 
2 Bihar 7.93 9.49 13.41 23.84 
3 Jharkhand 1.46 1.55 2.58 4.27 
4 U.P. 28.74 32.33 37.90 44.78 
5 WB 22.11 27.27 33.56 27.34 
6 Tripura 0 0.18 0.14 0.11 
Total 60.59 71.85 89.70 101.6 
         *KMS 2020-21 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
The numbers of procurement centres for procurement of paddy operated during last 4 
years are as under: 
S.No. STATES KMS 
2017-18  2018-19  2019-20 2020-21* 
1 Assam 101 118 159 133 
2 Bihar 6,688 6,161 6223 6508 
3 Jharkhand 592 274 274 448 
4 Tripura 0 37 44 44 
5 UP 3,420 3,107 3,880 4453 
6 WB 19,238 27,563 30,070 28,973 
TOTAL 30,039 37,260 40,650 40,559 
*KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 
 
  

35 
 
The number of farmers benefitted are as under:- 
S.No. STATES KMS 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1 Assam 4,332 12,921 26,537 17,194 
2 Bihar 1,63,425 2,10,028 2,79,402 4,97,097 
3 Jharkhand 42,346 34,595 53,305 1,03,946 
4 U.P. 4,92,913 6,84,013 7,06,549 10,22,286 
5 WB 3,50,181 7,33,357 8,05,186 8,14,772 
6 Tripura 0 5,506 13,613 9,546 
Total 10,53,197 16,80,420 18,82,607 24,64,841 
    *KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 
Emphasis has also been given on procurement of wheat in Eastern States such as UP & 
Bihar.  
 
The details of procurement of wheat is as under: 
                                                                                                  (Fig in LMT) 
States RMS 2019-20 RMS 2020-21 RMS 2021-22* 
UP 37.00 35.77 56.41 
Bihar 0.03 0.05 4.56 
*RMS 2021-22 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
 
It has been seen from above that in Bihar procurement of wheat has shown an inclined 
trend, 4.56 LMT wheat is procured in RMS 2021 -22 as against 0.03 LMT wheat procured 
during RMS 2019-20, which indicated farmers has shown their trust i n Govt‟s procurement 
operations. Further, in order to upgrade the storage system, following steps are being taken 
by FCI:- 
 Creation of SILOS: - In order to upgrade and modernize the storage 
facilities, construction of silos u nder PPP (Public Private Partnership) mode is being 
undertaken. In 2007 -09, silos at 7 locations with capacity of 5.50 LMT were 
constructed. After 2016, Silos at 21 locations with capacity of 10.625 LMT have been 
completed and put to use and silos at 38 lo cations with capacity of 19.125 LMT are 
under implementation. 

36 
 
 
 Phasing out of CAP: -Govt of India has decided that CAP Storage should be 
phased out over a period of time. State Govts of Haryana and M.P have furnished 
their Action Plans to create scientific covered capacity by phasing out CAP.  
FCI is also in the process of chalking out an  „Action Plan‟ for phasing out owned CAP 
capacity by way of Asset Monetization for which steps regarding appointment of consultant 
has been initiated. 
 
In order to upgrade and modernize the storage facilities, construction of silos under PPP 
(Public Private Partnership) mode is being undertaken. In 2007 -09, silos at 7 locations with 
capacity of 5.50 LMT were constructed. After 2016, Silos at 21 locations with capacity of 
10.625 LMT have been completed and put to use and silos at 38 locations with capacity o f 
19.125 LMT are under implementation. 
As already stated above FCI is responsible for making available of good quality of food 
grains to the State/UT Governments against the allocation made by the Govt. of India.  The 
food grains are issued as per the qual ity norms prescribed by the Govt. of India.  The 
responsibility for distribution of food grains to end beneficiaries, rests with the concerned 
State/UT Government. 
As far as distribution management system is concerned, it is informed that FCI has well -
defined system for supply of food grains to the State/UT Govts. for catering their 
requirement under NFSA/OWS.   
FCI has to ensure availability of food grains in its depots situated at every nook and corner 
of the country for which stocks are moved from surplu s states to deficit states as per the 
requirement of food grains of the State/UT.  Movement planning is done on monthly basis 
as per the requirement of the States/UTs and final plan of movement is shared with all the 
stakeholders involved in t he movement p lanning.  State/UT Govts. or their nominated 
agencies lifts the stocks of food grains from the depots of FCI and distribute the same to 
the end consumers through their distribution network.   
In order to further strengthen the distribution system, Departme nt of Food & Public 
Distribution, Ministry of CAF&PD . GoI has taken various steps for End -to-End 
computerization of TPDS in the country.   Ministry may please substantiate further on the 
progress made in this regard. 
During COVID-19 pandemic, the most chal lenging job was to maintain food security of the 
nation due to lockdown like situation due to COVID -19 pandemic. FCI played a vital role 
during said period and through its effective distribution system, supplied a quantity of 
945.92 LMT food grains during the period from 25.03.2020 to 31.03.2021 under various 
schemes of Govt. of India. 
(Figs. InLMT) 
Scheme Wheat       Rice  Total 
NFSA (Regular)  221.56 302.48 524.04 
PMGKAY –I (April to June 2020) 15.01 102.99 118.00 
PMGKAY –II (July to November 2020) 88.47 98.35 186.82 
Scheme for Non -NFSA card holders 2.57 7.09 9.66 

37 
 
Other Welfare Schemes(OWS)/Others 15.81 32.89 48.70 
Open Market Sale Scheme (OMSS) 26.30 25.89 52.19 
Scheme for Charitable/ NGOs etc. 0.01 0.10 0.11 
Allocation for Migrants/ Stranded Migrants (ANB)  1.83 4.57 6.40 
Total 371.56 574.36 945.92 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
BUFFER STOCKS AND EXCESS STOCKS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
16. The Committee note that the Food Corporation of India has to maintain buffer stocks 
as prescribed by the Government of India as a measure of food security to guard against 
scarcity of food grains.  The buffer stock is presently equivalent to 4 months alloc ation.  
This stock enables the Government to intervene effectively to curb rising trend of crisis of 
foodgrains in the market. Thus, two types of stocks are maintained.  The first is operational 
stock which are required for month to month distribution to t he intended beneficiaries under 
Targeted Public Distribution System(TPDS) and Other Welfare schemes(OWS).  The 
second is the Strategic Reserve which is required by the Government only to maintain and 
renew the stocks unless foodgrains are drawn from it in case of crisis situation such as 
abnormal shortfall in production of foodgrains in the country or natural calamity and in such 
a case, the procurement will be required to be higher in the next season to the extent of 
drawal from the Strategic Reserve.  The  Committee however observe that during evidence, 
it was brought before the notice of the Committee that as per norm of 2014 for having 23 
million tonnes of buffer stock, presently it is about 64 million tons resulting in 40 million 
tonnes of excess stock.  With regard to the disposal of excess stocks, the Committee was 
informed that Open Market Sale Scheme(Domestic) [OMSS(D)] Policy is formulated for 
every fiscal year to offload excess stock of wheat and rice which is above buffer stock in 
norms in the open market.  There is a Committee constituted by the Government consisting 
of Secretary(Expenditure), Secretary(Food and Public Distribution), Secretary(Consumer 
Affairs) and Secretary, Department of Commerce to recommend quantity and price at which 
foodgrain stocks in excess of buffer and strategic norms are to be offloaded.  With regard to 
the sale of excess stocks of foodgrains through OMSS(D), the Committee note that annual 
sale of excess stock had been 71.88 LMT in the year 2015 -16, 47.45 LMT in 2016 -17, 
19.12 LMT in 2017 -18, 90.30 LMT in 2018 -19 and 52.48 LMT in 2019 -20.  The Committee 
were also given to understand that various proposals are being moved in the Government 
about liquidation of excess stocks but the details of these proposals were not elabor ated.  
The Committee observe that norms for buffer stock have been fixed taking into account the 
primary objective of maintaining food security to guard against scarcity of food grains which 
may occur for various reasons but at the same time maintenance of  large quantity of 
excess stocks over and above the fixed norms for buffer stock entails heavy cost to the 
Corporation.   The Committee appreciate Government policy to procure the foodgrains at 
MSP without any cap to allow the farmers to sell their produce  to the Government 
organisation and save them from distress sale to local venders at lower rates.  The 
Committee however desire that the Government should prepare a detailed plan for 

38 
 
liquidation of excess stocks in time so that the financial burden on the Government is 
reduced to maximum extent. 
Reply of the Government 
Due to open ended procurement policy of the Govt. of India, the procurement of Wheat and 
Rice remains more than that of the normal requirement of food grains under NFSA and 
OWS which is aroun d 600 LMT per year.  The stock in excess of the requirement gets 
accumulated in the Central Pool on year-to-year basis. 
The Govt. of India has constituted a committee, consisting of Secretary (Expenditure), 
Secretary (Food and Public Distribution) and Secr etary (Consumer Affairs) to recommend 
quantity and price at which foodgrain stocks in excess of buffer and strategic norms are to 
be offloaded in domestic market.  Every year, based upon the recommendation of the 
Committee of the Secretaries, DFPD, GoI, fo rmulates the policy for sale of food grains 
under OMSS (D)i.e. Open Market Sale Scheme (Domestic). During 2020 -21 a quantity of 
50.32 LMT of food grains, comprising of 25.32 LMT wheat and 25.00 LMT rice have been 
sold under OMSS (D).  However, the scope of disposal of food grains through Open Market 
Sale Scheme (Domestic) is also limited.  
In order to ameliorate the hardships faced by the poor due to economic disruption caused 
by the Corona pandemic, Government of India announced various additional schemes like 
PMGKAY, AtmaNirbhar Bharat, Non -NFSA card holders & Charitable/NGOs. during 
COVID-19 period in 2020-21.  Apart from regular schemes, following quantity of food grains 
were issued under different special schemes announced by Govt. of India: 
                                                                                                                   (Figs. InLMT) 
Scheme Wheat       Rice  Total 
PMGKAY –I (April to June 2020) 15.01 102.99 118.00 
PMGKAY –II (July to November 2020) 88.47 98.35 186.82 
Scheme for Non-NFSA card holders 2.57 7.09 9.66 
Scheme for Charitable/NGOs etc. 0.01 0.10 0.11 
Allocation for Migrants/ Stranded Migrants (ANB) 1.83 4.57 6.40 
Total 107.89 213.10 320.99 
 
Further, in view of resurgence of COVID during 2021 -22, Govt. of India has announced 
following schemes: 
(i) PMGKAY-III(May- June 2021)  
Govt. of India allocated a quantity of around 79.51 LMT food grains to NFSA beneficiaries 
for two months i.e. May & June 2021 @ 5 Kg. per person per month, free of cost against 
which a quantity of 76.95 LMT has been supplied by FCI to State/UT Govts. upto 
24.06.2021. The Govt. of India has further ext ended the PMGKAY for the period July to 
November 2021 and allocation of 198.78 LMT free food grains have been made. 
  

39 
 
(ii)  Liberalised OMSS (D) Scheme 
With the objective to make wheat and rice stocks easily available in open market, DFPD, 
Ministry of CAF& PD, Govt. of India has formulated the liberalised OMSS(D) policy for the 
year 2021 -22. Rates have been made attractive and uniform rates, have been fixed pan 
India, without addition of any freight component to facilitate buyers to lift stocks from any 
place at ease during Covid period. 
(iii)  Scheme for NGOs/Charitable 
The Govt. of India has extended the scheme for supply of food grains to Charitable/ Non -
Governmental Organizations etc. engaged in relief operations/ running relief camps for 
migrant labourer s/ vulnerable groups, during 2021 -22 at Rs. 21/ - per Kg. wheat and Rs. 
22/- per Kg. rice. 
(iv) Scheme for the persons not covered under NFSA 
DFPD, Ministry of CAF&PD, Govt. of India has also renewed the scheme for providing food 
grains to the persons not c overed under NFSA, , having State/UT ration card @ 5 Kg. per 
person per month for a period of eleven months i.e. from May, 2021 to March, 2022 at Rs. 
21/- per Kg. wheat and Rs. 22/- per Kg. rice. 
Details of food grains lifted from Central Pool during 2021 -22 (Upto 24.06.2021) under 
various schemes are as under: 
(Figs. InLMT) 
Scheme Wheat Rice Total 
NFSA (Regular) 45.71 52.96 98.67 
PMGKAY (May & June 21) 36.82 40.13 76.95 
Scheme for Non-NFSA card holders 0.27 2.04 2.31 
Other Welfare Schemes(OWS)/ Others 2.58 5.07 7.65 
Open Market Sale Scheme (OMSS) 4.52 3.21 7.73 
Total 89.90 103.42 193.32 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
STORAGE FACILITIES AND CAPACITY UTILIZATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
17. The Committee note that over a period of time, the quantum of procurement of 
foodgrains has gone up and it has necessitated the requirement of additional storage 
capacities. As informed to the Committee, the FCI opts for short -term hiring of covered 
godowns as well as Cover & Plinth  (CAP) to meet the short -term peak requirements  of 

40 
 
storage capacity.  The Committee‟s analysis reveals that the  total storage capacity owned 
by the  FCI was 387.40 LMT, 373.00 LMT, 361.91 LMT, 363.54 LMT, 381.06 LMT and 
407.34 LMT during the year 2014 -15, 2015 -16, 2016 -17, 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20  
respectively.   Further, as on 1 st July 2020, the storage capacity with State agencies was 
471.24 LMT. Thus, against the total available capacity of 878.58 LMT, 812.94 LMT of 
stocks of central pool were stored.  The Committee also note that out of total number of 
2131 storage available as on 30.11.2019, 561 is owned by FCI and 1572 is hired by FCI.  It 
was revealed during the examination of the subject that it is the excess procurement which 
necessitate additional storage facility but nevertheless once the foodgrains are procured, 
these are required to be safely preserved till its distribution/sale.  The Committee observe 
that Cover & Plinth(CAP) storage facility is relatively not safe for storage of foodgrains for 
long duration and therefore the Committee desire that CAP system of storage n eed to be 
phased out.  The Committee note that various schemes for construction of godowns for 
storage of stocks are (i) Private Enterpreneurs Guarantee Scheme (PEG) (ii) Central Sector 
Scheme (iii) Construction of Steel Silos and (iv) Cover and Plinth(CAP ) Hiring Scheme.  
Under PEG Scheme, storage capacity is created by private parties, Central Warehousing 
Corporation and State Government agencies and the FCI gives guarantee of 10 years for 
hiring to private investors and 9 years to CWC/SWCs/State Agencies .  Under the Central 
Sector Scheme, the storage capacity is created by FCI in North -Eastern States alongwith 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Kerala.  The construction of Steel Silos is to be done in 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) Model.  The Committee ho pe that efforts will be made by 
all the stakeholders to create the storage capacity under the respective scheme and will 
achieve the target within the prescribed time period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In order to upgrade and modernize the storage facilities , construction of silos under PPP 
(Public Private Partnership) mode is being undertaken. In 2007 -09, silos at 7 locations with 
capacity of 5.50 LMT were constructed. After 2016, Silos at 21 locations with capacity of 
10.625 LMT have been completed and put to use and silos at 38 locations with capacity of 
19.125 LMT are under implementation. 
Accordingly, proposal of additional silo capacities of 108.375 LMT at 247 locations under 
Hub & Spoke model are under the process of appraisal and approval. 
In order to upgrade and modernize the storage facilities, construction of silos under PPP 
(Public Private Partnership) mode is being undertaken. In 2007 -09, silos at 7 locations with 
capacity of 5.50 LMT were constructed. After 2016, Silos at 21 locations with capacit y of 
10.625 LMT have been completed and put to use and silos at 38 locations with capacity of 
19.125 LMT are under implementation. 
FCI has devised roadmap for development of silos which will be road -fed and will work on 
the Hub and Spoke ModelIn order to f urther ease the process of development of Silos. The 
bid documents for Hub and Spoke silos have been prepared by adopting a consultative and 
inclusive approach. The tender documents and list of locations (247 locations with total 
capacity of 108.375 LMT) f or silo construction under Hub & Spoke model are under the 
process of appraisal and approval. 
Further, the Storage Capacity of owned godowns of FCI, CWC and State Agencies has 
been augmented by 45.23 LMT through reassessment of stack size from 140 MT to 17 4 

41 
 
MT. Additionally, a capacity of 27.44 LMT has been hired from Pvt Investors during the 
period from March, 2021 to May, 2021. 
Under PEG Scheme, out sanctioned capacity of 153.11 LMT; a capacity of 144.18 LMT has 
been constructed as on 31.05.2021. 
Under Central Sector Scheme, 0.48 LMT has been completed at 7 locations in NE States. 
In states other than North East Region, a capacity of 0.93 LMT for construction of godowns 
at 13 locations, out of which, 0.18 LMT has been completed at 3 locations. 
In respect o f phasing out of CAP, it is informed that FCI Hqrs. vide letter No.  Proc.  
III/1(1)/2021/Misc. Policies dated 17.02.2021 has sent a proposal to Ministry for fixing a 
target to phase out CAP storage capacity by 25% in the first year, 35% in the second year  
and balance 40% in the third year so as to completely switch over to more scientific storage 
by RMS 2024-25 and for revision in MOU in consultation with the State Governments.  
In this regard, meetings were held with the State Govts of Punjab, Haryana and  MP on 
23.03.2021 and 11.05.2021 and they were requested to furnish Action Plan for the same. 
Accordingly, State Govts of Haryana and MP have furnished their Action Plans to create 
scientific covered capacity by phasing out CAP. 
 
The status of Silo, (Priva te Entrepreneur Guarantee(PEG) capacity and (Cover & Plinths) 
CAP capacity as on 31.05.2021 is given as under:-  
(Fig. in LMT) 
Silo PEG 
Capacity 
CAP 
Owned Hired Total Owned Hired Total 
1.10 8.88 9.98 113.67 25.71 11.57 37.28 
Total Storage Capacity (Cap+Covered) under Central Pool as on 31.05.2021 is as under; 
                                                                                                                           (Fig. in LMT) 
FCI (Own+Hired) 
 
State Agencies Total 
468.25 436.49 904.74 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF SILOS : HUB AND SPOKE MODEL 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
18. The Committee note that Steel Silo storage is highly mechanized and modernized 
way of storing of foodgrains in bulk.  It ensures better preservation of foodgrains and 
enhances its shelf life. If foodgrains are stored in Silos and transported in bulk, losse s due 
to theft, pilferage and transportation would be negligible compared to foodgrains storage in 
bags in conventional warehouses. The FCI informed that since land availability in existing 
FCI godowns is scarce, it would be prudent to shift to storage of foodgrains in Silos as it 
requires approximately 1/3rd land as compared to conventional storage warehouses. 
Moreover, Silos can be operated round the clock which would bring in flexibility and would 
improve overall efficiency. As such, construction of Silo s and utilization of Silos for storing 

42 
 
and transportation of foodgrains in bulk would be beneficial to the nation as a whole 
besides also creating an efficient Food Suppl y Chain Management System. The FCI has 
therefore planned to modernize its storage faci lities by construction of modern steel Silos 
on a PPP mode. The Committee note that as against the target set in 2016 for creating 100 
LMT silo capacity, FCI could create only 8.25 LMT even after four years which is just 8.25% 
of the target fixed. The silos were constructed in Punjab and Madhya Pradesh. The reasons 
attributed by FCI to their poor achievement is lack of availability of land and railway sidings 
which were made compulsory in the tender floated for the purpose. The Committee were 
informed that many big investors who showed interest to invest in silo construction could 
not move ahead because of these constraints. Since the earlier model failed, the 
Committee learn that FCI is changing its existing model under which silos are constructed 
on 'Hub a nd Spoke' model where in various silos are connected by road to a mother silo 
which will have rail connectivity. The Committee are of the opinion that setting up of smaller 
size silos near to the procurement and consumption locations will immensely reduce the 
transport cost of FCI as it will help in avoiding procuring grains at one location and sending 
them to the silo located at distant place and agai n bringing the foodgrains back for 
distribution under various welfare schemes to the same areas from where these foodgrains 
were actually procured.  The Committee are of the view that  this “to and fro”  movements 
not only create a lot of logistic issues but also cast heavily on the Government in terms 
transportation charges and therefore these could be effectively reduced if the localised 
small silos are constructed and then integrated to the main silos under hub and spoke 
model. The Committee therefore recommend that immediate steps be taken to prepare a 
comprehensive scheme for creation of the Silos ne twork on Hub and Spoke model 
throughout the country in a time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
 In order to upgrade and modernize the storage facilities, Government of India 
chalked out an Action Plan for construction of steel silos on PPP (Public Private 
Partnership) mode in the country for a capacity of 100 LMT. At present, Silos with capacity 
of 10.625 LMT have been completed and put to use and 19.125 LMT silo capacity is under 
implementation. 
Earlier silos with Railway siding were considered. A major bottleneck in construction of 
Railway siding silos has been difficulty to find and acquire suitable land along rail tracks. 
Hence, in order to fast track the progress of construction of steel silos, a professional study 
was conducted by FCI through M /s RITES for examining the feasibility of road -side silos 
with containerized movement. M/s RITES submitted its final report recommending Hub & 
Spoke  Model with road side silos and containerized bulk movement. DFPD accorded “in -
principle approval” for construction of silos under the Hub and Spoke model as proposed by 
FCI. Land for roadside silos is relatively easily available, as compared to land along rail 
side tracks.  
Thereafter, by adopting a consultative and inclusive approach, involving and interactin g 
with key stakeholders, the bid documents for Hub and Spoke silos were prepared. Draft Bid 
Documents were put up for stakeholder consultation and extensive deliberations on 
comments received on various issues and changes pertaining to contractual and tech nical 
issues considering the best practices and recent developments were undertaken.  
The locations for silos have been identified considering the Storage Gap, concept of direct 
delivery form Mandis to consuming areas and distribution of silos on basis of buffer stock in 
consuming regions rather than be  centrally maintained. Accordingly, proposal of additional 

43 
 
silo capacities of 108.375 LMT at 247 locations under Hub & Spoke model are under the 
process of appraisal and approval. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURE WITH RAILWAY CPSUS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
19. The Committee note that investors - both domestic and foreign - are willing to invest 
in creation of modern storage infrastructure had to withdraw for want of land and railway 
sidings. The Committee also note that FCI transports 85% of food grains through rail mode 
as it is the cheapest option. The Committee learn that FCI and the Department of Food and 
Public Distribution have not succeeded in convincing railways to give vacant land near the 
railway sidings to create storage infrastructure. The Committee recommend that the 
Government should explore the possib ility of forming a Joint Venture with the Railways for 
undertaking the business of movement of foodgrains as such type of arrangement will be 
beneficial for FCI as well as Railways.  The Committee may be apprised of the precise 
action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter regarding utilization of surplus land of Railways for construction of storage 
infrastructure has been deliberated with Railways and certain locations were tentatively 
identified after joint inspection.  CRWC/CWC were mandated to construct storage 
infrastructure on Railway Land as CRWC already had MoU with Railways. 
As of now, around 80% of stocks are moved by rail to different parts of the country, still 
being the most economical mode. FCI and Railways work in tandem and maintain proper 
coordination to ensure that foodgrains are moved across the country. 
 
However, no special benefits are given to FCI by Railways for transporting foodgrains. 
Freight rates charged for commodities under classification Foodgrains, Flours & Pulses by 
Railways is same to all whether it is FCI, Private party or any other Govt. Agency.  
 
Further, recommendation of committee for exploring the possibility of forming a Joint 
Venture with the Railways appears to be a policy issue. Ministry may take a suitable view 
on same. 
As far as, the matter regarding utilization of surplus land of R ailways for construction of 
storage infrastructure, the same has been deliberated with Railways and certain locations 
were tentatively identified after joint inspection. CRWC/CWC were mandated to construct 
storage infrastructure on Railway Land as CRWC already had MoU with Railways. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 

44 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 
20. The Committee note that  FCI is a „No Profit No Loss‟ organization and is a 100% 
subsidized Corporation. As such, the commercial practices applied to other CSPUs set up 
with profit motives and adding value to its shareholders cannot be applied to FCI. The 
objective of the Governm ent is not to make profit by procuring food grains at a lower cost 
and selling it at a higher price. The  stated objectives of the government is to (i) provide 
remunerative production cost to farmers by ensuring payment of Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) (ii) provide foodgrain to public at large at subsidized price and (iii) maintain buffer 
stock and strategic reserve of foodgrain for the country. FCI executes Government welfare 
programs and fulfils it social objectives and thus is not a profit oriented entity. In case all the 
provisions of the Companies Act are made applicable to FCI, it may materially impact the 
subsidy calculation and will have financial implications on Government of India. The 
Corporation is governed under Food Corporation Act 1964 and many provisions of the 
Companies Act 2013 are not applied to it and some additions/ deletions/ modifications have 
been done in the financial statements of FCI in consultation with C&AG keeping in view the 
Act and the special nature of operations entrusted to FCI. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Observation of the committee is Factual. No comments to offer. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 
21. The Committee note that the sources of finance of FCI are mainly through equity 
share capital, cash credit constituting long term bonds, ways and means advance (WMA)/ 
unsecured short term advances and the National Small Saving Fund. The t otal budget of 
FCI constitutes Sales and Subsidy. The budget of FCI was Rs. 134762 crore during 2014 -
15, Rs. 131694 Crore during 2015 -16, Rs. 131053 Crore during 2016 -17, 133912 Crore 
during 2017-18, Rs. 156272 Crore during 2018 -19 and Rs. 166085 Crore dur ing 2019-20. 
There is no consistency in the sales figures.  However, the subsidy has been constantly 
rising since 2015 -16.  The subsidy  was Rs, 102425 Crore during 2015 -16, Rs. 109136 
Crore during 2016 -17, Rs. 116282 Crore during 2017 -18, Rs. 131787 durin g 2018-19, Rs. 
140928 during 2019 -20. There are three components of subsidy viz. consumer subsidy, 
buffer subsidy and losses. The rise in subsidy as explained by FCI is due to the increase in 
MSP every year. The Committee note that the MSP of wheat that wa s Rs. 1120 per quintal 
in 2010-11 has gone up to Rs. 1840 per quintal in 2018 -19 indicating a rise in 64.3% over a 
period of 9 years. Similarly, MSP of common paddy that was Rs. 1000 per quintal in 2010 -
11 has increased to Rs. 1750 per quintal indicating a n increase of 75% over the same 
period. The increase is also due to storage charges on the stock held in excess to the 
stocking norms. For instance, the Committee observed that as against stock holding norms 

45 
 
of 276 LMT of wheat and 135 LMT of rice, FCI held wheat stock of 458 LMT and rice stocks 
of 354 LMT by the end of March 2020. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The budget figures shown in the question is sum of sale and subsidy which is updated:              
Amount in Rs. crore 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The Sales figures are mainly sum of foodgrains lifted by State Govts under NFSA / OWS 
and sale in OMSS (D). 
The NFSA was introduced in 2013-14. However, the switch by states to NFSA was gradual 
resulting in higher sales value in 2014 -15 to 2015-16 as Sales rate in A PL/BPL was higher 
than sale rate in NFSA. After 2015 -16 variation in sales value was only due to OMSS(D).  
The open sale quantity keeps varying as per the demand and supply situation, the sales 
figures change accordingly. The OMSS (D) sale position is given below – 
Year Wheat Rice Total Value 
(Rs in Cr) Qty 
(LMT) 
Value  
(Rs in Cr) 
Qty 
(LMT) 
Value  
(Rs in Cr) 
2014-15 42.06 6,829.62 0 0.06 6,829.68 
2015-16 70.37 11,157.19 0.89 203.93 11,361.12 
2016-17 46.76 8,513.50 1.94 463.29 8,976.79 
2017-18 13.82 2,644.43 4.69 1,172.35 3,816.78 
2018-19 82.04 16,191.22 8.05 2,103.10 18,294.32 
2019-20 34.15 7,512.19 14.61 3,668.75 11,180.94 
2020-21(RE) 50.00 11,000.00 30.00 6,750.00 17,750.00 
 
Due to above shown variation only, the sales figures are not consistent. 
The procurement of Paddy and Wheat is open ended. As a result, there is excess 
stock well beyond the stock norms with FCI. FCI is incurring carrying cost to hold such 
excess stock which includes storage charges and interest. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Year Sales Subsidy Total 
2014-15 29,755 1,05,007 1,34,762 
2015-16 29,269 1,02,425 1,31,694 
2016-17 21,917 1,09,136 1,31,053 
2017-18 17,630 1,16,282 1,33,912 
2018-19 30,758 1,20,352 1,51,110 
2019-20 23,434 1,32,408 1,55,842 
2020-21(RE) 31,560 2,30,536 2,62,096 

46 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 
22. The Committee further note that the Government sanctioned a loan of Rs. 65,000 
Crore to FCI from National Small Saving Funds (NSSF) in 2017 -18. During the same year 
FCI had made short term borrowing of Rs. 82376.48 Crore from Banks. FCI explained that 
the Rs. 65,000 Crore sanctioned to FCI during 2017 -18 were book adjustments with no 
cash release . These loans were sanctioned for reversal of subsidy released to FCI and 
converting them into NSSF loans or for rollover/ recovery of previous NSSF loans/ WMAs 
released to FCI. Similarly the Short term loans (STL) from banks was taken to meet 
working capital requirement and cash flow mismatch. The Committee note that as on 30 
October 2019, FCI had an outstanding short term loans (STL) of Rs. 4,700 Crore that rose 
to  Rs. 40,700 Crore as on 31 March 2020. 
 
Reply of the Government 
During the year 2017-18, NSSF loan of Rs. 65,000 crore was released to FCI in three parts 
amounting to Rs. 14,000 crore for the rollover of NSSF Loan instalment, Rs.42,919.46 
crore in lieu of reversal of subsidy allocation and remaining Rs. 8,080.54 crore was 
released in cash and subsequently paid back for repayment of WMA of Rs. 8,080 crore. 
 Further in respect of issue of rise in outstanding short term loans (STL) of Rs.4,700 
crore to Rs. 40,700 crore,. It is stated that STLs are availed in order to meet the cash flow 
mismatch aris ing due to non -receipt/delay in receipt of funds from GoI. The details of 
receipt as well as expenditure reflecting the difference of approximately Rs. 37,988 crore, 
which was met by FCI through availment of STL from 1 st November, 2019 to 31 st March, 
2020 are as under:- 
Payments Amount (Rs. In Crore) Receipt Amount (Rs. In Crore) 
Normal Operations 57,497.00 Subsidy 13,164.02 
Annual Bond Interest 1,480,.48 NSSF 19,435.98 
NSSF Interest 8,164.02 Bonds 8,000.00 
Payments of DCP States on 
behalf of  DFPD 
11,436.00   
Total 78,577.50 Total 40,600.00 
 
As on 31.03.2021 the NSSF loan outstanding is NIL as all the liability in respect of NSSF 
has been discharged after the additional allocation of subsidy in Union Budget 2021 -22 and 
STL outstanding was Rs. 20,500 crore which was subsequently repaid in the month of 
April, 2021. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
  

47 
 
FIXATION OF ECONOMIC COST OF FOODGRAINS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
23. The Committee note that the “economic cost” of foodgrains comprises of (i) pooled 
cost of foodgrains (ii) procurement incidentals consisting of statutory charges, gunny cost 
and others (iii) freight (iv) interest (v) handling charges (vi) storage charges (vii) 
administrative expenses and (viii) operati onal losses. The difference between Economic 
Cost and Central Issue Price is reimbursed to FCI in the form of “Subsidy.”   The 
Committee‟s analysis of the data furnished by FCI reveals that the MSP of wheat per 
quintal during 2017-18 was Rs. 1625 per quinta l. The Acquisition Cost of Wheat during the 
same year was Rs. 1891 per quintal which included Rs. 1587.90 of pooled cost of wheat 
and Rs. 303.91 on procurement incidentals. The distribution cost of wheat was Rs. 406.11 
per quintal.  Thus, the Economic Cost of wheat was Rs. 2297.92 per quintal during 2017-18 
against MSP of Rs. 1625 per quintal.  Similarly, the economic cost of wheat during 2018-19 
was Rs. 2505.67 against an MSP of Rs. 1735 declared by the Government.  Further, an 
analysis of data on the Econ omic Cost of rice reveals that that the economic cost of Rice 
during 2017-18 was Rs. 3280.31 against and MSP of Rs. 1550 per quintal.  Similarly, the 
Economic Cost of rice during 2018 -19 was Rs. 3472.94 against an MSP of Rs. 1750 per 
quintal.  The Committee express their apprehension that the norms adopted for calculation 
of the procurement incidentals, distribution costs for ascertaining the economic cost of 
wheat and rice apparently are on the higher side and therefore the Government is bearing 
expenditure in the form of Subsidy almost two times more than the MSP declared for rice 
and one and a half times more than the MSP of the wheat.  The Committee therefore 
strongly recommend that the entire mechanism and the system of costing under different 
Heads as Acquisition cost and Distribution cost of the foodgrains need to be thoroughly 
reviewed with a view to reduce substantially the financial burden on public exchequer. 
Reply of the Government 
Economic Cost of FCI is sum of Acquisition Cost and Distribution C ost of food grains. 
Acquisition cost consists of pool grain cost (weighted average cost of MSP) and 
procurement incidentals.  
Operational Cost of FCI comprises of following elements:- 
1. Transportation Cost/Freight 
2. Transit Losses 
3. Storage Losses 
4. Handling Charges 
5. Administration Charges 
6. Storage Charges 
7. Interest Charges 
Total Operation cost of FCI is apportioned into two parts - Distribution Cost  and Buffer 
Carrying Cost. Distribution cost becomes the part of the Economic cost. Buffer Carrying 
Cost becomes the part of the Buffer Subsidy. The apportionment of operational Cost by 
FCI is made as per the guidelines laid down by the Ministry. 
In 2019-20, FCI procured 16.60% of Wheat and 1.54% Paddy of its total procurement. Rest 
portion was taken over from State Govts from purchases made by them. 

48 
 
For purchase of FCI, the expenses are booked in respective heads. It is a small portion of 
total procurement cost. For taken over stock, states are reimbursed cost on the basis of 
Cost sheets issued by DFPD and the element wi se payments were made to the respective 
Agencies. 
 
The review of the mechanism and system of costing under different heads, needs to be 
taken up at the level of DFPD, since, FCI follows the costing system as prescribed by 
DFPD. 
 
In the Budget of 2021-22, the GoI provided additional subsidy. As a result FCI repaid entire 
NSSF loan in 2020 -21. Due to th is, FCI would save interest of Rs 25307 cr in 2021 -22. 
Because of this, the Economic cost of 2021-22 (BE) was revised as under – 
 
Rate Rs./Qtl 
 
The Economic cost of Rice is calculated whereas MSP is declared for Paddy. Pooled cost 
taken in Economic Cost is the sum of weighted average cost of MSP available for 
distribution in the year. For this calculation Paddy is converted into Rice by multiply w ith 
out-turn ratio. The out-turn ratio for converting Paddy to Rice is 67%. When MSP of Paddy 
is converted into Rice, the MSP of Rice is almost 150% of MSP of Paddy.  
Example: MSP of Paddy Grade „A‟ for   RMS 2019 -20 is Rs. 1835 per qtl. and when it is 
converted into Rice, the MSP becomes Rs.2738.81 per qtl. Which is around 150% of the 
MSP of Paddy. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
24. The Committee are also surprised to note that the pooled cost of rice fixed for 
determination of Economic Cost of rice is almost one and a half times more than the MSP 
declared.  While the costing has been made for all servi ces involved right from the stage of 
procurement to the stage of distribution such as statutory charges, gunny cost, freight, 
interest, handling charges, storage charges, administrative expenses and operational 
losses etc., the Committee are not able to co mprehend as to why then the pooled cost is 
separately shown one and a half times more than the MSP.  The Committee therefore 
desire the Government to explain the reasons for adopting such method of costing and also 
to take corrective measures if the costing system is deficient on any accounts. 
  
Particulars 2021-22(BE) 
[Old Rate] 
2021-22(BE) 
[Revised Rate] 
Reduction 
Wheat 2,993.80 2,573.14 420.66 
Rice 4,293.79 3,678.92 614.87 

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Economic cost of Rice is calculated whereas MSP is declared for Paddy. As explained 
in the reply of earlier question, pooled cost is the sum of weighted average cost of MSP 
available for distribution in the year. For this calculation Paddy is converted  into Rice by 
multiplying with outturn ratio. The outturn ratio for converting Paddy to Rice is 67%. When 
MSP of Paddy is converted into Rice, the MSP of Rice is almost 150% of MSP of Paddy.  
 Example: MSP of Paddy Grade „A‟ for   RMS 2019-20 is Rs. 1835 per qtl. and when 
it is converted into Rice, the MSP becomes Rs.2738.81 per qtl. which is around 150% of 
the MSP of Paddy. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
25. The Committee note that about 15066.86 MTS of food grains were damaged in FCI‟s 
own godowns during the period from 2014 -15 to 29 February 2020.  The damages during 
the same period in CWC godowns and SWC godowns were 11713.51 MTS and 12097.05 
MTS respectively.  As informed to the Committee, there are no losses on account of 
rodents and also on account of storage. As per submission of FCI, there is a storage gain 
of 0.12 % during 2018 -19 due to the fact tha t wheat gains weight as it absorbs moisture 
and rice loses moisture.  The Committee however note that the losses on account of transit 
are 0.28% and in terms of money, FCI is losing annually about Rs. 300 crores due to this. 
The reasons for transit losses are stated to be on account of multiple handling, poor texture 
of gunnies, accentuated  use of iron hooks, poor quality wagons, en -route pilferages, 
inadequate security at rail points, etc. The Committee while taking note of the various 
measures taken to prevent the losses on account of damages, storage and transit, express 
their opinion that the annual financial loss of Rs. 300 crores on account of transit alone is 
really worrisome.  The Committee therefore recommend that concrete steps need to taken 
to strengthen the storage and transport management system in such a way as to minimize 
losses on these accounts. 
Reply of the Government 
In case of transit losses, there has been an improving trend and the overall losses in 
percentage terms are on decline. However, the higher value of transit losses during 2020 -
21 is because of higher quantity moved to meet the requirement of enhanced speci al 
allocations in the wake of Covid -19 pandemic. Also, the total movement during 2020 -21 
was 538.55 Lakh MT as against total movement of 409.58 Lakh MT during 2019 -20. 
Moreover, MSP of foodgrains is increased every year resulting in higher value for same 
quantum of loss.  
  

50 
 
The trend of transit losses is given in the table below:   
YEAR 
MOU Targets (%) 
Qty Moved 
(LMT) 
Qty of 
Loss 
(LMT) 
% of loss 
 
Value of Loss 
(Rs Crore) 
2015-16* 0.42 437.36 1.30 0.30 298.86 
2016-17* 0.40 438.09 1.32 0.30 313.90 
2017-18* 
0.371 
(Excellent grade) 456.72 1.12 0.25 286.40 
2018-19* 
0.294 
(Excellent grade) 414.99 1.03 0.25 276.85 
2019-20* 
0.28  
(Excellent grade) 409.58 0.94 0.23 257.92 
2020-21** 
(Upto Mar‟21) - 538.55 1.50 0.28 431.23 
1. * indicates Audited figures and ** indicates Provisional figures of Transit Loss. 
(Rail + Road) 
2. Value calculated at Acquisition Cost for 2020-21 (BE) @ Rs.2220.75 per Qtl 
(Wheat) and Rs.3162.73 per Qtl (Rice) 
 
Action Taken to control Transit Losses: 
The position of Storage & Transit losses is reviewed in every Monthly Performance Review 
Meeting (MPRM) at HQ level. At Zone level EDs,(Zone) monitor it in meetings and at 
Regional levels GM(R) reviews it in meetings. Accordingly, all concerned have been 
instructed to intensify inspections of dep ots showing higher storage and transit loss cases 
and to take action against delinquents for unjustified losses. 
Further, the measures taken to minimise Storage &Transit Losses are as under:- 
 HQ/ ED (Zones)/ GM (Regions) are continuously pursuing close monitoring of 
the trend of transit losses and taking effective steps to bring them down. 
 Spreading polythene sheets on the floor of railway wagons to retrieve the 
spilled-over grains, has been introduced to minimize losses due to spillage during 
transportation. 
 An „SoP‟ regarding Joint Verification of High TL cases has been introduced to 
fix responsibility of high transit losses. 
 Vulnerable points at dispatching & recipient centers are identified for intensive 
checking by senior officers. 
 Special Squads are  deputed to selected railheads and destination/dispatch 
centers. 
 Instructions have been issued to deploy Independent Consignment 
Certification Squad (ICCS) at the time of loading and unloading of rakes. 
 Proper weighment and accounting at the time of receip t and issue is 
emphasized. 
 Disciplinary action is initiated against delinquents wherever 
abnormal/unjustified transit losses are reported. 

51 
 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
QUALITY CHECKS OF FOODGRAINS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 
26. The Committee note that with a view to introduce mechanized process for quality 
checking, FCI has purchased 30 Computerized Rice Analysers (Annadarpan SMART) 
developed by Centre for Development of Advance Computing (CDAC), Kolkata and made it 
available to 30 locations of 07 major procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh during Kharif Marketing  
Season (KMS) 2017 -18 and rice acceptance at these location were carried out through 
Computerized Rice Analysers (CRA).  During KMS 2018 -19, the CRAs were shifted to 
bigger centres and rice acceptance were carried out through it. The Committee note that 
FCI has entered into an agreement with CFTRI, Mysuru for providing consultancy services 
for modernizing FCI laboratories. The CNP Agreement was signed by both the parties and 
fresh tender was floated on 10.12.2018 for supply of major laboratory equipment reg arding 
which the technical bid was opened on 03.01.2019 and technical evaluation was being 
done by the Technical Evaluation Committee. The Committee further learn that funds 
allocated for modernization of its lab at Gurugram could not be utilized and hence  the 
remaining budget was allocated for modernisation of QC Lab at IFS Gurugram.  The 
Committee are in agreement with the view of FCI that there is no proven technology even in 
the advanced countries to check the quality of foodgrains and the present CRA t echnology 
having its limitations. Yet the Committee feel that quality of such huge quantities of food 
grains cannot be ensured through physical human inspection but can only be ensured by 
quality checks through technological intervention. The Committee may  be apprised of the 
progress made in the agreement signed with CFTRI, Mysuru. The Committee recommend 
that the modernization of FCI labs need to be taken up on priority and a suitable technology 
need to be developed for the purpose to ensure the effective quality checks of foodgrains 
so as to make available the better quality food stuffs to the intended beneficiaries including 
poor families in the country. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
All FCI Depots/District offices/Regional offices/Zonal offices are equipped to test the 
physical parameters of food grain samples. Besides physical parameters, chemical 
parameters are also to be tested hence, FCI has set up an ultra -modern Quality Control 
Lab at Institute of Food Security (IFS) Gurugram  with the scope of testing o f Mycotoxins, 
Uric Acid, residual toxicity of Malathion, Deltamethrin  & Aluminum Phosphide so as to 
provide quality foodstuff to PDS beneficiaries.  
 
On similar lines, action has been initiated to modernize four more labs under different Zonal 
Offices i.e.  ZO (North), Noida/ZO (South), Chennai/ ZO (East), Kolkata & ZO (West), 
Mumbai with the scope of testing of pesticide residues, mycotoxins, uric acid in food grains 
including level of fortificants present in fortified rice so as  to develop in-house capability for 
testing the quality of  fortified rice. In this regard,  suitable instructions have been issued to 
concerned zonal offices with a direction to take an immediate action. 

52 
 
  
In order to conduct chemical testing of food grains all the FCI Regional offices have entered 
into agreement with NABL accredited labs for testing of FSSAI parameters and fortificants 
in case of fortified rice. Samples are being sent to such third party labs on a regular basis 
for testing of quality. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
REDUCING THE QUANTUM OF NON-ISSUABLE FOOD GRAINS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29)  
 
27. The Committee note that foodgrains that do not conform to  FSSAI norms and 
further cannot be reconditioned for normal issue are considered as 'non -issuable' and are 
classified under various categories such as Feed I, II, I II, Industrial Use, Manure and are 
disposed off through tender enquiry system after fixing reserve price.  The Committee also 
note that scientific management and preservation of stock of food grains minimizes the 
quantum of non -issuable food grains. Beside s, quality checks in procurement are also 
undertaken to ensure that anything below the specified quality are not accepted in the 
Central Pool and quality checks of foodgrains also done by third parties. Samples of 
foodgrains procured & stored in FCI godown s are periodically referred to FSSAI notified 
NABL accredited labs for quality checks.  However, despite, so many measures taken, the 
Committee note that 6274.774 MTs of wheat was found non -issuable during 2014 -15 and 
4845.978 MTs during 2016 -17. Similarly 18236.025 MTs of Rice was found non -issuable 
during 2014-15.  The Committee do not understand how foodgrains become non -issuable 
especially when so many measures and quality checks are being undertaken from time to 
time for ensuring quality and the stocks  are being disposed off on the principle of First  In& 
First Out (FIFO) and planned liquidation of older crop year stocks being done by FCI on top 
priority. Although the data reflects considerable reduction in non -issuable foodgrains during 
2017-18, the qu antum of non -issuable foodgrains had increased during 2018 -19.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised in detail about the reasons for such situation and urge 
the FCI to effectively manage the stocks of the foodgrains so that quantum of non -issuable 
foodgrains are minimized.  The Committee further desire the FCI to develop a scientific 
system to achieve this objective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 FCI follows scientific methods of preservation. Regular preventive and curative 
measures are undertaken to ensure quality of foodgrains during storage. However, being 
perishable commodity, losses due to damage majorly because of natural calamities are 
bound to happen. However, it has been ensured that damage to foodgrains is kept at 
minimum. Year -wise position of non -issuable foodgrains against the off -take quantity is 

53 
 
placed as : 
 
ACCRUAL OF NON-ISSUABLE FOODGRAINS IN FCI AGAINST OFFTAKE QUANTITY  
 
Crop Year Non-Issuable foodgrains 
accrued (in MT) 
Off-take Quantity (in 
LMT) 
% of Damaged foodgrains 
against off-take qty. 
2014-15 18847 501.75 0.037 
2015-16 3116 490.15 0.006 
2016-17 8776 473.31 0.020 
2107-18 2663 452.16 0.006 
2018-19 5213 500.08 0.010 
2019-20 1930 455.13 0.004 
2020-21 1850 688.57 0.003 
 
 During the period 2014 -15 to 2020 -21, occurrence of damage to foodgrains in FCI 
was reduced from 0.04% to 0.003%. Majority of damage was caused due to natural 
calamities such as rains, cyclones and floods. Details placed as : 
 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING REASONS FOR ACCRUAL OF NON-ISSUABLE FOODGRAINS IN FCI 
DURING 2014-15 to 2020-21(Fig. in MT) 
 
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17  2017-18   2018-19     2019-20  2020-21  
A. NATURAL CALAMITIES   
Rain 130 119 138 22 0 15 2 
Flood 6144 0 204 1527 4390 993 1447 
Cyclone 9251 2039 4 5 0 689 67 
A. TOTAL 15525 2158 346 1554 4390 1697 1516 
B. OPERATIONAL REASONS   
Prolonged Storage 318 31 30 3 8 0 0 
Quality Complaints 551 354 56 39 106 63 196 
Transit Damaged 516 417 186 262 271 106 83 
Negligence 1746 79 7924 11 0 0 0 
Others 191 77 234 794 438 64 55 
B. TOTAL 3322 958 8430 1109 823 233 334 
G. TOTAL (A+B) 18847 3116 8776 2663 5213 1930 1850 
 
 Damage monitoring cells have been set up at District &  Regional Office levels to 

54 
 
investigate each case of damage to foodgrains. Wherever damage due to negligence is 
observed, action is taken against the defaulting officers/ officials and recoveries effected 
from storage agencies in case negligence on part of their staff is observed.  
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
COMPUTERIZATION AND MODERNIZATION OF DEPOTS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 
28. The Committee note that 561 Depots/Godowns are owned by FCI, 191 
Depots/Godowns are owned by the Central Warehousing Corporation and 702 
Depots/Godowns are owned by the State Warehousing Corporations. FCI has implemented 
the Depot Online System (DOS) Applicat ion to automate all the operations at FCI Depots 
with the vision to transform the food supply chain management through innovative use of 
technology for ensuring transparency, reliability and efficiency in their procurement, storage 
and distribution operations.  The other objectives of the project include standardization and 
automation of depots level processes, enablement of real time monitoring of operations, 
timely data reporting, data based decision support system and effective planning and 
optimization of administrative works.  Further FCI is also implementing Food & Essential 
Commodities Assurance & Security Target  (FEAST) application of NIC for managing the 
supply chain of Public Distribution System across 16 States/UTs. They also plan to 
integrate FEAST to DOS that will ensure transmission of indent related information from 
FEAST to Depot Online System (DOS) and then the Release Order related information 
from DOS to FEAST. Similarly, the CWC has implemented WMS application in its Depots 
that need to  be integrated with DOS.  The Committee however learn that the DOS is 
currently operational in only 533 FCI Depots and 144 CWC Depots. As  per the information 
furnished to the Committee, all SWC godowns hired by FCI were to be brought online on 
DOS by the 1 st of April 2020 but the updated status of actual progress made in this regard 
is not known.  The Committee observe that the o nline computerized system will ensure that 
the Government has the real time data/information on the quantity of availability of 
foodgrains in the stocks in their Depots/Godowns which will help in taking timely and quick 
decisions on various related issues. The Committee are thus of the considered view that 
unless all the Depots/Godowns are fully computerized and modernized, the main objectives 
of implementing Depot Online System by FCI will not be materialized.  The Committee 
therefore recomm end the Government to expedite not only the computerization and 
modernization processes in all the Depots/Godowns of FCI, CWC and SWCs but also t he 
integration work  of DOS with FEAST in a time bound manner preferably within 6 months‟ 
time so that the intended benefits of the  online foodgrain management system could be 
fully achieved  at the country level in near future. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to implement DOS in non – FCI depots (Hired godowns), a meeting was held on 
17.01.2020 at FCI HQ, attended by SIs of the WMS Application of CWC/ SWCs for 
deciding further course of action.  In the meeting, SWCs were requested to ensure all their 

55 
 
godowns hired by FCI for keeping central pool stocks are brought online with the DOS 
application to provide the Government of India with the real -time information on Central 
Pool Stocks of FCI.  
 
Since then, about 1646 godowns hired by FCI have been provisioned in DOS Application. 
As on 24.06.2021, the status  of implementation of Depot Online System (DOS) in FCI 
owned and Hired godowns is mentioned below : 
 
  FCI Owned Hired depots 
CWC SWC PEG Others Total 
Provisioned in DOS # 555 193 804 494 155 2201 
# Figures taken from National Dashboard of DOS (as on 24-06-2021) 
 
DOS-FEAST Integration: 
In order to ensure end -to-end monitoring of food -grains distributed to state governments 
under NFSA, integration of DOS (FCI Stock Accounting Software) and FEAST (State 
Supply Chain Management software) was conceptualized. FEAST is developed by NIC 
for managing the Supply Chain of Public Distribution System and has been implemented, 
either partially or fully across 16 States / UTs. State Govt./UTs submit Indents/Requests 
to FCI and depending upon the allocation and the amount paid by the State Govt./UT, 
FCI issues a Release Order (RO) to the Representatives of State Govt./UT, who in turn 
lift the stocks from FCI Depots, for further disbursal in PDS.  
 
The integration of FEAST to DOS will ensure transmission of indent related information 
from FEAST to DOS and  then the Release O rder related information from DOS to 
FEAST. 
 
API-based integration from Indents (along -side details of Indenter) received from state 
governments to issue of stock through release order (RO) from FCI with the truck chit 
details from DOS has been completed. 
 
NIC has state-wise instance of FEAST application (currently for 11 States) and in order to 
communicate with DOS all these individual instances have been brought under a CAS 
(Central Authentication Server) system. 
 
For Integration of DOS  with FEAST, joint testing by FCI and NIC teams has been done 
successfully in test environment. 
FEAST implementing states (Goa, Uttarakhand, Nagaland), identified by NIC, to be tested 
in production, post server upgradation which is pending with the system integrator. 
 In order to further increase transparency in procurement operations, GOI has envisaged an 
ecosystem where the procurement portals being used by the State Governments captures 
the Minimum threshold parameters in respect of Farmer Registration, Land record 
verification & online payment through EAT module of PFMS. Meeting has been held with 
the State Governments on 11.06.2021 and they have been apprised for completion of the 
exercise by the beginning of the next KMS. 
It is also proposed that these MTPs will be captured through APIs in the National Portal. 
 
FAP (Financial Accounting Package) 

56 
 
FAP is an Oracle based online ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) software for Finance 
and Accounts related work of the corporation implemented up to divisional office level  
(Total Units -197). 
At Present, following activities are done through FAP:  
 Preparation of Annual Accounts; 
 Preparation of Salary, Wages and other payments to all employees 
and all types of FCI labour; 
 All payments, receipts, invoices and bills are routed through FAP. 
FAP has provision for tracking of bills. FAP is integrated with the PFMS application of 
GOI through SFTP server for MIS purposes. 
 [Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
INCENTIVISING CROP DIVERSIFICATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 
29. The Committee note that the procurement of wheat and rice is open ended which 
implies that whatever comes from the farmers for sale has to  be procured at Minimum 
Support Price(MSP).  The larger quantity of procurement definitely results in higher 
financial burden  on the Government in the form of subsidy. As per the data furnished to the 
Committee, every year the procurement is nearly 40 LMT  higher than the buffer stocking 
norms which increases the expenditure on storage costs.  Also, due to excess stocks, there 
are chances of the stocks getting spoiled. As per estimation submitted before the 
Committee, approximately Rs. 2 lakh crore excess s tocks are there and therefore it is high 
time for giving a serious thinking by the Government for promoting cultivation of other 
commercial crops by incentivizing the farmers.  The other aspect is that rice and wheat 
being water guzzling crops, their culti vation adversely impacts the water table in the wheat 
and rice producing areas. The Committee however note that apart from the involvement of 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (CAF&PD), for the fixation of 
MSP and incentivising  cultivation of oilseeds, pulses, millets and commercial crops, the 
Ministry of Agriculture also needs to be consulted and taken into confidence for ensuring 
MSP to farmers on alternate crops other than rice and wheat. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government in consultation with both the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution and the Ministry of Agriculture needs to explore for developing 
a suitable programme for incentivising cultivation of crops like millet, oilseeds, p ulses and 
other commercial crops. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of COPU is being taken up with Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer Welfare.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 

57 
 
VIGILANCE CASES 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
30. The Committee note that as on 30 September 2019, there are 37 Major  and 155 
Minor vigilance cases pending with FCI. The number of cases reported every year are 
enormously high considering that in 2017 alone 64 major cases and 753 minor cases were 
reported. In 2018 -19, there were 92 major and 736 minor cases reported. And as on 30 
September 2019, 48 major and 326 minor cases were reported. The Committee note that 
although FCI has tried to quickly dispose off many cases every year, yet the number of 
fresh cases reported every year are surprisingly very high. One of the reasons for 
recurrence of the cases could be either FCI taking a lenient view while disposing of t he 
cases or sufficient harsher punishment not being levied on the charged officer. This is 
substantiated by the fact that more than 800 fresh cases are being reported by FCI every 
year.  Such unpleasant scenario is despite FCI taking many preventive measur es for non -
occurrence of such cases in matters related to procurement, storage, contracts, 
transportation/ movement, distribution and on labour issues. The Committee understand 
that incidence of corruption/ malpractice are high as FCI is a large organisati on with about 
21,000 staff and about 38,000 number of Departmental Labour with most of its activities 
having direct staff and public interface. The Committee are of the view that such high 
incidence of corruption in FCI not only reflects a bad reputation a bout the organisation but 
also raises apprehensions on the efforts made by the Government to fight corruption. The 
Committee recommend that there should be zero leniency and zero tolerance on corruption 
and incidence of malpractice/ corruption should be de alt strictly, meting with harsher 
punishment to deter officials in repeating the offence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Status of Major and Minor Penalty cases during the last four years are as under:- 
Period Opening Balance Number of cases 
initiated  during the 
year 
Number of Cases 
disposed during the 
year 
Closing Balance 
 Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor Major Minor 
2017-18 156 187 64 753 74 742 146 198 
2018-19 146 198 92 736 112 706 126 228 
2019-20 126 228 71 620 85 661 112 187 
2020-21 112 187 53 664 79 706 86 145 
 
The total number of cases have shown a decreasing trend during last four years.  Further, 
the disposal of the cases has been done in time bound manner, which also reflects in the 
reduction in the closing balance over the years.  The concerns expressed by the Committee 
about high incidence of corruption have been noted and following remedial actions are 
being taken:- 
i. FCI seeks advice of Central Vigilance Commission (wherever applicable) in 
corruption matters and takes further necessary action keeping in view the advice of 
the Commission. FCI has taken disciplinary action in all cases in consonance with 
advice of CVC, during last two years. 
 

58 
 
ii. Cases of criminal nature and having high financial implications are referred to 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).  All cases forwarded by CBI for grant of 
Prosecution Sanction/Permission for Preliminary Investigation/FIR are dealt with 
expeditiously and disposed of in time bound manner. 
iii. Amendment in Regulations of FCI have been done on 1 6.10.2020 for 
imposing penalty of dismissal/removal from service wherever corruption/bribery or 
disproportionate assets are proved. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
SETTLEMENT OF AUDIT PARAS AND DUES FROM CPSUS 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33)  
 
31. The Committee note that during 2015 -16, two performance and three Commercial 
Audit reports were issued by C&AG. The major observations pertained to serious issues  
such as incidental charges, commission to societies, suboptimal utilisation of silos, 
management of gunny bags and road transport contracts, etc.  The Committee however 
noted that C&AG had raised nearly 113 paras on FCI in their reports bet ween 2013 to 
2018. Out of the 113 paras raised, only 12 paras have been closed and 89 paras are 
pending with the Ministry and the C&AG. 12 paras are still pending reply of FCI.  The 
Committee is of the view that the number of audit paras reflects the commi ssion, 
ommissions and violations on the part of the organisation that has to be rectified/ 
streamlined at the earliest. The Committee further note that out of the 44 paras raised by 
C&AG during 2015, 30 paras are still pending with the Ministry & C&AG and 6 paras are 
still pending reply from FCI.  Similarly out of the 54 paras raised by C&AG during 2017, 51 
are still pending with the Ministry.  This reflects slackness and non -seriousness of the FCI/ 
Ministry on the observations of the C&AG.  The Committee s trongly recommend expediting 
settlement of pending audit paras of C&AG preferably within 03 months. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
As against 113 Paras / Sub -Paras raised in 6 C&AG Audit Reports in the past 7 years; as 
on 24th June‟2021, replies to 93 Paras / Sub -Paras had been submitted with the Ministry 
/C&AG; 12 Paras are closed.  
As regards to the pending 8 Paras / Sub -Paras, preparation of replies is under process 
and shall be submitted with the Ministry. These pending „Vetting Remarks‟ are forwarded to 
FCI for further comments / additional information / clarification are in their 3rd to 6th 
journey. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 

59 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 
32. The Committee further note that dues amounting to Rs. 92.18  Crore from MMTC, 
Rs. 6.64 Crore from STC and Rs. 6.65 Crore from PEC are pending payment to FCI 
despite regular persuasion by the Corporation. The dues relate to export of wheat during 
the period 2012 to 2014.  As per the reply furnished by FCI, the matter regarding settlement 
of claim of MMTC has been referred to the Ministry of CAF&PD while the matter of STC 
and PEC is being pursued.  The Committee recommend that all out efforts be made to 
recover or settle the pending dues of Rs. 105.40 Crore from the concerned CPSUs that has 
been pending since the last 6-8 years and FCI might be losing huge interest on it.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. For settlement of claims pending with MMTC, these are under the provisions 
of Administrative Machinery for redressal of CPSE's disputes (AMRCD) last meeting 
was held on 13.10.2020 at FCI, Hqrs for reconciliation of claims and counter claims 
between officials of MMTC and FCI. 
2. For settlement of claims pending with ST C, a meeting was held on dated 
09.12.2019, followed by meeting dated 30.07.2020and 20.08.2020. For conducting 
next meeting letter dated 05.01.2021 and 29.01.2021, 25.03.2021 and 16.06.2021 
has been written to STC. STC vide letter dated 18.06.2021 informed that due to 
covid-19 pandemic reconciliation of all  figures was not taken place and meeting may 
take place after reconciliation of figures related to STC & FCI. 
 
3. In case of PEC, FCI vide letter dated 11/14.06.2021 has requested 
MoCAF&PD to take up the mat ter with PEC as per provisions of AMRCD as PEC is 
not responding to any meeting for claims settlement. 
 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
1. The Committee‟s analysis furthe r reveals that section 7(1) of the Act  clearly 
provides  for mandatory representation of three separate Ministries viz. (i) Food (ii) Finance 
and (iii) Co-operation by appointing one Director each from  these Ministries in the Board of 
FCI.  The Committee however observe that against the norm o f one official Director 
representing each of these Ministries, the Board of FCI in fact  has two officers -{(AS &FA) 
and JS (P&FCI)}-from the same Ministry viz.  Ministry of Consumer affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution and none from the Ministry of Finan ce has been appointed in the Board which 
is apparently in violation of the provisions of section 7 of the Food Corporations Act, 1964. 
The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the circumstances in which two 
officers from one Ministry i.e. Minis try of Consumer affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
have been appointed on the Board of FCI and also the reasons for not making any 
appointment from the Ministry of Finance on the Board despite the mandatory requirement 
thereof. The Committee therefore r ecommend that immediate steps be taken by the 
Government to set right the representation of each three Ministries in the Board of FCI in 
the same ratio as has been provided in the Food Corporations Act, 1964.  The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
AS&FA/FA is considered as the representative of Ministry of Finance in the Ministry and 
has been appointed in the BoD of FCI. 
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

62 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND FINAL REPLIES  
 
 
 
Movement and Distribution of Foodgrains 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
1. The Committee note that one of the major functions of FCI is to move food gra ins 
from surplus producing states to consuming / deficit states.  The proper and planned 
movement of food grains ensures (i) evacuation of stocks from surplus regions, (ii) meet the 
requirements of deficit regions for NFSA/ TDPS and other schemes, and (iii ) create buffer 
stocks in deficit regions. The Committee further note that Punjab, Haryana and Madhya 
Pradesh are the surplus States in terms of wheat procurement vis -à-vis their own 
consumption. Similarly, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh/Telengana, Chhati sgarh and 
Odisha are surplus States in terms of rice procurement vis -à-vis  their own consumption. 
Surplus stocks of wheat and rice in these states are moved to deficit States to meet the 
requirements under NFSA/ TDPS and other schemes as well as to create  buffer stocks.  
There are various modes of transport for movement of food grains viz. (i) Multimodal 
Transport movement, (ii) Containerized movement, (iii) Long Route Road Transportation, 
(iv) Bulk Movement, etc.  The movement under these are undertaken t hrough road, rail, 
coastal or riverine mode.  Under the Multimodal Transport Movement, FCI has undertaken 
a Pilot project of containerized multimodal coastal movement of 25000 MTs of food grains 
from Punjab to Karnataka. Similarly, under the same pilot pro ject, movement of food grains 
by CONCOR from identified centres of Punjab to Kerala viz Cochin, Quilon, etc. and also to 
Tamil Nadu is being taken up to make a cost -benefit analysis in comparison with the 
conventional movement of rakes. The Committee learn  that FCI has taken several 
initiatives for increasing movement using waterways also. However, the fact remains that 
rail movement is much cheaper and economical mode for movement of food grains.  About 
85% of the FCI‟s movement takes place through rail. F CI spends about Rs. 10,000 crore 
annually for transporting food grains all across India, out of which Rs. 8,500 Crore goes to 
the Indian Railways alone. The Committee recommend the Government to get an 
independent study conducted on the movement -cost economics taking into account the 
operational feasibility and economical viability of the major modes/routes of transport so as 
to minimize the transportation cos ts and to reduce the financial burden on public 
exchequer. The Committee  would also like to b e apprised of the outcome of the pilot 
projects undertaken to determine the cost economics of the containerized costal movement 
from Punjab to  down south in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 FCI has taken initiatives in exploring the feasibility of moving food grains through 
multimodal costal/ riverine mode so as to supplement rail/road movement through coastal 
movement. 
                                                                                                                    
  

63 
 
                                                                                                   Fig. in MT 
Year Multimodal  Coastal Movement from Ex-AP to Kerala 
2018-19 45,132 
2019-20 55,554 
2020-21 35,776 
Total 2,79,586 
 
FCI has also initiated containerized movement of foodgrains on certain routes through 
CONCOR/ Associates wherein it is found to be economical in comparison to conventional 
Railway rakes.  
Year No. of Container Rakes 
Moved 
Freight Savings                                            
(in Rs Lakhs) 
2016-17 13 44 
2017-18 134 662 
2018-19 167 796 
2019-20 309 694 
2020-21 296 480 
Total 919 2,676 
 
 A total of twelve (12) rakes (27,912 MT) were also moved from Punjab to Karnataka using 
multimodal containerized mode under Pilot project, from March‟19 to March‟20 on 
experimental basis through CONCOR. FCI floated three (3) tender enquiry for appointment  
of Multimodal Transport operators for the movement of food grains under Multimodal 
Coastal movement  from designated depots of Punjab Region to designated depots in 
Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, but no bids were received in any of the tender enquiry.  
[Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Public 
Distribution)] 
(O.M. No. 14-4/2019-FC-I/E-368662 Dated 30.07.2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR  
24 January, 2022               Chairperson 
04 Magha, 1943 (Saka)                         Committee on Public Undertakings

64 
 
ANNEXURE 
[Annexures to the reply of the Government to Recommendation (Sl.No. 1)]   
ANNEXURE A 
 
Recommendations of High Level Committee, decisions taken by Government of India and Action Taken by FCI thereon  
Sl. 
No. 
Recommendations Action Taken 
1. HLC recommends that FCI hand over all 
procurement operations of wheat, paddy and rice 
to states that have gained sufficient experience in 
this regard and have created reasonable 
infrastructure for procurement. These States are 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Madhya 
Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab. 
FCI has already handed over procurement operation t o State Governments in Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh fully. FCI is participating in 
procurement operations in Punjab and Haryana on the request of concerned State 
Governments. 
 
FCI is procuring around 1% of paddy and 10 % of wheat out of total procurement done for 
central pool. Rest of the procurement is done by State Agencies. FCI has moved towards 
focusing more on storage and movement of foodgrains. 
 
The list of DCP State for procurement of wheat and rice is attached as Annexure-II. 
2. FCI should move on to help those states where 
farmers suffer from distress sales at prices much 
below MSP, and which are dominated by small 
holdings, like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West 
Bengal, Assam etc. This is the belt from where 
second green revolution is expected, and where 
FCI needs to be pro -active, mobilizing state and 
other agencies to provide benefits of MSP and 
procurement to larger number of farmers, 
especially small and marginal ones. 
On the recommendation of HLC committee , FCI moved towards the States, where farmers 
suffer from distress sales at prices much below MSP, and which are dominated by small 
holdings, like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam etc.  
Conscious and persistent efforts are being made towards helping the States especially in the 
Eastern and North Eastern part of the Country to extend the benefit of MSP to the farmers. In 
ongoing KMS 2020-21, 101.6 LMT rice has been procured in Eastern states as against 34.28 
LMT rice procured during KMS 2013 -14. To extend the benefit of MSP to the famers of 
Tripura, FCI has commenced procurement of Paddy in Tripura from KMS 2018-19.  
The procurement done during last 4 years in the Eastern States is as under 
 
 

65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Fig. in LMT) 
 
 
S. 
N. 
  
STATES 
  
KMS 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21* 
1 Assam 0.35 1.03 2.11 1.26 
2 Bihar 7.93 9.49 13.41 23.84 
3 Jharkhand 1.46 1.55 2.58 4.27 
4 U.P. 28.74 32.33 37.90 44.78 
5 WB 22.11 27.27 33.56 27.34 
6 Tripura 0 0.18 0.14 0.11 
Total 60.59 71.85 89.70 101.6 
         *KMS 2020-21 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
 
The numbers of procurement centers for procurement of paddy operated during last 4 years 

66 
 
are as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SN. STATES KMS 
2017-
18  
2018-
19  
2019-
20 
2020-
21* 
1 Assam 101 118 159 133 
2 Bihar 6,688 6,161 6223 6508 
3 Jharkhand 592 274 274 448 
4 Tripura 0 37 44 44 
5 UP 3,420 3,107 3,880 4453 
6 WB 19,238 27,563 30,070 28,973 
TOTAL 30,039 37,260 40,650 40,559 
 
*KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 
 
 The details of number of farmers benefitted are as under:- 
 
 
 

67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.N. STATES KMS 
2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
1 Assam 4,332 12,921 26,537 17,194 
2 Bihar 1,63,425 2,10,028 2,79,402 4,97,097 
3 Jharkhand 42,346 34,595 53,305 1,03,946 
4 U.P. 4,92,913 6,84,013 7,06,549 10,22,286 
5 WB 3,50,181 7,33,357 8,05,186 8,14,772 
6 Tripura 0 5,506 13,613 9,546 
Total 10,53,197 16,80,420 18,82,607 24,64,841 
*KMS 2020-21 is under progress. 
Emphasis has also been given on procurement of wheat in Eastern States such as UP & 
Bihar.  
The details of procurement of wheat is as under: 

68 
 
(Fig in LMT) 
States RMS 2019-
20 
RMS 2020-21 RMS 
2021-22* 
UP 37.00 35.77 56.41 
Bihar 0.03 0.05 4.56 
*RMS 2021-22 is under progress. Data as on 23.06.2021 
It has been seen from above that in Bihar procurement of wheat has shown an inclined trend, 
4.56 LMT wheat is procured in RMS 2021-22 as against 0.03 LMT wheat procured during 
RMS 2019-20, which indicates that farmers has shown their trust in Govt‟s procurement 
operations.  
 
In KMS 2019-20, 89.70 LMT of Rice has been procured in Eastern States. As on 23.06.2021, 
101.6 LMT rice has been procured in ongoing KMS 2020-21 in Eastern States. 
3 DFPD/ FCI at the Centre should enter into an 
agreement with states before every procurement 
season regarding costing norms and basic rules 
for procurement. 
 
 
MOU with States both DCP & Non-DCP are being entered into. Suitable provision has been 
made in the MOU. It has also been emphasized that in the situation of State giving any 
bonus/ financial incentive, in direct or indirect form, over and above MSP, if the overall 
procurement of State is in excess of the total allocation of the State made by the 
Government of India under TPDS/OWS, such excess quantity shall be treated to be outside 
the central pool. 
4 Quality checks in procurement have to be 
adhered to, and anything below the specified 
quality will not be acceptable under central pool. 
Quality checks can be done either by FC I and/ or 
any third party accredited agency in a transparent 
manner with the help of mechanized processes of 
quality checking. 
 
 
 FCI is setting up an Ultra - modern Quality Control Lab at Institute of Food 
Security (IFS) Gurugram.  Major five (5) Equipments  have already been 
purchased & installed. List of Chemicals/reagents has been finalized and required 
budget has been allocated to IFS, Gurugram for its purchase. Majority of the 
minor equipments and glassware have also been purchased. Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysuru has been requested to visit 
IFS, Lab to check installation & calibration of equipment. 
 
 Samples of food -grains procured &  stored in FCI godowns are periodically 
referred to FSSAI notified NABL accredited labs for quality checks. In the FY 
2020-21, from 01.04.2020 to 31.03.2021, 9825 samples of food -grains from 
different godowns of FCI across the India were sent for quality c hecks out of 

69 
 
which result of 7759 samples have been received and found conforming to FSSR 
2011 specifications.  
 
 With a view to introduce mechanized process for quality checking, 30 
Computerized Rice Analyzers (Annadarpan SMART) developed by Centre for 
Development of Advance Computing (C-DAC), Kolkata were made available at 30 
locations of 07 major procuring regions namely Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, 
Odisha, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh and rice acceptance at 
these locations is being carried out through Computerized Rice Analyzer (CRA) 
since KMS 2017-18. In addition, as per our request, EOI have been received from 
07 firms / parties to provide AI based technology solutions for analysis of food 
grains and a committee of senior officers has already been constituted to evaluate 
the options received from interested parties for developing technologies in 
foodgrains analysis. Evaluation of options is in progress. 
5 GoI needs to revisit its MSP policy. Currently, 
MSPs are announced for 23 com modities, but 
effectively price support operates primarily in 
wheat and rice and that too in selected states. 
This creates highly skewed incentive structures in 
favour of wheat and rice.  
 
In KMS 2016-17, FCI procured 64737.16 MT of Moong, 18234.67 MT of Urad and 175301.40 
MT of Tur. FCI did not participated from RMS 2017 -18 onwards in procurement of pulses as 
per decision taken by DoCA. 
 
As per the direction of DAC&FW vide letter dated 11.10.2018, FCI carried out procurement 
of pulses in KMS 2018 -19, Rabi 2018-19, KMS 2019-20 & RMS 2020 -21 under PSS 
Scheme. 
 
The details of Pulses procured under PSS during KMS 2018 -19, Rabi 2018-19, KMS 
2019-20 &RMS 2020-21 by FCI are as under 
 
                                                                        (Fig. in MTs)  
States KMS 2018-19 
Total 
Rabi 
2018-
19 
KMS 2019-
20 
RMS 2020-
21 
Moong Urad Tur Chana Tur Chana 
Maharashtra 5981.82 3636.64 0 9618.46 46.1 9245.13 15159.92 
M.P. 207 52852.24 0 53059.24 0 0 0 
Andhra Pradesh 0 493 0 493 0 0 0 

70 
 
Karnataka 0 0 15341.81 15341.81 0 0 0 
Gujarat 0 0 0 0 0 1612 0 
Total 6188.82 56981.88 15341.81 78512.51 46.1 10857.13 15159.92 
 
 
 
FCI is carrying out procurement of pulses in ensuing KMS 2020 -21 under PSS 
scheme 
 
(Fig. in MTs)  
States KMS 2020-21(As 
on 22.03.2021) 
Tur 
Maharashtra  
Gujarat 17.20 
Total 17.20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 HLC recommends that FCI should outsource its 
stocking operations to various agencies such as 
Central Warehousing Corporation, State 
Warehousing Corporation, Private Sector under 
Private Entrepreneur Guarantee (PEG) scheme, 
and even state governments that are building 
silos through private sector on state lands (as in 
Madhya Pradesh). It should be done on 
competitive bidding basis, inviting various  
stakeholders and creating competition to bring 
down costs of storage. 
Total number of depots with FCI as on 28.02.2021 is 2096. FCI has its own godowns 
at 545 places. In addition, FCI hires godown from State Government/ CWC/SWC and 
Private parties also.  
In NE states,  As per recommendation of HLC, FCI has decided to handover 
godowns constructed under plan scheme by FCI in NE region and other state to 
CWC for Preservation, Maintenance and Security (PMS) works.  Initially, capacity of 
61,580 MT (total 19 FC I godowns) constructed under Plan scheme has been offered 
to CWC for carrying out the Preservation and Maintenance Services . ( List of 
godown enclosedatAnnexure III). 
 Out of which, capacity of 5000 MT at Karimganj, 7000 MT at Jogighopa, 4600 
MT at Bishnupu r and 5000 MT at Lalbazar has been taken over by CWC for PMS 
works.For the remaining 15 depots, CWC has also been requested to take over 

71 
 
depots for PMS works. 
 
7 India needs more bulk handling facilities than it 
currently has. Many of FCI's old convention al 
storages that have existed for long number of 
years can be converted to silos with the help of 
private sector and other stocking agencies. Better 
mechanization is needed in all silos as well as 
conventional storages. 
 
While there is need to work out specific quantity 
and what places it needs to be through a more 
detailed study, HLC's overall assessment is that 
given the overall production in the country,  and 
drought prone nature of many regions, a silo 
capacity of about 10 MMT (together for wheat and 
rice) should be created in the next 3-5 years.  
 
 
 Govt. of India has approved Action Plan for construction of 100 LMT silos upto 
2019-20 with following tentative targets: 
 
 
 
Commodity/ 
Agency FCI CWC State 
Govt. Total 
Wheat 27.75 2.50 61.00 91.25 
Rice 1.25 0 7.50 8.75 
Total 29.00 2.50 68.50 100.00 
 The implementation status is as under: 
  
No. of locations 
Tendered 
(tendering date) 
Type/Mode Capacity 
(LMT) 
Status 
6  
(23.04.2015) 
VGF 2.5 1 in use. 1 terminated. 4 in 
progress. 
26 
(25.05.2016) 
Non-VGF 13.5 3 in use. 7 terminated. 16 at 
various stages. 
8 
(23.08.2017) 
Non-VGF 4.5 5 terminated/scrapped. 3 CA 
signed. 
9 
(07.12.2017) 
Non-VGF 4.5 5 scrapped. 2 resiled. 2 in 
progress. 
7 
(11.05.2018) 
Non-VGF 3.5 CA signed, in progress of CPs 
fulfillment. 
9 
(17.09.2018) 
Non-VGF 4.5 Financial bid opened. Tender 
scrapped for 4 locations and 
LoA issued for remaining 5 
locations. 
2 
(07.12.2016) 
VGF 1 CA signed. 

72 
 
2 
(10.03.2017) 
VGF 1 CA signed and 1 location is 
terminated.  
The updated statement showing Agency & State-wise status of silo construction is 
enclosed as Annexure-IV & V. 
 
The summary of action taken is as under: 
 
 Silos with railway sidings at 6 locations (VGF route) for 2.5 LMT have been 
sanctioned. However, for Wh itefield location, contract/agreement has been 
terminated due to failure of concessionaire to meet conditions precedent. 25000 
MT silo at Kotkapura has been put to use in RMS 2017 -18. Work is in progress in 
balance 4 locations.  
 Work awarded for 13.5 LMT a t 26 locations under Non -VGF route, which are 
with railway siding. However, contract for seven locations, with capacity of 0.5 
LMT each, i.e. Rohtak, Palwal (Haryana), Rangapani, Dankuni, Macheda (West 
Bengal), Varanasi (UP), Bettiah (Bihar) have been term inated. Three locations 
(Barnala, Patiala and Sangrur) have been taken over and are in use.  
 Tender for 8 locations (4.5 LMT) was floated under Non -VGF mode out of 
which 2 locations has been scrapped. Further, CA has been signed for 3 locations 
and 3 locations have been terminated.  
 Tender for 9 more locations (4.5 LMT) in Bihar were finalized under Non -VGF 
mode out of which 5 locations where single bid was received were re -tendered 
and LOA for 4 locations issued on 27.07.2018. Out of these 4 locations, the  
selected bidder for 2 locations (Muzaffarpur and Sitamarhi) has withdrawn/resiled 
from the contract, hence terminated and locations will be re -tendered, CA for 
remaining 2 locations has been signed. However, 5 locations where single bid 
was received were re-tendered along with two more locations i.e. Baroda(Gujarat) 
and Rohtak(Haryana) on 11.05.2018 and CA signed for 7 locations (3.5 LMT).  
 Tender for 9 more locations (4.5 LMT) in West Bengal floated under Non -VGF 
mode on 17.09.2018 and technical bids were  opened on 26.03.2019. Out of 4.5 
LMT, 3 LMT capacity is for fresh tender and 1.5 LMT capacity is for retendered 
locations (Rangapani, Dankuni, Macheda) which were terminated earlier.As per 
HLC (dated 21.05.2020) decision the financial bids have been opene d on 
29.07.2020, tender scrapped for 4 locations and LoA issued for remaining 5 

73 
 
locations. 
 Silo operator for silo construction at Kaimur&Buxar (total 1 LMT) under DEA -
VGF mode has been selected and CA signed on 15.01.2018. Land parcel 
acquired by the Conce ssionaire and transferred to the Authority.The Appointed 
Date has been issued on 05.11.2019 
 Silo operator for silo construction at Dhamora and Borivali (total 1 LMT) under 
DBFOT mode has been selected and CA signed on 15.02.2019.Appointed Date 
has been issued for Dhamora. As per HLC (21.09.2020) decision Borivali location 
has been terminated. 
 
It was observed that there are certain issues regarding construction of Railway siding 
silos with specialized wagon movement that affect the pace of implementation of  silo 
projects. To address such issues, a study was conducted by M/s RITES to analyse 
whether a Hub and Spoke model of silos with containerized movement would be 
more effective. M/s RITES have submitted its final report recommending Hub & 
Spoke model with road side silos and containerized bulk movement. HLC during its 
meeting held on dated 06.12.2019 has recommended the proposal which has been 
approved by the Ministry. HLC dated 21.05.2020 decided that the tender documents 
for Hub & Spoke should be reviewed  and finalized by ED level committee. After 
finalization by ED level committee and approved by the HLC dated 21.09.2020 the 
tender documents and the list of locations for silo construction under Hub & Spoke 
locations has been forwarded to M/o CA,F&PD on 01.10.2020 for approval. 
 
8 Covered and plinth (CAP) storage should be 
gradually phased out with no grain stock 
remaining in CAP for more than 3 months. Silo 
bag technology and conventional storages where 
ever possible should replace CAP. 
 
FCI didan assessment of existing depots where vacant land or CAP storage was 
available and identified 7 locations viz. Changsari (Assam), Katihar(Bihar), 
Narela(Delhi), Whitefield(Karnataka), Sahnewal (Punjab),Kotkapura (Punjab) and 
Harduaganj (UP) where FCI had vac ant land that was sufficient to set up silos with 
Railway Siding. 
Moreover, as a part of recent exercise of Hub & Spoke model, FSD Malaut (1 LMT), 
FSD Alwer (0.5 LMT), Lalpur (Bulandshar) (0.5 LMT), Sandila (Hardoi) (0.5 LMT), 
Gandhidham (0.375 LMT), FSD W adhwan (0.25 LMT), FSD Wankaner (0.25 LMT) 
have been identified for development of Silo on vacant land or dismantling of existing 
CAP. 
9 Each state, especially the deficit ones in difficult I. The monthly allocation of food grains for NE is 2.42 LMT and existing 

74 
 
terrain (like hilly areas of North -East, Jammu and 
Kashmir (etc), must have storage of grains for at 
least three months of their consumption 
requirement. 
storage capacity in NE is 6.27 LMT. Storage gaps at various centers have been 
worked out and the shortfall is being covered through construction capacities 
under PEG Scheme, Silos and Central Sector Scheme (CSS). The status is as 
under:- 
i. Construction works for 30,020 MT are in progress and a capacity of 
27,530 MT has been completed in NE under Central Sector Scheme.  
ii. Silo at Changsari (Assam) for a capacity of 50,000 MT has also been 
planned. 
 
iii. In Assam, under PEG scheme, 25,000 MT capacity at Barpeta has 
been completed . 
iv. Tender for 34,180 MT capacity in Meghalaya is also under process. Out 
of which, 15000 MT capacity has been sanctioned. 
v. Capacity of 13,000 MT and 49,000 MT at Nagaland and Tripura has 
been approved in 57 th HLC dated 06.10.2020 for construction under PEG 
Scheme. 
II. Average monthly allocation in J& K under NFSA/OWS is 0.65 LMT. As 
on 28.02.2021, total covered storage capacity with FCI in J&K is 2.67 LMT 
(Owned 1.03 LMT and Hired 1.64 LMT),which is sufficient to store more than  
3 month‟s requirement. In addition, a capacity of 0.69 LMT is under 
construction under PEG Scheme in J&K.  
 
 The Region wise storage capacity  and monthly allotment of (Rice and Wheat) 
of NE and J&K as on 28.02.2021 is as below- 
Sr. 
N. 
Region Capacity 
in LMT 
Monthly 
Allotment 
in MT 
1 Assam 4.05 156800 
2 AP 0.33 7800 
3 Meghalaya 0.22 16030 
4 Mizoram 0.25 6090 
5 Tripura 0.44 24760 
6 Manipur 0.52 14747 
7 Nagaland 0.46 13420 
8 Sikkim 0.11 3850 
9 J&K 2.77 65430 
 
  
The construction work of godowns is going on in the States of North -East region 

75 
 
under Plan Schemes. A capacity of 27530 MT has been completed and taken over 
and construction work is under progress of 0.30 LMT capacity in NE states. In 
addition to the above capacities, a capacity of 69160 MT at five location are under 
construction under PEG scheme in J&K. 
 
 
10 FCI engages large number of workers (loaders) to 
get the job of loading/ unloading done smoothly 
and in time. Currently there are roughly 16,000 
departmental workers, about 26,000 workers that 
operate under Direct Payment System (DPS), 
some under no w ork no pay, and about one lakh 
contract workers. A departmental worker (loader) 
costs FCI about Rs 79,500/ per month (Apri -Nov 
2014 data) vis-a-vis DPS worker at Rs 26,000/per 
month and contract labour costs about Rs 10,000/ 
per month.  
 
Some of the departmental labour (more than 300)  
have received wages (including arrears) even 
more than Rs 4 lakhs/per month in August 2014. 
This happens because of the incentive system in 
notified depots, and widely used proxy labour. 
This is a major aberration and must be  fixed, 
either by de -notifying these depots, or handing 
them over to states or private sector on service 
contracts, and  
 
by fixing a maximum limit on the incentives per 
person that will not allow him to work for more 
than say 1.25 times the work agreed with him.  
 
These depots should be put on priority for 
 
 
Following action has been taken so far on the recommendation of HLC. 
 
Exemption of depots from Section 10 of Contract labour (R&A) Act 1970. 
 
In pursuance to the order passed by Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench, the exemption 
notification was issued by the Ministry of Labour and Employment on 06.07.2016 exempting 
all 226 depots/ railheads from the applicability of Section 10 of Contract Labour (R&A) Act 
1970 for a period of 2 years. This exemption was extended upto 05.07.2020 vide Gazette 
Notification dated 26.06.2018 and subsequently further extended for two years w.e.f. 
06.07.2020 to 05.07.2022 vide Notification No. S.O.2040(E) dated 25.06.2020. 
 
Consequent upon issue of Exemption Notification total of 9,193 labourers have been 
repositioned out of 45,009 labourers, thereby vacating 149depots and 72 railheads 
and 29,284 contract labours have been deployed in vacated depots/railheads. There 
is likely annual sav ing of Rs. 600 crores on account of this exercise. With the 
extension of exemption for further two year w.e.f 06.07.2020 to 05.07.2022 the Zonal 
Offices and Regional Offices has been further requested to look for 2 nd phase of 
rationalization of labour on a case to case basis. 
 
De-notification of notified depots. 
 
 Hon’ble Bombay High Court, (Nagpur Bench) vide judgement dated 20.11.2015, directed 
Government of India to decide on the denotification of all the notified depots within 6 months. 
The time limit of 6 months is already over.  
 
In the meantime, Hon‟ble High  Court Kerala at Ernakulum directed Ministry of Labour & 
Employment to consider the denotification of Kollam depot after obtaining comments of FCI. 
The proposal for denotification of Kollam depot along with the other notified depots has been 
sent to Minist ry of Labour through Ministry of CA,F&PD Vide letter No  
IR(L)/31(10)/2004/Vol.III dated 02.07.2018. Ministry of Labour & Employment, has decided to 
refer the matter to Central Advisory Contract Labour Board (CACLB) for detailed 
examination. Accordingly, a meeting was fixed on 19.03.2020 by CACLB at New Delhi.  This 

76 
 
mechanization so that reliance on departmental 
labour reduces. If need be, FCI should be allowed 
to hire people under DPS/ NWNP system. 
 
HLC recommends that the condition of contract 
labour, which works the hardest and are the 
largest in number, should be improved by giving 
them better facilities. 
 
 
meeting could not be held due to COVID -19 pandemic. The next date has yet not been 
decided.  
 
Thus the matter is still pending with the Ministry of Labour and Employment. 
 
Declaration of Departmental Labour System(DLS) as Dying Cadre. 
 
 Proposal for Declaration of Departmental Labour system (DLS) as Dying Cadre has been 
approved by Ministry of CA,F& PD on 03.01.2020 and same has been communicated to field 
offices vide Circular No.1/2020 dated 08.01.2020 with the instruction that there will be no 
further induction under DLS.  
 
Changes in existing incentive scheme. 
 
 Hon‟ble Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench also passed the following order :- 
“We also clarify that the respondent/Corporation would be at liberty to implement its policy of 
change in the Scheme of incentives”. 
 
In compliance to above order FCI Hqrs. has sent a detail proposal to the Ministry of CA,F&PD 
on 08.10.2018 for effecting changes in the service benefits of Departmental labour and Direct 
Payment System (DPS) labour. Following changes in service benefits are required: 
[i] Non-inclusion of incentives for computation of CPF; 
[ii] Non-inclusion of incentive for computation of Gratuity; 
[iii] Non- inclusion of HRA elements for computation of Incentive and OTA; 
[iv] No payment of „A‟ Area rates to DPS labour working in „B‟ and „C‟ Area; 
and 
[v] Consideration of Mandal as Handling Labour. 
 
The matter is under consideration in MoCA,F&PD. 
 
Revision of Datum: 
 
In pursuance to Award dated 05.07.2016 passed by CGIT, Karkardooma, Delhi, the 
datum of DLS workers has been revised from 105 to 135 Bags per worker per day, 
resulting in reduction of incentive by about 30%. 
 
Improved Condition of Contract Workers: 
 
Nodal Officers have been appointed at field level for improving the working condition 
of Contract Labour and to ensure better facilities and provide adequate welfare 

77 
 
provisions like EPF, Min imum wages, ESI, Workmen Compensation etc. Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism has also been introduced to settle the grievance of labours, if 
any, at the field level and Nodal officers have been designated for same. 
 
Introduction of VRS Scheme: 
 
For introduction of suitable VRS (Voluntary Retirement Scheme) in respect of 
Departmental Labour, the proposal was sent to the Ministry of CA, F&PD on 
22/26.11.2018.The matter is under consideration in MoCA,F&PD. 
 
 
11. HLC recommends total end to end 
computerization of the entire food management 
system, starting from procurement from farmers, 
to stocking, movement and finally distribution 
through TPDS. It can be done on real time basis, 
and some states have done a commendable job 
on computerizing the procurement operations. But 
its dovetailing with movement and distribution in 
TPDS has been a weak link, and that is where 
much of the diversions take place. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I.    The current status of implementation of Depot Online System (DOS) is as follows: 
a) Considered as Go Live w.e.f. 1st Dec‟18 
b) Status of implementation in FCI owned and Hired godowns : 
 
 
 FCI 
Owned 
Hired depots 
CWC SWC PEG Others Total 
Provisioned in 
DOS# 
549 198 731 464 86 2028 
 
 
 
 
 
# Figures taken from National Dashboard of DOS (as on 30-04-2021) 
 
II. Progress on key e-Governance Initiatives 
 
a. Integration of DOS with Food & Essential Commodities Assurance and Security 
Target (FEAST): 
-Integrates DOS with PDS, for release order related data exchange 
-Developed and deployed in production; Joint testing with NIC and SI done. 
- FEAST implementing states (Goa, Uttarakhand, Nagaland), identified by NIC, to be 
tested in production 
b. Integration of DOS with National Food Procurement Portal (NPP): 
-Enables automatic flow of procurement data from DOS to NPP 
-Developed and Deployed in production. 
-Gaps in data (DOS and NPP) identified; Being resolved by SI team in coordination 
with the NIC team and FCI‟s procurement division. 
c. Development of National Dashboard in DOS: 
-Depicts information pertaining to FCI‟s owned and hired depots. 
-Developed and deployed in production. 
 

78 
 
 (Monthly Report) 
 (As on 31.05.2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ***********

79 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
 
Point No. 1 
STATES UNDERTAKING DECENTRALISED PROCUREMENT OF RICE 
DCP for Rice 
S.N. State With Effect From 
1 Uttrakhand 2002-03 
2 Chhattisgarh 2001-02 
3 Odisha 2003-04 
4 Tamil Nadu 2002-03 
5 West Bengal 1997-98 
6 Kerala 2004-05 
7 Karnataka 2009-10 
8 Madhya Pradesh 2007-08 
9 Andhra Pradesh Fully DCP for KMS 2015-16. 
10 Bihar 2013-14 
11. Telangana Fully DCP from KMS 2014-15. 
12. Maharashtra 2016-17 
13. Gujarat 2017-18 
14. Andaman 
Nicobar 
2003-04 
15.  Tripura KMS 2018-19 (Rabi Crop) , KMS 2019 -20 (Rabi Crop)& KMS 2020 -
21  
  

80 
 
 
 
STATES UNDERTAKING DECENTRALISED PROCUREMENT OF WHEAT 
DCP for Wheat 
S.N. State With Effect From 
1 Madhya Pradesh 1999-2000 
2 Uttarakhand 2003-04 
3 Chhattisgarh 2001-02 
4 Gujarat 2004-05 
5 West Bengal 2010-11 
6 Bihar 2014-15 
7 Maharashtra 2020-21 
8 Punjab* 2014-15 
 
Note: 
1. *Punjab was DCP State for Wheat from RMS 2014-15, but on request of State Govt, FCI 
is participating in procurement operations.  
2. Uttar Pradesh was DCP for KMS 1999 - 2000 to KMS 2009 -10 and RMS 1999 -2000 to 
RMS 2010-11. Procurement of wheat & rice is under Non-DCP mode. 
3. Rajasthan was DCP for wheat in RMS 2013 -14 to 2015 -16 (for 1 district) and 2016 -17 
(for 9 districts). From RMS 2017-18 onwards wheat is procured under Non-DCP mode. 
4. Jharkhand was DCP for KMS 2016 -17 (only for 1 district) 2017 -18 (only f or 5 District), 
2018-19 (only for 6 District). They have adopted Non-DCP in KMS 2019-20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
 
Annexure III 
 
Point No. 6 
List of Godowns offered for PMS to CWC 
 State  Centre  Capacity in MT Remarks 
I. ASSAM  
1.  Jogigopa 7,000 Taken over by CWC on 02.09.2019. 
2. Lalbazar 5,000 Taken over by CWC on 02.02.2021. 
3. Karimganj 5,000 Taken over by  
CWC on 11.11.2017 
       Total 17,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. ARUNACHAL PRADESH  
4.  Anjaw (Khupa) 640 - 
5. Upper Siang 
(Yingkiong) 
640 - 
6. Lohit (Tezu) 3,340 - 
7. Ziro 2,500 - 
8. Seppa 1,670 - 
9. Twang 1,670 - 
10. Ainini (Dibang 
Valley) 
640 - 
                                                                      
Total 
11,100  
III. DIMAPUR (NAGALAND)  
11.  Mon 2,220 - 
12. Mokokchung 2,500 - 
13. Tuensang 2,500 - 
      Total 7,220  
IV. N.E.F.  
14. Tripura Chandrapur 5,000 - 
15. Aizawal Lunglei 2,920 - 
16. Lanwngtlai 3,340 - 
      Total 11,260  
V. MANIPUR (IMPHAL)  
17.  Senapati 5,000 Approval of Hqrs. given for handing 
over FSD, Thoubal and FSD, 
Bishnupur instead of this depot. 
FSD, Bishnupur taken over by  
CWC on 01.03.2020. 
18. Ukhrul 5,000 - 
19. Jiribam 5,000 - 
    Total 15,000  
     GRAND TOTAL 61,580  

82 
 
 
Point No. 7 
Annexure-IV 
(Position as on 01.06.2021) 
 
AGENCY WISE STATUS OF SILO CONSTRUCTION  
 
Fig. In LMT (No. of Locations) 
Agenc
y 
Targe
t 
Complete
d 
Capacity/ 
No. of 
locations 
after 2016 
Under Implementation Awarded 
to State 
Govt. on 
Nominatio
n 
Total Capacity 
approved 
by  HLC 
for Hub 
& Spoke 
Location
s to be 
identifie
d 
Rice Silos 
to be 
implemente
d after 
outcome of 
Pilot 
Project 
Tota
l Under 
Constructio
n 
LoC 
to be 
issue
d 
Total 
FCI 29 4.625/9* 10.625/21     7/14 17.62
5/ 35 0 22.25/4
4 
35.875/10
0 18.275 15.1 
30.7
5 
+ 
69.2
5 
= 
100 
CWC 2.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
State 
Govt. 68.5 6/12 0 1.5/3 1.5/3 1/1 8.5/16 
Total 100 10.625/21 10.625/21 8.5/1
7 
19.12
5/ 38 1/1 30.75/6
0 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Annexure-V 
 (Position as on 01.06.2021) 
STATEMENT SHOWING AGENCY-WISE STATE-WISE 
STATUS OF SILO CONSTRUCTION 
(Fig. In LMT) 
Age
ncy State 
Tar
get 
as 
per 
Act
ion 
Pla
n 
Comp
leted 
Contracts Awarded 
Award
ed to 
State 
Govt. 
on 
nomin
ation 
To
tal 
Capa
city 
Appr
oved 
by 
HLC 
for 
Hub 
& 
Spok
e 
Locat
ions 
to be 
identi
fied 
Rice 
Silos 
to be 
implem
ented 
after 
outco
me of 
Pilot 
Project 
Gr
an
d 
Tot
al 
Under 
Constr
uction 
Land 
Not 
Acq
uired 
Tot
al 
FCI 
Assam 0.5 0 0.5 0 0.5 0 0.5 
35.87
5 
18.27
5 15.1 
30.
75 
+ 
69.
25 
Bihar 4.5 0.5 1.5 3.5 5 0 5.5 
Chattisg
arh 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Delhi 1 0 0 0.5 0.5 0 0.5 
Gujarat 1 0.5 1.5 0 1.5 0 2 
Karnatak
a 
0.2
5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Haryana 3 1.375 0.625 0.5 1.1
25 0 2.5 
Maharas
htra 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Punjab 4.2
5 2.25 2 0 2 0 4.2
5 
Rajastha
n 1.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Uttar 
Pradesh 7 0 4 0 4 0 4 
West 
Bengal 4 0 0.5 2.5 3 0 3 
Tot
al  29 4.625 10.625 7 17.
625 0 22.
25 
CW
C Punjab 2.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Stat
e 
Gov
t. 
AndhraP
radesh 3.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Bihar 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Gujarat 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Haryana 6.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Madhya
Pradesh 10 4.5 0 0 0 0 4.5 
Maharas
htra 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Orrisa 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Punjab 24.
25 1.5 0 0 0 1 2.5 

84 
 
Rajastha
n 
4.7
5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Telanga
na 1.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Uttar 
Pradesh 5 0 0 1.5 1.5 0 1.5 
West 
Bengal 3.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Tot
al  
68.
5 6 0 1.5 1.5 1 8.5 
G.T
otal  100 10.62
5 10.625 8.5 19.
125 1 30.
75 
35.87
5 
18.27
5 15.1 100 
 
  

85 
 
Annexure-B 
Recommendations of High Level Committee, decisions taken by 
Government of India and Action Taken by FCI thereon 
 
S. 
N
o. 
Recommendat
ions 
Decisio
ns taken Action Taken by FCI 
7 India needs 
more bulk 
handling 
facilities than it 
currently has. 
Many of FCI's 
old 
conventional 
storages that 
have existed 
for long 
number of 
years can be 
converted to 
silos with the 
help of private 
sector and 
other stocking 
agencies. 
Better 
mechanization 
is needed in all 
silos as well as 
conventional 
storages. 
 
 
While there is  
need to work 
out specific 
quantity and 
what places it 
needs to be 
through a more 
FCI will 
undertak
e 
construct
ion of 
approx. 
43.5 lakh 
tonnes 
capacity 
of silos 
in next 
five 
years.  
 
FCI 
depots 
having 
railway 
sidings,    
will be 
upgrade
d to Silos 
first.  
 
Where 
FCI or 
State 
Agencies 
do not 
have 
their own 
land, 
Silos 
would be 
 Govt. of India has approved Action Plan for 
construction of 100 LMT silos upto 2019 -20 with 
following tentative targets: 
Commodity/ 
Agency FCI CWC State 
Govt. Total 
Wheat 27.75 2.50 61.00 91.25 
Rice 1.25 0 7.50 8.75 
Total 29.00 2.50 68.50 100.00 
 The implementation status is as under: 
No. of 
location
s 
Tendere
d 
(tenderin
g date) 
Type/M
ode 
Capac
ity 
(LMT) 
Status 
6  
(23.04.20
15) 
VGF 2.5 2 in use. 1 
terminated. 3 in 
progress. 
26 
(25.05.20
16) 
Non-
VGF 
13.5 7 in use. 7 
terminated. 12 
at various 
stages. 
8 
(23.08.20
17) 
Non-
VGF 
4.5 5 
terminated/scra
pped. 3 CA 
signed. 
9 
(07.12.20
17) 
Non-
VGF 
4.5 5 scrapped. 2 
resiled. 2 in 
progress. 
7 
(11.05.20
18) 
Non-
VGF 
3.5 CA signed, in 
progress of CPs 
fulfillment. 
9 
(17.09.20
18) 
Non-
VGF 
4.5 Financial bid 
opened. Tender 
scrapped for 4 
locations and 

86 
 
detailed study, 
HLC's overall 
assessment is 
that given the 
overall 
production in 
the country,  
and drought 
prone nature of 
many regions, 
a silo capacity 
of about 10 
MMT (toge ther 
for wheat and 
rice) should be 
created in the 
next 3-5 years.  
built on 
Private 
land. 
FCI has 
already 
engaged 
a 
Consulta
nt for this 
work. 
LoA issued for 
remaining 5 
locations. 
2 
(07.12.20
16) 
VGF 1 CA signed. 
2 
(10.03.20
17) 
VGF 1 CA signed and 
1 location is 
terminated.  
The updated statement showing Agency & State -
wise status of silo construction is enclosed as 
Annexure-I & II. 
The summary of action taken is as under: 
 Silos with railway sidings at 6 locations (VGF 
route) for 2.5 LMT have been sanctioned. 
However, for Whitefield location, 
contract/agreement has been terminated due to 
failure of concessionaire to meet conditions 
precedent. 0.75 LMT silos at Kotkapura and 
Katihar have been put to use. Work is in progress 
in balance 3 locations.  
 Work awarded for 13.5 LMT at 26 locations 
under Non -VGF route, which are with railway 
siding. However, contract for seven locations, with 
capacity of 0.5 LMT each, i.e. Rohtak, Palw al 
(Haryana), Rangapani, Dankuni, Macheda (West 
Bengal), Varanasi (UP), Bettiah (Bihar) have been 
terminated. Seven locations (Barnala, 
Patiala,Sangrur, Jind, Sonepat, Bhattu and 
Ahmedabad) have been taken over and are in 
use.  
 Tender for 8 locations (4.5 LMT) was floated 
under Non-VGF mode out of which 2 locations has 
been scrapped. Further, CA has been signed for 3 
locations and 3 locations have been terminated.  
 Tender for 9 more locations (4.5 LMT) in Bihar 
were finalized under Non -VGF mode out of which  
5 locations where single bid was received were re -
tendered and LOA for 4 locations issued on 
27.07.2018. Out of these 4 locations, the selected 
bidder for 2 locations (Muzaffarpur and Sitamarhi) 
has withdrawn/resiled from the contract, hence 
terminated an d locations will be re -tendered, CA 
for remaining 2 locations has been signed. 
However, 5 locations where single bid was 
received were re -tendered along with two more 

87 
 
locations i.e. Baroda(Gujarat) and 
Rohtak(Haryana) on 11.05.2018 and CA signed 
for 7 locations (3.5 LMT).  
 Tender for 9 more locations (4.5 LMT) in West 
Bengal floated under Non -VGF mode on 
17.09.2018 and technical bids were opened on 
26.03.2019. Out of 4.5 LMT, 3 LMT capacity is for 
fresh tender and 1.5 LMT capacity is for 
retendered locations (Rangapani, Dankuni, 
Macheda) which were terminated earlier.As per 
HLC (dated 21.05.2020) decision the financial bids 
have been opened on 29.07.2020,tender scrapped 
for 4 locations and LoA issued for remaining 5 
locations. 
 Silo operator for silo construction at 
Kaimur&Buxar (total 1 LMT) under DEA -VGF 
mode has been selected and CA signed on 
15.01.2018. Land parcel acquired by the 
Concessionaire and transferred to the 
Authority.The Appointed Date has been issued on 
05.11.2019 
 Silo operator for silo  construction at Dhamora 
and Borivali (total 1 LMT) under DBFOT mode has 
been selected and CA signed on 
15.02.2019.Appointed Date has been issued for 
Dhamora. As per HLC (21.09.2020) decision 
Borivali location has been terminated. 
 It was observed that ther e are certain issues 
regarding construction of Railway siding silos with 
specializedwagon movement that affect thepace of 
implementation of silo projects. To address such 
issues, a study was conducted by M/s RITES to 
analyse whether a Hub and Spoke model o f silos 
with containerized movement would be more 
effective. M/s RITES have submitted its final report 
recommending Hub & Spoke model with road side 
silos and containerized bulk movement. DFPD 
accorded “in-principle approval” for construction of 
silos under the Hub and Spoke model as proposed 
by FCI. Land for roadside silos is relatively easily 
available, as compared to land along rail side 
tracks.  
 
 Thereafter, by adopting a consultative and 
inclusive approach, involving and interacting with 
key stakeholders, the bid documents for Hub and 

88 
 
Spoke silos were prepared. Draft Bid Documents 
were put up for stakeholder consultation. Views 
were invited from over 80 stakeholders including 
government entities, sector experts, private sector 
entities, institutions etc . and extensive 
deliberations on comments received on various 
issues and changes pertaining to contractual and 
technical issues considering the best practices 
and recent developments were undertaken.  
 
 The locations for silos have been identified 
considering the storage gap and distribution of 
silos on basis of buffer stock in consuming regions 
rather than be centrally maintained. Accordingly, 
proposal of additional silo capacities of 108.375 
LMT at 247 locations under Hub & Spoke model 
are under the process of appraisal and approval. 
8 Covered and 
plinth (CAP) 
storage should 
be gradually 
phased out 
with no grain 
stocks 
remaining in 
CAP for more 
than 3 months. 
Silo bag 
technology and 
conventional 
storages where 
ever possible 
should replace 
CAP. 
 
There 
are 8 .90 
LMT FCI 
owned 
CAP 
capacity. 
CAP 
Complex
es 
having 
5000 MT 
or above 
capacity   
will be 
taken up 
for 
conversi
on into 
silos.  
 
 
 
FCI didan assessment of existing depots where 
vacant land or CAP storage was available and 
identified 7 locations viz. Changsari (Assam), 
Katihar(Bihar), Narela(Delhi), Whitefield(Karnataka), 
Sahnewal (Punjab),Kotkapura (Punjab) and 
Harduaganj (UP)where FCI had vacant land that was 
sufficient to set up silos with Railway Siding. 
Moreover, as a part of recent exercise of Hu b & 
Spoke model, Katihar (0.50 LMT), FSD Gandhidham 
(0.375 LMT), FSD -Wadhwan (0.25 LMT),  FSD -
Wankaner (0.25 LMT), FSD Borivali (1 LMT), FSD 
Solapur (0.25 LMT),BG -Malaut (1 LMT), FSD - CAP 
Alwar (0.5 LMT), Sandila (Hardoi) (0.5 LMT), Lalpur 
(Bulandshar) (0. 5 LMT), FSDRoza (0.5 LMT); 
FSdDhamora (0.25 LMT); FSD Gonda (0.5 LMT); 
FSD Khurja (0.25 LMT), FSD Chandari (1 LMT)have 
been identified for development of Silo on vacant land 
or dismantling of existing CAP. 
 

89 
 
Annexure-I 
 
AGENCY WISE STATUS OF SILO CONSTRUCTION  
 
Fig. In LMT (No. of Locations) 
Agency Target Completed 
Capacity/ 
No. of 
locations 
after 2016 
Under Implementation Total 
Under 
Construction 
LoC to be 
issued 
Total 
FCI 29 4.625/9* 11.625/23    6/12 17.625/ 35 22.25/44 
CWC 2.5 0 0 0 0 0 
State 
Govt. 68.5 6/12 0 1.5/3 1.5/3 7.5/15 
Total 100 10.625/21 11.625/23 7.5/15 19.125/ 38 29.75/59 
*Bhattu location is partially completed for a capacity of 37500 MT out of 50000MT..  
 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
Annexure-II 
STATEMENT SHOWING AGENCY-WISE STATE-WISE 
STATUS OF SILO CONSTRUCTION 
(Fig. In LMT) 
Agency State Target as per 
Action Plan Completed 
Contracts Awarded 
Total Under 
Construction 
Land Not 
Acquired Total 
FCI 
Assam 0.5 0 0.5 0 0.5 0.5 
Bihar 4.5 0.5 2 3 5 5.5 
Chattisgarh 1 0 0 0 0 0 
Delhi 1 0 0 0.5 0.5 0.5 
Gujarat 1 0.5 1.5 0 1.5 2 
Karnataka 0.25 0 0 0 0 0 
Haryana 3 1.375 1.125 0 1.125 2.5 
Maharashtra 1 0 0 0 0 0 
Punjab 4.25 2.25 2 0 2 4.25 
Rajasthan 1.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Uttar Pradesh 7 0 4 0 4 4 
West Bengal 4 0 0.5 2.5 3 3 
Total  29 4.625 11.625 6 17.625 22.25 
CWC Punjab 2.5 0 0 0 0 0 
State 
Govt. 
AndhraPradesh 3.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Bihar 5 0 0 0 0 0 
Gujarat 2 0 0 0 0 0 
Haryana 6.5 0 0 0 0 0 
MadhyaPradesh 10 4.5 0 0 0 4.5 
Maharashtra 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Orrisa 2 0 0 0 0 0 
Punjab 24.25 1.5 0 0 0 1.5 
Rajasthan 4.75 0 0 0 0 0 
Telangana 1.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Uttar Pradesh 5 0 0 1.5 1.5 1.5 
West Bengal 3.5 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  68.5 6 0 1.5 1.5 7.5 
G.Total  100 10.625 11.625 7.5 19.125 29.75 

91 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2021-2022) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21 st December, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to  
1515  hrs. in Room No „147‟, 3rd Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                     -        Additional Secretary 
2. Shri G.C. Prasad                   -        Additional Director 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. 
3. 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Janardan Mishra 
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
8. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
9. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
11. Shri M. Shanmugam 
  

92 
 
 
2. At the outset, t he Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following four draft 
Action Taken Reports:- 
(i)      *****                                    *****       *****                                    ***** 
 
(ii)      *****                                    *****       *****                                    ***** 
 (iii)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
        of the Committee contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Public     
        Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on Food Corporation of India. 
 
(iv)    *****                                    *****       *****                                    ***** 
 
3.  The Committee then considered and adopted the aforesaid reports one by one 
without any modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize 
the aforesaid Draft Reports on the basis of factual verification by Ministries/Departments 
concerned and present the same to Parliament. 
 
                                The Committee then adjourned. 
(-----------)

93 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2020-21) on 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) 
 
I Total number of recommendations                    34 
 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations  
[ vide Recommendations at  Sl. Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 
34 ]    
 
   Total           -   32 
 
 
 
 
    Percentage – 94.12 
 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s replies.                          
 
    Total           -   NIL 
 
 
    Percentage –  NA 
 
  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration.  
[ vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 3] 
 
    Total           -   01 
 
 
 
   Percentage – 2.94 
 
   V Observations/Recommendations to which the 
Government has furnished interim replies. 
[ vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 20] 
 
   Total           -   01 
 
   Percentage – 2.94 
 
 
 
 
 