22 
    
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE TOWARDS CONSTRUCTION  
OF COPPER ORE TAILINGS BENEFICIATION PLANT 
RELATING TO HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021] 
 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 

ii 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
    (2023-24) 
 
 
               (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE TOWARDS CONSTRUCTION 
OF COPPER ORE TAILINGS BENEFICIATION PLANT 
RELATING TO HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021] 
 
 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 February, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08  February, 2024  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 

iii 
 
CPU No. 1049 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedur e and Conduct of Business in              
Lok Sabha (……. Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 
---------- 

iv 
 
 
 C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S  
  Page No. 
 Composition of the Committee (2022-23) v 
 Composition of the Committee (2023-24) vi 
 Introduction vii 
 DRAFT REPORT  
 PART  -  I  
A BACKGROUND 1 
B AUDIT PARAGRAPH  
(I) UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITUR E TOWARDS CONSTRUCTI ON OF COPPER ORE TAILINGS 
(COT) BENEFICIATION PLANT 
4 
(II) AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 4 
C ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS  
(I) Need for setting up of Copper Ore Tailing beneficiation plant 
a. Waste to Wealth Project of HCL 
b. Other examples of such projects in India or Globally 
6 
(II) Establishment of Pilot Project at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) 
a. Role of HCL and Ministry of Mines 
b. Grounds for choosing M/s STPL for pilot project at KCC 
9 
(III) Setting up of Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP) 
a. Role of HCL and  Ministry of Mines 
b. Awarding the project on single tender basis 
c. Disciplinary action against erring officials 
13 
(IV) Salvage value of the COT plant 
 
23 
 PART  -  II  
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 26 
   
 *ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 27.03.2023 37 
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2023 40 
III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2023 42 
IV Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 05.02.2024 44 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2022-23) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
7.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9.    Shri Janardan Mishra 
10.  Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
11.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
18.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
19.  Dr. Anil Jain  
20.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
21.  Dr. Amar Patnaik  
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
  

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3.    Shri Anil Firojiya  
4.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
5.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
7.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
10.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
11.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
12.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
13.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
14.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
17.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
18.  Dr. Anil Jain  
19.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20.  Dr. Amar Patnaik  
21.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
22.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
 
 
                                            
 Elected as a Member of the Committee on Public  Undertakings (2023-24) for the un -expired portion of the term of the Committee 
vide Bulletin Part -II Para No. 7765 dated 19.12.2023 vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh resigned as Member of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
06.12.2023. 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal         -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar -        Director  
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal            -        Additional Director 
4. Shri Dhruv                        -        Executive Officer 

vii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (20 23-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, pre sent this Twenty-
Second Report on  ‘Unfruitful expenditure towards construction of Copper Ore Tailings 
Beneficiation Plant relating to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) (Based on Audit Para 
No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021)'. 
  
2. The Committee on Public  Undertakings (2022-23) had selected the said subject 
for detailed examination. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive 
during the previous Committee  term, the present Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2023-24) decided to carry forward the subject so as to complete the unfinished task.  
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (202 2-23) was briefed about the subject 
by the representatives of the C&AG on 27th March, 2023. The Committee then took oral 
evidence of the representatives of  Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) and  Ministry of 
Mines on 26th June, 2023. 
 
4. The Committee (2023-24) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting 
held on 05th  February, 2024. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Hindustan 
Copper Limited (HCL)  and Ministry of Mines for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with 
examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their apprec iation for the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India.  
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
 
New Delhi:            Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
07 February, 2024                           Chairperson 
18 Magha, 1945 (S)                            Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

R E P O R T 
PART- I 
 
A.    BACKGROUND 
 
 Copper, a malleable and ductile metallic element, is an excellent conductor of 
heat and electricity as well as being corrosion resistant and antimicrobial. Copper 
occurs naturally in the Earth‟s crust in a variety of  forms. The global demand for 
copper continues to grow, and usage has more than tripled in the last 50 years. 
Demand of copper is increasing due to progress of implementation of electric 
vehicle worldwide with associated charging infrastructure, decarboniz ation policy 
push by US and EU and more and more emphasis on green energy to mitigate 
climate change. The antimicrobial properties of copper are finding newer application 
in view of global pandemic situation. Copper being the green metal has been 
considered as a core driver for moving the global economy toward net zero 
emissions. Copper has been termed as new oil. The global copper mine production 
and primary copper production remain flat during last three years and hence the 
secondary market for scrap copp er will play an increasingly important role in 
meeting future growing demand. Virtually all products made from copper can be 
recycled and recycled copper loses none of its physical and chemical properties. 
Although copper recycling rates are already signif icant, with over a third of the 
world‟s copper currently produced via secondary markets. 
 
2. India has limited copper ore reserve contributing about 0.31 % of world 
copper reserves. Mining production is just 0.2% of world‟s production, whereas 
refined copp er production capacity is about 4% of world‟s production.  HCL has 
access to around two-fifths of the copper ore reserves and resources in India with an 
average grade 0.99%. As on 1.4.2021, HCL has reserves of about 2.20 million 
tonnes in terms of copper me tal and total reserves and resource of 6.18 million 
tonnes in terms of copper metal . There are three major players which dominate the 
copper industry in Indian markets. Hindustan Copper Ltd (HCL) in Public sector, M/s 
Hindalco Industries Ltd and M/s Sterli te Industries in Private Sector. It is reported 
that M/s Adani Group is installing custom copper smelter & refinery complex named 
as Kutch Copper Ltd of capacity of 1 million tonne in a phased manner. Refined 

2 
 
 
copper production in India has declined signifi cantly due to permanent closure order 
issued to M/s Sterlite Industries for their Smelter/ refinery plant at Tuticorin by 
Tamilnadu Government in May, 2018.  HCL is the only vertically integrated copper 
producer in the country which produces refined copper from its own mined ore. Their 
Copper ore tailing processing plant & nickel recovery project are waste to wealth 
project of the Company. HCL also  sell scrap/obsolete/surplus items through e -
auction from time to time. Solid waste like granulated slag, waste bricks and boiler 
ash are sold to the intended party whereas tailings and waste rock are safely stored. 
The waste thus stored is reused, recycled or disposed in an environmentally 
acceptable manner. 
 
3. Copper ore Tailings are a mixture of water and finely  ground rock that is left 
over once the mineral concentrate is remove d. HCL is onl y company in India 
involved in mining of c opper ore and further beneficiation i.e. production of Metal in 
Concentrate ( MIC), no other private company is working in Copper Ore  Tailing 
Beneficiation.  Copper ore tailing (COT) beneficiation plant  of Company was set up 
at Malanjkhand Copper Plant ( MCP) unit for extraction of valuable minerals and 
metals from copper ore tailings with a capacity of 10000 tonnes per day (TPD) based 
on the sole technology provider M/s STPL. The intermittent trial run failed on number 
of occasions and the quality and quantity of produ cts achieved at various stages 
were not as per the parameters envisaged in contract agreement. A preliminary 
notice was i ssued to the party to complete and commission  the project. The party 
agreed to commission the plant, but the progress of the work at site was stopped 
due to lockdown for COVID -19 pandemic. The Company had extended the timeline 
upto August 31, 2020 for supp ly, erection of the thickener and commission ing of the 
plant. But the party failed to execute the contract and the contract got terminated 
with efflux of time. The present cost of the COT plant appearing in books of accounts 
under Capital Work In Progress (CWIP) is Rs. 15805.03 lakh as on 31.03.2021 after 
forfeiture of security deposit under the contract amounting to Rs. 849.27 lakh. The 
Company has appointed an independent registered valuer to evaluate the salvage 
value of the plant. The total salvage valu e assessed as per valuation report is Rs. 
3027.09 lakh. Since the party has failed to execute the project under sole technology 
provider, the management has created a provision amounting to Rs. 12777.94 lakh, 

3 
 
 
being present cost of the plant under CWIP less salvage value.  
 
4. C&AG looked into the disregard of the results/ findings of an ongoing pilot 
project at Khetri Copper Complex  by the HCL management and hastening into 
construction of commercial Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant at Malanjkhand 
Copper Project (MCP) with unproven  technology, rendering Rs. 158.05 crore 
unfruitful. In their Report No. 14 of 2021, C&AG had pointed out several deficiencies 
on the part of  HCL Management . The Committee on Public Undertakings during 
their term 2022-23 and in 2023-24 selected Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 
14 of 2021 pertaining to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) regarding „ unfruitful 
expenditure towards construction of Copper Ore Tailings beneficiation plant‟ for 
examination and report to Parliament. Th e Committee during examination of the 
subject heard the views of officers of the C&AG, representatives of the Hindustan 
Copper Limited (HCL) and the Ministry of Mines before finalizing their Report.  The 
detailed observations /recommendations of the Committ ee on the Audit Para have 
been given in bold type in Part-II of this Report. 
 
-------- 
 

4 
 
 
B.     AUDIT PARAGRAPH 
 
(I)  Unfruitful expenditure towards construction of Copper Ore Tailings 
Beneficiation Plant 
5. As per para 6.1 of the C&AG Report  No. 14 of 202 1, Imprudent decision of 
Hindustan Copper Limited  (HCL) to construct full scale Copper Ore Tailings  (COT) 
beneficiation plant without adequately operating the pilot plant and verifying its 
feasibility/ success thereof, resulted in unfruitful expenditure of  Rs.158.05 crore s. 
The Company should analyze the lapses in decision taken for construction of 
commercial plant without considering the results/findings of the related pilot project.  
6. HCL opted to utilize their by-product COT via the beneficiation proce ss in 
order to recover valuable material such as gold and silver. As a result, the Company  
in January 2016, awarded a contract to M/s Star Trace Private Limited (STPL) after a 
competitive bidding process for the design, supply, civil work, installation, 
commissioning, and operation of a pilot plant at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) with a 
capacity to treat 200 tonnes COT per day at a total value of Rs. 6.98 crore as a 
Research and Development  (R&D) project, to be completed within 12 months from 
the date of com missioning. This pilot project was designed to assess the techno-
commercial viability to take a decision  on commercial installation on the basis of 
results. In May 2016,  the Company decided to install a full -scale plant at 
Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP) with a capacity to process 10,000 MT of COT 
per day based on the preliminary findings of the KCC pilot plant at the trial run stage. 
In January 2017, b ased on the Company's techno -commercial evaluation and 
SBICAP's financial appraisal of a full scale COT Beneficiation Plant, in March 2017 
the Company awarded STPL a contract for Rs. 280 crore (including Rs. 85 crore for 
operation and maintenance of the above plant for two years) on a single tender basis 
for the establishment of a 3.29 million tonne per annum  Copper Ore Tailings 
Beneficiation Plant at MCP, which was to be completed by November 2017.  
(II)   Audit Observations 
7. The Company's techno -commercial evaluation of a full -scale Copper Ore 
Tailings Beneficiation Plant, as well as SBICAP's financial app raisal of the same, 

5 
 
 
was based on only three days of KCC pilot project performance. As a result, the 
Management's decision (May 2016) to establish a full scale plant at MCP prior to the 
completion of the pilot plant at KCC (June 2016), based on trial stage performance of 
the pilot plant, was imprudent and injudicious. Furthermore, no consideration was 
given to the pilot project's most recent results before making the decision to scale it 
up. 
8. Despite two extensions and an additional expenditure of Rs. 2.06 crore, the 
pilot project failed to meet its objectives even after 33 months of operation and was 
deemed unviable on commercial and technical grounds by the performance 
evaluation committee (November 2018). 
9. MCP Plant trial runs (August/October 2018) and  reliability test runs 
(December 2018) failed to deliver the expected output. Three shift trial performed for 
30 days (April 2019), without taking into account failed pilot project concluded in 
February 2019, was equally unsuccessful, but the Company accep ted new 
commitment offered by STPL (June 2019), which was unjustifiable. The full scale 
plant at MCP was not completed even after a delay of 35 months (from  November 
2017 to October 2020). 
 
10. While accepting the audit observation,  HCL management in November 2020, 
stated that the Company's decision to build a full -scale COT Beneficiation Plant at 
MCP with a capacity of 3.29 MTPA without adequately operating the pilot plant was 
not prudent, which resulted in an unproductive expenditure of Rs. 158.05 crore. 
11. HCL management thus  disregarded the results/findings of an existing pilot 
project at KCC and rushed towards the development of a new commercial Copper 
Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant at MCP with untested  and proven technology which 
ultimately, as stat ed above,  resulted in a bove loss of Rs.158.05 crore  to the 
Company exchequer.  
-------- 

6 
 
 
C.     ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
(I) Need for setting up of Copper Ore Tailing beneficiation plant 
 
 
a. Waste to Wealth Project of HCL 
 
12. The Company sells its s crap/obsolete/surplus items through e  
auction from time to time. Solid waste like granulated  slag, waste  
bricks and boiler ash are sold to the intended party whereas tailings  
and waste rock are safely stored. The  waste thus stored is reused,  
recycled or di sposed in an environmentally acceptable manner.   
Copper ore tailing processing plant & nickel recovery project are 
waste to wealth project of the company.”  
13. The Company in their Annual Report (2016-17) regarding the waste 
management stated that:  
“Currently, the Company recycles less than 5% of its waste generated 
internally. A good amount of copper bearing waste generated in TCP 
unit is recycled to HCL smelter plant. The copper waste  of refinery 
and electrical workshop is also recycled back to smelter.  The tailing 
of concentrator plant is partly  backfilled in the mines. The Company 
sells the used oil, rubber scrap to the Government approved 
recyclers and these recyclers address environmental concerns while 
recycling or disposing the waste. A good amount  of granulated  
copper slag (i.e. a waste of smelter plant) is sold for using as an 
alternative of sand blasting.  New Technology to recover nickel, pure 
copper and acid from the spent electrolyte of ICC refinery – a waste 
stream has been commissioned in Aug ust 2016. The Company has 
planned to install a plant at MCP to recover valuable metals &  
minerals from the copper ore  tailing, a waste generated from the 
concentrator plant‟‟.  
….  
 
14. In their Annual Report (2021 -22), with regard to waste management , the 
Company further added that: 
„‟…provisions are being adopted to enhance percentage of 
recycling of products and waste. The tailing of concentrator plant is 
partly backfilled in the mines at ICC and action has been initiated to 
recycle the part of Copper or e tailing (a waste generated in the 
beneficiation process) as paste to fill up the void in the underground 
mine at MCP. The Company sells the used oil, rubber scrap to the 
Government approved recyclers and these recyclers address 
environmental concerns while recycling or disposing the waste.” 
 
15. During the course of oral evidence before the Committee, the representative 

7 
 
 
of HCL deposed as under: 
“ख ेत ड़ी भें हभाये स्भेल्टसस थे, ज ो काप ी ऩहर े फ ंद हो च ुके  हैं। ब ायत ीम कॉऩय ओय भें 
कॉऩय का ज ो प्रज ेंस है, वह 1 प्रतत श त  है। इस त यह से, एक सौ टन कॉऩय ओय भें 
एक टन कॉऩय की उऩस्स्थतत  यहत ी है। कॉऩय ओय फ ेतनफप शश एश न प्रॉसेस के  दौयान 
ही कॉऩय ओय टेशर ंग तनकर त ी है, स्ज स ऩय हभ च च ास कयेंगे। ज फ  हभ एक सौ टन 
कॉऩय ओय को प्रॉसेस कयत े हैं, त ो 96 टन वेस्ट ज ेनयेट होत ा है, स्ज से हभ  कॉऩय 
ओय टेशर ंग कहत े हैं, स्ज स ऩय आधारयत  मह नुकसान देने वार ा पर ांट र गा था।”  
 
16. When asked by the Committee about the proceeds out of sale of scrap to 
Government approved recyclers during the last 10 years, HCL in a written reply to 
the Committee submitted that: 
“Rubber Scrap and used oil of basic value Rs 639.85  lakh was sold by HCL 
during last 10 years.” 
 
 
17. HCL also submitted to the Committee that a fter closing the MCP COT plant, 
no other project was undertaken by the Company to generate wealth from 
waste.HCL has signed an MoU with IIT -ISM(Indian School of Min es) Dhanbad 
recently for collaboration in Geology, Mining and ore beneficiation area.  However, 
neither any R&D project has started yet nor HCL has obtained any technology for 
copper beneficiation.  
b. Other examples of such projects in India or Globally 
18. When Committee enquired from HCL whether the Company undert ook any 
studies or appointed any independent parties to carry out the studies to look into 
such niche technology elsewhere before planning to in stall Pilot Plant/MCP to 
recover valuable metals & minerals from the copper ore tailings , HCL, in a written 
reply submitted to the Committee that there are no records to establish that such 
niche technology was in use elsewhere.   The Company further added that, from the 
records it is not found that C ompany undertook any studies or appointed any 
independent party to carry out the studies to look into such niche technology.  
 
19. HCL stated to the Committee the potential benefits of setting up of Copper 
Ore tailings beneficiation plant as under: 

8 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
           
20. HCL further submitted to the Committee that the proposed plant would have 
been achieved the following key performance parameters in operation:-  
 
Minerals and metals recovery from MCP - COT 
Sl. No. Metal/Mineral Feed Tailings 
Grade 
% 
Recovery 
Concentrate 
Grade % 
A Copper 0.06% 30% 0.50% 
B Magnetite 2% 15% 50% + 
C Gold 0.15 ppm 63.5% 80% + 
D Silver 1.5 ppm 63.5% 80% + 
E Silica sand 80% 69% 95% 
                        
         However, the contractor was not able to commission the plant. 
21. On being asked the reasons for setting up the technology during the course of 
deposition, the representative of HCL gave the following justification: 
“भैं मह बी  फताना  च ाह ॊगा कि  पयवयी , 2013 भें, ि े ऩटाउन  भें भाइननॊग  एग्जजबफशन 
हु ई थी,  तो तत्िारीन  सीएभडी , एचसीएर  ने  उस एग्जजबफशन िो  अटेंड किमा  था 
औय वहाॉ उनिी  भुर ाि ात भेससस एसटीऩीएर  िे  येप्रजेंटेटटव से हु ई थी, उसी दयम्मान 
उन  रोगों ने  मह ननर्सम लरमा  था क्मोंकि एसटीऩीएर  ने  क्रेभ  किमा  था कि  हभ 
आऩि े िॉऩय  ओय टेलरॊग  से प्रेलसमस भेटर  गोल्ड औय लसल्वय ननिारिय  देंगे। 
च  ॊकि  हभाये महाॉ िॉऩय  ओय टेलरॊग , वेस्ट िे  रूऩ भें फहु तामत भें उऩरब्ध है, इसलरए  
उन  रोगों ने  डडसाइड  किमा  औय वाऩस आिय  फोडस िो  बी  स चच त किमा  औय इन्होंने 
ऩामरट  पराॊट  फनाने  िे  लरए  फोडस िो सॊज्ञान भें रेिय खेतड़ी भें ऩामरट  पराॊट  िा  
ननभासर् किमा , ग्जसिी रागत  ियीफ  सात ियोड़  रुऩए  िी  थी। ऩामरट  पराॊट  ऩय 
आधारयत पु र  स्ि े र पराॊट  िो  भराजखॊड  िॉऩय  ओय प्रोजेक्ट भें रगाने  िी  फात 
यखी गई।”  
 22. The Representative of HCL further elaborated on their decision to set up of the 
plant to retrieve Gold and Silver from Copper Ore Tailings  with an unproven 
technology as follows: 
Total Products recovered details Quantity in tonnes 
  
Copper Ore concentrate 360 Kg 
Gold 1.1906 Kg 
Silver 11.906 Kg 
Silica Sand 5500 Kg 
Total rejects 4079.98 
Total 10000 

9 
 
 
“सय, च  ॊकि  पस्टस टाइभ  िहीॊ  ऩय ऐसा पराॊट  रगामा  जा  यहा था, इसलरए  टेक्नोरॉजी  
तो प्र वेन  नहीॊ  थी, इसीलरए  ऩहरे  ऐसे ि े स भें ऩामरट  पराॊट  ही रगामा  जाता  है। 
इसलरए  ऩामरट  पराॊट  रगाने  िा  अप्र वर  देिय  वही किमा।  रेकिन  उसि े रयजल््स 
िो  बफना  ऩ यी तयह एनाराइज  किमे  औय बफना  एसेस किए  पु र  स्ि े र पराॊट  रगाने  
िे  लरए  आगे फढ़ गए। मही फात है, नहीॊ  तो ऐसे ि े सेज भें होता तो मही है कि  ऩहरे  
ऩामरट  पराॊट  रगामा  जाता  है।  
…..सय, भेयी जानिायी  िे  अन ुसाय, िॉऩय  ओय टेलरॊग  से गोल्ड औय लसल्वय प्रापत 
ियने  िा  िाभ  दुनन मा भें िहीॊ  औय नहीॊ  चर  यहा है।"  
 
(II) Establishment of Pilot Project at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) 
 
a.         Role of HCL and Ministry of Mines 
 
23. As per the written response furnished to the Committee, HCL had initiated a 
project to extract  minerals f rom COT lying at Malanjkhand Copper Project  (MCP) 
and Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) after having established the potential of the  
project based on the inputs received from the initial examination and analysis. 
Therefore, a pilot plant with a capacity of processing 200 tons per day of tailings was 
established in KCC by M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL), Chennai. The cost of the 
plant as per the contract was Rs. 5.9 crore plus a success fee of Rs. 1.5 crore. The 
pilot plant was based on the technology supplied by  M/s STPL. Besides processing  
KCC tailings, around 1000 tons  of MCP tailings was also  processed in the Pilot 
plant.  The matter was first placed for consideration of Sub Committee on Business 
Development ( SCoBD) meeting held on 29.08.2013 and based on the 
recommendations of the SCoBD, a Global Expression of Interest (EoI) was floated. 
Out of eight applications received against the EoI floated by the Company for 
recovery of minerals and material from copper ore tailings at KCC, the said 
Committee in its meet ing held on 28.07.2014 recommended  short listing of M/s 
STPL, Chennai, as the only qualified party for the project who had 
solutions/technology for establishment of a pilot plant of capacity 100 tonnes per day 
at KCC . Accordingly, RFP was prepared by M/s D eloitte, consultant appointed for 
the project and was issued to the party i.e. M/s STPL and the bid was submitted on 
3.4.2015. The party initially submitted a price bid of Rs.10.0 crore for 100 tonnes per 

10 
 
 
day(tpd) plant. After several rounds of negotiation  the Company finalized the 
contract for pilot plant of 200 tpd instead of 100 tpd with a cost of Rs.5.9 crore plus a 
success fee of Rs.1.5 crore. The Contract Agreement was signed with M/s STPL on 
30.12.2015.  HCL further added  that the approval of Board w as not sought for 
installation of the Pilot plant at KCC. In fact, the Board was only informed regarding 
the RFP process without the details of short listing of bidder thereof at the 348 th 
Board Meeting held on 1.12.2013 in which the information agenda regarding the EOI 
process for selection of suitable party for KCC COT Pilot Plant was placed before 
the Board for information, which the Board „noted‟. Board was again appraised about 
the pilot plant in its 363 rd meeting dated 30.5.2016, wherein approval was sought for 
installation of commercial plant at MCP.  
 
24. The sequence of events setting up of pilot project at K hetri Copper Complex 
(KCC) is given below: 
 
Sr No Event Date 
1 Date of awarding the tender for KCC. 01.01.2016 (Contract signed) 
2 Date of inauguration of the plant. 01.04.2016 
3 Date of commissioning the plant. 24.06.2016 
4 Date on which findings of Technical Feasibility 
Report were presented to the Board 
16.01.2017 (367th Board meeting) 
25.    During the course of deposition, representative of HCL clarified on the 
decision to set-up pilot project as under: 
“सय, ज फ  मे र ोग एस्जज बफ श न से र ौटकय आए, त ो बफ ज़नेस ड ेवर ऩभेंट ऩय फ ोड स की 
एक सफ -कभेटी थी, उस ऩय इन र ोगों ने अगस्त , 2013 भें च च ास की थी औय 
इन्होंने एक एक्सप्रेश न ऑप  इंट्रेस्ट फ्र ोट फकमा, स्ज सभें कॉऩय ओय पर ांट को 
ख ेत ड़ी भें र गाने की फ ात  हु ई। Due diligence, इन र ोगों ने इसे एक स्टार्टिंग 
ऩॉइंट फ त ामा औय च  ंफक एक्सप्रेश न ऑप  इंट्रेस्ट र्दमा था, इसशर ए उनका कहना था 
फक ऩाटीज  आएंगी, ज ो इस ऩय काभ कयत ी होंगी, र ेफकन एसटीऩीएर  ऐसी 
एकर ौत ी कम्ऩनी है, ज ो हभ र ोगों को ऩत ा च र ी थी, फ ात  मह थी फक प्र वेन 
टेक्नोर ॉज ी कहीं की थी ही नहीं। इसशर ए एसटीऩीएर  को इन र ोगों ने ऩामर ट 
पर ांट फ नाने का च ांस र्दमा।”  
26. Regarding the role of Ministry of Mines in setting up the Pilot project at 
KCC, HCL, submitted to the Committee that neither the then management 

11 
 
 
consulted Ministry of Mines before setting  up of the pilot project at KCC  and the 
Ministry had no role before setting up of pilot project.  Nor did the HCL obtained 
the views of Ministry of Mines on the results and findings of the pilot project.  
27. In this regard, the Ministry of Mines, during the course of verbal evidence, 
deposed before the Committee as under: 
“I would like to say that the commercial operations of the pilot plant 
actually started in June and in May the Board resolution was passed 
even though it was officially inaugurated on 1 st of April.  That is true.  
It is not my job to defend anybody but reading the Board note, it says 
that initial results are encouraging. I would appreciate what you are 
saying. That is possibly misleading to say that.  This is not in good 
faith.  When you ar e saying initial results, you might be presuming 
that it is a few months or six months or whatever but it is actually 
three days.  So, the intention of mala fide was very apparent. 
Whether „x‟ or „y‟ was also involved in the entire thing, it is difficult t o 
say.  We will check the inquiry report.  But it was out and out a set 
up.”  
28. When the Committee asked whether in the  opinion of the Ministry, there 
was a laxity in discharging responsibility by the Government representative s on 
Board, the Ministry of Mines, submitted as below: 
“It will be difficult to say that until I go through the inquiry report……. I 
will check whether he was under the ambit of the inquiry.   
I, actually, checked that and they say, „based on the encouraging 
results of the pilot project,‟, it would be in the fitness of things to see it 
because they are not technical people.  They would have gone by 
what the technical report says.  If it says this works and this is going 
to be the gold percentage, on that basis, they would have just mad e 
simple calculations.” 
 
b. Grounds for choosing M/s STPL for pilot project at Khetri Copper Complex 
 (KCC) 
 
29. The Committee enquired from the HCL  if there  were other Companies in 
India/ abroad with expertise in th is specific  field and if those Companies  were 
contacted by HCL management before awarding the contract of Pilot Project to M/s 
STPL, HCL in a written response to the Committee, clarified as under: 
 
“From the chronology of the event, it appears that although there 
were responses against EOI, but as per evaluation undertaken 

12 
 
 
nobody had such technology in processing of COT. In fact, the 
proposal initiated on 09.11.2016 for open tender enquiry for 
installation and commencing of COT processing plant at MCP states 
that precedence for such works in past is not available.”  
 
On the Contrary, Para No. 1.3 of item No. 363 -B-16 of Agenda for Board Meeting of 
HCL held on 30.5-2016 mentioned that:   
 
“The Sub Committee on Business Development in its meeting held 
on 28.07.2014 had recommended short listing of M /s Star Trace, 
Chennai, as the only qualified partly for the project who has solutions/ 
technology for extraction of minerals from copper ore tails and 
recommended issue of RFP for establishment of a pilot plant of 
capacity 100 tonnes per day at Khetri Cop per Complex for extraction 
of minerals from the copper ore tails.” 
 
30. When asked by the Committee  the ground for choosing  KCC as site for the 
pilot project, HCL, in a written response, submitted as below: 
 
“With the available records (Ref. visit report o f the committee placed 
before SCoBD in the 2 nd meeting dt. 28.11.2013), wherein it is 
mentioned that the party has lifted 30,000 tonnes of COT from Khetri 
and done some experiment for recovery of valuable mineral from it, 
and they have not lifted any mater ial from MCP because of 
regulatory issues there. It seems that because of this background 
and also 1 st SCoBD agenda dt. 27.08.2013 shows that there is need 
for creation of space at Khetri tailing pond besides the potential of 
profitability mentioned therei n. These may be the reasons for setting 
up COT pilot plant at KCC.”  
 
31. Regarding the credentials of M/s STPL based on which  the Pilot project  at 
KCC was awarded to the M/s STPL, HCL , in a written reply to the Committee ,   
submitted to the Committee that: 
“As per Records, (Agenda of Sub Committee of Board of Directors 
(SCoBD) meeting held on 29.08.2013), against a contract to sell tails 
(COT) in 2010 at the rate Rs. 26.40 per DMT, only 30,000 tonnes 
were lifted by M/s STPL. In the same SCoBD it is also st ated that 
during INDABA mining conference and Exhibition at Cape town, 
South Africa in Feb‟2013, a company (understood M/s STPL) had 
informed that they have requisite technology for extraction of 
Minerals from Copper Ore Tailings. Further, in the 348 th Board 
meeting, it is stated that M/s STPL had carried out the necessary 
work at their end and had informed HCL that they have been able to 
recover Magnetite, Copper, Gold & Silver for COT of KCC origin and 
the balance can be used as a good source of Micronutr ient & 

13 
 
 
Fertilizer fillers. However, there are no records available to justify 
such claims. In the SCoBD meeting on 28.11.2013, it is also stated 
that a committee had visited Chennai for inspecting the facilities of 
M/s STPL at Chennai. In course of discuss ion, M/s STPL had 
mentioned that the recovery of valuable mineral materials were 
achieved mainly by Magnetic & Gravity separator with more 
emphasis on dry process, wherever feasible. However, the details 
with regard to grade and process route for the valua ble minerals will 
be shared after entering into agreement for conducting pilot scale 
studies. It thus appears that the claims of M/s STPL were mainly 
verbal with no documentary evidence for the same, prior to award the 
Pilot plant project. 
Further as per r ecord, 5 th SCoBD minutes of the meeting 
(28.07.2014), “after deliberations, the Sub Committee recommended 
that the Business Plan for the proposed pilot plant of capacity upto 
100 tonnes at Khetri Copper Complex for extraction of minerals from 
the copper or e tails be analyzed further with more details. The aim 
would be to have a more detailed and nuanced issue of RFP to M/s. 
Star Trace, Chennai, the short -listed qualified party. After receipt of 
offer from the party, the proposal may be resubmitted along wit h 
information regarding profitability, turnover of the short-listed qualified 
party (a copy of the statement of the firm from the RoC for the past 3 
years would be good) and a copy of agreement signed by the party 
with Hutti Gold Mines for the jobs performed by them. Meanwhile, the 
Board of Directors may be informed about the status of the proposal 
in its next meeting.” 
But record shows that the recommendation of the SCoBD was not 
complied and instead, in the 13 th SCoBD meeting dated 15.04.2016, 
the Committ ee noted that the Company had signed a contract 
agreement with M/s. Star Trace Pvt Ltd, Chennai, for setting up of 
200 tons per day pilot plant facility at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) 
for extracting minerals and materials from copper ore tails lying at 
Malanjkhand and Khetri.  
Investigation by Vigilance shows that the files relating to pilot plant 
was not traceable hence further details could not be provided. 
Hence, no other details pertaining to the checking of credentials of 
M/s STPL are available. 
 
 (III)   Setting up of Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP) 
 
a. Role of HCL and Ministry of Mines 
 
32. Committee observe the following timeline with regard to setting up of COT 
plant at Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP): 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
Sr No Event Date 
1 The date of minutes of Bo ard 
meetings in which decision to set up 
the MCP was taken 
363rd Board meeting dated 30.5. 2016 & 367th 
Board meeting dated 16.01.2017 wherein the 
decision to set up the COT project at MCP Unit 
was taken. 
 
2 Date of awarding the tender for MCP The date of signing the contract of COT project 
at MCP Unit was 20.3. 2017 (LOI issued on 
24.02.2017) 
3 Date of inauguration of the plant Project work at site started on 01.4.2017 
4 Number of extensions given for 
setting up the plant 
The scheduled completion date was  11.11.2017 
and thereafter the time extension was granted 
upto 31.03.2018. The contractor was carrying 
out certain rectifications to commission the plant. 
The contract was terminated on 31.08.2020 with 
efflux of time. 
5 Date of commissioning the plant Not commissioned 
 
33. HCL submitted to the Committee that in 363rd Board meeting dated 
30.5.2016 and 367th Board meeting dated 16.01.2017 , the decision to set up the 
COT project at MCP Unit was given by the Board unanimously and  the 
representative(s) of Ministry in HCL Board also had no objections for setting up MCP 
COT plant in these meetings.  HCL further submitted to the Committee that its Board 
is empowered to approve a capital expenditure on new projects upto Rs 500 crores 
and for this reason the subject  proposal of setting up MCP COT plant may not have 
been sent to the Ministry for approval.  The matter came to the notice of the Ministry 
when the Vigilance department submitted verification reports dated 29.11.2019 and 
04.12.2019 on the matter of a complain having CVC reference. 
34. As per the information furnished to the Committee the Board of Directors of 
HCL took the decision to set up the project at MCP on the following grounds: 
“The matter was brought to the Board of Directors of HCL in its 363 rd 
meeting held on  30.05.2016 with the results obtained from the 
processing of tailings of KCC and MCP. It  was informed to the board 
that the initial assessment of the results was encouraging. One ton of 
tailings could deliver quantity of minerals as following: 
 
Based on the above, it was proposed in the agenda item 363 -B-16 of 
Sl. No. Parameter/ Element In KCC Sample In MCP Sample 
1. Copper (50% concentrate) 0.3% 0.1% 
2. Iron (50% concentrate) 3% 1% 
3. Gold (Au) 0.1 gram 0.5 gram 
4. Silver (Ag) 4 gram 4 gram 

15 
 
 
363rd Board meeting of HCL held on 30.05.2016 to install a 
commercial plant of capacity 10,000  tons per day at MCP, with an 
estimated cost of Rs. 285 crores. After deliberations, the  Board 
accorded its approval for initiation of action for installation of the plant 
on EPC (Engineering, Procurement and Construction)  mode through 
a tendering process. The Board also desired that cost benefit 
analysis of  the proposed  project to be submitted in the next  Board 
meeting. 
Accordingly, a Technical Feasibility Report (TFR) of the project was 
prepared in-house based on the results obtained from the pilot plant 
study conducted at Khetri Copper  Complex and financial appraisal of 
the project has been done by M/s SBI Capital Markets Ltd. As per the 
TFR of the project,  the MCP tailings contained following value  of 
metals: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Parameter/ Element Value in Tailing 
1. Copper (Cu) 0.06 to 0.14 wt% 
2. Magnetite (Fe2O3+(upto 2% 
Fe3O4)) 
10.69 wt % 
3. Gold (Au) 0.15 to 0.77 ppm 
4. Silver (Ag) 1.5 to 4.5 ppm 
5. Silica (SiO2) 82.76 wt % 
 
The same were brought before the board in its 367 th meeting held on 
16.01.2017 and after deliberations the Board approved the financial 
appraisal for setting up of CoT plant  based on M/s Star Trace 
technology at MCP with a capacity of 10,000 tons per day at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 200 crore and authorized CMD to finalize the 
award of contract   on EPC basis for setting up of CoT processing 
plant to M/s Star Trace, Chennai being  sole technology provide r 
within the estimated cost of Rs. 200 cror e with additional cost  for 
operation and maintenance for two years after performance 
guarantee test.  
35.   The Ministry of Mines  further submitted to the Committee that the TFR was 
based only on  three days result and there was no justification for conside ring three 
days performance as sufficient.  
36.   HCL stated that they appointed SBI -CAP for financial appraisal of the project 
and the Company submitted the following written information regarding the same:  
“In the available documents, nowhere criteria o f selecting SBI -CAP 
for financial appraisal of the project is narrated. In the 363 rd Board 
Meeting, the then Director (Operations) had sought approval of the 
Board for “an action may be initiated for installation of a commercial 
plant for the treatment of copper ore tails of capacity 10,000 MT per 

16 
 
 
day at Malanjkhand Copper Project on EPC mode with technology 
supplier M/s. Star Trace, Chennai”. In the said agenda it was also 
stated that “the final proposal with all due diligence of the consultant 
appointed (M/s. SBI Caps) will be submitted for approval in the next 
meeting of the Board”. However, record pertaining to criteria for 
choosing SBI-CAP is not available.  
 
Although, it is also stated that the project will be independently 
assessed through SBI Caps an d report of SBI Caps was also placed 
before the Board (unsigned draft report), it is noted from the 
„Important Notice‟ (part of the report) which was prepared “on the 
basis of technical study and certifications provided by the Technical / 
Project Team of H industan Copper Limited” . SBI Caps has also 
mentioned a „disclaimer‟ in their report which states – “All 
assumptions and commercial inputs with regard to project cost, 
pricing, market size, investments, capacity utilization, etc. or any 
technical aspects h ave been obtained from the Project / Technical 
Team of the Company and consultants appointed by the Company 
for the “Information Memorandum” and in certain cases such inputs / 
assumptions have been modified as per updates provided by the 
Company Management . SBICAP has not carried out any due 
diligence independently in verifying the accuracy or veracity of any 
data mentioned in this Memorandum".  
 
The financial analysis done by SBI -CAP as reported in the 367 th 
Board meeting is as follows: 
 
“the Internal Rate  of Return (IRR) of the project is 47.79% with a 
payback period of 6 months only. For the purpose of financial 
projections useful life of the assets have been considered as 15 
years. However, for the purpose of calculating the Project IRR have 
been conside red till FY 2024 and terminal value / salvage value of 
assets have been considered as on 31st March 2024.”  
 
37. The r epresentatives of HCL, during the course of oral evidence , 
submitted the following regarding the hasty decision-making process in giving 
the approval for construction of full-scale plant at MCP: 
“अफ  इसभें सफ से फ ड़ी ख ाभी मह हु ई थी फक ज ो  ऩामर ट पर ांट को च र ाना था औय 
उसकी ज ो कशभश तनंग कयनी थी, ज ल्दफ ाज ी भें इन र ोगों ने कशभश तनंग के  ऩहर े ही 
फ ोड स से पु र  स्के र  पर ांट र गाने का इन-प्प्रंशसऩर  अप्र वर  र े शर मा। इस त यह से, इन 
र ोगों ने 280 कयोड़ रु ऩए (इन क्र  डड ॊग ओ.एॊड.एभ. 86 कयोड़ रुऩए 2 वषों ि े  
लरए ) का पर ांट र गाने का अप्र वर  शर मा औय शसंगर  टेंड य ऩय इस ऩाटी को र्दमा 
गमा।  
 

17 
 
 
……..सय, फोडस िे  लभन्स  िो  देखने  से ऐसा रगता  है कि  फहु त जल्दफाजी  भें साये 
िाभ  हु ए। पाइर  भें नोटटॊजस  देखने  ऩय बी  मह रगता  है कि  एि -एि  टदन  भें िई 
साये लसजनेचय  हु ए। इस तयीि े से इनिा  गरत  इनटेंशन यहा होगा औय ड्म  डडलरजेंस 
प्रॉऩरी नहीॊ  किमा  गमा।  
 
……भहोदम, प ाइनेंशश मर  रयस्क के  शर ए कभेटी है औय छह भहीने भें एक फ ाय भीर्टंग 
ब ी कयत ी है औय उस ऩय एक्श न टेकन ब ी होत ा है। मह प्रोज ेक्ट इस त यह का हु आ फक 
असेस हो यहा है, फ न यहा है, येस्क्टफप के श न्स हो यहे हैं। ज फ  त क प ाइनर  आउटऩुट 
नहीं हु आ, उसके  फ ाद सफ के  नोर्टस भें आमा। फ ोड स को मह फ त ामा गमा फक इसके  
रयज ल््स अच्छे हैं औय इस फ ेसेस ऩय पु र  स्के ऩ पर ांट र गा देना च ार्हए।”  
 
38. The representative of Ministry of HCL gave clarifications on the role played by 
its internal audit department as under: 
 
"सय, ि ॊ ऩनी भें इनटनसर  ऑडडट  तो किमा जाता  है, रेकिन  इनटनसर  ऑडडटय  
ने  इस ि े स भें लसप स डडरे  ऩय ही फात िी , टैग्क्निर इश्म  ऩय फात नहीॊ  िी। 
इस ऩय चचास नहीॊ  हु ई। प्रोजेक्ट डडरे  हो यहा है, इस ऩय ि े वर उन्होंने रयऩोटस 
दी। "  
 
39. The Ministry of Mines  during the course of oral evidence, while giving 
clarifications on the  lack of monitoring on their part, deposed before the Committee 
as under: 
 
“सय, हभाये भंत्रार म की त यप  से संमुक्त  सचच व के स्त य के एक अचधकायी 
फ ोड स भें थे। हभने रयज ॉल्म श न फ ोड स की शभन्स का ध्मान से अध्ममन फकमा 
है। उसभें मह कहीं नहीं शर ख ा गमा है फक इस भेम्फ य ने मह कहा मा उस 
भेम्फ य ने वह कहा। इसके अर ावा, फ ोड स के सभऺ ज फ  कोई ब ी प्वषम आत ा 
है, त फ  स्ज म्भेदायी उसके ऊऩय होत ी है, स्ज सने फ ोड स नोट फ नामा है फक वह 
सही त थ्म फ ोड स को प्रस्त ुत  कये। अगय वह त थ्म ही गर त  है त ो फप य त ो ज ो 
तनर्सम होगा, वह ब ी गर त  ही होगा। इसशर ए, प्राथशभक स्ज म्भेदायी उन ऩय 
है, स्ज न्होंने मह सायी स च ना फ ोड स के सभऺ तनर्सम के शर ए ऩेश  की थी।  
 
………सय, भैं तथ्म देखि य आऩि ो रयऩोट स दे द ॊगा। भैं उस  सभम नहीॊ था। भैं 
मह आश्वस्त ि य सि ता ह ॊ कि  आज  ि ी तायीख भें हभ प्रोज ेक््स ि ो 
भॉनीटय  ियते हैं।”  
 

18 
 
 
b. Awarding the project on single tender basis 
 
40. Responding to the Committee‟s query about the circumstances/compulsions, 
under which HCL did not finalize a global open  tender and instead went for 
awarding the project on 'single tender basis' to  M/s STPL, Ministry of Mines,  in a 
written response to the Committee, submitted that: 
“As per the available information  in the Ministry , it is stated that the 
tendering process began with the issuance of a Notice Inviting 
Tender (NIT) in November 2016.  The deadline for bid submission 
was extended twice until December 27, 2016. Two bids   were 
received on the opening date: one from M/s STPL in consortiu m with 
M/s Mycom  Systems Trading and the other from M/s Larsen & 
Toubro Limited (L&T) in consortium  with M/s DRA Africa Holdings 
Proprietary Limited. 
After the receipt of the bids, the file was forwarded to the Deputy 
General Manager  (Projects) for technic al evaluation. It was noted 
that L&T had cited certain technical  deviations in their bid and 
requested their withdrawal for further consideration. Communications 
regarding these deviations and clarifications were exchanged 
between HCL and L&T prior to the official noting. 
In one of the communications, L&T mentioned a conflict of interest 
regarding M/s STPL, t h e pilot plant operator, being one of the bidders. 
They alleged that necessary data was  not shared by M/s STPL, 
which had kept it confidential. L&T ref erred to a clause in the  NIT 
related to conflicts of interest. 
Taking note of the conflict of interest raised by L&T, the Chief 
Manager (M&C) recommended that the Technical Evaluation 
Committee (TEC) deliberate on the matter. The recommendation was 
approved, and the TEC meeting was held on January 14,  2017. The 
TEC observed that M/s STPL was the sole technology provider and 
had conducted trials through a pilot plant at Khetri Copper Complex 
(KCC). They recommended informing the B oard about the stalemate 
in the project and exploring possibilities to proceed with M/s STPL as 
the only feasible alternative. 
On the same day, the recommendation of the TEC was approved by 
the CMD of HCL.  The board note was prepared in line with the TEC 
recommendation, and it was presented in the 367th Board Meeting on 
January 16, 2017. The board approved the  award of the contract to 
M/s STPL on  an EPC  basis within the estimated cost, along  with 
additional costs for operation and maintenance. The responsibility to 
finalize the  contract was given to the CMD, and necessary 
communication was sent to the Director (Operations) for action. 
Following the board approval, the Executive Director (M&C) 
submitted a note to the  CMD proposing to float an enquiry on an 

19 
 
 
STE(Single Tender Enquiry) basis with M/s STPL. 
Further, with regard to the above, this Ministry observed  serious 
misconducts and issued charge sheet to Shri Santosh Sharma, Ex -
CMD, HCL and Shri D.K. Mahajan,  Ex-ED (M&C), HCL. Other 
officers of HCL were also issued major/minor penalty charge sheets 
on account of various irregularities, including irregular tender 
processes, presenting misleading information to the board based on 
the feasibility report prepared  by the contractor instead of HCL and 
making irregular advance payments to the contractor.”  
 
41.    HCL have submitted the following reasons for not considering M/s L&T: 
“Bid from M/s L&T had come with substantial deviations from the 
terms and conditions of RFP. The main deviations which were not in 
line with project requirement were as under: 
 
Terms in RFP L & T Offer 
Project execution 8 months 16 months 
Reclaiming old tailing from tailing dam Not agreed. HCL to provide as per 
L&T bid 
The performance guarantee Not given (only capacity agreed) 
The payment terms Not agreed 
 
Whereas, M/s STPL had accepted  all the terms and conditions  of 
RFP."  
 
42. The representative of HCL, during the oral evidence , further clarified on the 
tendering process as under: 
“सय, इसभें ऩहरे  टेंडरयॊग हु ई थी। जो  पस्टस अप्र वर  थी, वह थ्र  टेंडरयॊग भोड  ही थी। इसलरए , 
टेंडय बी  हु ए थे। उसभें दो बफड्स आई थीॊ। एि  एरएॊडटी  िी  िनशोयलशमभ  िे  साथ भें थी 
औय इसि े  अरावा  स्टाटसयेज िी  िनशोयलशमभ  िे  साथ भें थी। च  ॊकि  एरएॊडटी  ने  इसभें िु छ 
ऑब्जेक्शॊस किए , उन्होंने मह लरखा  कि  इसभें हभें ड्रॉइॊजस वगैयह औय ऩामरेट  पराॊट  िी  
डडटेर  नहीॊ  ऩास-ऑन  नहीॊ  िी  गई है। जो  द सयी बफड  एरएॊडटी  िे  साथ भें ओऩन  हु ई थी, वह 
उसी िी  है, ग्जसने ऩामरेट  पराॊट  रगामा , which is conflict of interest. इसलरए , उन्होंने 
मे सफ ऑब्जेक्शॊस येज़ किए , ग्जससे भैनेजभेंट िो  रगा  कि  फाद भें शामद मह लरटटगेशन  न  
हो जाए , क्मोंकि इसभें िु छ र ैि न ाज़ हैं, इसलरए  उन्होंने इसे ि ैं सर ियि े  फोडस से लसॊगर  
टेंडय िी  अप्र वर  रे  री।   
 
….सय, रयकॉड स को देख ने से त ो ऐसा र गत ा है फक सफ की सहभतत  से शसंगर  टेंड य कय र्दमा 
गमा, क्मोंफक ज ो ऩहर ा टेंड य था, एर एंड ी को त ो भौका ही नहीं शभर ा औय मह र गा फक आगे 
कहीं कोई कान नी सभस्मा न हो, इसशर ए उस टेंड य को ही डड स्च ाज स कय र्दमा गमा औय फ्रे श  
शसंगर  टेंड य की अनुभतत  र ेकय शसंगर  टेंड य को अवॉड स कय र्दमा गमा।  

20 
 
 
….सय, मह शसंगर  टेंड य है। इसे शसंगर  टेंड य से शब न्न नहीं भाना ज ा सकत ा है।”   
 
 
c. Disciplinary action against erring officials 
 
43. The Committee asked whether the percentage of gold content in tailings  was 
deliberately stated almost 20 times higher than the actual presence of gold, in order 
to make the project look attractive before the Board,  the Ministry of Mines,  in a 
written response, submitted as under: 
"As per the information provided by HCL, the percentage of gold 
content was shown, higher than the actual, to the board. As per an 
earlier report dated 12.03.2015 of   MCP lab, the gold content in MCP 
tailings was 0.02 ppm whereas it was presented to the board as 0.15 
ppm - 0.77ppm. Three officers from HCL namely Shri Santosh 
Sharma, ex-CMD, Shri Vinay Kumar Singh, ex -GM & Unit Head and 
Shri Vivek Gupta,  ex- AGM(IE) were identified for showing higher 
gold content and necess ary disciplinary  action have been already 
taken against them. A major penalty of „compulsory retirement‟ has 
been imposed on Shri Vinay Kumar Singh  and a penalty of „removal 
from service‟ has been imposed on Shri Vivek Gupta. Further, the IO 
in the case of  Shri Sharma has submitted his IR wherein they 
established presenting higher concentration  of precious  metal to  
Board instead of real data available in MCP's own laboratory. 
Further, this Ministry, vide communication dated 22/02/2021 and 
30/03/2021, had conveyed approval under Section 17A of the 
Prevention of the Corruption Act, 1988 to  the CBI for investigation in 
the matter. CBI vide their letter dated 11.10.2022 informed  that the 
said enquiry is concluded and FIR No. RC2172022A0007 dated 
31.08.2022  has been registered under Section 120 -B, 420 of IPC 
and Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of  PC Act, 1988 against Shri Santosh 
Sharma, the then CMD, HCL and others.  
 
44. During the course of oral evidence, HCL further submi tted regarding the 
actions taken by the Company against the erring officials, as under:  
 
"सय, मही याम है फक स्ज न र ोगों ने मह काभ फकमा है, स्ज नकी शभर ीब गत  से मह हु आ है, 
उनके  ऊऩय सख्त  से सख्त  कायसवाई होनी च ार्हए। ज फ  मह कायसवाई हभ र ोगों ने श ुरू की, त ो 
उस सभम के  सीएभड ी, ज ो साउथ अफ्रीका गए थे, वे रयटामय हो गए थे।…… 
 
…..सय, हभ रोगों िे  महाॊ ऩेंशन नहीॊ  थी, जो  इसि े रेिय  आए थे, वे श्री दीवान  थे, जो  कि  

21 
 
 
िापी  ऩहरे  रयटामय  हो गए थे। उसि े फाद श्री सॊतोष शभास जी  आए, जो  डामयेक्टय  थे औय 
फाद भें सीएभडी  फने।  वे जफ  रयटामय  हु ए, उसि े फाद उनि े  िु छ ड्म ज  िो  योिा  गमा था औय 
इॊक्वामयी चर  यही थी। इॊक्वामयी िी  रयऩोटस अबी  यीसेन्टरी  सग्ब्भट हु ई है। वे तो रयटामय  
होिय  चरे  गए। एि  एग्जज क्म टट व डामयेक्टय  – श्री भहाजन  बी  थे, वे बी  31 टदसॊफय, 2019 
िो  रयटामय  हो गए थे। उस टदन  उनिो  बी  एि  चाजसशीट  इश्म  हु ई थी औय उनि े  बी  िु छ 
ड्म ज  रुि े  थे। इसि े अरावा  जो  औय रोग  थे, जो  सर्विंग थे, जैसे  एि  जेनयर  भैनेजय  थे, जो  
भरॊजखॊड  िॉऩय  प्रोजेक्ट भें थे, उनसे  िभऩल्सयी रयटामयभेंट ियामा  गमा था।  
 
…. सय, उस सभम ग्जन्होंने ननर्सम लरमा  था, उन  ऩय िायसवाई हु ई थी। च  ॊकि  सीएभडी  
िापी  ऩहरे  रयटामय  हो गए थे, इसलरए  ि ॊ ऩनी  उन  ऩय िायसवाई नहीॊ  िय  सिती  थी औय 
लभननस्री बी  िायसवाई नहीॊ  िय  सिती  थी, क्मोंकि िई  सार  फीत च ुिे  थे, उसिा  एि  ननमभ  
है। उसि े फाद जो  रोग  रयटामय  हु ए, श्री सॊतोष शभास, सीएभडी , जो  31 टदसॊफय, 2019 िो  
रयटामय  हु ए, तो लभननस्री ने  उन  ऩय िायसवाई िी  औय उनि े  िु छ ड्म ज  रुि े  हु ए हैं। इॊक्वामयी 
चरी  थी, जो  कि  अफ ि ॊ परीट  हो च ुि ी है। रयऩोटस अबी  फॊद लरपाप े  भें है। साथ ही भें जो  एि  
एग्जज क्म टट व डामयेक्टय  थे, उन  ऩय एि  भेजय  ऩैनाल्टी  – प्रोसीडडॊ ग हु ई, ग्जसिो लभननस्री 
ने  किमा , क्मोंकि एग्जज क्म टट व डामयेक्टय  औय उनसे  ऊऩय िे  ऩदों िे  अचधिारयमों ऩय 
लभननस्री िायसवाई िो  इनीलशएट  ियती  है। अत: उन  ऩय बी  िायसवाई हु ई औय उनि े  बी  ड्म ज  
रुि े  हैं। वे बी  सेभ-डे  रयटामय  हु ए थे।   
 
…इसि े अरावा  हभ रोगों ने  बी  इनटनसर  िायसवाई बी  िी।  भरॊजखॊड  िॉऩय  प्रोजेक्ट िे  
जेनयर  भेनेजय  उसभें इनवॉल्वड  थे। जेनयर  भेनेजय , पाइनेंस, एचसीएर  बी  इनवॉल्वड  थे 
औय बी  िई  रोग  थे। हभने  जेनयर  भेनेजय , भरॊजखॊड  िॉऩय  प्रोजेक्ट िो  िभऩरसयी  
रयटामभेंट टदमा। (verbatim pg 7) 
 
सय, श्री र्वनम लसॊह तो िम्ऩरसरयरी  रयटामयभेंट भें चरे  गए हैं। श्री र्ववेि बिऩाठी, 
जो  उसभें इनवॉल्वड  थे, उन  ऩय भेजय  ऩैनाल्टी  रगाई  गई थी औय उनिो  टलभसनेट 
िय टदमा गमा था। रेकिन  उन्होंने अऩीर  िी औय अऩीर  ियने  िे फाद वे अफ 
रोअय  ग्रेड भें आिय अफ कपय  िाभ िय यहे हैं।  
 
…सय, इसिे  अर ावा हभ र ोगों न े ि यामा ऩुलर स स्ट ेशन  भें एि  एप आईआय दज स 
ियामी थी। ….. सय , वषस 2022 भें इन ि ा एि  ऑड सय हु आ था , उसभें इन्होंने 
ड ेयेलर क्शन  ऑप  ड्म ट ी , एनसीएरएटी ने जो आयऩी है , उनि े  अगेंस्ट भें इन्होंने 
लरखा है that there was serious dereliction of duty.  औय आईफीफीआई  ने 
इन ि ो स चच त ि यन े िे  लर ए फोर ा है। मह र ास्ट  हु आ है। …… We will take action 
on that…. 
 
…..भहोदम, टेक्नो कपजीबफलरटी रयऩोटस भें जो रोग थे , उन ऩय एक्शन लरमा गमा। 
उसभें तीन रोगों ऩय ि ायसवाई हु ई है। उन भें से एि  ऩ वस सीएभड ी ग्ज न ि ी 

22 
 
 
र्वबागीम िामसवाही (भॊिारम द्वाया) ऩ र्स हो च ुि ी है औय रयऩोट स सफलभट  ि य 
दी गई है। द सये ज ीएभ ि ो ि म्ऩर सयी रयट ामयभेंट , एि एजीएभ इॊडस्रीमर 
इॊज ीनन मय ि ो रयभ वर  फ्रॉ भ सर्वसस कि मा गमा।  
 
……भहोदम, च  ंफक मह भैटय सीफ ीआई के ऩास च र ा गमा है, इसशर ए हभ उनसे ब ी ऩ छ र ेंगे।”  
 
 
45. The r epresentatives of the Ministry of Mines , during the course of oral 
evidence, gave further clarifications on the enquiries conducted against the erring 
officials:  
“Sir, we have conducted an inquiry.  …..  
 
……There are multiple inquiry officers. In the case of the main 
person who was piloting the project, inquiry officer was Mr. 
Sarangi…… This was conducted by the Chief Vigilance Officer 
of the HCL…….  सय , सीवीओ ने  मह इॊक्वामयी िी है। श्री सयिाय ने  मह 
इॊक्वामयी िी है। It is a very detailed inquiry report. उसभें साप -साप  
मह येफ्रेक्ट हु आ है कि िौन -िौन  ग्जम्भेदाय है। In Board, there are 
large number of Members. But only few people were piloting 
the project and that has been identified in that. There are 
about nine officers who have been identified and accordingly, 
the action is being taken. Not all of them are responsible to 
the same extent. But we have taken action against all of 
them. 9 रोगों िी आइडेंटटकपि े शन हु ई है, but that is based on the 
detailed inquiry. Later on, the sanctioning was done….  
 
….. सय , फोड स िे  प्रस्ताव भें ऐसा िु छ न हीॊ लर खा है कि  उन्होंन े आऩनत 
िी। ….. सय , इसिी हभ जाॉच  िय रेंगे। वैसे तो सबी  अपसयों िी जाॉच  हु ई 
थी, जो   बी  इसभें सग्म्भलरत थे।….. सय , जहाॊ  ति भुझे भार  भ है, मह 
र्वषम भॊिारम  भें नहीॊ  आमा था। जफ  सीवीसी िी ि ॊ परेंट आई, तफ मह 
र्वषम ऩहरी  फाय भॊिारम  भें आमा।  
 
….सय, ज ैसा फक आऩको ऩत ा है फक मह फ हु त  ही गम्ब ीय भसर ा है औय 
सयकाय को 200 कयोड़ रु ऩमे का नुकसान हु आ है। इस प्वषम भें ज ैसे ही 
प्वब ाग को इसके फ ाये भें ऩत ा च र ा, उसी सभम इंक्वामयी बफ ठामी गमी। 

23 
 
 
हभाया ज ो प्रोसीज य होत ा है, उसके र्हसाफ  से प्वस्ज र ेंस भें इंक्वामयी की गमी। 
ज ो ब ी दोषी र ोग थे, उनके खख र ाप  कायसवाई की गमी है। इसभें कोई दो याम 
नहीं है मा इसभें कोई संश म का स्थान नहीं है फक ऑडड ट ने ज ो ऩामा है, वह 
बफ ल्कु र  ठीक ऩामा है। ऑडड ट ऑथोरयटीज़ ने ब ी फ हु त  अच्छा काभ फकमा फक 
वे इस प्वषम को हभायी नज य भें र ाए। उसी र्हसाफ  से हभने आगे कायसवाई 
कयत े हु ए ज ो अप सय थे, उनके खख र ाप  कायसवाई की है औय इसके अर ावा ज ो 
कं ऩनी है, उसके खख र ाप  ब ी हभने कायसवाई श ुरू की है। सीफ ीआई को ब ी 
इसभें के स यस्ज स्टय कयने के शर ए कहा गमा है।  
 
(IV)  Salvage value of the plant 
 
46. HCL, in a written reply to the Committee , submitted that t he COT plant at 
MCP could not be commissioned. On termination of the contract, HCL ha d encashed 
the Bank Guarantee of  Rs.8.49 crore on 28.09.2020 against Security Deposit of the 
contract.  The Company had also filed a claim of Rs .235.17 crore before the RP in 
the NCLT, Chennai against M/s STPL. the latest position as submitted by HCL to the 
Committee was as under : 
"Hon‟ble NCLAT vide its order dated 07.10.2021 has ordered for stay 
of Hon‟ble NCLT order dated 09.08.2021 i.e. order for initiation of 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP)." 
 
47.    HCL further  submitted the following additional information regarding  the 
actions taken by the Company against M/s STPL: 
“HCL has initiated legal actions against M/s STPL. The legal actions 
taken by HCL in this regard are as under: 
(i) HCL has filed a complaint at Karaya Police Station, Kolkata 
against M/s STPL Directors and others. 
(ii) The Karaya Police Station, Kolkata lodged the FIR on 
05.08.2022 only after the  directions from the Hon‟ble Court against 
M/s Star Trace Private Limited, based on the Petition of HCL. 
(iii) HCL had taken up the matter with the Superintendent of Police, 
CBI, Jabalpur (MP) on 10th December, 2020. Thereafter, the CBI, 
New Delhi took up the Case. 
(iv) The Contract with M/s STPL has been terminated on 31.08.2020. 

24 
 
 
 
(v) CBI, AC -II, New Delhi has registered RC vide FIR No. 
RC2172022A0007 dated 31.08.2022. 
(vi) HCL has blacklisted M/s STPL. 
 
(vii) HCL has issued a Notice of Rejection to M/s STPL on account 
of Unaccomplished/incomplete project. 
(viii) HCL has issued a Notice for the Demand of Compensation towards 
costs and  expenses incurred by HCL in respect of failed and/ or 
unaccomplished project. 
(ix) HCL has filed a claim of Rs. 235.16 Cr for non -performance as per 
contractual terms & conditions, under Form -F “Proof of claim by Creditors 
(other than Financial  Creditors & Operations Creditors) [Under Regulation 
9A of the Insolvency & Bankruptcy  Board of India (Insolvency Resolution 
Process for Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016]. ”  
 
48.     HCL, during the course of oral evidence , submitted the following regarding 
the cost of plant at MCP: 
“सय, हभने  एि िभेटी  गटठत ियि े स्टडी ियामी थी औय इस तयीि े िे 
आयएॊडडी  प्रोजेक््स िो हभ टेिअऩ  नहीॊ  िय यहे हैं, जो  कि प्र वन  
टेक्नोरॉजी  िे नहीॊ  हैं औय ि ॊ ऩनी िी ग्स्थनत बी  ऐसी नहीॊ  थी, उस सभम 
बी  नहीॊ  थी औय आगे बी  नहीॊ  यही कि हभ रोग  इस तयीि े िा वेंचय ियें, 
िोई नई  चीज  ऩय इतना  खचस रें तो प्रॉऩय ड्म  डडलरजेंस ियािय  ही फ्म च य 
भें िबी  होगा, मह एसओऩी फनाने  िा िाभ हभ रोगों ने  किमा है कि ऐसा 
हो कि बर्वष्म भें जफ  इस तयह िा खचास हो तो इस ऩय प्रॉऩय ड्म  
डडलरजेंस होना  चाटहए।  सय, एि भ ल्माॊि न  ियामा था औय 30 ियोड़ 
उन्होंने फतामा था।……. 
 
…. सय , 280 ियोड़ रुऩमे (िय सटहत ) िा ऑडसय था। उसभें दो सार िा 
ऑऩयेशन एॊड भेग्न्टनेंस बी था। वह 85 ि योड़ था। ट ोट र  इॊक्र  डड ॊग दी ट ैक्स 
195 ियोड़ िा प्रोजेक्ट था औय उसभें जो  िाभ किमा था , उसि े  अगेंस्ट भें 
165 ियोड़ िा क्रेभ उनिा था , उसि े  अगेंस्ट भें हभ रोगों ने , 158 ियोड़ 
(फेलसि  ब ुगतान -फैंि गायॊटी जो इनि ै श िी गई )  िा आउटफ्रो (ऩेभेंट 
रगबग 120 ियोड़ , रामग्ब्रटी रगबग 39 ि योड़ ज ो कि  फुक्स ऑप  
अिाउन््स भे है ) है। 
…. सय, हभाया आउटफ्रो हु आ है।….  

25 
 
 
 
…सय, वह तो हु आ ही न हीॊ। ऑऩयेशन  एॊड  भेग्न्ट न ेंस तो हु आ ही न हीॊ। ……. 
सय, फहु त साया लसर्वर  इॊफ्रास्र क्च य आटद तो रयिवय नहीॊ हो सिता। …. 
Sir, Design Engineering - Rs.8.50 crore, Equipment- Rs.132.84 
crore, erection, commissioning – Rs.28.52 crore.  All this 
comes to Rs.169.85 crore.  फािी दो सार  िा ओएॊडएभ था”  
 
49. In a written respo nse to the Committee, HCL , regarding the current value of 
the plant, submitted as under: 
  
“As per the last valuation report dtd 26.03.2021 done by Government 
approved valuer, the valuation of the MCP COT Plant including 
building, factory sheds, plant and machinery is Rs. 30.27 crore.” 
 
50. When asked by the C ommittee whether any timeline has been prepared by 
the Company to dispose of the COT plants constructed, HCL replied as under: 
        
“The tendering action for appointment of an external agency to 
assess the usefulness of COT plant at MCP is under process and the 
due date of opening of the bid is 24.07.2023. It may be noted that the 
entire case is under litigation under various forums and hence prior 
permission may be required from concerned agencies.”  
 
51. HCL, in a written information to the Committee , informed about the steps 
taken by the Company and the Ministry of Mines to ensure that such incidents are 
not repeated in the future: 
 
“Ministry of Mines has issued advisory to HCL for systemic 
improvement vide letter no -F.No Vig A05/6/2019 -Vig. 29/09/2022 
which in turn has been circulated within the organization vide letter 
no HR/Disc Cell/2023 dated 05.01.2023 for compliance. HCL is 
framing SOP (Standard Operating Procedure) through a committee, 
to en sure proper due diligence before implementing any new 
project.”  
 
------ 

26 
 
 
PART- II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
OVERVIEW 
 The present Audit Para 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021, examined by 
the Committee is related to imprudent decision  of Hindustan Copper Limited 
(HCL) to construct a full -scale Copper Ore Tailings (COT) beneficiation plant 
without adequately testing the pilot plant and verifying its feasibility or 
success. This decision led to a wasteful expenditure of Rs.158.05 crore.  HCL 
chose to utilize their by -product, Copper Ore Tailings (COT), by employing a 
beneficiation process to recover valuable materials like gold and silver. In 
January 2016, the Company awarded a contract worth Rs. 6.98 crore to M/s 
Star Trace Private Limited (STPL) through a competitive bidding process. This 
contract involved the design, supply, civil work, installation, commissioning, 
and operation of a pilot plant at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC). The pilot plant 
was intended for Research and Development (R& D) purposes, with a capacity 
to process 200 tonnes of COT per day. The project was expected to be 
completed within 12 months from commissioning, aimed at assessing the 
technical and commercial viability for potential commercial installation based 
on the results. 
2. Following the trial run stage of the KCC pilot plant, in May 2016, HCL 
decided to proceed with the establishment of a full -scale plant at Malanjkhand 
Copper Project (MCP). The full-scale plant was planned to handle 10,000 MT of 
COT per day, based  on preliminary findings from the KCC pilot plant.  
Subsequently, in January 2017, after evaluating the technical and commercial 
aspects of the project and receiving financial appraisal from SBICAP, HCL 
awarded M/s STPL a contract worth Rs. 280 crore (inclu ding Rs. 85 crore for a 
two-year operation and maintenance period) for setting of a 3.29 million tonne 
per annum Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant at MCP. This contract was 
awarded on a single tender basis. The project was scheduled to be completed 
by November 2017. The Committee, before finalizing their observations in their 

27 
 
 
report heard the views of the officers from C&AG who conducted the Audit, 
and also the views of the representatives of HCL and Ministry of Mines. The 
evidence of the stakeholders , the information and clarifications submitted by 
them, and after internal deliberations led the Committee to arrive at the 
conclusions and make suggestions as mentioned in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
WASTE TO WEALTH PROJECT 
3. The Committee note that the W aste to Wealth Project of HCL 
encompasses the C ompany's efforts to effectively manage and recover value 
from its waste streams. But the Committee find that i n their Annual Reports, 
HCL have stated that they recycle less than 5% of their internally generate d 
waste. During discussions with the Committee, representatives  of HCL  
emphasized the prevalence of copper ore tailings in their operations. The 
HCL's plan to install a plant to recover metals and minerals from copper ore 
tailings, was a step towards utili zing COT  and HCL should make efforts to 
recycle/process the remaining with due diligence for extracting of valuable 
materials. 
4. The Committee suggest that the Company should c onduct a detailed 
waste audit to identify all types of waste generated across H CL's operations to 
gain insights into waste composition, volume, and potential avenues for 
recovery. HCL should also focus towards d eveloping a circular economy to 
focus on minimizing waste generation, maximizing recycling and reusing 
opportunities, and re ducing dependence on landfill disposal.  The Committee, 
therefore recommend the Company to judiciously i nvest in technology , 
innovation, upgradation and process optimization to enhance the recovery 
rates of valuable metals and materials from waste streams  which can lead to 
increased revenue generation from waste products.  They should also make 
efforts for transfer of technology from appropriate quarters with foolproof 
mechanism. 
 

28 
 
 
 
OTHER EXAMPLES OF SUCH PROJECTS IN INDIA OR GLOBALLY 
5. The Committee are not happy to note that HCL justified their decision to 
proceed with the unproven technology based on claims from a specific 
company at a mining exhibition. HCL explained that due to the uniqueness of 
the project and the lack of precedent, a pilot plant was est ablished for testing 
before considering full -scale implementation. HCL stated the absence of 
proven technology in this specific domain globally.  However, the Company 
could not provide any information/record on the matter.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that before implementing  the project  of recovering valuable 
metals from copper ore tailings, the Company could have  conducted research 
and due diligence  for available technology/ process. The Committee is not 
convinced with the  version of HCL that no such info rmation/study/work is 
available in the country or abroad and therefore awarded the work to M/s STPL 
without exploring the availability of the required technology. The Company’s 
management, at any point of time  did not  consult the global copper mining 
leading companies. They also did not float Request for Proposal (RFP) for the 
purpose. It has come to the notice that certain copper mines in Mexico has 
conducted study for recovering the values in gold and silver out of copper  
tailings. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company should have 
explored global best practices,  and Request for Proposal (RFP) for extracting 
gold and silver from copper tailings would have been floated after consulting 
such Companies. The Committee would like to know the reaso ns of such 
omissions.  
ESTABLISHMENT OF PILOT PROJECT AT KHETRI 
6. The Committee note that HCL initiated the project based on the potential 
identified through initial examination and analysis. The pilot plant was 
established at KCC in collaboration with M/ s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL), 
Chennai. This plant, with a cost of Rs. 5.9 crore along with a success fee of Rs. 
1.5 crore, was based on technology provided by M/s STPL. The involvement of 
a single technology provider underscores the technical expertise re quired for 

29 
 
 
successful tailings processing.  The timeline for the establishment and 
operation of the pilot plant is  also crucial. The contract was signed on 
01.01.2016, the plant was inaugurated on 01.04.2016, and it was commissioned 
on 24.06.2016. The Committee believe that these dates indicate a relatively 
hasty implementation process. The pilot plant was meant to evaluate the 
technical feasibility of the mineral extraction process. The findings of the 
Technical Feasibility Report were presented to the Boar d in the 367th Board 
meeting on 16.01.2017. This finding would have eventually formed the basis  of 
decision-making process for setting up the full scale COT plant at MCP which 
has not done by HCL. This Committee would like to be apprised of the 
circumstances and reasons which compelled HCL to establish full fledged 
plant without waiting for results of Pilot Project.  
7. The Committee are  of the opinion that HCL should have conducted 
substantial comprehensive feasibility studies before initiating projects of such 
nature. A thorough assessment of technological viability, potential benefits, 
and alignment with the organization's goals should have also been carried out 
by the Company. The Committee believe that while the Ministry of Mines might 
not have had a d irect role in setting up the pilot project,  but their 
oversight/activities could have played a crucial role in ensuring projects  to 
align with national mineral resource strategies and regulations. The Committee 
therefore, stress upon  that the G overnment through their  representatives in 
the Board should  have kept a clos e watch over activities of PSU  since t heir 
input and scrutiny are vital in ensuring that various projects of PSUs under the 
Ministry of Mines are in line with rules, regulations and standard p ractices. 
Further, whenever Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is not available, they 
should stress upon formulation of SOP in a time bound manner.   
GROUNDS FOR CHOOSING M/s STPL FOR KCC 
8. From the information furnished to the Committee , it is clear that the 
decision to choose M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL) for the pilot project at 
Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) is based on a series of considerations, 
including their claimed expertise, previous interactions, and self -claimed 

30 
 
 
technology capabilities. The Committee find that M/s STPL claimed themselves 
to have  the requisite technology for extracting minerals from Copper Ore 
Tailings (COT) , which was reportedly made during the INDABA M ining 
Conference and Exhibition at Cape town in South Africa  and w as never 
verified. The claimed technology primarily involved Magnetic & Gravity 
separators with an emphasis on dry processes. The Committee note that no 
documentary supporting these claims were asked for/made available  before 
awarding the pilot project.  The Committee feel, that if documents would have 
been shared with, the matter would have been resolved ab-initio which was not 
done by HCL . The Committee, therefore, desire that such issues in future be 
shared with Ministry in time for proper guidance/direction. The Committee take 
serious note on the fact that M/s STPL was chosen for the pilot project based 
on their claimed expertise and awarding project without  documentary 
evidence to substantiate their claims raises concerns about the decision -
making process. The Committee, further feel that  a more rigorous evaluation 
and due diligence process, along with transparent documentation, would have 
enhanced the credibility and success of such projects.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the selection of a company for a s ignificant project 
should be based on comprehensive documentation , sufficient past experience 
and evidence of their claimed capabilities. The use of verbal claims should  
always be supported by technical documentation and studies.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons of such omissions.  
9. Further, t he choice of KCC as the site for the pilot project was 
influenced by various factors, including the lifting of 30,000 tonnes of COT 
from KCC by M/s STPL and the need for creating space at Khetri  tailing pond. 
These considerations, along with the potential for profitability, were likely 
played a role in choosing KCC as the project site.  The Committee further note 
that t he Sub Committee of Board of Directors (SCoBD) meetings provided 
recommendations for analyzing the business plan and credentials of the short-
listed qualified party, M/s STPL. The aim was to ensure a detailed evaluation 
before proceeding. However, the recommendations of SCoBD were not fully 
complied with, and instead, in the subseque nt meeting held on 15.04.2016, 
SCoBD noted that the Company had signed a contract agreement with M/s. 

31 
 
 
Star Trace Pvt Ltd, Chennai, for setting up of 200 tons per day pilot plant 
facility at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) for extracting minerals and  materials 
from copper ore tailings  lying at Malanjkhand and Khetri . The Committee 
would like to know the reason of not considering the recommendations of 
SCOBD and desire that due weightage should be accorded to  the 
recommendations of sub-committees of BOD in future.  
SETTING UP OF MALANJKHAND COPPER PROJECT (MCP) 
10. Despite the initial assessment that showed promising results in terms of 
mineral content from tailings, in the firm opinion of the Committee, it is vital to 
acknowledge that the project's viability and sustainability should be evaluated 
based on comprehensive data and analysis. The use of a three -day result of 
the feasibility study raises questions on working of BOD  and their reliability. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that all future projects should undergo 
in-depth and required feasibility  studies to ensure accurate projections and 
risk assessments, with due diligence and ward off misuse of money.  
11. The Committee from the timeline of events infer that the decision to 
establish the MCP was taken  through the 363rd and 367th Board meetings of 
HCL, with unanimous approval from the Board members. However, the 
Committee note  that the proposal was not sent to the Ministry  of Mines  for 
approval due to the empowered authority of the HCL Board to approve capital 
expenditures up to Rs .500 crore.  The Committee, therefore, desire that a 
proper SOP should be framed with checks and balances of power of Board for 
project upto Rs.500 crores , too, and there should be provision of  proper 
Governmental scrutiny to prevent potential discrepancies.   
12. The Committee observe that HCL's Internal Audit D epartment, in the case 
of MCP, focused primarily on the document review, and technical issues were 
not thoroughly assessed  rather ignored. This raises concerns about the  
effectiveness of internal audits in identifying and mitigating potential technical 
risks. The Committee , therefore, desire that  internal audit processes should 
include comprehensive technical issues too for addressing the 
issues/concerns in time.  

32 
 
 
13. The Committee note that HCL's hastiness in seeking Board approval for the 
full-scale MCP plant before commissioning of the pilot plant is a critical 
concern. To prevent such instances in the future, the Committee urge HCL that 
the Company should implement a s tringent decision -making process with 
professional acumenship that requires thorough commissioning, testing, and 
validation of pilot projects before seeking approval for large -scale 
installations. Further, the Ministry of Mines should also play a more active role 
in overseeing major projects initiated by HCL, especially when they involve 
significant investments and potential financial risks.  Though the responsibility 
of accurate data and information lies with the HCL Board , yet the Ministry 
should actively scrutinize project proposals and ensure that due diligence is 
conducted before giving approvals. Regular monitoring and periodic reviews 
of projects at the level of the Ministry of Mines will prevent any hasty decisions 
particularly for projects more than 100 crores.  
14. The Committee believe that the decision to engage SBI Capital Markets 
Ltd. (SBI -CAP) for financial appraisal was a step in the right direction. 
However, it is important to note that the scope of SBI -CAP's appraisal was 
based on inputs prov ided by HCL's Project and Technical teams. This 
indicates that SBI-CAP did not conduct an independent due diligence to verify 
the accuracy of the data. The Committee, would, therefore, like to be apprised 
as to why SBI -CAP did not undertake appraisal of pr oject independently and 
desire that financial appraisals should involve an independent assessment of 
financial p rojections, cost -benefit analysi s, and market trends to reach 
accurate financial conclusions and future projects undertaken by HCL and 
other similar organizations under the Ministry of Mines must be subjected to 
thorough scrutiny, transparent processes, and robust due diligence. 
AWARDING THE PROJECT ON SINGLE TENDER BASIS 
15. The Committee note that HCL received t wo bids  for setting up of COT 
plant at MCP , one from M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL)  and another from M/s 
Larsen & Toubro Limited (L&T). The Committee observe from the information 
furnished by the Company that M/s L&T's bid contained substantial deviations 
from the terms and conditions of the Request for Proposal (RFP) including a 

33 
 
 
longer project execution timeline (16 months instead of the required 8 
months), disagreement on the reclamation of old tailings from the tailing dam, 
absence of a performance guarantee, and differing payment terms . These 
deviations indicated that M/s L&T's bid did not fully align with the project's 
requirements. On the other hand, M/s STPL's bid adhered to all the terms and 
conditions of the RFP, indicating that they were willing to meet the project's 
specifications as outlined in the tender documents.  The Committee further 
note that M/s L&T raised concerns about conflict of interest related to M/s 
STPL, the pilot plant operator, being one of the two bidders. M/s L&T also 
alleged that necessary data had not been sha red by M/s STPL with them , 
which could impact the fairness of the bidding process. The Committee are of 
the view that this conflict of interest potentially compromised the integrity of 
the process of tendering.  
16. The Committee note that t he process  in a warding contract was not 
properly documented. The decision to award a project on a 'single tender 
basis' should be well -documented and based on provisions of General 
Financial Rules for maintaining transparency  and economy. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urge HCL to ensure that the tendering process is 
conducted according to established guidelines , SOP, regulations and rules in 
future so that the same withstand the scrutiny of oversight agencies. 
17. The Committee, f urther note that awarding the project to M/s STPL due 
to technical deviations in M/s L&T's bid was not proper.  For this, Pre -bid 
Meeting(s) could have taken place and thereafter, a fresh tender could have 
been floated  for maintaining transparenc y in accordance with established 
guidelines. The Committee, therefore, suggest the Ministry of Mines and the 
Company management to a ddress irregularities, improve procurement 
processes, and ensur e fair competition  and maintaining public trust while 
undertaking public projects. 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
SALVAGE VALUE OF THE COT PLANT 
 
18. The Committee note that the COT plant at MCP could not be commissioned 
and on termination of the contract, HCL had encashed the Bank Guarantee of 
Rs.8.49 crore on 28.09.2020 against Security Deposit of the contract  and 
blacklisted M/s STPL  which are positive step s indeed  towards recovering 
costs associated with the terminated contract . The Committee also note that 
the Company had also filed a claim of Rs.235.17 crore before the Resolution 
Process in the  NCLT, Chennai against M/s STPL , however, NCLAT vide its 
order dated 07.10.2021 ordered for stay o n NCLT order dated 09.08.2021 for 
initiating Corporate Insolvency  Resolution Process  (CIRP). The Committee 
further note that the tendering action for appointment of an external agency to 
assess the us efulness of COT plant at MCP was under process and the due 
date of opening of the bid was 24.07.2023, and also acknowledge the fact that 
the entire case is under litigation under various forums for which  prior 
permission are to be required from concerned agencies. The Committee desire 
that efforts should be made for vacation of stay by NCLAT and necessary 
permission should be taken for further action in the matter.  
 
19. The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should continue its efforts to 
recover losses , make informed decisions about the plant's salvage value, 
prevent similar incidents in the future, and maintain transparency and 
compliance throughout the process. The Committee would  also suggest the 
Company to c ontinue to actively engage in legal procee dings to recover the 
claimed amount and any additional costs incurred  and believe that HCL's 
approach of filing complaints, FIRs, and involving law enforce ment agencies 
against M/s STPL D irectors is necessary for holding parties accountable.  The 
Committee further opine that the valuation report prepared  by a G overnment-
approved value rs or other accredited ones  provide  a credible and reliable 
estimation of the plant's value and this report should be utilized as a reference 
point for making informed decision s about the plant's future.  Further, t he 
ongoing tendering action to appoint an external agency to assess the 
usefulness of the COT plant is a crucial step.  

35 
 
 
 
20.  The Committee have taken note of the fact that the Ministry of Mines 
issued an advisory to H CL for systematic improvements vide letter no. -F.No. 
Vig A05/6/2019 -Vig. 29/09/2022 which in turn got circulated within the 
organization for compliance and HCL was framing SOP (Standard Operating 
Procedure) through a Committee, to ensure proper due diligen ce before 
implementing any new project. In this regard, the Committee hope that the 
SOP would be framed soon  utilizing lessons from the fault of the Company 
which may serve as reference for other CPSUs  in preventing such action by 
them. The Department of P ublic Enterprises, Department of Economic Affairs, 
Department of Financial Services, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and other concerned Ministries/Departments having CPSUs 
may also be involved while framing SOP, if required. 
 
 
 
 
Disciplinary Action against erring Officials 
 
21. The Committee note that the setting up of COT plant at MCP was a case 
of deliberate misrepresentation of gold content in tailings to the Board of HCL, 
leading to a sign ificant financial loss for the G overnment. Though t he 
involvement of high -ranking officials, both serving and retired, has been 
identified and d isciplinary actions with a criminal investigation have been 
initiated, the Committee note that some officials are scot free due to retirement 
rules. Th e situation underscores the need for stronger internal controls, 
transparent investigations, and reforms to ensure accountability even post -
retirement. To address this issue,  the Committee are of the view that it's 
crucial to ensure a thorough, transparent , and timely investigation by the CBI 
while pursuing recovery of G overnment losses. Change in retirement rules, 
strengthening internal controls, promoting ethical behavio ur, and enhancing 
oversight mechanisms are necessary.  The Committe e also feel strongly  that 
CPSUs cannot be left totally independent in making such an important 
decisions involving investments of large scale, otherwise such incidents 
would be coming again and again. At this stage, the role of the nodal Ministr y 

36 
 
 
becomes important to create f ool proof ways and means to keep a watch over 
their activities and take necessary and timely intervention.  Therefore, the 
Committee urge both the Ministry of Mines and HCL to ensure  proactive policy 
reviews, and continuous monitoring of actions against wro ngdoers which will 
prevent future incidents and uphold transparency and accountability.  The 
Committee would also like to be appraised of the status of the CBI case(s) 
registered in the matter of disciplinary action against the officers of HCL, 
particularly FIR No. RC2172022A0007 lodged on 31.08.2022 by CBI on the 
basis of its enquiry/investigation. 
 
 
New Delhi:            Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
07 February, 2024                           Chairperson 
18 Magha, 1945 (S)                                  Committee on Public Undertakings 

37 
 
 
ANNEXURES-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2022-23)   
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY- FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 27 th March, 2023 from 1455 hrs. to 1535 
hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
 
 
3. Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
7. Shri Janardan Mishra 
8. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
9. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
11. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
  
            Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Anil Desai 
13. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
14. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
15. Dr. Anil Jain 
16. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
17. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
18. Shri M. Shanmugam 
      

38 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Chander Mohan            -                 Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar             -        Director 
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal                  -        Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal            -        Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR 
GENERAL 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy. C&AG (Comm.) & Chairman Audit Board 
 2. Dr. Kavita Prasad - Director General (Commercial Audit) 
 3. Ms. Suparna Deb - Director General of Audit 
4. Shri B.R. Mondal - Director General (Parliamentary Committee) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, COPU welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the O/o C&AG and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of briefing before the 
Parliamentary Committees. Thereafter, the representatives of O/o C&AG made a 
Power Point Presentation and briefed the Committee on 'Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG 
Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding unfruitful expenditure towards construction of 
Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant relating to Hindustan Copper Limited ' 
highlighting the issues that led to unfruitful expenditure of Rs. 158.05 crore.  The 
major reasons behind setting up the pilot project was to evaluate techno -commercial 
feasibility of Copper Ore Tailing Beneficiation Plant so that decision regarding setting 
up of commercial installation could be taken on the basis  of the results achieved. 
The representatives of C&AG informed the Committee about the Action Taken  Notes 
(ATNs), which was due in June 2022, has not been received till date. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members raised queries and sought 
clarifications on various aspects of the Audit Para which among other included the 
very concept of „ beneficiation process ‟, the manner i n which it  occurs, the  
engagement of M/s Star Trace Private Limited on pilot project basis and 
commissioning of a full scale plant a t Malanjkhand Copper Project (MCP) when the 
Pilot Project was yet to be commissioned. The Members also sought  clarification on 
two times extensions of the pilot project, additional expenditures incurred thereon, 
failure of pilot project at KCC in achieving  its envisaged parameters even after 33 

39 
 
 
months operation, the commercial as well as technical failure of the projects etc.  
The Members sought further clarification s on the role of Company Management and 
M/o Mines in issuing guidelines for addressing the lapses in decision making for 
construction of commercial plant without considering the results/findings of the 
ongoing pilot project and actions taken against the responsible officers. 
4. The representatives of the O/o C&AG responded to the queries except 
technical issues for which the Committee decided that the representatives of 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL)  and Ministry of Mines be called for further detailed 
deliberations at a later date. 
5. The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the O/o C&AG for briefing the 
Committee and sharing valuable information with the Committee on such an 
important subject.  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
/-----------/ 

40 
 
 
ANNEXURES-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th June, 2023 from 11 30 hrs. to 1 220 
hrs. in  Committee Room No. „2‟, Ground Floor, Block A, Extension to  Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar         -          Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. 
4. 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
7. Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Santosh Kumar               -          Director 
2. Shri G.C. Dobhal                    -          Additional Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal              -          Deputy Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan       -     Dy. C&AG (Commercial) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Dr. Kavita Prasad                           -     Director General (Commercial - I) 
3. Shri B.R. Mondal                            -     Director General (Parliamentary Committee) 
4. Shri Atul Prakash                           -     Principal Director  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
 
1. Sh. Arun Kumar Shukla                  -     CMD 
2. Sh. Sanjay Panjiyar-     Director (Operations) 
3. Sh. Ghanshyam Sharma                -     Director (Finance) 
4. Shri Ravi Gupta                              -     GM (Finance) 

41 
 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officers of C&AG at the 
sitting convened to take evidence of the representatives of Hindustan Copper 
Limited (HCL)in connection with examination of Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report 
No. 14 of 2021 pertaining to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) regarding „Unfruitful 
expenditure towards construction of Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant‟ . 
Representatives of C&AG made a brief presentation on the subject under 
consideration. 
(The representatives of HCL were then called in.) 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of HCL and drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality 
of evidence before the Parliamen tary Committees . Hon‟ble Chairperson enquired 
about the reasons behind investing in an unproven technology leading to unfruitful 
expenditure by the Company, steps taken by the Company for the recovery of the 
amount, initiatives by the Company to ensure suc h instances are not repeated in the 
future etc, 
4. Thereafter, the r epresentatives of the HCL made a presentation to the 
Committee on the subject  under consideration.HCL, then, made submission on the 
observations by the Audit as to why the contract was awa rded of the Malanjkhand 
Copper Project (MCP) has started before obtaining the findings of Pilot Project Khetri 
Copper Complex and that to a technically single bidder. 
5. The Members, then, raised various issues pertaining to Audit findings  such as 
the role of the Internal Audit Department of the Company, the reasons behind delays 
in remedial actions taken by the Company management etc. 
6. The representatives of the HCL clarified issues on which information was 
readily available with them. In respect of some  points for which information was not 
readily available, the Chairperson desired that written replies may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
/---------------------/ 
 
 

42 
 
 
ANNEXURES-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th June, 2023 from 1 225 hrs. to 1 300 
hrs. in  Committee Room No. „2‟, Ground Floor, Block A, Extension to  Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar        -          Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. 
4. 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
  
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Dr. Anil Jain 
6. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
7. 
8. 
Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Santosh Kumar               -          Director 
2. Shri G.C. Dobhal                    -          Additional Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal              -          Deputy Secretary 
 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan       -     Dy. C&AG (Commercial) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Dr. Kavita Prasad                           -     Director General (Commercial - I) 
3. Shri B.R. Mondal                            -     Director General (Parliamentary Committee) 
4. Shri Atul Prakash                           -     Principal Director  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
1. Sh. Vivek Bharadwaj                      -     Secretary 
2. Sh. Upendra Chandra Joshi           -     Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. Sanjeev Verma                        -     Director 

43 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officers of 
C&AG at the sitting convened to take evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Mines in connection with examination of Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 
of 2021 pertaining to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) regarding „Unfruitful 
expenditure towards construction of Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant‟. 
(The representatives of Ministry of Mines were then called in.) 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Mines and drew 
their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker ' regarding 
confidentiality of evidence before the Parliamentary Committees . Hon‟ble 
Chairperson emphasized on important aspects of the subject under consideration 
and the lack of monitoring by the controlling Ministry. Chairperson while emphasizing 
on theof role, responsibility and recovery by the Ministry; also enquired about  why no 
independent authority was involved in preparation of Technical Feasibility Report 
(TFR). 
4. Thereafter, the r epresentatives of the Ministry gave clarification on various 
aspects of commissioning of Malanjkhand Copper Project (MC P) while the results 
from Khetri Copper Complex were still awaited. The representatives of the Ministry of 
Mines agreed that there might have been some apparent malafide intention in the 
case under consideration.  
5. The Members, then, raised various issues such as the future of the defunct 
plants and their disposal, role of the Government nominee on the Board of Directors 
of HCL, steps taken by the Ministry for the recovery of money, future course of action 
of the Ministry so that such incidents are not repeated in the future, role of SBI 
Capital Markets in the financial appraisal of the project etc. 
6. The representatives of the Ministry clarified issues on which information was 
readily available with them. In respect of some points for which information was not 
readily available, the Chairperson desired that written replies may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
7. The Committee also discussed and decided to undertake a local study visit to 
Haridwar on 07, July 2023. 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
 
/---------------------/ 
 

44 
 
 
ANNEXURES-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 05th February, 202 4 from 1 500 hrs. to  
1545 hrs. in Committee Room No. „2‟, Ground Floor, Extension to  Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar         -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Anil Firojiya 
3. 
4. 
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
5. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
7. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
8. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
10. Dr. Anil Jain 
11. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
13. Shri Binoy Viswam 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy. C&AG (Commercial) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri Deepak Kapoor - Director General (Commercial) 
3. Shri B.R. Mondal - Director General (Parliamentary Committee) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 
1. Shri Ali Raza Rizvi - Secretary (Public Enterprises) 
2. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan - Joint Secretary (Administration) 
3. Shri Mahender Kumar Jjjainia - Dy. Director General (Survey) 

45 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF CONTROLLER GENERAL OF ACCOUNTS 
 
1. Shri Shyam S. Dubey - Controller General of Accounts 
2. Smt. Aastha Saxena Khatwani - Add. CGA 
3. Smt. Tripti Patra Ghosh - Joint CGA 
4. Shri Neeraj Kumar - Joint Director (NIC) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda for the sitting.  The Committee then considered and 
adopted the draft report on „ Unfruitful expenditure towards construction o f Copper 
Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant relating of Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL)  in 
connection with its Based on C&AG  Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 ‟ 
without any changes/modifications. The draft report was already sent to the C&AG 
and conc erned Ministry/Department for factual verification in anticipation of 
presenting the report in Budget session, 2024 and the Chairperson had finalized the 
report on the basis of factual verification as suggested by C&AG and concerned 
Ministry/Department. The Committee authorized the Chairperson for presenting the 
report during the current session of the Parliament. 
(The representatives of DPE and CGA were then called in.) 
XXX    XXX   XXX   XXX 
 XXX    XXX   XXX   XXX 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 