 
 
 
6
 
 
FINANCING OF RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS BY INDIAN RENEWABLE ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT AGENCY LIMITED (BASED ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT NO. 12 OF 2015)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS
 
(2020
-
21)
 
 
SIXTH   REPORT
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 


ii
 
 
SIXTH REPORT
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS
 
(2020
-
21)
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
FINANCING OF RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS BY INDIAN RENEWABLE ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT AGENCY LIMITED (BASED ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT REPORT NO. 12 OF 2015) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on 
the 
Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty
-
Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on
 
Financing of Renewable Energy Projects by 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (based on Performance Audit Report No. 12 of 
2015)]
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
29.01.2021
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
29.01.2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
January
, 202
1
/  
Magha
, 1942 (Saka)
 
 


iii
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
                        
Page No.
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020
-
21)
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report...........................................................................................
 
1
-
17
 
CHAPTER  II
 
Observations/ Recommendations which have been  accepted by the Gover
n-
ment...................................................................
.........
 
18
-
42
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government
 
R
epl
ies.....................................................................
 
43
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration 
 
44
-
47
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
 
final replies of the Government are still awaited.............................   
 
48
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
ANNEXURE
-
I    
Loan Agreement
                                      
 
 
 
           
    
 
49
-
50
 
ANNEXURE
-
II   
Status of the projects as observed by Audit
       
                            
 
 
  
51
 
ANNEXURE
-
III
   
List of Projects sanctioned during last quarter of 2017
-
18
             
  
52
 
ANNEXURE
-
IV
  
Letter of MIS HCL Agro limited
         
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
53
-
54
 
ANNEXURE
-
V
   
Details of smaller projects upto 5MV 
Sector
-
wise and year
-
wise
   
  
55
 
ANNEXURE
-
VI
  
List of projects upto 
10
 
MV Sector
-
wise and year
-
wise for last 4 
 
 
 
y
ears
 
                                                         
                         
 
           
56
-
57
 
ANNEXURE
-
VII
  
Status of RTS capacity
 
(MW) sanctioned and achievements
 
   
58
-
59
 
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
I                Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 07.1.2021    
                              
60
-
61
 
 
II              Analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/
 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty
-
Second Report of 
 
CoPU (2020
-
21) on 
Financing Of Renewable Energy Projects by
 
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited
 
(based on Performance Audit Report No. 12 of 2015).....................                
      
62
 
 
 
 
 

iv
 
 
COMPOSITION OF 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2020
-
21)
 
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi       
-
        
Chairperson
 
 
Members
 
LOK SABHA
 
2.   Dr.Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
 
3.   Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
 
4.   Smt. K. Kanimozhi
 
5.   Shri Raghu Ramakrishna 
Raju Kanumuru
 
6.   Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
 
7.   Shri Arjunlal Meena
 
8.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
 
9.   Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
 
10.  Prof. Saugata Roy
 
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
14.  Shri 
Uday Pratap Singh 
 
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
16.  Shri Prasanna Acharya 
 
17.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
 
18.  Shri Anil Desai 
 
19.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
 
20.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur
 
21.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
22.  Sh
ri M. Shanmugam
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat
 
 
Shri R.C. Tiwari
 
          
-
     
Joint Secretary
 
Shri Srinivasulu Gunda
 
          
-
     
Director
 
 
Shri G.C. Prasad
 
          
-
     
Additional Director
 

v
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
          
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2020
-
21) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
 
in the Twenty
-
second Report of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Financing of Renewable Energy 
Projects by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (based on Performance Audit 
Report No. 12 of 2015).
 
 
 
2.
 
The Twenty
-
second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2018
-
19) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8 February, 2018.  The Action 
Taken Replies to all the 16 Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the 
Mini
stry of New and Renewable Energy on 29 November, 2018.
 
 
3.
 
The Committee (2020
-
21) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 
7 
January
, 202
1
. 
 
 
4.       The observations/recommendations of the Committee based on the analysis of the a
ction 
taken reply submitted by the Ministry on Twenty
-
second report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
have been given in Chapter
-
1 of this Report.
 
 
5.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
given by the Commit
tee in their Twenty
-
second Report (16th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II.
 
 
 
New Delhi
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
MEENAKASHI LEKHI
 
7 January
, 202
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
Chairperson
 
1
7
 
Paush
a, 1942 (S)
 
 
                  
                 
Committee on Public Undertakings
 
 
 

 
 
 
R E P O R T
 
CHAPTER  I
 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee as contained in the Twenty Second Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertaking on 
"Financing of Renewable Energy Projects by In
dian Renewable 
Energy Development Agency Limited (based on Performance Audit Report No. 12 of 2015)"
 
which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2018.
 
 
2.
 
Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all t
he sixteen 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the report. These have been categorized as follows: 
-
 
 
    
(i)
 
Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Sl.Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,12,13,15 &
 
16                                                
 
(Chapter II)
 
(Total: 14)
 
    
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies.                       
 
NIL                                
                                            
 
 
(Chapter III)
 
(Total: NIL)
 
 
    
(iii) 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration.   
 
Sl.No. 8&
14                                                                          
 
 
(Chapter IV)
 
(Total: 2)
 
 
    
(iv) 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                     
Sl.No. NIL
 
(Chapter V)
 
(Total: NIL)
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee desire that the response
 
to their comments in Chapter
-
I of the Report should 
be furnished to them expeditiously. They further desire that the final replies in respect of the 
Observations/Recommendation of the Committee may be furnished to the Committee in a 
comprehensive manner a
nd within the prescribed time period.
 
 
4.
 
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in succeeding paragraphs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2
 
 
 
Contribution of IREDA in development of Renewable
 
Energy(RE)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1 in Original Report)
 
 
5. 
 
The Committee in their Twenty
-
second Report had observed and recommended on contribution of 
IREDA in development of Renewable Energy as follows: 
-
 
 
"
IREDA, a GOI public finance institution established in 1987 under the Companies Act for financing 
RE and energy efficiency projects has so far approved financial assistance to 2382 clean energy projects 
supporting green capacity addition of more than 7525 
MW, with loan commitment of Rs. 48,832 crore and 
disbursement of Rs. 27,790 crore, which has helped in supporting the growth of Renewable Energy sector in 
India. The Committee noted that as per 
 
MNRE’s Report on status of implementation of Green Energy 
com
mitments for financing of Renewable Energy Projects, IREDA is second leading NBFC in RE sector 
amongst the leading financial institutions in the Country in terms of total 
 
amount sanctioned and total amount 
disbursed during the period 15.2.2015 to 30.9.201
6 after L&T Infrastructure Finance Company limited. 
 
The Committee note that renewable energy installed capacity as on 31 December, 2016 was 50,068 
MW and it is targeted to achieve 175 GW RE
 
capacity by 2022. IREDA being Government re
-
financing 
agency has 
a greater role to play in this regard. While taking note of the role and the contribution made by 
IREDA, the Committee feels that still a lot needs to be done particularly in view of the ambitious targets of 175 
GW RE capacity by 2022. Not only that, in th
is era of competition, IREDA being a commercial entity and with 
other major 
 
private layers in field, sustainable efforts are required by IREDA to maintain its position in the 
market. The Committee hope and trust that IREDA would take all the desired initi
atives and emerge as a lead 
player in RE re
-
financing sector, thereby promoting the growth of renewable energy sector which would help in 
reduction of carbon emissions in the Country."
 
 
6. 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken 
reply have stated as follows: 
-
 
 
"The Committee’s suggestions have been noted for guidance. IREDA would make all efforts to ensure 
that pace of renewable energy in the country would not 
 
slow down for want of financing. It is further informed 
that Renewabl
e Energy 
 
installed capacity has been enhanced to 71.85 GW as on 31.08.2019 and IREDA has 
sanctioned and disbursed cumulative loan of Rs. 62,077.87 Crore & Rs.38297.63 Crore respectively as on 
31.08.2018."
 
 
7.
 
The Committee appreciate that IREDA has not on
ly taken the recommendations/observations 
of the Committee in right perspective with regard to strengthening their role in achieving the 
ambitious target of 175 GW Renewable Energy capacity by the year 2022 but has also made a 
commitment to make all effort
s to ensure that the pace of renewable energy in the country would not 
slow down for want of financing. The Committee have however noted that the renewable energy 
capacity installed as on 31
st
 
December 2016 was 50,068 MW which as on 31.08.2019 had gone up 
to 
71.85 GW.  This implies that only 21.782 GW of renewable energy has been added during a period of 3 
years from 2016 to 2019 and thus about 103.15 GW more capacity of RE still were left to be added in 
the next 3 years after 2019 to meet the target in the
 
year 2022.  Given this slow pace of capacity 
addition upto August, 2019, the Committee are constrained to express their apprehension as to 
whether the ambitious target of achieving 175 GW RE capacity would be met by the year 2022. The 
Committee therefore 
desire that more structured efforts need to be made vigorously in this regard by 
all concerned and IREDA being a major player must take all necessary initiatives to strengthen and 

3
 
 
support the government’s plan in meeting the ambitious target of 175 GW rene
wable energy by the 
year 2022.
 
 
Recovery of the Loan
 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5 in Original Report)
 
 
8.
 
The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed and recommended on Recovery of 
Loans as follows:
-
 
 
"As per Para No. 4.9 and 4.10 of the C&AG Rep
ort during the year 2008
-
09 to 2012
-
13, IREDA 
settled 29 cases under One Time Settlement (OTS). So far as sector wise number of these 29 OTS 
cases is concerned, 10 related to wind, 4 each in solar and briquetting, 3 each in waste to energy, co
-
generation a
nd biomass and 2 in small
-
hydro. In these 29 cases, the amount due for recovery on 
account of principal on interest, etc. was Rs. 446.70 crore, out of which recovery of Rs. 208.85 crore 
was made through OTS. Hence, IREDA sacrificed Rs. 237.85 crore, that i
s more than half its dues, on 
account of OTS, i.e. Rs. 8 crore on account of principal, Rs. 187.06 crore on account of interest and 
Rs. 42.79 crore on account of other dues such as liquidated damages, incidental charges, etc.
 
 
As per the Audit findings, ou
t of 17 OTS cases selected by then for scrutiny, in 14 cases IREDA 
deviated from the OTS/financing guidelines. Such deviations include not conducting physical 
inspection before the release of interim loan, OTS even to the willful defaulters, etc. The exami
nation 
of the Committee reveal that in many cases, interim disbursements were made multiple times to the 
parties without creation of mortgage. Not only that rescheduling of the projects was sanctioned at the 
interim disbursement stage. To mention a few ins
tances 
viz. 
in case of M/s Sree Suryachandra 
Synergetic Pvt. Ltd, four interim disbursements were made and after third interim disbursement, re
-
schedulement of the project was sanctioned. In case of M/s Purti Sakhar Karkhana Ltd, two interim 
disbursements 
were made; in another case M/s Jain Farms and Resorts Ltd. the disbursement was 
made without inspection of the project. In some of the cases, Trust and Retention Account was not 
created and additional security was not made in case of repeated default by th
e borrowers. Besides 
as pointed out by Audit, adequate mechanism was not there to assess the wealth of the guarantor 
independently.
 
 
In addition to above, the Committee find from the data furnished by Ministry/IREDA, that a number of 
projects after sanctio
ning of the loan are being abandoned. During the year 2014
-
15 out of 61 projects 
sanctioned by IREDA, only 20 projects could be commissioned and 18 projects were dropped. During 
the year 2015
-
16 there was some improvement with regard to the abandoned proje
cts as the data 
indicate that 7 projects were abandoned. With regard to commissioned projects, the position 
worsened as against 108 sanctioned projects, only 34 were commissioned. The Committee conclude 
from the aforesaid scenario that the whole approach o
f IREDA in sanctioning loan is somewhat 
flawed.
 
 
To improve the situation, IREDA has stated that certain measures have been taken viz. adjustment of 
pending dues from the next disbursement for under implementation projects and evoking of personal 
guarantee
 
which require court’s intervention. The Committee observe that these steps are the last 
resort for the recovery of loan for a failed project. Most important on the part of IREDA is to put in 
place an effective mechanism for ascertaining the viability of t
he projects for which loans are 

4
 
 
sanctioned. Besides the system of relaxing of norms also need a review. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that measures like OTS must be utilized sparingly and definitely not for willful 
defaulters. IREDA, being a
 
financial institution, must follow the benchmarks of financial prudence and 
monitor performance of repayments so as to recall loans before those turn into NPAs."
 
 
9. 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken reply have stated as 
follows:
-
 
 
"The recovery through OTS in 29 cases was effected during the period under observation of Audit as 
per the approved OTS Policy. While arriving at the settlement amount due consideration has been 
given to the status of the project, valuation of s
ecurities i.e. project assets/ collateral securities as 
obtained from government approved independent valuers and networth of personal/ corporate 
guarantors to the loan duly certified by practicing chartered accountant.  The summarized status of 
due amount
 
in cases where OTS were sanctioned, recoveries through OTS, sacrifice for these 29 
cases is given as under:
-
 
 
 
(Amount in Crore)
 
Particular
 
Total dues
 
Recovered
 
Sacrifice
 
Principal
 
 
18,117.22
 
17,316.64
 
800.58
 
Interest dues
 
 
22,239.55
 
3,533.57
 
18,705.98
 
LD & Incidental charges
 
4,313.60
 
34.66
 
4,278.94
 
Total
 
 
44,670.37
 
20,884.87
 
23,785.5
 
 
 
It may be seen from the above table that IREDA has recovered most of the principal outstanding and 
the sacrifice on principal was only Rs. 800.58 Crore which is 4.41% 
only. The sacrifice on principal 
was mainly in case of Briquetting Sector and Waste to Energy Sector where the projects have 
adversely suffered due to technological issues.
 
 
As regard the observation on conducting physical inspection, release of interim lo
an, it is to inform 
that the systems and procedure have been strengthened and financing guidelines modified. It is 
ensured that the physical inspections are carried out pre and post sanction of the project loan and 
also during implementation of the project
. Generally lender’s engineers are engaged to monitor the 
physical progress on the site and based on their reports only the disbursement are made in the 
project sanction. The policy of interim disbursement has been modified and no interim disbursement 
befo
re the creation of mortgage is made unless bank guarantee is obtained. As regards monitoring of 
Trust and Retention Account (TRA), the recovery team is strengthened and they are now closely 
monitoring the TRA Accounts.
 
 

5
 
 
Abandoned Projects indicate that the
 
projects were either not financed by IREDA or were dropped by 
the developers. There could be many reasons for it relating to policy, regulation, land acquisition, 
evacuation, etc. When projects are sanctioned, conditions for pre
-
execution, pre
-
disbursemen
t and 
compliance of security are imposed. The project will not move forward if it is not able to comply with 
these conditions. As a lender it is not prudent on our part to push a developer to take disbursement or 
push the project forward in case some of th
ese conditions are not met.
 
 
The appraisal process for sanction of the loan has been strengthened. The due diligence of the 
project loan application is carried out by reviewing the CIBIL Status of the promoter/guarantor, 
external rating of the project by t
he rating agencies like CRISIL, ICRA, CARE, India Rating and 
Brickwork. Internal credit rating is also carried out. Based on the assessment of the rating of the 
project, the interest rate and security matrix is finalized. The financing guidelines are modif
ied from 
time to time  it has been decided not to take exposure of more than 50% of project cost in respect of 
small hydro and cogeneration sector which are perceived more risky in nature. Biomass Sector is not 
being sanctioned any loan for the more than 5
 
years since the projects in the Biomass Sector are not 
performing well.
 
 
As regards, the recommendation of the Committee that OTS must be utilized sparingly, the same is 
noted for guidance and it is assured that this would be used sparingly. IREDA shall 
approach NCLT/ 
file recovery proceeding before DRT/ initiate action under SARFEASI Act for resolution of Non
-
 
Performing Assets."
 
 
10.
 
The Committee note from the action taken replies that in the 29 One Time Settlement (OTS) 
cases, IREDA had sacrificed a t
otal of Rs.23,785.5 crores which is about 53.25% of the total dues of 
Rs.44,670.37 crores. The 4.41% sacrifice as mentioned by MNRE  in the reply is only in the case of 
dues settled on account of Principal amount.  On the other side, the sacrifice on accou
nt of Interest 
dues is quite huge considering the fact that out of total  interest dues of Rs.22,239.55 crores, sacrifice 
of Rs.18,705.98 crores was made which is 84.11% and astonishingly, IREDA lost almost all amount of 
“LD & Incidental charges” as out of
 
the total dues of Rs.4,313.60 crores on this account, they 
sacrificed Rs. 4,278.94 crores which is 99.20%.  The Committee are dismayed to note the sacrifice of 
such a huge amount by IREDA and strongly feel that the systemic flaw which led to this scenario
 
needs to be corrected immediately and a system of fixation of responsibility and accountability for 
non
-
adherence of financial norms also needs to be put in place. The Committee therefore reiterate 
their recommendation that willful defaulters are not enco
uraged and the planned and deliberate 
defaults resulting in siphoning of hard earned public money by unscrupulous elements are fully 
avoided. The Committee reiterate their observation that IREDA being a financial institution, must 
follow the benchmarks of 
financial prudence and monitor constantly the performance of repayments 
so as to recall loans well before those turn into NPAs.
 
 
Status of IREDA
-
Applicability of RBI Norms
 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8 in Original Report)
 
 
11.
 
The Committee in their 
Twenty
-
second Report had observed and recommended on contribution of 
IREDA in development of Renewable Energy as follows: 
-
 
 
“It has been stated in the Audit Para that while scrutinizing IREDA’s application for categorizing it as 

6
 
 
an infrastructure finance 
company, RBI noticed that it was exceeding the permissible exposure limits. 
RBI, therefore, directed (September 2010) IREDA to submit the time frame within which IREDA would 
comply with RBI norms of December 2006. The Ministry/IREDA has stated that IREDA d
id not apply 
to RBI for infrastructure Finance Company status. On a specific query as to whether IREDA had ever 
applied for being designated as Infrastructure Finance Company, RBI in the written reply has stated 
that IREDA had applied for classifying itsel
f as IFC vide its letter no. Accts/26/NBFC/96
-
97/IREDA/VI 
dated March 12, 2010. The Committee are unable to comprehend how the Ministry/IREDA straight 
away denied applying to RBI regarding the infrastructure status even when Audit in the replies has 
catego
rically mentioned about this and RBI in the replies specifically quoted the relevant letter no. and 
date. The Committee take strong objection to the way they have been misinformed about the position 
in this regard. They would like Ministry/IREDA to explain
 
the position.
 
 
As stated by RBI, IREDA is currently categorized as NBFC Non Deposit Accepting
-
Systemically 
Important Company. The Committee have been apprised that the exposure norms of RBI with respect 
to single borrower/group of borrowers do not apply t
o IREDA being a Government NBFC not 
accepting/holding public deposit in terms of RBI circular. As stated by the Ministry/ IREDA, IREDA’s 
Board of Directors has approved the exposure norms for NBFC i.e. single borrower 15%+5% of net 
worth and for group borr
owers 25%+10% of net worth. The Committee further note that as per the 
position indicated by the RBI, in view of the role being played by Government companies in 
discharging social obligations, norms prescribed by their respective supervisory 
Departments/M
inistries and to avoid dual control and regulation over them, the Bank had, in 
consultation with the Central Government, decided to grant them exemption from key regulatory 
provisions vide Notifications dated January 13, 2000 and October 1, 2002. While app
reciating the 
spirit of the relaxations granted by RBI to NBFC, the Committee feel that these relaxations need to be 
exercised sparingly after due diligence and with proper justifications. In case of IREDA, Audit has 
pointed out that the prescribed credit 
exposure limit was exceeded in 29% of selected cases. Not only 
that IREDA exceeded its own relaxation norms, for example IREDA exceeded the exposure limit even 
to 56 per cent in case of M/s Tata Power Company Limited (Project No. 1838), as pointed out by 
A
udit, besides deviations of various kinds made in 40 per cent of selected cases. Not only that, IREDA 
was operating an OTS scheme continuously without a fixed timeframe, which could promote a culture 
of non
-
 
payment, as rightly observed by Audit in its rep
ort. Above all, as observed in preceding paras 
of the report, many of the projects after interim disbursement were abandoned, the percentage of 
commissioned projects being only 31 per cent during 2015
-
16, thus serving little social obligations.
 
 
The 
Committee find that RBI is in the process of bringing all deposit taking systemically important 
Government owned companies under the provision of RBI’s prudential norms framework, in view of 
the high systemic risk they can pose on account of their large ba
lance sheets and their 
interconnectedness in the broader financial system besides their ability to impact financial markets 
being recipients from the budgets. While taking note of the large scale relaxation being granted by 
IREDA as elaborated above, the C
ommittee would like to recommend to consider bringing even the 
Non Deposit Accepting
-
systemically Important Companies too within the RBI’s prudential norms 
framework on the same consideration, after due consultation with these Government NBFC’s and 
concern
ed Ministries.”
 
 
12. 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
-
 
 
“The Ministry and IREDA conveys sincere regrets regarding incorrect communication that IREDA did 
not apply to RBI for Infrastructure Status
. The fact is that though IREDA had once referred to RBI for 
classification of IREDA as Infrastructure Finance Company, the same was not pursued by IREDA due 

7
 
 
to RBI requirement of submitting the time frame within which IREDA would comply with RBI norms of 
December’2006. 
 
The table given below would clear as to how IREDA Board has approved the exposure norms in line 
with RBI exposure norms as contained in Circular No. RBI/DNBR/2016
-
17/45 dated 09.11.2017. 
(Refer page no. 31 para 22 (1) )
 
 
Table: IREDA’s expo
sure norms vs RBI Norms
 
Particulars 
 
Single borrower
 
Group borrower
 
Exposure norms for  NBFC
 
15%
 
25%
 
Exposure norms for NBFC financing to 
Infrastructure 
projects ( adopted by IREDA)
 
20%
 
 
(15%+ 5%)
 
35%
 
 
(25% + 10%)
 
Exposure norms for NBFC classified as 
Infrastructure 
Finance Company by RBI
 
25%
 
 
(15% + 10%)
 
40%
 
 
(25% + 15%)
 
 
Since IREDA is financing RE Projects only, which fall under the definition of Infrastructure Projects, 
IREDA Board has approved exposure to single borrower upto 20% of net worth and 
for single group of 
borrower upto 35% of its net worth as indicated in the 2
nd
 
Row of the table. Had IREDA been 
classified as Infrastructure Finance Company by RBI, IREDA’s exposure norms could have been 25% 
and 40% for single borrower and group of borrowe
r respectively (Row 3 of the table). The relevant 
extract of RBI Circular is enclosed at
 
Annexure
-
V.
 
 
It is to inform that the above norms as per approved by the Board were being followed by IREDA in 
view of the exemption provided by RBI vide their 
circular dated 13.01.2000 to all government NBFCs 
which are Systemically Important Non Deposit Taking. As per the latest circular dated 31
st
 
May, 2018,  
these exemptions have been withdrawn by RBI and now all the government NBFCs like IREDA have 
to follow 
the norms prescribed by RBI for NBFCs except the norms relating to credit exposure by 
specific sector companies for which a request has to be sent to RBI. Accordingly, IREDA’s Board in its 
307th meeting held on 20
th
 
July, 2018 has approved that the norms a
s prescribed by RBI in its circular 
dated 31.05.2018, to be followed by IREDA w.e.f. 01.06.2018 onwards. As regard, credit exposure 
relaxation a specific proposal has been sent to RBI through MNRE vide letter No. 340
-
12/4/2018
-
IREDAdt. 31
st
 
October, 2018.”
 
 
13.
 
The Committee had observed in their original Report that the Audit had pointed out about the 
fact that while scrutinizing IREDA’s application for categorizing it as an Infrastructure Finance 
Company, RBI had noticed that IREDA was exceeding the permi
ssible exposure limits. During the 
course of examination of the subject, the Ministry/IREDA had however stated that IREDA had not 
applied to RBI for Infrastructure Finance Company(IFC) status. Surprisingly, the RBI, on being 
enquired, had stated in a writt
en reply that IREDA had applied for classifying itself as IFC 
vide 
its letter 
No. Accts/26/NBFC/96
-
97/IREDA/VI dated 12 March, 2010. The Committee in their original report had 
taken strong objection to the way the Ministry/IREDA had misinformed the Committ
ee on this issue 
and had desired for an explanation on this. The Committee observe that in the action taken reply, the 
Ministry and IREDA have accepted their mistake and regretted for furnishing incorrect communication 
that IREDA did not apply to RBI for t
he IFC status. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of 
the Ministry/IREDA as the circumstances in which incorrect information was submitted to the 
Committee have not been explained at all in their reply. Further, from the reply, it is evident tha
t 
apparently no mechanism has been devised by the Ministry/IREDA to prevent reoccurrence of such 

8
 
 
lapse in future. The Committee therefore take serious note of the way in which incorrect information 
had been furnished by the MNRE and IREDA to this august Pa
rliamentary Committee and express 
their strong displeasure. The Committee further caution the Ministry/IREDA to exercise extra care and 
alertness while submitting information to the Parliamentary Committees so as to ensure that 
information furnished to Par
liamentary Committees are accurate and authentic and also reoccurrence 
of such lapse is fully avoided in future.  The Committee further desire that a detailed explanatory note 
be submitted to them explaining the circumstances in which such lapse occurred i
n furnishing the 
information to the Committee.  The Committee further strongly recommend for fixation of 
responsibility for the lapses which led to submission of incorrect/false information to the Committee 
in this case and also desire to be apprised of ac
tion taken in this regard and also about the measures 
taken/guidelines issued in this regard to prevent such incidents in future.
 
 
Research, Development and Demonstration in Renewable Energy Sector
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13 in Original Report)
 
 
14.
 
The 
Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed and recommended on Research, 
Development and Demonstration in Renewable Energy Sector as follows:
-
 
"The Committee are disappointed to note that the Country remains dependent on imported technology 
in RE 
Sector as indigenous technology has not moved ahead much. During the evidence, the 
Committee have been apprised by the Ministry/IREDA representatives that 85 per cent of the solar 
panels are still being imported from China as they are cheaper and technolog
ically advanced.
 
 
So far as the efforts made by MNRE in Research and Development in RE Sector are concerned, the 
Committee find that Rs.584 crore has been spent on Research, Development and Demonstration as 
support for R&D projects to various R&D/academic 
institutions/industry in the area of solar thermal, 
SPV, Biogas, Wind, Bio
-
fuel by hydrogen and fuel cell; and to MNRE Institutes, namely, NISE and 
NIWE during the 12th Plan Period. Besides, MNRE has three dedicated Institutions as autonomous 
bodies for so
lar energy, wind energy and bio
-
energy which are functioning as research 
demonstrations, standardization and testing centres. Alternate Hydro energy Centre at IIT Roorkee is 
also involved for testing and evaluation of small hydro power.
 
 
The Committee have
 
also been apprised that the Ministry has also supported creation of a Centre of 
Excellence for innovation, incubation and entrepreneurship in the area of renewable energy at CIIE 
IIM Ahmedabad by providing/committing a grant
-
in
-
aid of Rs.24 Crore. CIIE II
M Ahmedabad through 
this grant has created Indian Fund for Sustainable Energy to support start up with innovative ideas 
besides providing them training and hand holding support.
 
 
The Committee firmly believe that the Country has scientific and technologica
l potential to move 
forward in RE Sector for which more needs to be done in the field of Research and Development. 
There is no dearth of talent in the Country. The need of the hour is to encourage Research and 
Development in RE sector through our premier t
echnological institutions like IITs. The Committee, 
therefore, are of the view that IREDA/Ministry has to work in the mission mode so as to encourage 
financing for Research and Development, particularly in RE Sector and financing for smaller project 
so as 
to ensure technologically competitive projects besides promoting use of indigenous products 
through various policy decisions in RE Sector. The concrete initiatives as suggested may be taken 
and the Committee be apprised accordingly."
 

9
 
 
 
15. 
 
The Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
-
 
 
"The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) has been supporting research, design and 
development through various R&D/academic institutions, industries, etc., in the fields 
of solar, wind, 
biogas, hydrogen, fuel cells, geothermal, etc., for technology development and demonstration leading 
to commercialization. A comprehensive policy and guidelines for research, development and 
demonstration (RD&D) for new and renewable energy
 
sector is in place. During the 12
th
 
Plan Period, 
total of 112 R&D projects in the area of solar energy, wind energy, bio
-
energy, small hydro, hydrogen 
and fuel cells were sanctioned to various R&D/academic institutions, industries with total grant of 
Rs.5
23.43 crore. The MNRE has spent Rs. 307.66 crores on R&D projects during the last three years. 
The RD&D Programme was also reviewed by a Panel of experts in September, 2017.
 
 
The MNRE has decided to scale
-
up its RD&D effort to Technology Development and In
novation 
Programme during the current three years period from 2017
-
18 to 2019
-
20. The focus is on promoting 
application oriented innovation, integrated with research and development for commercial applications 
and testing and standardization for quality an
d reliability assurance in renewable energy sector. A 
Technology Development and Innovation Policy (TDIP) is also being finalised. It is based on a robust 
ecosystem for support for research, innovation and validation for technology development and 
demonstr
ation, testing and standardization, awards for innovation linked with start
-
ups.
 
 
Following steps are being taken by the Ministry for development of indigenous Solar PV technology
 
 
A
.
 
Comprehensive Solar PV manufacturing Policy
 
 
MNRE is proposing a comprehensive scheme to build up manufacturing capacity of solar PV 
modules, cells, wafers/ ingots and polysilicon in India which, 
inter
-
alia 
provides following incentives:
 
 

 
Capital subsidy for new capacities/ up
-
gradation of capacity
 

 
P
roduction Subsidy to existing and upcoming manufacturing facility
 

 
Fiscal Incentives in the form of Exemption from Customs duty on import of capital 
goods required for setting up solar manufacturing facility
 

 
Permission to set up solar power plant with provi
sion of banking the power 
 
generated there from, to reduce the cost of power supply to manufacturing unit.
 
 
B
.
 
Solar PV manufacturing facility linked with PPAs for solar PV power plant
 
 
>
MNRE envisages setting up of around 3 GW of Solar PV Manufacturing 
Capacities 
in India linked with assured off
-
take in the form of PPAs of 10 GW for Solar Power 
Plant.
 
 

10
 
 
>
The manufacturing capacity is proposed to be allotted through transparent 
competitive bidding wherein, bidding shall be for tariff for the PPAs and capac
ity 
allocated to bidder (s) shall be on bucket filling basis."
 
 
16. 
 
The Committee are constrained to observe that despite India having achieved much 
technological advancements in almost all fields of engineering, manufacturing, IT etc. and also having 
laudable initiatives like ‘Make In India’ programme and ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’, admittedly 85% of solar 
panels are still being imported from China primarily because they are  stated to be cheaper and 
technologically better. The Committee are quite apprehensi
ve that given the modern day geo
-
political 
situations, excessive dependency on import in critical areas could be counterproductive as any 
unfavourable international atmosphere may cause disruption in import which in turn will adversely 
affect our economic 
and commercial ventures. This assumes greater significance in wake of the fact 
that out of 175 GW renewable energy target to be achieved by the year 2022, 100 GW is targeted from 
the Solar energy alone.  In such a situation, any disruption in import will p
ose a serious challenge to 
all stakeholders in achieving that ambitious target. In view of this inherent threat associated with the 
import, the Committee are of the strong opinion that taking advantage of the ambitious ‘Make in India’ 
programme and call fo
r ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’, the domestic manufactures and entrepreneurs should 
be effectively encouraged and motivated to take up on priority the indigenous production of Solar PV 
Modules, Solar Cells, Lithium batteries and other solar accessories and also for
 
working on alternate 
battery system.
 
 
17.      The Committee further observe that the pace with which the Ministry has been moving so far 
towards augmentation of indigenous production, needs a serious thrust because the scheme to build 
up manufacturing ca
pacity of Solar PV modules is still stated to be in proposal stage only. The 
Committee also observe that steps taken till now by MNRE resemble only broad guidelines and even 
that too is at proposal stage only and no concrete action plan seems to have been 
prepared by MNRE 
so far. The Committee, therefore, feel that there needs to be more focus on R&D work and incentives 
need to be provided to IITs and other premier Technical Institutions so that the indigenous production 
gains momentum at the earliest. The 
Committee also desire that a comprehensive strategy for each 
stage of solar PV modules manufacturing process needs to be put in place. The Committee emphasize 
that these steps need to be taken in mission mode so that indigenization of Solar PV modules is 
a
chieved at the earliest and dependency on imported items/technology is minimized.  The Committee, 
in view of the excessive dependency on imports for Solar panels, would like to suggest the 
Government for consideration to re
-
prioritise different sources of 
Renewable energy targets so as to 
achieve better economical outputs in respect of the sources having strong indigenous capabilities like 
wind, hydro and bio
-
fuels and keep the pace of Solar energy linked with the indigenous production of 
Solar panels and a
ccessories.  The Committee would therefore like that in view to the present 
scenario of available of accessories, more focus needs to be given to the alternate RE sources like 
wind, hydro, biofuels which could be explored effectively with indigenous inputs
.  The Committee 
would like to know the steps being taken in this regard and also about the details of the Technology 
Development and Innovation Policy (TDIP) once it is finalised by the Government.  
 
 
 
 
Financing of Start
-
ups/Small Projects
 
 
Recommendatio
n (Sl. No. 14 in Original Report)
 
 

11
 
 
18.
 
The Committee in their Twenty Second Report had observed and recommended on Financing of 
Start
-
Ups/ Small Projects as follows:
-
 
 
"The Committee are disappointed to note that IREDA is yet to start financing for 
 
start
-
ups which is 
apparent from the reply whereby it is stated that no start
-
up as 
 
borrower has approached IREDA so far. The 
Committee would like IREDA to 
 
analyse the factors due to which start
-
ups do not approach IREDA for 
financing.
 
 
 
 
The Committee f
urther note that there is a great potential for small projects in hilly and North
-
Eastern 
areas. There is a need to tap the potential by the positive
 
and favourable policies for financing the small 
projects. The Committee have
 
been apprised that IREDA fina
nces project loan as low as Rs. 50 lakh and 
finance solar project, with aggregate capacity of 1 MW and above and hydro projects of size lower than 1 MW.
 
 
 
The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the year wise financing/loan advanced 
to
 
smaller projects in various sectors viz. hydel, solar, wind, bio
-
mass etc.
 
 
 
The Committee are of the view that start
-
ups/small projects bring innovation to the field and 
renewable energy being the emergent sector, there is an urgent 
 
need to have favorab
le policies with regard 
to financing start
-
ups/small projects. Besides there is a need for having simple procedures/formalities for 
financing particularly when start
-
ups/small entrepreneurs cannot afford chartered 
 
accountants/professionals or 
completing t
he formalities. IREDA being the exclusive Government financing agency for RE sector, need to 
act proactively and try to reach out to the startups/ small entrepreneurs. Awareness about the financing of RE 
projects also need to be created."
 
 
19.
 
 
The Ministr
y of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken reply have stated as follows:
-
 
 
 
"MNRE supported entrepreneur development in renewable energy under a project 
 
sanctioned in 
January 2011 to Centre for Innovation Incubation and Entrepreneurship(CIIE), II
M, Ahmadabad. Under 
this Project, total grant of Rs.24 crores was sanctioned in 2011 with the condition that a matching 
investment would be mobilized by CIIE from private sector investors. So far 22.47 crores has 
 
been released to CIIE, IIM, Ahmedabad for 
the project. The CIIE, IIM, Ahmedabad has mobilized 
more than Rs. 25 crores from the private investors for the project. The project has incubated 40 start
-
ups in renewable energy sector. The project has generated useful experience on entrepreneur 
developme
nt.
 
 
 
 
However, start
-
ups generally require seed money which is provided by venture
 
funds. IREDA also 
finances new technology, new projects after mitigating the perceived risks in any new project/venture. 
 
 
The Ministry finances new technology under 
Technology Demonstration Project Mode.
 
Details of 
smaller project upto 5 MW financed
 
by IREDA sector wise and year 
wise for last four year is enclosed 
at 
Annexure
-
V
.
"
 
 
20.
 
The Committee in their original report had expressed their disappointment that no bo
rrower 
had approached IREDA for start
-
up programmes and the Committee had asked IREDA to analyse the 
factors due to which start
-
up did not approach the Agency for financing.  The Committee are of the 
view that a reactive approach may not yield the desired 
results. The Committee feel that the Agency 

12
 
 
should be proactive in visiting  small entrepreneurs at various locations and also start
-
ups hubs in 
various premiere technical and management institutions in order to asse
s
s their R&D works and to 
ascertain thei
r achievements and progress in this area.  The Committee had also noted that there is a 
great potential for small projects in hilly and North
-
Eastern areas. The MNRE in their reply have stated 
that CIIE, IIM, Ahmedabad has mobilized more than 25 crores fro
m private investors for the project 
which has incubated 40 start
-
ups in renewable energy sector. However, the fate of the start
-
ups or the 
factors why start
-
ups are not approaching IREDA for financing have not been elaborated by the 
Agency.  There is also 
no mention of the initiatives taken on financing small projects in the North
-
Eastern sector.  The Committee while taking into account the fact that generally the needy persons 
approach the Banks for financing would suggest that IREDA may also develop a mec
hanism to have a 
tie up with the Banks so that applications of the potential borrowers could reach to IREDA through 
Banks also.  The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation would like to be apprised 
of the initiatives taken by IREDA on fin
ancing small projects in the North
-
Eastern sector and the steps 
taken by them to promote start
-
ups in Renewable Energy sector as well as the measures taken by 
them to make financing on start
-
ups more encouraging for borrowers.
 
 
Various Important Issues of 
RE Sector
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16 in Original Report)
 
 
21. The Committee in their Twenty
-
second Report had observed and recommended on  various issues of RE 
sector as a whole as follows:
-
 
 
 
"
The Committee during the course of examination besides considering the issues pertaining to IREDA 
particularly those raised in the Audit paras, also 
 
examined other matters related to renewable energy sector 
as a whole. The observations/ recommendations of
 
the Committee in this regard are as follows :
 
 
 
(A)
 
Sensitizing people’s contribution towards environment
 
 
"The Committee note that as part of creation and evacuation of renewable energy infrastructures, 
IREDA/MNRE is involved in Grid Connected solar roof top programme and the schemes / 
programmes of the MNRE are implemented all over the Country including rural
 
areas. On analysis of 
the data on sanctioned and installed capacity as furnished to the Committee, it is observed that States 
like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana and Uttarakhand have ac
hieved less than 30% of sanctioned capacity while States like 
Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand have installed capacity of as low as 5% and 10% respectively. 
States like Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Bihar have installed capacity 
muc
h higher than their sanctioned capacity. The Committee are concerned to note that States like 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Bihar, Daman and Diu and Dadar
-
Nagar Haweli have zero sanctioned 
capacity. The Committee were astounded to note such high level varia
tions in this programme. The 
Committee feel that as Government is providing subsidy for solar roof top programme it becomes 
imperative to monitor its implementation. India is one of the lowest per capita consumers of electricity 
in the world. The Committee
 
are disheartened to note that despite energy shortages and high cost of 
back up supply, roof
-
top solar PV systems have not yet become widespread in India. The Committee 
feel that this is primarily due to lack of adequate financing, unfamiliar technology a
nd low consumer 
awareness. The Committee also note that there are various discrepancies in implementation of 
subsidy scheme, like non availability of subsidy to the needy people, prolonged delay in disbursement 

13
 
 
of the subsidy and no continuity in the schem
e. Therefore, solar roof top programme has not achieved 
the desired level.
 
 
The Committee are of the view that aided by Government policy and cost effectiveness the solar roof
-
top programme has the potential to transform the renewable energy sector and pro
mote ecologically 
sustainable growth while addressing India’s energy security challenge. The Committee note that 
Government has full support of World Bank at international level too and a variety of financing 
mechanisms are available under this programme. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that Government 
should spread awareness about the scheme and impart required training to interested investors to 
make them familiar with the technology. It will not only correspond to a major innovation for the roof
-
top mark
et but also improve the investment climate for solar PV while addressing the much needed 
low cost power at individual level. At the same time, the Committee hope that, it will sensitize the 
public about climate change and the individual responsibility towa
rds saving the environment."
 
 
(B)
 
Installation of roof
-
top solar panel on residential premises
 
 
The Committee note that many of the States have their own policies in place, and installation of solar 
panels by the general public on their residences is gover
ned by these policies which varies from State 
to State. The Committee have been apprised that the cost of a solar panel is approximately Rs. 
50,000 per KW and that many private banks are open to providing loans to people for the same. 
However, people in ge
neral hesitate to spend huge amounts for solar roof top panels as the subsidy 
provided by the Ministry is not passed on to the people. The Committee see a good future in 
residential roof top programme of the Government and feel that the pressure on the dis
coms can be 
eased with more and more people using solar roof tops. But to achieve this, the Government has to 
spread awareness amongst people about the programme, the loan facility being provided by the 
banks and the subsidy being provided by the Governmen
t."
 
 
(C)
 
 
Promotion of roof top solar panels on Government, Industrial & commercial buildings, Railway 
Stations and foot over bridges of metro and railway station, etc.
 
 
The Committee note that solar panels are being installed on Government buildings to save power and 
make use of the land. The Committee have been informed that the life span of solar panels is of 25 
years with a degradation of 10% every 10 years and the pow
er produced through solar panel is cost 
effective. Besides, multilateral funding is also being provided through World Bank and ADB to promote 
rooftops in industrial, commercial, residential and social sector. Regarding installation of solar panels 
to cover
 
foot
-
over bridges at railway stations, metro stations in place of metallic sheds, the Committee 
have been informed that the Government can try to install the solar panels but the efficiency of such 
type of design will limit the efficiency of the solar mod
ule. The model has already been tried on the 
parking sheds in many organizations with solar panels as a roof. While taking note of the cost 
effectiveness and longevity of the solar panels, the Committee recommend that the Government 
should encourage instal
ling solar panels on roof top of Government, industrial and commercial 
buildings including railway stations and bus stops. The Government should also encourage the State 
Governments, urban local bodies etc. to include installation of solar panels in their 
building bye
-
laws. 
The efficiency of solar panels already installed on parking sheds and foot
-
over bridges of rail and 
metro stations should be assessed and if found, should be implemented all over the Country."
 
 
(D)
 
Installation of Solar panels on water b
odies
 

14
 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Government of India has approved the implementation of 
a 'Pilot
-
cum
-
Demonstration project for Development of Grid
-
connected Solar PV power Plants on 
Canal
-
banks and Canal
-
tops' under National Solar Mission (
NSM). On the basis of the request 
received from various States, in
-
principle approval has been given for setting
-
up full targeted capacity 
of 50 MW canal
-
top and 50 MW canal
-
bank solar PV power projects in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Kerala, Kar
nataka, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. IREDA is financing 
the Solar Projects being installed on canal banks and canal tops as applied by some of the 
developers. The Committee have also been informed that there is no harmful effect of i
nstalling solar 
panels on canals either on the environment or the water for consumption by animals, birds, plants and 
humans. The Committee note that although the concept of installing solar panels over water bodies is 
new in India, solar panels have been 
installed world
-
wide on water bodies like ponds, lakes etc. The 
Committee are of the view that this concept would help in saving electricity as there are a huge 
number of water bodies/lakes/canals in India some of which are major tourist attractions. The 
C
ommittee recommend that Ministry and IREDA should sincerely work on this project and also give 
wide publicity on their website and print media to attract developers from various States. However, 
while installing the solar panels, care should be taken on pr
eserving the ambience of those water 
bodies, which are major tourist attractions."
 
 
 
(E)
 
Installation of Solar panels on highways
 
 
 
Regarding the use of solar
-
panels for lighting the path on National and State Highways, the 
Committee note that the MNRE has
 
supported 50 km path from Deogarh to Basukinath temple in 
Jharkhand with 5 x 100 KWP solar power plant. The Government has proposed to try the same model 
on State and National Highways. The cost involved would be roughly Rs. 1.5 lakh per KWP solar 
power p
lant with centralized location for better maintenance and safety. The Committee appreciate 
the initiative of the Government as solar panels on highways would prove to be cost effective in the 
long run in view of the vast network of National and State highw
ays in the Country. The Committee 
emphasize that more State and National Highways should be covered and desire to be apprised of 
the progress on the same, the response received from NHAI and the State Governments on the 
matter as well as the future plans o
f MNRE."
 
 
(F)
 
Exploiting of Wind Energy potential by various States
 
 
The Committee note that wind energy potential mainly exists in 8 to 9 States and most of these States 
are yet to exploit their full wind potential. Although MNRE has taken initiatives to 
exploit their energy, 
the desired targets have not been achieved. Delay in land allotment, obtaining clearance especially of 
forest land, non
-
development of accurate forecasting and scheduling system, delay in payment to 
wind power generators, 'most
-
run' s
tatus not being complied with, breaking down of wind power 
generators, etc. have been cited as some of the major factors in non
-
achievement of targets in the 
wind energy sector by the developers and the States. The Committee find that State Governments 
hav
e not provided enough support to deal with the problems of developers especially in allotment of 
land and the required clearances which are the main reasons for delay in initiating the projects.
 
 
The Committee note that apart from other useful initiatives,
 
the Government is establishing 
Renewable Energy Management Centers(REMCs) at 11 locations in renewable resource rich States. 
The Committee, however find that not even a single REMC has been established as yet. The 
Committee recommend expediting establishm
ent of REMCs that would be of great help in advanced 

15
 
 
forecasting, dispatching solutions & real time monitoring of RE generation to closely coordinate with 
the Grid Operations. The Committee also recommend the Government to bring out a comprehensive 
policy 
for taking care of all concerns of wind energy developers at the earliest that is coherent across 
all States in India. The policy should not only focus on reducing cost but also on reducing risk of 
installing wind projects.
 
 
(G) 
 
Avoiding installation of s
econd
-
hand Wind units
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that 70 percent indigenization has been achieved by manufacturers 
of Wind Energy Units. However, instances have been reported as apprised to the Committee 
regarding installation of second
-
hand wind ene
rgy units as new units in India which were earlier 
closed down in other Countries. Shockingly, neither IREDA nor officials of MNRE are aware of such 
installations. The Committee express their apprehension that such installations are taking place 
without th
e knowledge of MNRE and IREDA. Now when things have been brought into the knowledge 
of IREDA/Ministry, it is expected that such activities would stop and the Government will promote 
indigenization and installation of new wind units. The Committee also reco
mmend expediting 
replacement of large turbines in place of smaller turbines so that capacity (potential of wind energy) 
could be increased."
 
 
 
22. 
 
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their action taken replies on the aforesaid issues 
submitted as 
under:
-
 
 
" (A). 
 
Under Rooftop Solar (RTS) Scheme MNRE is providing subsidy for the residential, 
institutional and social sector for installation of RTS plants. For the Government sector incentives are 
provided on achievement of targeted RTS capacity 
within a given time frame against capacity 
sanctioned by MNRE. There is no subsidy for industrial and commercial sector. The scheme is being 
implemented through State Nodal Agencies and PSUs. The proposals for sanction of 
subsidy/incentives are to be submi
tted by these implementing agencies through online web portal 
SPIN. Scheme is demand driven and proposals are yet to be received from some of the states/UTs.  
Updated statement on state
-
wise capacity sanctioned and capacity achieved under subsidy/incentive
 
category and without subsidy/incentive category is giv
en in the table at Annexure
-
VII
. It may be seen 
that some of the states have good progress of RTS capacity installation in non
-
subsidised sector. 
Project completion duration generally varies from 15 to
 
18 months from the date of sanction. The 
progress is closely monitored by MNRE. The subsidy/incentives are disbursed on submission of 
completion report by the implementing agencies on the online web portal. It has been observed there 
is considerable delay
 
in submission of completion report by these implementing agencies. 
 
 
The installation of RTS plants was slow during initial phase because of challenges such as 
involvement of multiple approval process, apprehension of loss of revenue by Discoms due to mov
ing 
out of high tariff paying customers, non
-
uniformity of state regulations, skill and knowledge gap, lack 
of awareness, etc. Ministry has taken various steps to address these challenges, these include 
development of online single window portal, creating 
public awareness, identification of gaps in 
policies and regulations, manuals for best practices, skill development and capacity building of 
Discom/banks, etc. The Ministry under various (multilateral/bilateral) technical assistance 
programmes have taken i
nitiatives to promote RTS in the country by providing support to the various 
stakeholders and these include aggregation of demand with prior approvals to get benefit of 
economies of scale, development of single window portal from application process to 

16
 
 
com
missioning/net
-
metering installation and release of subsidy, capacity building activities, 
formulation of conducive policies and regulations, bid process management, creation of RTS cell in 
the Discom, etc.
 
 
(B). 
 
RTS scheme is being implemented by SNAs an
d PSUs. After sanction of the RTS capacity 
these 
 
agencies have to complete the project within a time period of 15
-
18 months.  
                              
The subsidy/incentives
 
 
are
 
 
disbursed
 
 
on 
   
submission
 
 
of 
 
completion 
 
report
 
 
by 
 
the
         
 
implementing agencies on the online web portal. 
  
It has been observed 
    
there
   
 
is
  
 
considerable
  
 
delay 
 
in 
    
submission 
       
of 
  
completion
  
 
reports 
  
by
   
 
these 
  
implementing
 
 
agencies 
  
due to 
involvement of 
    
multiple agencies. To exped
ite the process single window 
 
portal
  
 
has 
   
been 
developed which 
 
will take care from application stage to commissioning / net
-
 
metering 
 
installation 
 
and 
 
release 
 
of 
 
subsidy 
  
and the 
  
process
 
can 
 
be
 
 
tracked online
 
by the consumer. 
 
So far 
awareness is concerned Ministry has planned public awareness campaign through print and 
electronic media to create awareness on RTS in the masses."
 
 
(C). 
 
To ensure the quality and efficiency of the solar PV modules the MNRE Guidelines provides 
for install
ation of solar PV modules used in solar power plants under MNRE Scheme must confirm to 
IEC/BIS standards.
 
 
In order to promote RTS systems in various railway premises, metro rail locations, etc., the Ministry 
has already sanctioned RTS projects to Railway,
 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, Kochi Metro Rail 
Corporation, Noida Metro Rail and Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation. Aggregate capacity of about 68 
MW has been reported commissioned by these organisations.
 
 
MNRE is constantly pursuing with Central Ministries/
Departments as also State Governments for 
installation of RTS projects in Government buildings. MoUD in its Model Building Bye
-
Laws has made 
provision for installation of RTS projects on all buildings above a certain area and has written to all 
States/UTs 
to make RTS compulsory on buildings by making changes in building byelaws. Four 
States/ UTs (Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh) have made mandatory bye
-
laws/ 
regulations.
 
 
(D) 
 
Under MNRE’s ‘Pilot
-
cum
-
Demonstration project for development
 
of grid
-
connected solar PV 
power plants on canal
-
banks and canal
-
tops’, 94 MW solar PV power projects on canal
-
tops/ canal
-
banks have been commissioned. Taking this concept further, MNRE has directed Solar Energy 
Corporation of India Limited (SECI), to ex
plore possibility of setting up floating solar PV power plants, 
through competitive bidding in different states of India.
 
 
To begin with, SECI has floated a tender for setting up 150 MW floating solar PV power plants on 
Rihand Dam in Sonbhadra district of 
Uttar Pradesh.
 
 
Further, in December’2016, IREDA had sanctioned 14.5 MW Canal Bank Solar PV Power Project of 
M/s Svarog Global Power Ltd. in Uttarakhand and disbursed Rs. 70 Crore towards the project. IREDA 
has also sanctioned a 22 MW Floating Solar Power 
Project to be setup in Tamil Nadu."
 
 
 
(E).
 
Under Off
-
grid Solar PV Programme Ministry is providing support for installation of solar street 
lights throughout the country, with special emphasis on areas where there is no facility for street 

17
 
 
lighting systems
 
through grid power, North Eastern States and Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected 
districts. So far as lighting on State and National Highways is concerned, these are mainly supplied 
through grid power, however, NHAI and State authorities may consider using
 
solar power, which may 
prove more cost effective with availability of
 
cheaper energy storage solutions in coming future. 
MNRE can provide necessary support in terms of prescribing standards and specification in this 
regard.”
 
 
23. 
 
Various Important Issues
 
of RE Sector
 
 
 
 
The Committee’s analysis reveal that various measures have been initiated in different areas 
for achieving the target of Renewable Energy.  The Committee however observe that in view of the 
inadequate availability of indigenous solar 
accessories, the expansion of Solar Energy at present is 
largely dependent on imported materials. The Committee therefore feel that till the indigenous 
production of solar accessories reaches at adequate level, more focus should be given for the 
developmen
t of alternate renewable energy sources like wind, hydro, bio
-
fuels etc. so that the dream 
of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ could be meaningfully materialized.
 
 
 
 

18
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl. No. 1)
 
 
Contribution of IREDA in Development of RE
 
IREDA, a GOI public finance institution established in 1987 under the Companies Act for financing RE 
and energy efficiency projects has so far approved financial assistance to 2382 clean energy projec
ts 
supporting green capacity addition of more than 7525 MW, with loan commitment of Rs. 48,832 crore and 
disbursement of Rs. 27,790 crore, which has helped in supporting the growth of Renewable Energy sector in 
India. The Committee noted that as per MNRE’s
 
Report on status of implementation of Green Energy 
commitments for financing of Renewable Energy Projects, IREDA is second leading NBFC in RE sector 
amongst the leading financial institutions in the Country in terms of total amount sanctioned and total am
ount 
disbursed during the period 15.2.2015 to 30.9.2016 after L&T Infrastructure Finance Company limited.
 
The Committee note that renewable energy installed capacity as on 31 December, 2016 was 50,068 
MW and it is targeted to achieve 175 GW RE capacity by 
2022. IREDA being Government re
-
financing agency 
has a greater role to play in this regard. While taking note of the role and the contribution made by IREDA, the 
Committee feels that still a lot needs to be done particularly in view of the ambitious target
s of 175 GW RE 
capacity by 2022. Not only that, in this era of competition, IREDA being a commercial entity and with other 
major private players in field, sustainable efforts are required by IREDA to maintain its position in the market. 
The Committee hopes
 
and trusts that IREDA would take all the desired initiatives and emerge as a lead player 
in RE re
-
financing sector, thereby promoting the growth of renewable energy sector which would help in 
reduction of carbon emissions in the Country.
 
Reply of the Gove
rnment
 
The Committee’s suggestions have been noted for guidance. IREDA would make all efforts to ensure that 
pace of renewable energy in the country would not slow down for want of financing. It is further informed that 
Renewable Energy installed capacity 
has been enhanced to 71.85 GW as on 31.08.2019 and IREDA has 
sanctioned and disbursed cumulative loan of Rs. 62,077.87 Crore & Rs. 38297.63 Crore respectively as on 
31.08.2018.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                 
                                              
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
 
 

19
 
 
Market share of IREDA
 
The Committee noted that as per the Audit Report, IREDA’s share i
n the total commissioned capacity of RE 
which was 52.83 per cent at the beginning of the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002
-
07) period declined to 19.21 per 
cent at the end of the Tenth Five Year Plan and further to 7.66 per cent at the end of the Eleventh Five Ye
ar 
Plan. Thus, IREDA was not able to sustain its position as a leading financial institution in the renewable 
energy sector. MNRE, in the information furnished to the Committee, has given an altogether different 
perspective of IREDA’s share in the total co
mmissioned capacity, whereby it is stated that IREDA’s share at 
the beginning and end of 10th Five Year Plan was 25 per cent and 15 per cent respectively. Further, at the end 
of 11th Five Year Plan IREDA’s share was 12 per cent. The Committee are not able 
to comprehend huge 
difference in the data given in the Audit Report and in the revised position furnished to the Committee. Even 
the revised position furnished to the Committee indicates decline in IREDA’s share over the years. 
 
When specifically asked for
 
the reasons, IREDA has tried to justify by stating that they have been consistently 
making growth of around 23 per cent of CAGR in terms of absolute disbursement and sanctions. In one of the 
replies IREDA has stated that the agency was able to retain mark
et share to about 12 per cent consistently 
and in the post evidence replies it is stated that IREDA is maintaining 10
-
12 per cent market share. The 
Committee find from the replies a sense of complacency on the part of IREDA. The Committee caution IREDA 
and
 
would like the Company to continuously monitor its performance and take all the initiatives to maintain its 
share in the highly competitive market particularly when the private sector is taking keen interest in re
-
financing RE projects.
 
Reply of the Gover
nment
 
The comments of the Committee are noted for guidance.  However, it is to bring to the kind notice of the 
Committee that persistent efforts have been made by IREDA to increase its sanctions and disbursements.
 
The cumulative sanctions during the 25 yea
r period upto 2012
-
13 was Rs.22460 Crore, while in last five years 
(till March 2018) cumulative sanction was Rs.  38502.67 Crore i.e. 1.71 times of previous 25 years. Similarly, 
the cumulative disbursement during the period upto 2012
-
13 was Rs. 11848.79 Cr
ore while in last five years 
cumulative disbursement was Rs. 24269.79 Crore i.e. 2.04 times of previous 25 years.
 
It is also informed that IREDA has been in specialized sector of RE financing since 1987 and in earlier days 
IREDA was the only RE financing a
gency. Now with stable RE sector most of the banks and financing 
agencies have also started lending for the sector, which indicates early stage catalytic role played by IREDA in 
development of RE financing market.
 
IREDA’s critical activities are being moni
tored on continuous basis by its senior management, Board (including 
independent Directors), the Ministry and DPE.
 
It may be appreciated that there is no clear method of monitoring the market share considering, takeover of 
loans, underwriting, down
-
selling
, etc., in financing RE Projects. However, IREDA is continuously evolving new 
and innovative financing products to remain the leading financer in the RE Sector. Further considering the 
exponential growth in the sector in view of GOI targets of setting up o
f 175 GW of RE Capacity by 2022, 
financing by other NBFCs/Banks is also necessary for the growth of the sector.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 
26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL No. 3)
 

20
 
 
Discrepancies as pointed out by Audit
 
The Committee observes that the C&AG, in their Audit Report have pointed out some of the discrepancies on 
non
-
adherence of financial guidelines by IREDA in a number of projects. T
he discrepancies in this regard 
inter
-
alia 
include disbursing loan even without registration, exceeding credit exposure limits, non
-
creation of 
mortgage before disbursement, non
-
creation of trust and retention account in some projects, allowing longer 
repa
yment period in some projects advancing loan to the borrowers whose accounts have been closed due to 
NPA and non
-
conducting of inspection in some projects. Some instances as quoted by Audit are (i) projects of 
Tata Power Company Limited and Maharashtra Sta
te Power Generation Company Limited, the loans were 
sanctioned even without registration of the projects. In case of M/s SCI India Ltd as observed by Audit, 
different conditions for obtaining security against the loan were imposed in the sanction letter an
d the loan 
agreement; (ii) as per the Audit, IREDA exceeded its own exposure norms in cases of M/s Tata Power 
Company Limited, M/s Vaayu India Power Corporation Limited, IL&FS Wind Power Ltd. and Athena Damwe 
Power Limited. It was also noted that M/s Venka
teshwra Sponge and Power Private Limited were issued 
NOCs by IREDA without creation of additional security by them, even though it was a co
-
financed project and 
that Andhra Bank was able to recover more amount from the borrower than IREDA in spite of havin
g a 
pari 
passu 
arrangement. IREDA has submitted to the Committee that their financing norms/guidelines are only 
indicative for financing RE projects. As per project requirement guidelines are reviewed/revised/modified from 
time to time in line with changin
g scenario and deviations from the guidelines, wherever considered, are duly 
approved by the Board of Directors. The Committee, however, are not convinced as to how even the basic 
requirements of a project can be waived off. They find that such irregularit
ies/deviations, besides inviting Audit 
objections, affect the creditability of the PSU and may erode IREDA's standing in the RE sector. The 
Committee while taking serious note of these deviations would like to recommend to take due precautions 
while sancti
oning loans.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendations of committee to take due precautions while sanctioning loans is noted for compliance 
in future. 
 
 
As regards specific observation with respect to parties indicated therein, the status is given as und
er:
-
 
 
1
.
 
Project sanctioned without registration:
-
 
 
a
)
 
Tata Power Company Limited
 
 
b
)
 
 
Maharashtra State Power Generation Limited
 
The process of registration of a project is improved and simplified. Also no project is submitted for 
sanction by competent authority 
without first being registered, such a situation will not arise in future.
 
 
2
.
 
Case of SCI India Limited
 
 
It is to confirm that security conditions as per the prevailing financing norms applicable at the time of 
sanction were stipulated in the loan agreement. (Copy of loan agreement enclosed at 
Annexure
-
I
). 
The company could not create mortgage of project asse
ts and therefore the borrower was not eligible 

21
 
 
for disbursement. Further, no disbursement was recommended, due to change in project parameters 
as observed during the pre
-
disbursement visit.  In the meantime company decided not to avail the 
disbursement
 
 
 
 
3
.
 
Exceeding the exposure limit
 
 
a
)
 
Tata power company limited
 
b
)
 
Vaayu India Power Corporation India limited
 
c
)
 
IL&FS wind power limited
 
d
)
 
Athena Damwe Power Limited
 
 
IREDA had exceeded its exposure norms after taking approval of Board of Directors in the above 
stated 
projects as IREDA’s net worth was very small and in order to take advantage of growth 
opportunity and credit worthy client the decision to exceed exposure norms were taken. However, the 
observations of the Committee are noted for compliance in future and i
t is further confirmed that now 
the exposure in respect of project mentioned at S.No. a) & b) is within the norms, the loan of project 
at S.No. c) has been completely repaid and project at S.No. d) no disbursement has yet been made.
 
 
4
.
 
Case of M/s Venkateshw
ara Sponge & Power P Ltd.
 
 
This is confirmed that IREDA has recovered its entire amount due (without any sacrifice) viz principal 
loan outstanding, interest, liquidated damages and incidental charges through action initiated under 
SARFAESI Act, DRT, etc., 
and the account stands closed in the books of IREDA.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 4)
 
Gaps in sanction, disbursem
ent and recovery of loans
 
The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Ministry/IREDA that although the amount of loan 
sanctioned, disbursed and recoveries made has increased in absolute terms during 12th Five Year Plan as 
compared to 11th Five Yea
r Plan, the percentage of loan disbursed as compared to loan sanctioned has 
declined from 59 per cent to 53 per cent. Not only that the percentage of recovery as compared to loan 
disbursed which was 62 per cent during 11th Five Year Plan has declined consi
derably to 33 per cent. The 
Committee are concerned to note the aforesaid disturbing trends which clearly indicate the non
-
viability of the 
projects for which loans are being sanctioned by IREDA, as substantiated by the analysis of few projects 
pointed out
 
by Audit and further examined by the Committee. The information furnished by the Ministry reveal 
that post sanction of loan a number of projects on which Audit made objections have been closed or 
disbursement not made thus making the whole process of sanc
tioning of loan futile. To quote specific 
instances in case of projects of (i) Shri Venkateswara Sponge and Power Pvt. Ltd.; (ii) Mahita Power Projects 
(P) Ltd. and (iii) Renew wind energy (Rajasthan) Pvt. Ltd., loan account stand closed. Besides in case o
f (i) 

22
 
 
Athena Damwe Power Ltd., (ii) Bhadragiri Power (P) Ltd. and (iii) Vaayu (India) Power Corporation (P) Ltd., no 
disbursement has been made. In another case relating to Enbee Infrastructure Ltd. the project was 
abandoned. The aforesaid analysis calls f
or a re
-
look into the whole system of granting of loan by IREDA to 
various agencies. The Committee would like Ministry/IREDA to analyze the position project wise and apprise 
the Committee accordingly. Not only that, the PSU need to be very careful before s
anctioning the loan to an 
entity so as to avoid such situations in future.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Comments/Observations of Committee have been noted for guidance. However, this is to inform the 
Committee that a loan becomes effective only after the loan documents are executed and disbursement is 
effected only after creation of security, infusion of pro
moter’s equity in the project and physical progress of the 
project. Thus, not all projects which are sanctioned take disbursement of loan. 
 
 
As regards the instances quoted by the Committee where the disbursement has not been effected or the 
project has be
en abandoned, it is to inform that this situation emerges due to various factors such as 
abandoning the plan of setting up of the project by the promoter, inability to get requisite approval from various 
government agencies, delays in project implementatio
n causing cost over run and inability of the promoters to 
bring in additional funds to complete the project, etc. The status with respect to projects as observed by Audit 
is indicated in the
 
Annexure
-
II.
 
 
As desired by the Committee, an analysis of term lo
ans sanctioned by IREDA during last five years (from 
2013
-
14 to 2017
-
18), execution of loan agreement, amount disbursed and capacity commissioned /under 
commissioning is done and summarized in the table below:
-
 
Table: Summary of Projects sanctioned during 
last five years
 
 
(Rs. In Crore)
 
Particulars 
 
Amount/Capacity 
 
Sanctioned 
 
38,502.65
 
Disbursed 
 
22,650.94
 
LA executed of sanctioned 
 
22,706.65
 
Disbursed and commissioned
 
11,263.42
 
Disbursed and under commissioning 
 
5,809.62
 
Total disbursement out of LA Executed 
 
17,073.04
 
Total sanctioned capacity
 
11324.59 MW
 
Commissioned capacity 
 
5999.08 MW
 
Disbursed and under commissioning capacity
 
2510.11 MW
 
 
Analysis:
  
It may be seen from the above table that
 
 

 
During the period 
2013
-
14 to 2017
-
18, against the total loan sanctioned of Rs. 38,502.65 Crore, a
g-
gregate disbursement of Rs. 22,650.94 Crore was achieved which is 58.83% of sanctioned amount.
 

23
 
 

 
Loan Documents Executed for Rs. 22,706.65 Crores out of total sanctioned during 
the period which 
works out to 58.97 %.
 

 
The aggregate disbursement of Rs. 17,073.04 Crore has been achieved out of loan executed which is 
75.19% of loan executed.
 

 
The loan executed and disbursement there against resulted in capacity addition of 5999.08 MW a
nd 
the capacity under commissioning was 2510.11 MW.  
 
It may be seen that there is always a gap between sanction and final execution of loan agreement and 
availing of disbursement. The status of loan sanctioned during last quarter of 2017
-
18 (
Annexure
-
I
II
)
 
is 
indicated below:
-
 
                                                             
 
 
 
              
(Rs. In Crore)
 
Particulars
 
Amount 
 
Sanctioned 
 
3133.69
 
Disbursed 
 
612.98
 
LA executed of sanctioned 
 
1589.74
 
Disbursed and commissioned
 
348.72
 
 
Note
:
-
 
Out of Rs. 3133.69 Crores of sanctioned loan in the last quarter of FY 2017
-
18, LA executed in FY 
2018
-
19 till date is of Rs. 1589.74 Crores.
 
 
From the perusal of second table, it can be seen that the project sanctioned in the last quarter of the year 
were
 
amounting to Rs. 3134 Crore against which loan agreement executed were only Rs. 1579.74 Crore. The 
execution of loan agreement in these cases is in progress and shall be achieved during remaining part of year 
2018
-
19.
 
 
As regards recovery of loan disburse
d, this is to inform that for the year 2017
-
18 recovery of loan was Rs. 
5,115.74 Crore against the total due  amount of Rs. 5,173.21 Crore. Thus the percentage of recovery was 
98.89% of the due amount.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2
018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 5)
 
Recovery of the Loan
 
As per Para No. 4.9 and 4.10 of the C&
AG Report during the year 2008
-
09 to 2012
-
13, IREDA settled 29 
cases under One Time Settlement (OTS). So far as sector wise number of these 29 OTS cases is concerned, 
10 related to wind, 4 each in solar and briquetting, 3 each in waste to energy, co
-
genera
tion and biomass and 
2 in small
-
hydro. In these 29 cases, the amount due for recovery on account of principal on interest, etc. was 
Rs. 446.70 crore, out of which recovery of Rs. 208.85 crore was made through OTS. Hence, IREDA sacrificed 
Rs. 237.85 crore, 
that is more than half its dues, on account of OTS, i.e. Rs. 8 crore on account of principal, 
Rs. 187.06 crore on account of interest and Rs. 42.79 crore on account of other dues such as liquidated 
damages, incidental charges, etc.
 

24
 
 
As per the Audit finding
s, out of 17 OTS cases selected by then for scrutiny, in 14 cases IREDA deviated from 
the OTS/financing guidelines. Such deviations include not conducting physical inspection before the release 
of interim loan, OTS even to the willful defaulters, etc. The 
examination of the Committee reveal that in many 
cases, interim disbursements were made multiple times to the parties without creation of mortgage. Not only 
that rescheduling of the projects was sanctioned at the interim disbursement stage. To mention a fe
w 
instances 
viz. 
in case of M/s Sree Suryachandra Synergetic Pvt. Ltd, four interim disbursements were made 
and after third interim disbursement, re
-
schedulement of the project was sanctioned. In case of M/s Purti 
Sakhar Karkhana Ltd, two interim disbursem
ents were made; in another case M/s Jain Farms and Resorts 
Ltd. the disbursement was made without inspection of the project. In some of the cases, Trust and Retention 
Account was not created and additional security was not made in case of repeated default 
by the borrowers. 
Besides as pointed out by Audit, adequate mechanism was not there to assess the wealth of the guarantor 
independently.
 
In addition to above, the Committee find from the data furnished by Ministry/IREDA, that a number of projects 
after san
ctioning of the loan are being abandoned. During the year 2014
-
15 out of 61 projects sanctioned by 
IREDA, only 20 projects could be commissioned and 18 projects were dropped. During the year 2015
-
16 there 
was some improvement with regard to the abandoned p
rojects as the data indicate that 7 projects were 
abandoned. With regard to commissioned projects, the position worsened as against 108 sanctioned projects, 
only 34 were commissioned. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the whole approa
ch of 
IREDA in sanctioning loan is somewhat flawed.
 
To improve the situation, IREDA has stated that certain measures have been taken viz. adjustment of pending 
dues from the next disbursement for under implementation projects and evoking of personal guaran
tee which 
require court’s intervention. The Committee observe that these steps are the last resort for the recovery of 
loan for a failed project. Most important on the part of IREDA is to put in place an effective mechanism for 
ascertaining the viability o
f the projects for which loans are sanctioned. Besides the system of relaxing of 
norms also need a review. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that measures like OTS must be 
utilized sparingly and definitely not for willful defaulters. IREDA, bein
g a financial institution, must follow the 
benchmarks of financial prudence and monitor performance of repayments so as to recall loans before those 
turn into NPAs.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recovery through OTS in 29 cases was effected during the period
 
under observation of Audit as per the 
approved OTS Policy. While arriving at the settlement amount due consideration has been given to the status 
of the project, valuation of securities i.e. project assets/ collateral securities as obtained from governmen
t 
approved independent valuers and networth of personal/ corporate guarantors to the loan duly certified by 
practicing chartered accountant.  The summarized status of due amount in cases where OTS were 
sanctioned, recoveries through OTS, sacrifice for thes
e 29 cases is given as under:
-
 
         
 
   
(Amount in Crore)
 
Particular 
 
Total dues
 
Recovered 
 
Sacrifice
 
Principal 
 
18,117.22
 
17,316.64
 
800.58
 
Interest dues
 
22,239.55
 
3,533.57
 
 
18,705.98
 

25
 
 
LD & Incidental charges
 
4,313.60
 
34.66
 
4,278.94
 
Total 
 
44,670.37
 
20,884.87
 
23,785.5
 
 
 
It may be seen from the above table that IREDA has recovered most of the principal outstanding and the 
sacrifice on principal was only Rs. 800.58 Crore which is 4.41% only. The sacrifice on pr
incipal was mainly in 
case of Briquetting Sector and Waste to Energy Sector where the projects have adversely suffered due to 
technological issues.
 
 
As regard the observation on conducting physical inspection, release of interim loan, it is to inform that 
the 
systems and procedure have been strengthened and financing guidelines modified. It is ensured that the 
physical inspections are carried out pre and post sanction of the project loan and also during implementation 
of the project. Generally lender’s engi
neers are engaged to monitor the physical progress on the site and 
based on their reports only the disbursement are made in the project sanction. The policy of interim 
disbursement has been modified and no interim disbursement before the creation of mortga
ge is made unless 
bank guarantee is obtained. As regards monitoring of Trust and Retention Account (TRA), the recovery team 
is strengthened and they are now closely monitoring the TRA Accounts.  
 
 
Abandoned Projects indicate that the projects were either not financed by IREDA or were dropped by the 
developers. There could be many reasons for it relating to policy, regulation, land acquisition, evacuation, etc. 
When projects are sanctioned, condition
s for pre
-
execution, pre disbursement and compliance of security are 
imposed. The project will not move forward if it is not able to comply with these conditions. As a lender it is not 
prudent on our part to push a developer to take disbursement or push th
e project forward in case some of 
these conditions are not met. 
 
 
The appraisal process for sanction of the loan has been strengthened. The due diligence of the project loan 
application is carried out by reviewing the CIBIL Status of the promoter/guarantor
, external rating of the project 
by the rating agencies like CRISIL, ICRA, CARE, India Rating and Brickwork. Internal credit rating is also 
carried out. Based on the assessment of the rating of the project, the interest rate and security matrix is 
finalize
d. The financing guidelines are modified from time to time  it has been decided not to take exposure of 
more than 50% of project cost in respect of small hydro and cogeneration sector which are perceived more 
risky in nature. Biomass Sector is not being sa
nctioned any loan for the more than 5 years since the projects 
in the Biomass Sector are not performing well.
 
 
As regards, the recommendation of the Committee that OTS must be utilized sparingly, the same is noted for 
guidance and it is assured that this w
ould be used sparingly. IREDA shall approach NCLT/ file recovery 
proceeding before DRT/ initiate action under SARFEASI Act for resolution of Non
-
 
Performing Assets.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                            
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 

26
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 6)
 
Issue of Writing off loans
 
From the information submitted by IREDA, the Committee note that 
since the year 2001
-
02, the Company has 
written off a huge amount of bad loans. For instance in the year 2003
-
04, the written off bad loan amount was 
Rs. 12.25 crore. In the years 2009
-
10 and 2011
-
12 it was Rs. 16.13 crore and Rs. 23.86 crore respectively 
and in the years 2013
-
14 and 2014
-
15, it was Rs. 95.27 crore and Rs. 40.56 crore respectively. The Company 
has stated that these loans were technically written off from the books as they were classified as loss assets 
against which 100% provisioning was ma
de in earlier years. However, the recovery efforts for such technically 
written off loans are continuing in DRT/SARFAESI. The recovery affected against these loans shall be credited 
to P&L Statement as and when amount is recovered. The Company has also sta
ted that these projects were 
not in operation and the value of the security was depleting and thus, were identified for technical write off in 
order to get the advantage of income tax as per the Income Tax Act, 1961. The Committee note that the loans 
which
 
were considered for technical write off, are already classified as NPA (Loss Assets). The names of 
Promoters/Directors and guarantors are uploaded on CIBIL Website so as to bring to the notice of all FIs/ 
Banks about the default status of these accounts a
nd no further loans are extended to these borrowers 
generally by any bank/FIs.
 
The Committee are disheartened to note that IREDA is writing off huge amounts of loan and as the process is 
non transparent, it may lead to possibility of wrong
-
doings. Therefor
e, the Committee feel that as technical 
write
-
off creates non
-
transparency and destroys the credit risk management system, it must be done 
sparingly. The Committee expect that writing off should not develop as a regular practice in the Company and 
it shoul
d take strict action against the defaulters and exclusively blacklist defaulters so that no further loan is 
availed by them from any financing agency. The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the 
recovery made so far from the technicall
y written off loans year
-
wise, so that an assessment on the impact of 
technically writing off the loans can be made.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The recommendation of the Committee of using technical write off sparingly is noted for guidance.
 
 
It is to inform to committee that different recovery Actions against the defaulting borrowers are taken such as 
loans are recalled, action are initiated under SARFEASI Act, 2002/ Recovery Proceedings are filed before 
Debt Recovery Tribunal, the criminal pr
oceeding are initiated against the defaulting borrowers U/s 138 of 
Negotiable Instrument Act in respect of Cheque Dishonored Cases ( Post Dated Cheques are obtained as 
security at the time of loan sanction and documentation for the repayment schedule). In 
addition, the default 
status of the borrower’s account is report on  
CIBIL
 
Portal which is normally referred by all the Lending 
Institution/Banks before considering any loan sanction by a borrower. With the Promulgation of NCLT Act, the 
cases have been fil
ed in the NCLT against defaulting borrower which are in progress. 
 
The Committee is also informed that IREDA has already dispensed with the practice of technically writing off 
the borrower account w.e.f. 2015
-
16 onwards. 
 
 
As desired by Committee, the reco
very position from written off loans from 2008
-
09 till 2017
-
18 is as under:
-
 
 

27
 
 
 
Year 
 
Amount Recovered (in Crores)
 
2008
-
09
 
12.24
 
2009
-
10
 
10.08
 
2010
-
11
 
16.41
 
2011
-
12
 
8.58
 
2012
-
13
 
3.90
 
2013
-
14
 
2.75
 
2014
-
15
 
4.07
 
2015
-
16
 
4.47
 
2016
-
17
 
3.15
 
2017
-
18
 
6.10
 
Total 
 
71.75
 
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
 

28
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 7)
 
Issues of NPA
 
As per the data furnished by Audit, the gross NPAs of IREDA to the total loans outstanding in 2008
-
09 was 
13.34 
per cent 
which thereafter showed a decreasing trend and reduced to 3.86 per cent in 2012
-
13, except in 
the year 2011
-
12 in which it increased ma
rginally to 5.46 
per cent
. Further, as per the information furnished by 
the Ministry/IREDA, the gross NPA as on 30.09.2015 was Rs. 471.60 crore and as on 30.09.2016, the gross 
NPA was Rs. 554.67 crore. Audit has observed that the main reason for reduction 
in NPA from March 2013 to 
March 2015 was one time settlement (OTS) of NPA cases, upgradation to performing assets and write off of 
outstanding loans from the books of accounts.
 
The Committee have analyzed the issues related to OTS, write off and gaps betwe
en sanctions and 
disbursements in the preceding paras of the Report. While taking note of the strong observation of Audit, that 
reduction in NPA is due to OTS and write off outstanding loans, the Committee would like IREDA to 
specifically furnish the data 
of reduction in NPAs after excluding OTS/write off/upgradation to performing 
assets. The Committee are of the strong view that OTS/writing off should be sparingly resorted to and not for 
the purpose of book keeping for improving the image of the Company. T
here is an urgent need to take 
initiatives to improve the recovery position and increase the capital base of the Company. For this, IREDA 
should further strengthen its internal control mechanism and closely monitor the outstanding loans to reduce 
the level
 
of its NPAs.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted for guidance. Further, it may be noted that to strengthen 
recovery, IREDA has created a separate Recovery Cell headed by GM level officer. The Cell is continuously 
moni
toring all loans and also take preventive action to avoid future NPA Loans. As desired by Committee, NPA 
reduction excluding OTS / Written off / Upgradation of assets are as under:
-
 
 
A
.
 
Including OTS/Written off/ Upgradation of Assets.  The period covered is 
2012
-
13 to 2014
-
15 as the 
same period was covered in the audit observation.                         
 
                                                         
   
(Amount in Crore)
 
Particulars
 
2012
-
13
 
2013
-
14
 
2014
-
15
 
Gross NPA
 
254.80
 
341.55
 
475.85
 
*Gross NPA % 
 
3.86%
 
4.18%
 
5.34%
 
 
* Indicates % of Gross NPA to Total loans.
 
Excluding OTS/Written off/ Upgradation of Assets.
 
 
Particulars
 
12
-
13
 
13
-
14
 
14
-
15
 
Gross NPA
 
265.46
 
437.01
 
516.42
 
Gross NPA %
 
4.02%
 
5.28%
 
5.77%
 
 

29
 
 
It is to inform the committee 
that IREDA has not technically written off any loan after 2015
-
16.  Internal 
control mechanism has been strengthened to monitor NPAs regularly by Internal Audit & Board of Directors.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA          
                                                          
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 9)
 
 
Discrepancies in subsidy schemes
 
Several irregularities have been pointed out by Audit in implementation of subsidy schemes viz. continued 
passing on subsidy to borrowers who became ineligible, non
-
recovery of subsidy and absence of mechanism 
to ensure continuity of the project. The Compa
ny took the stand that in most of the programmes of the 
Ministry, wherein subsidy is being provided, there is an inbuilt mechanism of monitoring the physical and 
financial performance and therefore, it is the responsibility of the third party/implementing 
agency who certify 
the eligibility of the users. The Ministry on regular basis directs State Nodal Agencies for improvement in 
monitoring system. But in some cases as observed by Audit, 
subsidy amount was not recovered, for instance 
from M/s Purti Sakhar K
arkhana Limited and M/s IndBarath Energies Limited, where in spite of their projects 
switching over to 100 per cent coal based operation while only 25 per cent can be allowed, subsidy amount 
was not recovered as per the prescribed guidelines. The Committee
 
also noticed that in the case of 
Bhagyanagar Solvent Extractions Private Limited, subsidy was not recalled. To substantiate its stand, IREDA 
has quoted several State orders to justify switching to 100% coal based operation against admissible limit of 
25% 
as prescribed in the subsidy scheme. But, on the contrary, the Committee find that in the order of the 
Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission (MERC), the regulator upheld that 
Energy Purchase 
Agreement (EPA) 
dated 02.09.2002 would only operate if th
e cogeneration power plant uses non
-
fossil fuel 
and if the non
-
fossil fuel is not available then the EPA would cease to operate or remain suspended till the 
time bagasse is available for 240 day/annum. However, due to shortage of power in the State later, 
MERC 
allowed it to happen.
 
The Committee feel that any dilution in implementation of subsidy scheme was uncalled for as the purpose of 
subsidy to generate electricity through renewable sources got defeated and IREDA did not recover subsidy 
from the borrowe
r when the plant switched over to use of fossil fuel. Similarly in the cases of M/s IndBarath 
Energies Limited, M/s GK Bio Energy Limited and M/s Bhagayanagar Solvent Extractions Private Limited, 
Audit observed that the subsidy was not called back by IREDA
 
in spite of violations of terms and conditions 
governing the subsidy scheme. Even in some cases IREDA requested MNRE not to recall subsidy on the 
ground that the project has been commissioned. However, the Committee are of the considered opinion that 
thes
e actions of the Company defeat the very purpose of the subsidy scheme. They agree with the Audit 
observation that IREDA needs to develop a mechanism to monitor continuity of the project for the specified 
period after their commencement to ensure electrici
ty generation through RE project in lieu of Government 
subsidy. Further, subsidy should be recalled in all cases where projects do not run for the specified period as 
this dilutes the objective of the scheme. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need
 
for taking a policy 
decision by IREDA/MNRE in this regard. The concrete action in this regard should be taken and the 
Committee apprised accordingly.
 

30
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The interest subsidy scheme is not in existence as on today and the capital subsi
dy is only sanctioned and 
released by MNRE in Small Hydro and Cogeneration Sector. The said capital subsidy is released only upon 
commissioning of the project. The loan against the project is reduced against the amount of capital subsidy 
received.  
 
The in
terest subsidy as per the scheme can be recalled if the project is abandoned and not commissioned. 
However, if the project is fully commissioned and is in operation, the interest subsidy amount is not recalled. 
Similarly, in the case of capital subsidy whi
ch is normally treated as part of means of finance, the same is not 
recalled if the project is commissioned. This was decided by MNRE in the case of M/s HCL Agro Limited vide 
letter No. 6/1/94
-
CPG dated 27.09.2004. 
(Copy enclosed at Annexure
-
IV
)
 
 
Accordingly, the interest subsidy to M/s Purti Sakhar Karkhana Limited was passed on to the borrower upto 
the quarter ended September’2009, the dues for which period were settled by the borrower. For the remaining 
period of the loan amount the unutilized s
ubsidy amount was refunded back to MNRE.
 
 
In case of M/s Ind Barath Energies Ltd, the interest subsidy was recalled by IREDA as per advise of MNRE 
since the project was reported to be running on coal. The borrower has filed a writ petition in the High Cour
t 
challenging the decision of recall of interest subsidy amount. The matter is still pending.
 
 
In the case of M/s G K Bio Energy, the capital subsidy was sanctioned by MNRE as a means of finance and 
the project was commissioned in August’2005. Therefore, the capital subsidy was not recalled. 
 
 
In the case of Bhagyanagar Solvent Extraction Pvt Ltd., 
the interest subsidy was passed on to the borrower 
based on their payment of IREDA dues. The balance interest subsidy was converted by MNRE into capital 
subsidy and therefore, the outstanding loan was reduced by the capital subsidy amount. 
 
However, the ob
servation of the Committee to recall subsidy in case of violation are noted for guidance and 
would be taken care of in drafting of new schemes.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                  
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 10)
 
Monitoring and Vigilance of the sanctioned projects
 
The Committee have been apprised that IREDA officials visit the project site before sanction of the project, 
during its implementation and also
 
after commissioning of the project. Subsequent project visits are also 
undertaken in the event of default of payment, non
-
operation of the plant etc. IREDA has also started 
appointing Lender’s Engineer (LE) for monitoring of the projects. Appointment of L
E for 1
-
 
2 years post 
commissioning of the project is reportedly being considered too which can be extended based on 
requirements. As regards the Ministry's monitoring mechanism, the Committee have been informed that the 
Ministry has appointed two Governme
nt nominee Directors on the Board of IREDA to ensure the compliance 
of financial guidelines for sanctioning of loans under various RE projects. Further, the performance on the 
various parameters fixed in the MoU, is monitored by Inter
-
Ministerial Committee
 
set up by the DPE in their 

31
 
 
MoU evaluation meetings and the Company is rated according to its performance, along with review meetings 
that are conducted periodically by Secretary/Joint Secretary 
-
 
MNRE on the performance of IREDA and also 
on the policies/p
rocedures adopted by IREDA in financing of projects. However, despite the Ministry's 
monitoring, discrepancies have been noticed by C&AG in the projects financed by IREDA. The Committee 
are, therefore, of the considered view that to prevent such discrepanc
ies, there is a need to improve the 
efficacy of its internal Audit, ensure safety of the financial assets, monitor the financial health of the borrower, 
besides appointing LE to every project to keep a check on any deviations and to discourage any further 
non
-
compliance by the developers and the Company as well.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
The observation / suggestion of Hon’ble Committee is noted for future guidance. It is however, to inform that in 
addition to appointment of Lender Engineer and concurrent au
ditor, a separate Recovery Cell has been 
created in IREDA. The cell monitors on a regular basis the operation of the project, financial health of the 
borrower, regularly monitors Trust & Retention Account of the borrower to keep a check on the project reve
nue 
and utilization.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 11)
 
Manpower Requirements
 
The Committee note that out of 213,
 
total sanctioned strength (executive and non
-
executive), the actual 
manpower strength of the Company is only 152. The Company informed that based on the study of ASCI, 
which suggested to increase the manpower, the Board of Directors has sanctioned the str
ength as 215 and it 
will reach 170 at the end of March, 2017. Though Company targets to raise the number in next five years, the 
Committee are surprised to note that despite the Audit objections in the year 2012
-
13, the Company took four 
years to increase 
their workforce. The Committee further note that despite DPE instructions there is no 
independent Director on the Board of IREDA and the Ministry of NRE are still in the process of appointing 
independent Directors on the Board of the Company. In view of th
e above, the Committee infer that manpower 
constraints in IREDA may hamper its efficiency and operations of Company. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the MNRE/IREDA should immediately initiate necessary action to fill up the vacant posts and appointme
nt 
of Independent Director on the Board of the Company so that its performance is not adversely affected.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The suggestion/ observation of Committee noted for compliance. It is to inform the Committee that as on 
31.03.2018, the no. of employees was 149. During the year 2018
-
19, we have recruited 17 executive trainees 
in Technical, Finance and Legal departments. 
We have also recruited 3 engineers on contract basis and 
henceforth IREDA shall be recruiting similar number of employees each year to reach the sanctioned strength.
 
 
The committee is further informed that MNRE has inducted 3 independent Directors in April
’2018. The number 

32
 
 
of independent Directors has now reached 5 i.e. the requisite number as required as per SEBI norms being 
50% of the total Board Strength.  The total no. of Directors in the Board is 10 consisting of 3 functional 
directors including CMD, 2
 
Government Nominee Directors and 5 independent directors.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 12)
 
Increasing equity bas
e of IREDA
 
The Committee note that keeping in view the capital requirement of the Company, the authorized share capital 
of IREDA was enhanced to Rs. 6000 Crore in 2014
-
15. The paid up capital of IREDA at present is Rs. 784.60 
Crore. Due to Mini Ratna Statu
s, IREDA is no longer eligible for any further equity infusion by the Government 
of India. Operations of IREDA viz. lending as well as raising of resources now depend upon its net worth. The 
Committee have been further informed that in view of the enhanced
 
target of Government of India for setting 
up renewable energy upto 175 GW by 2022, IREDA has also prepared its business plan for next five years 
projecting a market share upto 15 per cent. Besides, IREDA was expected to raise its requisite equity capital 
to the extent of Rs. 1250 crore through an IPO. The Company has also submitted that increase in authorized 
share capital from Rs. 1000 Crore to Rs. 6000 crore is only an enabling provision, its full benefit can accrue if 
it is capitalized to that extent.
 
A
s stated by the Secretary during the course of deposition, to achieve 100 GW RE, there is a need for 
financing of Rs. five to six lakh crore. So far, Banks have sanctioned loan of Rs. 1,38,220 crore out of which 
Rs. 63,000 crore has been disbursed. The Com
mittee are disappointed to note that IREDA’s share in this 
regard was very less as stated by the Secretary, MNRE during the evidence. The Committee emphasize that 
IREDA being the main Government agency for refinancing the RE project, it has to play an impo
rtant role for 
which IREDA need intensified capitalization, particularly when the Government has scaled up RE target to 
175GW by 2022, for which substantial investments would be required. The Committee in this regard, would 
like IREDA to raise resources fr
om market through IPO as projected by the Company, which would also 
enable it to unlock its true value and increase its visibility in domestic and international market. The Committee 
hope that the Government/MNRE would help IREDA to capitalize intensively 
as IREDA has to play the major 
role in refinancing for the scaled up ambitious target for RE sector.
 
Reply of the Government
 
IREDA has obtained the Cabinet approval  for  its IPO for Rs. 139 Crores i.e. 13.90 Crores shares @ Rs. 10 
each. The GOI share hold
ing post IPO, shall be 85% and public share holding shall be 15%. The Draft Red 
Hearing Prospectus (DRHP) has been filed on 22.12.2017 and in principle approval of SEBI also received on 
16.02.2018. IREDA will launch its IPO keeping in view the market condi
tions for NBFC/Banks  or favorable 
market sentiment.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 13)
 

33
 
 
Research, Development and
 
Demonstration in Renewable Energy Sector 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that the Country remains dependent on imported technology in RE 
Sector as indigenous technology has not moved ahead much. During the evidence, the Committee have been 
apprise
d by the Ministry/IREDA representatives that 85 per cent of the solar panels are still being imported 
from China as they are cheaper and technologically advanced.
 
So far as the efforts made by MNRE in Research and Development in RE Sector are concerned, the 
Committee find that Rs.584 crore has been spent on Research, Development and Demonstration as support 
for R&D projects to various R&D/academic institutions/indus
try in the area of solar thermal, SPV, Biogas, 
Wind, Biofuel by hydrogen and fuel cell; and to MNRE Institutes, namely, NISE and NIWE during the 12th 
Plan Period. Besides, MNRE has three dedicated Institutions as autonomous bodies for solar energy, wind 
en
ergy and bio
-
energy which are functioning as research demonstrations, standardization and testing centres. 
Alternate Hydro energy Centre at IIT Roorkee is also involved for testing and evaluation of small hydro power. 
 
The Committee have also been apprised
 
that the Ministry has also supported creation of a Centre of 
Excellence for innovation, incubation and entrepreneurship in the area of renewable energy at CIIE IIM 
Ahmedabad by providing/committing a grant
-
in
-
aid of Rs.24 Crore. CIIE IIM Ahmedabad through
 
this grant 
has created Indian Fund for Sustainable Energy to support start up with innovative ideas besides providing 
them training and hand holding support.
 
The Committee firmly believe that the Country has scientific and technological potential to move 
forward in RE 
Sector for which more needs to be done in the field of Research and Development. There is no dearth of 
talent in the Country. The need of the hour is to encourage Research and Development in RE sector through 
our premier technological institu
tions like IITs. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that IREDA/Ministry 
has to work in the mission mode so as to encourage financing for Research and Development, particularly in 
RE Sector and financing for smaller project so as to ensure technologi
cally competitive projects besides 
promoting use of indigenous products through various policy decisions in RE Sector. The concrete initiatives 
as suggested may be taken and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The Ministry of New
 
and Renewable Energy (MNRE)  has been supporting research, design and development 
through various R&D/academic institutions, industries, etc., in the fields of solar, wind, biogas, hydrogen, fuel 
cells, geothermal, etc., for technology development and dem
onstration leading to commercialization. A 
comprehensive policy and guidelines for research, development and demonstration (RD&D) for new and 
renewable energy sector is in place. During the 12
th
 
Plan Period, total of 112  R&D projects in the area of solar 
energy, wind energy, bio
-
energy, small hydro, hydrogen and fuel cells were sanctioned to various 
R&D/academic institutions, industries with total grant of Rs.523.43 crore. The MNRE has spent Rs. 307.66 
crores on R&D projects during the last three years. Th
e RD&D Programme was also reviewed by a Panel of 
experts in September, 2017. 
 
The MNRE has decided to scale
-
up its RD&D effort to Technology Development and Innovation Programme 
during the current three years period from 2017
-
18 to 2019
-
20. The focus is on
 
promoting application oriented 
innovation, integrated with research and development for for commercial applications and testing and 
standardization for quality and reliability assurance in renewable energy sector. A Technology Development 

34
 
 
and Innovation P
olicy (TDIP) is also being finalised. It is based on a robust ecosystem for support for 
research, innovation and validation for technology development and demonstration, testing and 
standardization, awards for innovation linked with start
-
ups. 
 
 
Following 
steps are being taken by the Ministry for development of indigenous Solar PV technology 
 
 
A
.
 
Comprehensive Solar PV manufacturing Policy
 
 
MNRE is proposing a comprehensive scheme to build up manufacturing capacity of solar PV 
modules, cells, wafers/ ingots an
d polysilicon in India which, 
inter
-
alia
 
provides following 
incentives:
 

 
Capital subsidy for new capacities/ up
-
gradation of capacity
 

 
Production Subsidy to existing and upcoming manufacturing facility
 

 
Fiscal Incentives in the form of Exemption from Customs 
duty on import of capital goods 
required for setting up solar manufacturing facility
 

 
Permission to set up solar power plant with provision of banking the power generated th
e-
refrom, to reduce the cost of power supply to manufacturing unit.
 
 
B
.
 
Solar PV manufac
turing facility linked with PPAs for solar PV power plant
 

 
MNRE envisages setting up of around 3 GW of Solar PV Manufacturing Capacities in I
n-
dia linked with assured offtake in the form of PPAs of 10 GW for Solar Power Plant.
 

 
The manufacturing capacity is p
roposed to be allotted through transparent competitive 
bidding wherein, bidding shall be for tariff for the PPAs and capacity allocated to bidder 
(s) shall be on bucket filling basis.
 
 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA         
                                                          
Dated: 26.11.2018
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 16 & 17 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 15)
 
Bio
-
mass co
-
generation
 
The Committee have been informed that lack of regulatory policy framework for governing the price of raw 
material, escalation of tariff not commensurating with the hike in price of Biomass, downward revision of tariff 
by DISCOMs in some cases despite enter
ing into a PPA development of other industries and inexperienced or 
first time borrowers with lack of long term planning, bio
-
mass co
-
generation projects are the main reasons for 
loans sanctioned by IREDA for bio
-
mass co
-
generation plants turning into NPA.
 
The Committee are of the considered view that considering the importance of bio
-
mass cogeneration 
particularly their contribution to address the environmental concerns and tackling climate change and the 
significant employment they provide in rural areas,
 
there is a need to encourage and incentivize this sector. 
IREDA/MNRE has to play a greater role by co
-
ordinating with State Governments, through policy intervention 

35
 
 
and integrating with schemes like MGNREGA so as to enhance the viability of bio
-
mass power
 
plants 
particularly in the States having high bio
-
mass power potential. All the desired initiatives should be taken in 
this regard and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
 
Reply of the Government
 
The suggestion / observation of Committee has been noted 
for future compliance and for guidance in helping 
existing biomass projects to become operative/ operate viably through extending necessary concessions. 
 
It is a fact that the some of DISCOMs are not willing to purchase power produced from Biomass Power Pl
ants 
due to higher tariffs as compared to Solar and Wind energy. However, the Ministry has written to the State 
Governments to formulate a policy on Biomass Power and has also been urging the states and DISCOMs to 
purchase power produced from Biomass Power
 
Plants.
 
The Ministry has recently brought out a new scheme to support biomass co
-
generation in Sugar Mills and 
Other Industries. Under the new scheme, there is provision of higher Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to the 
biomass power plants. The rate of
 
CFA has been revised and ceiling on the maximum amount of CFA has also 
been removed.
 
The Ministry is also planning to bring out a new scheme on Biomass supply chain management to ensure 
utilization of biomass for manufacture of value added products like b
riquettes, pellets and terrified pellets so 
that biomass available in rural areas can be utilized at optimum level and farmers can get additional income.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                      
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 16)
 
Other issues
 
The Committee during the course of examination besides considering the issues pertaining to IREDA 
particularly those raised in the Audit paras, also examined other mat
ters related to renewable energy sector as 
a whole. The observations/ recommendations of the Committee in this regard are as follows :
 
(A) 
Sensitizing people’s contribution towards environment
 
The Committee note that as part of creation and evacuation of renewable energy infrastructures, 
IREDA/MNRE is involved in Grid Connected solar roof top programme and the schemes / programmes of the 
MNRE are implemented all over the Country including rural 
areas. On analysis of the data on sanctioned and 
installed capacity as furnished to the Committee, it is observed that States like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, 
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttarakhand have ach
ieved 
less than 30% of sanctioned capacity while States like Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand have installed 
capacity of as low as 5% and 10% respectively. States like Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal and Bihar have installed capacity much
 
higher than their sanctioned capacity. The Committee are 
concerned to note that States like Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Bihar, Daman and Diu and Dadar
-
Nagar 
Haweli have zero sanctioned capacity. The Committee were astounded to note such high level variat
ions in 
this programme. The Committee feel that as Government is providing subsidy for solar roof top programme it 
becomes imperative to monitor its implementation. India is one of the lowest per capita consumers of 
electricity in the world. The Committee 
are disheartened to note that despite energy shortages and high cost 
of back up supply, roof
-
top solar PV systems have not yet become widespread in India. The Committee feel 

36
 
 
that this is primarily due to lack of adequate financing, unfamiliar technology an
d low consumer awareness. 
The Committee also note that there are various discrepancies in implementation of subsidy scheme, like non 
availability of subsidy to the needy people, prolonged delay in disbursement of the subsidy and no continuity 
in the scheme
. Therefore, solar roof top programme has not achieved the desired level.
 
The Committee are of the view that aided by Government policy and cost effectiveness the solar roof
-
top 
programme has the potential to transform the renewable energy sector and promo
te ecologically sustainable 
growth while addressing India’s energy security challenge. The Committee note that Government has full 
support of World Bank at international level too and a variety of financing mechanisms are available under this 
programme. Th
erefore, the Committee desire that Government should spread awareness about the scheme 
and impart required training to interested investors to make them familiar with the technology. It will not only 
correspond to a major innovation for the roof
-
top market
 
but also improve the investment climate for solar PV 
while addressing the much needed low cost power at individual level. At the same time, the Committee hope 
that, it will sensitize the public about climate change and the individual responsibility toward
s saving the 
environment.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Under Rooftop Solar (RTS) Scheme MNRE is providing subsidy for the residential, institutional and social 
sector for installation of RTS plants. For the Government sector incentives are provided on 
achievement of 
targeted RTS capacity within a given time frame against capacity sanctioned by MNRE. There is no subsidy 
for industrial and commercial sector. The scheme is being implemented through State Nodal Agencies and 
PSUs. The proposals for sanction 
of subsidy/incentives are to be submitted by these implementing agencies 
through online web portal SPIN. Scheme is demand driven and proposals are yet to be received from some of 
the states/UTs.  Updated statement on state
-
wise capacity sanctioned and capa
city achieved under 
subsidy/incentive category and without subsidy/incentive category is giv
en in the table at Annexure
-
VII
. It may 
be seen that some of the states have good progress of RTS capacity installation in non
-
subsidised sector. 
Project completion
 
duration generally varies from 15 to 18 months from the date of sanction. The progress is 
closely monitored by MNRE. The subsidy/incentives are disbursed on submission of completion report by the 
implementing agencies on the online web portal. It has been
 
observed there is considerable delay in 
submission of completion report by these implementing agencies. 
 
 
The installation of RTS plants was slow during initial phase because of challenges such as involvement of 
multiple approval process, apprehension of 
loss of revenue by Discoms due to moving out of high tariff paying 
customers, non
-
uniformity of state regulations, skill and & knowledge gap, lack of awareness, etc. Ministry has 
taken various steps to address these challenges, these include development of
 
online single window portal, 
creating public awareness, identification of gaps in policies and regulations, manuals for best practices, skill 
development and capacity building of Discom/banks, etc.
 
  
 
The Ministry under various (multilateral/bilateral) te
chnical assistance programmes have taken initiatives to 
promote RTS in the country by providing support to the various stakeholders and these include aggregation of 
demand with prior approvals to get benefit of economies of scale, development of single win
dow portal from 
application process to commissioning / net
-
metering installation and release of subsidy, capacity building 

37
 
 
activities, formulation of conducive policies and regulations, bid process management, creation of RTS cell in 
the Discom, etc.  
 
[Mi
nistry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
(B) 
Installation of roof
-
top solar panel on residential premises
 
The Committee note that many of the States 
have their own policies in place, and installation of solar panels 
by the general public on their residences is governed by these policies which varies from State to State. The 
Committee have been apprised that the cost of a solar panel is approximately Rs
. 50,000 per KW and that 
many private banks are open to providing loans to people for the same. However, people in general hesitate 
to spend huge amounts for solar roof top panels as the subsidy provided by the Ministry is not passed on to 
the people. The 
Committee see a good future in residential roof top programme of the Government and feel 
that the pressure on the discoms can be eased with more and more people using solar roof tops. But to 
achieve this, the Government has to spread awareness amongst peop
le about the programme, the loan 
facility being provided by the banks and the subsidy being provided by the Government.
 
Reply of the Government
 
RTS scheme is being implemented by SNAs and PSUs. After sanction of the RTS capacity these agencies 
have to comp
lete the project within a time period of 15
-
18 months.  The subsidy/incentives are disbursed on 
submission of completion report by the implementing agencies on the online web portal. It has been observed 
there is considerable delay in submission of complet
ion reports by these implementing agencies due to 
involvement of multiple agencies. To expedite the process single window portal has been developed which will 
take care from application stage to commissioning / net
-
metering installation and release of subs
idy and the 
process can be tracked online by the consumer. 
 
 
 
So far awareness is concerned Ministry has planned public awareness campaign through print and electronic 
media to create awareness on RTS in the masses.
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM 
No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
 
(C) 
Promotion of roof top solar panels on Government, Industrial & commercial buildings, Railway 
Stations and foot over bridges of metro and 
railway station, etc.
 
The Committee note that solar panels are being installed on Government buildings to save power and make 
use of the land. The Committee have been informed that the life span of solar panels is of 25 years with a 
degradation of 10% ever
y 10 years and the power produced through solar panel is cost effective. Besides, 
multilateral funding is also being provided through World Bank and ADB to promote rooftops in industrial, 
commercial, residential and social sector. Regarding installation of
 
solar panels to cover foot
-
over bridges at 
railway stations, metro stations in place of metallic sheds, the Committee have been informed that the 
Government can try to install the solar panels but the efficiency of such type of design will limit the effic
iency 
of the solar module. The model has already been tried on the parking sheds in many organizations with solar 

38
 
 
panels as a roof. While taking note of the cost effectiveness and longevity of the solar panels, the Committee 
recommend that the Government s
hould encourage installing solar panels on roof top of Government, 
industrial and commercial buildings including railway stations and bus stops. The Government should also 
encourage the State Governments, urban local bodies etc. to include installation of 
solar panels in their 
building bye
-
laws. The efficiency of solar panels already installed on parking sheds and foot
-
over bridges of 
rail and metro stations should be assessed and if found, should be implemented all over the Country.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
To ensure the quality and efficiency of the solar PV modules the MNRE Guidelines provides for installation of 
solar PV modules used in solar power plants under MNRE Scheme must confirm to IEC/BIS standards. 
 
 
In order to promote RTS systems in various ra
ilway premises, metro rail locations, etc., the Ministry has 
already sanctioned RTS projects to Railway, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, Kochi Metro Rail Corporation, 
Noida Metro Rail and Lucknow Metro Rail Corporation. Aggregate capacity of about 68 MW has 
been reported 
commissioned by these organisations.
 
MNRE is constantly pursuing with Central Ministries/Departments as also State Governments for installation 
of RTS projects in Government buildings. MoUD in its Model Building Bye
-
Laws has made provision fo
r 
installation of RTS projects on all buildings above a certain area and has written to all States/UTs to make 
RTS compulsory on buildings by making changes in building byelaws. Four States/ UTs (Chandigarh, 
Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh) have ma
de mandatory bye
-
laws/ regulations. 
 
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
(D) 
Installation of Solar panels on water bodies
 
The Committee have been informed that the Government of India has approved the implementation of a 'Pilot
-
cum
-
Demonstration project for Development of Grid
-
connected Solar PV power Plants on Canal
-
banks and 
Canal
-
tops' under National Solar Mission (NSM). O
n the basis of the request received from various States, in
-
principle approval has been given for setting
-
up full targeted capacity of 50 MW canal
-
top and 50 MW canal
-
bank solar PV power projects in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Kerala, Karnataka,
 
Punjab, 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. IREDA is financing the Solar Projects being installed on canal 
banks and canal tops as applied by some of the developers. The Committee have also been informed that 
there is no harmful effect of installi
ng solar panels on canals either on the environment or the water for 
consumption by animals, birds, plants and humans. The Committee note that although the concept of 
installing solar panels over water bodies is new in India, solar panels have been install
ed world
-
wide on water 
bodies like ponds, lakes etc. The Committee are of the view that this concept would help in saving electricity 
as there are a huge number of water bodies/lakes/canals in India some of which are major tourist attractions. 
The Committe
e recommend that Ministry and IREDA should sincerely work on this project and also give wide 
publicity on their website and print media to attract developers from various States. However, while installing 
the solar panels, care should be taken on preservin
g the ambience of those water bodies, which are major 
tourist attractions. 
 

39
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Under MNRE’s ‘Pilot
-
cum
-
Demonstration project for development of grid
-
connected solar PV power plants on 
canal
-
banks and canal
-
tops’, 94 MW solar PV power projects on canal
-
tops/ canal
-
banks have been 
commissioned. Taking this concept further, MNRE has dir
ected Solar Energy Corporation of India Limited 
(SECI), to explore possibility of setting up floating solar PV power plants, through competitive bidding in 
different states of India. 
 
To begin with, SECI has floated a tender for setting up 150 MW floating 
solar PV power plants on Rihand Dam 
in Sonbhadra district of Uttar Pradesh.
 
Further, in December’2016, IREDA had sanctioned 14.5 MW Canal Bank Solar PV Power Project of M/s 
Svarog Global Power Ltd. in Uttarakhand and disbursed Rs. 70 Crore towards the proj
ect. IREDA has also 
sanctioned a 22 MW Floating Solar Power Project to be setup in Tamil Nadu.
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
(E) 
Install
ation of Solar panels on highways
 
Regarding the use of solar
-
panels for lighting the path on National and State Highways, the Committee note 
that the MNRE has supported 50 km path from Deogarh  to Basukinath temple in Jharkhand with 5 x 100 
KWP solar power
 
plant. The Government has proposed to try the same model on State and National 
Highways. The cost involved would be roughly Rs. 1.5 lakh per KWP solar power plant with centralized 
location for better maintenance and safety. The Committee appreciate the in
itiative of the Government as 
solar panels on highways would prove to be cost effective in the long run in view of the vast network of 
National and State highways in the Country. The Committee emphasize that more State and National 
Highways should be cover
ed and desire to be apprised of the progress on the same, the response received 
from NHAI and the State Governments on the matter as well as the future plans of MNRE.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Under Off
-
grid Solar PV Programme Ministry is providing support
 
for installation of solar street lights 
throughout the country, with special emphasis on areas where there is no facility for street lighting systems 
through grid power, North Eastern States and Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected districts. So far as ligh
ting 
on State and National Highways is concerned, these are mainly supplied through grid power, however, NHAI 
and State authorities may consider using solar power, which may prove more cost effective with availability 
of
 
 
cheaper energy storage solutions i
n coming future. MNRE can provide necessary support in terms of 
prescribing standards and specification in this regard.
 
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
(F) Exploiting of Wind Energy potential by various States
 

40
 
 
 
The Committee note that wind energy potential mainly exists in 8 to 9 States and most of these States are yet 
to exploit their full wind potential. Although MNRE has taken initi
atives to exploit their energy, the desired 
targets have not been achieved. Delay in land allotment, obtaining clearance especially of forest land, non
-
development of accurate forecasting and scheduling system, delay in payment to wind power generators, 
'm
ost
-
run' status not being complied with, breaking down of wind power generators, etc. have been cited as 
some of the major factors in non
-
achievement of targets in the wind energy sector by the developers and the 
States. The Committee find that State Gover
nments have not provided enough support to deal with the 
problems of developers especially in allotment of land and the required clearances which are the main 
reasons for delay in initiating the projects.
 
The Committee note that apart from other useful ini
tiatives, the Government is establishing Renewable Energy 
Management Centers (REMCs) at 11 locations in renewable resource rich States. The Committee, however 
find that not even a single REMC has been established as yet. The Committee recommend expediting 
establishment of REMCs that would be of great help in advanced forecasting, dispatching solutions & real 
time monitoring of RE generation to closely coordinate with the Grid Operations. The Committee also 
recommend the Government to bring out a comprehensi
ve policy for taking care of all concerns of wind 
energy developers at the earliest that is coherent across all States in India. The policy should not only focus 
on reducing cost but also on reducing risk of installing wind projects. 
 
Reply of the Governme
nt
 
Wind Energy
 
 
The Ministry regularly issues guidelines and policies for taking care of concerns of wind energy developers in 
consultation with all the windy states and stakeholders. This Ministry has issued guidelines for development of 
onshore wind 
power project, prototype, transparent competitive bidding process and Revised List of Models & 
Manufacturers in order to ensure orderly growth of wind power sector and also ensure the quality & safety of 
wind power projects. Regarding state related issues 
like delays in payment, must run status, etc., the Ministry 
issues advisories to the state Governments.
 
 
 
Status of Renewable Energy Management Center (REMC)
 
 
Power Grid Corporation of India (PGCIL) is implementing the REMC. Total 11 locations: States Load
 
Dispatch 
Centres (SLDC) of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh & 
Rajasthan, Southern Region Load Dispatch Centre (SRLDC), Western Region Load Dispatch Centre 
(WRLDC), Northern Region Load Dispatch Centre (NRLDC) & N
ational Load Dispatch Centre (NLDC).
 
 
 
Budget: Rs. 409 crore: being provided by Ministry of Power.
 
 
Tenders for 11 REMCs has been done in 3 packages: a) Southern Region Package (TN, AP , Karnataka, 
SRLDC) b) Western Region Package (Gujarat, Maharashtra, MP ,
 
WRLDC) c) Northern Region Package 
(Rajasthan, NRLDC, NLDC).
 
 

41
 
 
 
The implementation of REMC takes 15 months from the award of contract. All the tenders have been awarded 
and the REMCs are under implementation.
 
 
 
Commissioning Schedule:
 
REMCs are scheduled to
 
be commissioned progressively from December 2018 to 
June 2019.
 
 
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                                                   
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
(G) Avoiding installation of second 
-
han
d Wind units
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that 70 percent indigenization has been achieved by manufacturers of Wind 
Energy Units. However, instances have been reported as apprised to the Committee regarding installation of 
second
-
hand wind energy units
 
as new units in India which were earlier closed down in other Countries. 
Shockingly, neither IREDA nor officials of MNRE are aware of such installations. The Committee express their 
apprehension that such installations are taking place without the knowled
ge of MNRE and IREDA. Now when 
things have been brought into the knowledge of IREDA/Ministry, it is expected that such activities would stop 
and the Government will promote indigenization and installation of new wind units. The Committee also 
recommend exp
editing replacement of large turbines in place of smaller turbines so that capacity (potential of 
wind energy) could be increased.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
For wind turbines, the extent of indigenisation is about 70
-
80%. The Ministry maintains a list wind turbine 
models through Revised List of Models & Manufacturers (RLMM) mechanism. As per RLMM guidelines, the 
wind turbine models which are listed in the RLMM
 
can only be installed in the country and only those models 
& manufacturers are allowed which have hub/ nacelle manufacturing/ assembly facility in India. The same list 
is being followed by all the states which ensure installation of new wind turbines only
. Further, as per 
Guidelines for installation of prototype wind turbine models, it is clearly mentioned that no second hand 
components shall be allowed to procure / import in India. Further, this Ministry has not received any 
information about the installa
tion of second hand wind turbines. MNRE has issued Repowering Policy for 
replacing old wind turbines in order to exploit maximum wind power potential.  
 
[Ministry of New & Renewable Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA                                        
Dated: 26.11.2018]
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 23 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 

42
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
 
 
 
-
Nil
-
 
 
 

43
 
 
CHAPT
ER IV
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAD 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 8)
 
 
Status of IREDA
-
Applicability of RBI Norms
 
 
It has been stated in the Audit 
Para that while scrutinizing IREDA’s application for categorizing it as an 
infrastructure finance company, RBI noticed that it was exceeding the permissible exposure limits. RBI, 
therefore, directed (September 2010) IREDA to submit the time frame within wh
ich IREDA would comply with 
RBI norms of December 2006. The Ministry/IREDA has stated that IREDA did not apply to RBI for 
infrastructure Finance Company status. On a specific query as to whether IREDA had ever applied for being 
designated as Infrastructure
 
Finance Company, RBI in the written reply has stated that IREDA had applied for 
classifying itself as IFC vide its letter no. Accts/26/NBFC/96
-
97/IREDA/VI dated March 12, 2010. The 
Committee are unable to comprehend how the Ministry/IREDA straight away de
nied applying to RBI regarding 
the infrastructure status even when Audit in the replies has categorically mentioned about this and RBI in the 
replies specifically quoted the relevant letter no. and date. The Committee take strong objection to the way 
they 
have been misinformed about the position in this regard. They would like Ministry/IREDA to explain the 
position.
 
 
As stated by RBI, IREDA is currently categorized as NBFC Non Deposit Accepting
-
Systemically Important 
Company. The Committee have been apprise
d that the exposure norms of RBI with respect to single 
borrower/group of borrowers do not apply to IREDA being a Government NBFC not accepting/holding public 
deposit in terms of RBI circular. As stated by the Ministry/ IREDA, IREDA’s Board of Directors ha
s approved 
the exposure norms for NBFC i.e. single borrower 15%+5% of net worth and for group borrowers 25%+10% of 
net worth. The Committee further note that as per the position indicated by the RBI, in view of the role being 
played by Government companies
 
in discharging social obligations, norms prescribed by their respective 
supervisory Departments/Ministries and to avoid dual control and regulation over them, the Bank had, in 
consultation with the Central Government, decided to grant them exemption from 
key regulatory provisions 
vide Notifications dated January 13, 2000 and October 1, 2002. While appreciating the spirit of the relaxations 
granted by RBI to NBFC, the Committee feel that these relaxations need to be exercised sparingly after due 
diligence a
nd with proper justifications. In case of IREDA, Audit has pointed out that the prescribed credit 
exposure limit was exceeded in 29% of selected cases. Not only that IREDA exceeded its own relaxation 
norms, for example IREDA exceeded the exposure limit eve
n to 56 per cent in case of M/s Tata Power 
Company Limited (Project No. 1838), as pointed out by Audit, besides deviations of various kinds made in 40 
per cent of selected cases. Not only that, IREDA was operating an OTS scheme continuously without a fixed
 
timeframe, which could promote a culture of non
-
 
payment, as rightly observed by Audit in its report. Above all, 
as observed in preceding paras of the report, many of the projects after interim disbursement were 
abandoned, the percentage of commissioned p
rojects being only 31 per cent during 2015
-
16, thus serving 
little social obligations.
 
 
 
The Committee find that RBI is in the process of bringing all deposit taking systemically important 
Government owned companies under the provision of RBI’s prudential 
norms framework, in view of the high 
systemic risk they can pose on account of their large balance sheets and their interconnectedness in the 
broader financial system besides their ability to impact financial markets being recipients from the budgets. 

44
 
 
Whil
e taking note of the large scale relaxation being granted by IREDA as elaborated above, the Committee 
would like to recommend to consider bringing even the Non Deposit Accepting
-
systemically Important 
Companies too within the RBI’s prudential norms framewo
rk on the same consideration, after due consultation 
with these Government NBFC’s and concerned Ministries
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Ministry and IREDA conveys sincere regrets regarding incorrect communication that IREDA did not apply 
to RBI for Infras
tructure Status. The fact is that though IREDA had once referred to RBI for classification of 
IREDA as Infrastructure Finance Company, the same was not pursued by IREDA due to RBI requirement of 
submitting the time frame within which IREDA would comply wit
h RBI norms of December’ 2006. 
 
 
The table given below would clear as to how IREDA Board has approved the exposure norms in line with RBI 
exposure norms as contained in Circular No. RBI/DNBR/2016
-
17/45 dated 09.11.2017. (Refer page no. 31 
para 22 (1) )
 
Table: IREDA’s exposure norms vs RBI Norms
 
 
Particulars  
 
Single borrower
 
Group borrower
 
Exposure norms for  NBFC
 
15%
 
25%
 
Exposure norms for NBFC financing to 
Infrastructure 
projects ( adopted by IREDA)
 
20%
 
 
(15%+ 5%)
 
35%
 
 
(25% + 10%)
 
Exposure norms for NBFC classified as 
Infrastructure 
Finance Company by RBI
 
25%
 
 
(15% + 10%)
 
40%
 
 
(25% + 15%)
 
 
Since IREDA is financing RE Projects only, which fall under the definition of Infrastructure Projects, IREDA 
Board has approved exposure to sing
le borrower upto 20% of networth and for single group of borrower upto 
35% of its networth as indicated in the 2
nd
 
Row of the table. Had IREDA been classified as Infrastructure 
Finance Company by RBI, IREDA’s exposure norms could have been 25% and 40% for 
single borrower and 
group of borrower respectively ( Row 3 of the table). 
 
 
 
It is to inform that the above norms as per approved by the Board were being followed by IREDA in 
view of the exemption provided by RBI vide their circular dated 13.01.2000 to all
 
government NBFCs which 
are Systemically Important Non Deposit Taking. As per the latest circular dated 31
st
 
May, 2018,  these 
exemptions have been withdrawn by RBI and now all the government NBFCs like IREDA have to follow the 
norms prescribed by RBI for 
NBFCs except the norms relating to credit exposure by specific sector companies 
for which a request has to be sent to RBI. Accordingly, IREDA’s Board in its 307th meeting held on 20
th
 
July, 
2018 has approved that the norms as prescribed by RBI in its circu
lar dated 31.05.2018, to be followed by 
IREDA w.e.f. 01.06.2018 onwards. As regard, credit exposure relaxation a specific proposal has been sent to 
RBI through MNRE vide letter No. 340
-
12/4/2018
-
IREDA dt. 31
st
 
October, 2018.
 
 
Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018
-
IREDA                                                                    
Dated: 26.11.2018
 
 

45
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SL NO. 14)
 
 
Financing of Start
-
Ups/Small 
Projects
 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that IREDA is yet to start financing for start
-
ups which is apparent 
from the reply whereby it is stated that no start
-
up as borrower has approached IREDA so far. The Committee 
would like IREDA to analyse th
e factors due to which start
-
ups do not approach IREDA for financing.
 
 
The Committee further note that there is a great potential for small projects in hilly and North
-
Eastern areas. 
There is a need to tap the potential by the positive and favourable polic
ies for financing the small projects. The 
Committee have been apprised that IREDA finances project loan as low as Rs. 50 lakh and finance solar 
project, with aggregate capacity of 1 MW and above and hydro projects of size lower than 1 MW. 
 
The Committee in
 
this regard would like to be apprised about the year wise financing/loan advanced to 
smaller projects in various sectors viz. hydel, solar, wind, bio
-
mass etc. 
 
The Committee are of the view that start
-
ups/small projects bring innovation to the field and 
renewable energy 
being the emergent sector, there is an urgent need to have favorable policies with regard to financing start
-
ups/small projects. Besides there is a need for having simple procedures/formalities for financing particularly 
when start
-
ups/sma
ll entrepreneurs cannot afford chartered accountants / professionals for completing the 
formalities. IREDA being the exclusive Government financing agency for RE sector, need to act proactively 
and try to reach out to the startups/ small entrepreneurs. Awa
reness about the financing of RE projects also 
need to be created.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
MNRE supported entrepreneur development in renewable energy under a project sanctioned in January 2011 
to Centre for Innovation Incubation and Entrepreneurship (CI
IE), IIM, Ahmadabad. Under this Project, total 
grant of Rs.24 crores was sanctioned in 2011 with the condition that a matching investment would be 
mobilized by CIIE from private sector investors. So far 22.47 crores has been released to CIIE, IIM, 
Ahmedaba
d for the project. The CIIE, IIM, Ahmedabad has mobilized more than Rs. 25 crores from the private 
investors for the project. The project has incubated 40 start
-
ups in renewable energy sector. The project has 
generated useful experience on entrepreneur dev
elopment. 
 
 
 
 
However, start
-
ups generally require seed money which is provided by venture funds. IREDA also 
finances new technology, new projects after mitigating the perceived risks in any new project/venture.  The 
Ministry finances new technology under 
Technology Demonstration Project Mode.
 
 
 
 
Details of smaller project upto 5 MW financed by IREDA sector wise and year wise for last four year is 
enclosed at
 
Annexure
-
V
.
 

46
 
 
 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy  OM No. 340
-
16/1/2018 
-
IREDA          
                                                         
Dated: 26.11.2018
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
 
 
 
 

47
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS FURNISHED INTERIM 
REPLIES
 
 
 
-
NIL
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
MEENAKASHI LEKHI
 
7 January, 2021
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
Chairperson
 
17 Pausha, 1942 (S)
 
 
                 
                    
 
Committee on Public Undertakings
 
 
 
 
 
 

48
 
 
 
Annexure
-
I
 
 
LOAN
 
AGREEMENT
 
 
 
DATED
 
30
-
05
-
2011
 
 
 
BETWEEN
 
 
M/s. SC1 India Limited
 
 
 
AS BORROWER
 
 
 
 
AND
 
 
 
INDIAN
 
REN
EWA
BLE 
EN
ERGY 
DEVELOPMENT 
AGENCY LIMITED 
(I
R
EDA)
 
 
 
AS
 
LENDER
 
 
 
(Rupee
 
Loan)
 
 
 


49
 
 
LOAN AGREEMENT
 
 
Borrower
 
M/s SCI India Limited
 
Details of Project
 
Setting up of 1.6 MW Biagas 
Power at Raipura, Rajoun, District Banka, in the State 
of Bihar (Project No. 1941)
 
Loan Amount
 
Rs850.00 Lakhs
 
Security
 
1. Mortgage of immovable properties
 
 
2.  Hypothecation of movable assets
 
 
3.  Personal Guarantee of 
 
     
i)  Shri Sunil Kishorepuria
 
     
ii) Shri Sajjan Kumar Kishorepuria
 
     
iii) Shri Shiv Kumar Kishorepuria
 
     
iv) Shri Binod Kumar Kishorepuria
 
Promoters/Directors of the Borrower
 
 
4.  Bank Guarantee for an amount not less than 5% of the IREDA's loan amount 
having validity period
 
till expiry of the repayment period of IREDA loan.  The Bank 
Guarantee can initially be valid for a period of three years with a provision that on 
the expiry of initial period of three years, the guarantee unless invoked, will stand 
automatically renewed 
for a further period of three years.
 
 
5.  Pledge of shares 55% held/to be held by the promoters/promoter companies in 
the Borrower's share capital as security for the loan.
 
 
6.ESCROW A/c to be provided on main revenue A/c in which receivables of distil
l-
e
ry shall be credited through tripartite ESCROW Agreement between borrower, 
Bank and IREDA to the satisfaction of IREDA.
 
                                                                      
Or
 
The Borrower shall arrange a letter from the Bank agreeing for 
earmarking the wor
k-
ing capital limits/cash credit limit or in the Bank in which receivables of distillery shall 
be credited to the extend of servicing IREDA loan repa
y
ment
 
 
7.  Collateral Security of the land held in
 
t he name of Company/Directors values 
at 
about Rs. 6 crores as per valuation report by SBI Patna circle approved valuer.
 
 
Besides the above, the Borrower will deposit:
 
   
a)  Post dated cheques towards payment of 
installments
 
of principal of Loan
 
  
b)  Post dated cheques towards payment of 
installments
 
of interest on Loan
 
towards repayment of the loan.
 
 
..
·
 

e
 
 
50
 
  
 
Annexure
-
II
 
 
 
Status of the projects as observed by Audit
 
 
 
 
Annexure
-
II
S
.N
o.
 
NA
M
E
 
O
F
 
T
HE
 
BORR
O
WER
 
SEC
T
OR
 
R
E
M
ARK
 
 
 
1
 
S
h
ri
 
V
enk
a-
te
shwa
 
ra
 
S
p
o
n
g
e
 
and
 
Energy
 
 
Effici
enc
y
 
The
 
project was
 
sanct
i
oned
 
i
n
 
co
-
financ
i
ng
 
m
o
d
e
 
with
 
Andhra
 
Ba
n
k
 
and
 
part
 
di
sbursement
 
was
 
made
 
based
 
on
 
the
 
physical
 
progress
 
of
 
project
.
Th
e
 
project
 
co
uld
 
n
o
t
 
 
 
 
to
 
down
 
t
 
r
e
n
d
 
i
n
 
the
 
industr
y
.
The
 
account
 
became
 
NPA
 
with
 
both
 
the
 
i
nst
i
tut
i
ons
 
and
 
 
 
 
recovery
 
under
 
SARFAESI
 
Act
 
were
 
i
n
i
t
i
ated
 
and
 
the
 
p
l
ant
 
was
 
auct
i
oned
 
wh
i
ch
 
he
l
ped
 
 
 
 
i
n
 
recovery
 
of
 
the
 
ent
i
re
 
outstan
d
i
ng
 
pr
i
ncipa
l
,
 
i
nterest
 
(compound
)
,
 
Liqu
i
dated
 
Charged
 
&
 
I
n
c
i
dent
a
l
 
Charg
e
s
.
 
No
 
sacrifice
 
i
n
 
due
 
amount
 
was
 
m
a
d
e
.
 
T
he
 
2
 
M
a
h
i
ta
 
P
o
wer
 
Projec
ts
 
P
 
Ltd
 
SHP
 
T
h
e
 
l
o
an
 
w
as
 
sanct
i
oned
 
for
 
sett
i
ng
 
up
 
for
 
Small
 
Hydro
 
Project
 
and
 
part
 
d
i
sbursement
 
was
 
m
a
d
e
.
T
h
e
 
pr
o
ject
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
n
o
t
 
be
 
i
mp
l
emented
 
by
 
promoter
 
and
 
therefore
 
 
 
 
a
c
c
o
u
nt
 
sta
n
ds
 
c
l
o
s
e
d
 
i
n
 
bo
o
ks
 
of
 
I
R
E
D
A
.
 
1
3
 
A
th
en
a
 
D
amwe
 
P
o
w
er
 
Lt
d.
 
H
y
d
ro
 
The 
 
l
oan
 
w
a
s
 
s
a
 
n
ct
i
o
n
ed
 
t
o
 
b
o
rrower
 
for
 
sett
i
ng
 
up
 
Hydro
 
P
r
oject
 
where 
 
i
n
 
REC
 
•
 
 
 
Li
mit
ed
 
i
s
 
t
he
 
l
e
ad
 
finan
c
e
r
 
a
mong
 
fe
w
 
other  ban
k-
ers
/
institutions
.
 
Howe
 
 
 
 
i
n
 
the
 
project
.
 
4
 
Bh
adragir
i
 
P
o
w-
e
r
 
P
 
L
t
d
.
 
S
HP
 
T
h
e
 
p
art
 
d
i
s
b
u
r
s
ement
 
for
 
the
 
p
r
o
ject
 
has
 
been
 
made
 
based
 
on
 
t
h
e
 
p
h
y
s
i
cal
 
p
r
o
g
r
ess.
 
 
 
 
How
e
v
e
r
,
t
h
e pro
j
e
c
t
 
h
as
 
w
i
t
n
essed
 
de
l
ays
 
i
n
 
i
mpl
e-
me
n
tati
 
on
 
caus
i
ng
 
increase
 
i
n
 
the
 
co
st.
 
Howe
ve
r
,
 
s
i
nce
 
 
 
 
pro
j
e
c
t
 
r
e
m
a
i
n
 
u
n
d
e
r
 
i
m
p
l
e
m
e
n
tat
i
on
 
cate
g
ory
 
and
 
class
i-
fied
 
as
 
N
P
A.
 
Rec
o
v
e
ry
 
Act
i
on
 
 
 
 
u
nd
e
r
 
SA
R
F
AESI
 
Act
 
has
 
been
 
i
n
i
t
i
ate
d
.
 
5
 
V
aa
yu
 
(I
n
di
a
)
 
Pow
er
 
Corpo
r
a-
W
i
nd
 
The
 
d
i
sb
u
r
se
m
e
n
t
 
has
 
been
 
made
 
by
 
I
REDA.
 
As
 
on
 
dat
e
,
the
 
outstanding
 
amount
 
i
s
 
Rs.
 
N
i
l.
 
6
 
Enbe
e
 
ln
frastr
c-
tur
e
 
Lt
d.
 
MSW
 
T
he
 
l
o
a
n
 
w
a
s
 
sanc
t
i
o
n
e
d
 
to
 
the
 
borrower
 
for
 
sett
i
ng
 
up
 
for
 
waste
 
to
 
energy
 
project
 
J
 
ba
s
e
d
 
o
n
 
M
u
n
i
cipal
 
Sol
i
d
 
W
a
s
t
e
 
i
n
 
State
 
of
 
Ma
h
a
ras
h-
 
 
 
ma
de
 
 
for 
 
i
ni
ti
a
l
 
work. 
 
How
e
ver,
 
the 
 
project 
 
was 
 
abandon
ed
 
 
b
y
 
 
the 
 
borrower
 
ther
e
f
o
r
e
,
the
 
part
 
a
m
o
unt
 
 
 
 
Bank
 
G
uarant
e
e
 
by 
 
R
s
.
69
.
22  
 
acs
 
and
 
adjusted
 
a
g
a
i
nst
 
the
 
b
a
l
ance
 
o
u
tsta
n
d
i
n
g
 
l
oan
 
 
 
 
amount.
 
The
 
DRT
 
proceed
i
ng
 
are
 
b
e
i
ng
 
i
n
i
t
i
ated.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
\

 
 
51
 
 
Annexure
-
III
 
r
 
.f
 
p
 
s
 
(
 
 
 
Pro
].
 
No
.
 
 
Ap
p
ro
val
 
D
ate
 
 
Typ
e
 
 
C
ap
.
 
 
Uni
t
 
 
Se
ctor
 
Lo
a
n
 
Amount
 
(Rs
.
 
l.akhs)
 
 
Tota
l
 
Ol
5bu
rsement
 
(R
s
.
Lakhs)
 
•
 
As
 
 
LA
 
Da
te
 
Com
m
issi
o
n
i
ng
 
Dat
e
 
LA
 
EXECUT
SANCTIONE
S.
N
o
.
Name
 
of
 
the
 
Project
 
1
 
R
EW
A
 
ULTRA
 
MEGA
 
SOLAR
 
LIMITED
 
2341
 
29
-
Jan
-
18
 
Ma
i
n 
Loan
 
 
 
SO
LAR
 
GRID
 
2
1
0
6
2
.
00
 
404
1
.
66
 
3
l
 
J
an·
 
8
 
 
2
 
JIN
D
A
L
 
URBAN
 
W
A
S
T
E
 
MANA
G
E-
MENT
 
(
V
ISHAKHAPAT
 
N
AM)
 
L
IM
I
T
ED
 
234
5
 
7
-
Feb
-
1
8
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
5
 
MW
 
WAST
E
 
TO
 
EN
ER
GY
 
1
1
000
.
00
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
MYTRA
 
H
V
A
Y
U
(SAB
A
RMA
T
I)
 
P
R
I
VATE
 
LIMITED
 
2344
 
7·
Feb
 
 
8
 
Ma
in
 
Loan
 
252
 
MW
 
W
I
N
D
 
40000.
00
 
59
9
7
.
00
 
23
·
0
c
t 
1
7
 
 
40000.00
4
 
NER
 
I
I
T
R
A
N
S
M
IS
S
I
ON
 
LIMITED
 
234
2
 
7
-
Feb
-
1
8
 
Mam
 
Loan
 
 
 
SO
LAR
 
GR
I
D
 
3()
100.00
 
 
 
 
 
s
 
KHAR
I
 
HYDR
O
 
POWER
 
PR
OJ
E
CT
 
PR
IV
ATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
211
9·
1
 
B
·
F
eb
-
1
8
 
Ad
d
1
t
ion1I
 
Loan
 
1.7
5
 
MW
 
H
Y
DR
O
 
625.
3
0
 
41
2.77
 
7
-
J
un·
 
B
 
 
6
 
A
S
IAN
 
FAB
 
T
EC
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2348
 
7
 
Mar·
 
8
 
Main
 
l
o.an
 
1
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
6
85.00
 
5000.00
 
2
6
 
Mar
·
1
8
 
29
-
Dec·
l7
 
7
 
A
S
I
AN
 
FAS
 
T
E
C
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
2349
 
7
·
Ma
r
·
8
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOlAR
 
GRI
D
 
4350.00
 
3300.00
 
26
-
M
U
·
B
 
2·
 
•n·
 
8
 
8
 
A
S
I
AN
 
F
A
B
 
T
EC
 
LI
M
I
T
ED
 
23
50
 
7•
Mar
-
1
8
 
Main
 
Lo.an
 
2
0
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
GRID
 
85
45.
00
 
 
26
-
Mar
-
 
1
8
 
6
-
J
an
-
1
8
 
9
 
AT
R
I
A
 
W
I
ND
 
P
O
W
E
R
 
(BASAVANA 
B
A
GE
\
 
 
A
D
I
)
 
P
R
I
V
ATE
 
L
I
M
I
TED
 
23
51
 
7·Mar·
 
8
 
Mam
 
Loan
 
3
9
.
6
 
M
\
Vp
 
W
I
ND
 
21
500.
00
 
48l
l
.
OO
 
2l
 
Ma
y
·
1
8
 
1
8
·
Apr·
 
8
 
1
0
 
8AI
TARA
 
N
I
POWER
 
PRO
JE
CT
 
PVT
.
LTD
 
2
 
1
45
-
2
 
7
 
Ma
r·
 
8
 
Ad
d
1
t
1on1I
 
Loa
n
 
 
 
HYDR
O
 
1
82
0
.
00
 
 
 
 
 
11
 
SHA
N
AY
 
REN
EW
AB
LE
S
 
L
IMIT
ED
 
23
46
 
7
 
Mar
-
1
8
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
1
.
5
 
MW
 
W
I
ND
 
1
5
7
1
5
.
00
 
9770.
00
 
2
6
·
Mar·
 
8
 
3
l
 
Ma
r
·
8
 
1
2
 
V
ENTO
 
POWER
 
PR
I
VATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2347
 
7·
Mar·
l8
 
Main
 
Loan
 
40
 
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
1
5755
.
00
 
13708.
00
 
1
0
-
May
-
1
8
 
 
13
 
V
E
N
TO
 
P
O
WtR
 
P
R
I
V
A
TE
 
LIMITED
 
2
34
7
-
VG
F
 
7
 
Ma
r·
 
8
 
VGF
 
 
 
5
0
lAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
485.00
 
1
292
.
00
 
O·
May·
 
B
 
 
1
4
 
F
E
RM
I
SOl.A
RFA
R
M5
 
PR
I
VATE
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
2357
 
2
6
·
Mar
-
1
8
 
M
a
in
 
n
 
80
 
M
W
 
50
1.AR
 
GRIO
 
1
900
0
.00
 
1
1
99
1
.
58
 
25
·
J
un
-
1
8
 
1
4
-
Apr
 
-
1
8
 
1
5
 
GR
E
E
'
.
I
N
F
RA
 
R
E
NEWABLE
 
ENERG
Y
 
LIM
I
TED
 
23
55
 
26
-
Mar
-
1
8
 
Mam
 
Loan
 
2
4
9.9
 
MWp
 
W
I
ND
 
30000.00
 
 
 
 
 
1
6
 
POC
H
AMPAO
 
CONSTRUCT
I
O
N
S
 
C
O
MPANY
 
P
R
I
V
ATE
 
L
I
MITED
 
235
2
 
26·
Mar
-
1
8
 
M
a
in
 
Loan
 
4
 
5
 
MW
 
50
LAR
 
G
RID
 
375.00
 
 
1
7
-
May
-
 
1
8
 
31
 
M
a
r
·
1
7
 
1
7
 
S
O
LARSYS
 
NO
N
-
C
ONVE
N
T
I
O
NAL
 
E
NE
R-
GY
 
PVT
 
LTD
 
2358
 
26
-
Mar  
 
B
 
M
a
m
 
loin
 
90
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
G
RID
 
:
8200.00
 
 
 
31
-
M
ar
-
1
8
 
 
IS
 
\
\
'ATSUN
 
I
N
F
RA
B
U
I
LD
 
P
R
I
V
A
TE
 
L
IM
I
TED
 
236
1
 
26
-
M
a
r
-
1
8
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
1
50
 
MW
 
WIND
 
30000.00
 
 
 
 
 
1
9
 
AVAA
D
A
 
NO
N
-
C
O
NVE'
\
I
T
I
O
N
AL
 
EN
E
R
GY
 
PVT
 
L
I
M
I
TED
 
2359
 
2
7·
Mar
-
l
8
 
Mai
o
 
Lo
a
n
 
3
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
6000.00
 
 
 
26
-
M
a
r
-
1
8
 
2
0
 
A
V
AA
 
D
A
 
su
s
-
A
l
lJA
S
L
E 
E
N
ER
G
Y
 
PR
I
VATE
 
L
I
M
I
T
E
D
 
2>
50
 
27
-
M
ar
-
1
8
 
Mam 
L
o
a
n
 
30
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
6000.00
 
 
 
2·
Mar·
 
8
 
 
21
 
ECORE'1
 
C
AR
 
D
EA
 
PO
\
'
.
E
R
 
P
R
IVA
T
E
 
L
.
MIT
E
D
 
2354
 
27·
Mar
-
1
8
 
Moun
 
L
oan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
GRID
 
4845.
00
 
 
 
 
 
22
 
ECORE
 
i
 
V
E
N
T
 
\
'J
 
'.l
OS
 
PR
I
V
AT
 
E
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2356
 
27
-
r
v
i
a
r
-
1
8
 
M
i
11n 
l
oan
 
1
6
 
MW
 
5
0
LAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
7730.
00
 
 
 
 
 
2
3
 
GR
E
E'.A'.
 
ENERGY
 
PR'V
A
TE
 
L
I
M
I
T
E
D
I -
GE
P
L
)
 
2353
 
2
7
·
Mar
 
1
8
 
Mam
 
Loan
 
22
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
8200.
00
 
 
 
 
 
24
 
N
ANT
 
I
 
HYD
R
O
 
POWER
 
P
R
I
V
ATE
 
L
I-
M
ITED
 
1
9
80
-
3
 
27
 
Mar
-
1
8
 
A
dd
it
i
on
al
 
Loa
n
 
 
 
HYDRO
 
1
7
5
3.
70
 
9
7
4
.
50
 
25·
Ap
r·
 
8
 
 
25
 
TA
l
u
V
 
DA
 
HY
D
RO
 
PO
\
"
 
ER
 
P
R
I
VATE
 
Li
M
I
T
ED
 
1
979
-
4
 
27
-
Mar
-
1
8
 
A
d
diti
ona
l
Loa
n
 
 
 
HYDRO
 
1
823.00
 
 
25
-
Apr·  S
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
313
369.00
 
6
1
2
98
.
5
1
 
 
 
1
5
 

 
 
52
 
 
Annexure
-
IV
 
 
N. i 6/1/94
-
CPG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated_________
 
The Managing Director
 
Indian Renewable Energy Dvt. Agency (IREDA)
 
India Habitat Centre
 
East Court, Core
-
4 A i floor
 
Lodhi Road
 
New Delhi
-
110003
 
 
M/s HCL
 
Agro Power Ltd. 
-
 
Financial Assi
stance for setting up a 6.75 MW 
 
Dendro Thermal Power 
Plant at Vedadri, Village, Jaggaiah pet Mandal Krishna District, A.P . (Project No. 340)
 
Sir,
 
 
Please refer to your letter no. PTS
-
810/IREDA/2004
-
05/6197 dated 1.11.04 on
 
the above project, 
I am directed to in
form you that the project has vali
dated the terms and conditions of the sanction for 
grant of capital
 
 
Thanking you,
 
 
 
        
Yours faithfully,
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
(R. D. Sharma)
 
 
Principal Scientific Officer
 
 
 

 
 
53
 
 
1110/REDA/2004
-
05
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated, the 11th August 2004
 
 
 
M.L. Garg
 
Non
-
Conventional Energy Sources
 
No. 14, C.G.O. Complex,
 
New Delhi
-
110003
 
 
 
M/s HCL Agro Power Ltd. 
-
 
Financial Assistance for setting up a 6.75 MW Dendro Thermal Power Plant at 
Vedadri, Vill
age, Jaggaiah pet Mandal Krishna District, A.P . (Project No. 340)
 
 
 
 
 
Please refer to para 2 of our letter no. IREDA/Legal/2004/380i dated
 
 
 
You are aware that IREDA has recalled its loan amount of Rs. 399.00 lacs of bridge loan of Rs. 
41.00 lacs against 1
0% of MNES Capital Subsidy of lacs for the said project.
 
 
regards to MNES capital subsidy, the same can be recalled after cancellation.
 
 
Subsidy by MNES and/or in case the Borrower Company defaults in the of conditions of sanction 
of subsidy by MNES. In th
is connection, reference the Subsidy Agreement dated 4th April 1996 entered 
into between the 
 
 
In terms of special condition no. 1 on page 19 of the said Subsidy Agreement have the right to 
cancel the subsidy in case there is deviation in DPR which
 
 
I Acce
ptable to MNES and in the eventuality the whole of the disbursed subsidy that have to be 
returned/refunded by the Company to MNES together with interest thereon within 60 days from the date 
of cancellation of subsidy.
 
 
Hence, the security offered by the Co
mpany for the MNES is common for the loan by IREDA to 
the Company, it shall be appropriate the amount of subsidy in should also be from the Company and 
thereafter suitable proceedings by way of O A could be initiated. You are also aware that IDBI, has 
alre
ady filed Recovery Proceedings against the Company for Recovery of 
 
 
 
In view of the above, MNES is requested to please take a final view for the subsidy and 
enable us to proceed in the matter accordingly.
 
 
 
Thanking You,
 
 
 
 
 
 
ASST. GENERAL MANAGER
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yours faithfully,
 
 
 
 
(S BASKARAN)
 
 
 
 
R (PTS)
 

 
 
54
 
 
0
Annexure
 
V
 
D
etail
s
 
o
f
 
s
ma
 
ller
 
p
ro
jec
t
 
u
 
p
to
 
5
 
MW
 
se
ct
orw
ise
 
and
 
y
e
arwise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name
 
of
 
the
 
Project
 
Proi
.
No.
 
Sanction
 
Dat
e
 
Type
 
Cap.
 
Unit
 
Sector
 
Lo
a
n 
(R
s
.
L
ak
hs)
 
SHAKTl
 
HYDRO
 
ELECTRIC
 
CO.
 
P
V
T
.L
T
D.
 
2088
 
1
9
-
J
u
n
-
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
.4
 
MW
 
HY
DR
O
 
762
 
GRE
EN
 
INFRA
 
WIND
 
POWER
 
GENERATION
 
LIMITED
 
2058
-
1
 
1
2
-
Se
p
-
1
4
 
Additional
 
Loan
 
4
 
MW
 
WIN
D
 
1
800
 
NEXTGEN
 
SOLUX
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
03
 
22
-
Sep
-
 
1
4
 
M
ai
n
 
Loan
 
1
M
W
 
S
O
LAR
 
G
R
ID
 
500
 
TARANDA
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
1
979
-
1
 
2
4
-
Sep
-
1
4
 
Ad
d
i
t
i
o
n
al 
 
oan
 
1
MW
 
H
Y
D
RO
 
1
538
 
ABUNDAN
T
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
06
 
1
-
0
c
t
-
1
4
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
M
W
 
S
OLA
R
 
GR
I
D
 
995
 
ALLIANZ
 
ECOPOWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2
1
05
 
1
-
0
c
t
-
1
4
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
000
 
TR
 
ENERGY
 
&
 
AGRO
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
21
07
 
20
-
0ct
-
14
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
RI
D
 
995
 
SAi
 
ACHYUTH
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE 
LIMI
TED
 
21
20
 
4
-
Feb
-
1
5
 
M
ai
n
 
Loa
n
 
5
 
M
W
 
SO
LA
R
 
G
R
I
D
 
2450
 
KHARI
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PROJECT
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
211
9
 
5
-
Fe
b
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
1
500
 
SRI
 
KPR
 
I
NDUSTRIES
 
LIM
I
TED
 
2
1
26
 
9
-
M
a
r
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
MW
 
W
I
ND
 
1038
 
SRI
 
VIJAYEEBHAVA
 
ENTERPRISES
 
PVT
 
LTD
 
2
1
25
 
9
-
M
a
r
-
1
5
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
.
95
 
M
W
 
W
I
N
D
 
13
75
 
CAMBRIDGE 
ENERGY
 
RESOURCES
 
(P)
 
LTD.
 
21
28
 
1
1
-
M
a
r
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
L
oa
n
 
4.
23
 
M
Wp
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
4068
 
BALAJI
 
ENERGY
 
PVT.
 
LTD.
 
2
 
1
27
 
1
6
-
M
a
r
-
1
5
 
Ma
in
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
1
1
38
 
RAYS
 
POWER
 
I
NFRA
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2132
 
1
6
-
Mar
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRI
D
 
900
 
ATLANTIC
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2135
 
23
-
M
a
r
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
0.
65
 
M
W
 
H
YDR
O
 
5
0
1
 
SLS
 
POWER
 
LIMITED
 
2
 
1
4
3
 
30
-
A
p
r
-
1
5
 
M
a
i
n
 
L
oan
 
0
.
01
MW
 
B
IO
M
ASS
 
850
 
SSJ
 
POWER
 
PROJECTS
 
&
 
INFRASTRUCTURES
 
PVT.
 
LTD.
 
21
44
 
2
1
-
M
ay
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
L
oan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOL
A
R
 
G
R
I
D
 
2466
.
46
 
AZURE
 
POWER
 
MARS
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
4
9
 
22
-
M
av
-
1
5
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
2566
.
25
 
EMMA
 
ESTATE
 
PVT.
 
LTD.
 
21
55
 
5
-
A
u
g
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
1
550
 
PURSHOTAM
 
INDUSTRIES
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
56
 
5
-
A
u
g
-
1
5
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
624
 
RAVINDRA
 
ENERGY
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
6
1
 
1
1
-
A
u
g
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3.
77
 
MW
 
SOLA
R 
O
F
F
 
G
RID
 
2709
 
DARTVENS
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
62
 
1
8
-
S
e
p
-
 
S
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oa
n
 
1MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
4
50
 
VAAYU
 
ENERGY
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
69
 
3
0
-
S
e
p
-
1
5
 
M
ai
n 
L
oa
n
 
3
 
MW
 
WIND
 
1
0000
 
TARANDA
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
1
979
-
2
 
1
3
-
0
c
t
-
1
5
 
Addltlonal
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
1
262
 
MAGNIFI
CI
ENT
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
72
 
5
-
Nov
-
1
5
 
M
ai
n
 
L
o
a
n
 
1MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
4
63
 
ABUNDANT
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
21
73
 
6
-
N
ov
-
1
5
 
Main
 
oan
 
1
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
483.2
 
NEXTGEN
 
SOLUX
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
74
 
6
-
Nov
-
1
5
 
M
ai
n
 
oan
 
1MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4
63
 
KESTAHYDRO
 
POWER
 
PV
T
.
 
LTD.
 
2
1
78
 
1
8
-
N
o
v
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
4.5
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
2350
 
KUSUM
 
FINSERVE
 
LLP
 
2
1
98
 
1
1
-
Fe
b
-
1
6
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oa
n
 
2
.
1
MW
 
W
I
ND
 
1035
 
PHOTON
 
SOLAR
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
22
0
2
 
7
-
M
a
r
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GR
ID
 
1
640
 
UTR
ECH
T
 
SOLAR
 
PRI
VA
TE
 
LIMITED
 
2
2
00
 
8
-
Ma
r
-
1
6
 
Ma
i
n
 
oa
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
465
 
DLI
 
POWER
 
(
I
NDIA)
 
PV
T
.
LT
D
.
 
1
95
1
-
1
 
9
-
M
a
r
-
1
6
 
A
d
d
i
tion
a
l
L
o
an
 
4
 
MW
 
H
YD
R
O
 
1
S
60
 
HIMALAYAN
 
RENEWABLE
 
ENERGY
 
PR
I
VATE
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
2210
 
3
1
-
Ma
r
-
1
6
 
Ma
i
n
 
 
oa
n
 
0.6
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
560
 
PURSHOTAM
 
I
NDU
S
TR
 
IES
 
LIMITED
 
221
6
 
27
-
A
p
r
-
1
6
 
Main
 
L
oa
n
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
925
 
VENSOL
 
(BIDAR)
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2236
 
4
-
Aug
-
16
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOL
A
R
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
 
1
5
9
6
 
VE
NSOL
 
(NIRNA)
 
E
N
ERG
Y
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2237
 
4
-
Aug
-
16
 
Main
 
Loa
n
 
3
 
MW
 
SOL
A
R
 
GR
I
D
 
1
 
1
596
 
VIN
S
O
L
(HUBLll
 
E
N
E
RGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2230
 
4
-
Aug
-
1
6
 
Main
 
L
oa
n
 
2
 
MW
 
S
O
L
A
R
 
GR
I
D
 
1
 
1
064
 
HARI
KRISHNAN
 
POWER
 
AND
 
TECHNOLOGY
 
PRIVA
TE
 
LI
 
2
240
 
3
0
-
Au
g
-
1
6
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loan
 
1
 
MW
 
SOL
A
R
 
GR
I
D
 
1
 
355
 
ARETE
 
ELENA
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
22
4
1
 
6
-
Se
p
-
1
6
 
Main
 
L
oa
n
 
3
 
MW
 
S
O
L
A
R
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
 
1
4
 
11
 
B
 
G
 
SUN
 
SOLAR
 
HIRlYUR
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2242
 
6
-
Sep
-
1
6
 
M
a
in
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
GRID
 
l
 
1
420
 
CONTINENTAL
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LI
M
IT
ED
 
2
2
4
3
 
6
-
S
e
p
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
H
Y
D
RO
 
1
800
 
POORVAJ SOLAR
 
ENERGY
 
PR
IVATE
 
LIMITED
 
22
4
4
 
6
-
Se
p
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
 
1
4
22
.
72
 
SAMYAMAJYOTHI
 
SOLAR
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
2245
 
6
-
Se
p
-
 
1
6
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
S
O
LAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1
4
 
1
1.
1
5
 
SU
N
 
SOLAR
 
KFP
 
BELLARI
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
22
4
8
 
28
-
Se
p
-
 
1
6
 
Main
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
95
1.
76
 
EMMVEE
 
SOLAR
 
SYST
E
M
S
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
2
49
 
1
0
-
0
c
t
-
1
6
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loa
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
4
85
 
NANDAL
 
FINANCE
 
AND
 
LE
A
S
I
NG
 
PRIVATE
 
L
I
M
I
TED
 
2250
 
1
3
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
4
62
 
PREMIER
 
P
HOTOVOLTAI
C
 
MEDAK
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2251
 
25
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
13
7
1
 
B
E
LIJ
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2254
 
2
6
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
H
Y
D
RO
 
2428
 
LUi
 
R
ENEWABLE
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
26
8
 
1
7
-
J
a
n
-
1
7
 
M
ai
n
 
L
o
a
n
 
0.3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
THERMAL
 
11
0
 
V
IVAAN
 
SOLAR
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
22
77
 
2
1
-
Fe
b
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
RO
O
F
 
TOP
 
2250
 
AGV
 
SOLAR
 
POW
E
R
 
PROJECT
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMIT
ED
 
2284
 
23
-
Fe
b
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
ID
 
1
 
1
0
1
0
 
CLEAN
 
MAX
 
ENV
I
RO
 
ENERGY
 
SO
L
U
T
I
ONS
 
P
V
T
 
LTD
 
2299
 
2
3
-
May
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
2
 
.
48
 
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
888.2
 
SA
M
BHAR
 
SALTS
 
LIMITED
 
2298
 
23
·
Ma
y
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
500
 
MADHAV
 
SOLAR
 
(VADODARA
 
ROOFTOP)
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
 
2303
 
1
-
Jun
-
1
7
 
Ma
i
n
 
Loan
 
4
 
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
1
6
7
5
 
AZURE
 
POWER
 
MER
CURY
 
PR
IVA
TE
 
LIMIT
ED
 
2
3
1
4
 
3
-
Au
g
-
1
7
 
Main
 
L
oan
 
4
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
1
750
 
PRE
M
I
ER
 
S
O
LAR
 
SYSTEMS
 
PR
IVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2321
 
4
-
Se
p
-
1
7
 
Ma
in
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
420.
62
 
A
TLAN
T
IC
 
P
O
WER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMIT
ED
 
2328
 
1
3
-
Nov
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
oan
 
0.
3
 
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
320
 
SUNRUN
 
SOLAR
 
VENTURES
 
UP
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2335
 
23
-
Nov
-
 
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
L
oa
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
259
 
SE
 
FREIGHT
 
AND
 
LOG
I
ST
I
CS
 
I
NDIA
 
PRI
V
A
TE
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
233
8
 
 
 
4.
2
MW
 
W
IND
 
1
750
 

 
 
55
 
 
Annexure VI
 
L
I
S
T
 
OF
 
PR
O
JE
C
T
S
 
U
P
T
O
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SECTOR
 
W
I
SE
 
AND
 
YEAR
 
W
I
SE
 
F
OR
 
LAST
 
4
 
YEA
R
S
 
Name
 
of
 
the
 
Pro/ect
 
P
r
of.
 
No.
 
Sancti
on
 
Date
 
Type
 
Cap.
 
Uni
t
 
Sector
 
Loan
 
(Rs
.
 
Lakhs)
 
KAM
DAR 
 
I
N
FRA
S
T
RUCT
U
RE
 
PV
T
.
L
T
O
.
 
2051
 
2
 
Au11
 
13
 
Ma
in
 
Lo
a
n
 
4
 
MW
 
HYDR
O
 
1
7
50
 
PHOTON
 
SOLAR
 
POWER
 
PVT
 
LTD
 
206
3
 
s.Fe
b
·
1
4
 
Mai
n
 
L
oan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
2SOO
 
SRI
 
A
VAN
TI
KA
 
CONTRACTORS
 
(IILIMI
TED
 
2062
 
5
·
fe
b
·
4
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oan
 
5 MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
2500
 
SAROJ
 
ENERGY
 
COMPANY
 
PVT.
 
L
TD
.
 
1
87
7
·
1
 
6
·
Fe
b
·
1
4
 
Additional
 
Loan
 
1
.5
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
35
0
 
SASI
 
POW
ER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2073
 
1
8
 
Mar
·
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
H
Y
D
R
O
 
1
456.55
 
M/S
 
GI
LL
 
POWER
 
GENERATI
ON
 
CO 
(P)
 
LTD
 
1
397
·
1
 
1
9
 
Mar
·
1
4
 
Additional
 
Loan
 
1
.5
MW
 
HYDRO
 
600
 
PRE
M
I
ER
 
PHOTOVOLATAIC
 
M
EDAK
 
PRIVATE 
LIMITED
 
2083
 
3
1
M
a
r
 
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
2500
 
RENEW
 
POWER
 
V
EN
T
URES
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2080
 
3
·
Mar
-
1
4
 
M
a
i
n
 
L
o
an
 
5
 
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
4644
 
RENEW
 
POWER
 
VE
NTURE
S
 
PRI
V
ATE
 
LIMI
TE
D
 
2082
 
3l
 
M
a
r
-
1
4
 
Mai
n
 
Loa
n
 
5
 
M
W
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
4460
 
RENEW
 
POWER
 
VENTURES
 
PR
I
VATE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2085
 
31
 
Mar
-
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4794
 
RENEW
 
POWER
 
VENTURES
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
MITED
 
2087
 
31
 
Mar
 
1
4
 
Main
 
Loa
n
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4794
 
SHAl<TI
 
HYDRO
 
ELECTRIC
 
CO.
 
PVT
.
 
TD.
 
2088
 
1
9
·
Ju
n
-
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2.4
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
762
 
GRE
EN
 
INFRA
 
WINO
 
POWER
 
GENERATION
 
LIMI
TED
 
20S8
-
1
 
1
2
-
Se
o
·
1
4
 
Addi
ti
onal
 
Lo
an
 
4
 
MW
 
W
I
ND
 
1
800
 
NEXTGEN
 
SOLUX
 
POWER
 
PR
I
V
A
T
E
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
210
3
 
22
·
Sep
·
1
4
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
500
 
RDA
 
ENERGYPRI
VATE
 
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
02
 
22
 
Se
o
-
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
S
4S6.4
 
RI
S
HABH
 
RENERGY
 
PRI
V
ATE
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
01
 
22
-
Sep
-
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
S480
 
SAMRUDHI
 
SUGARS
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
04
 
23
-
Sep
-
14
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
MW
 
CO
-
GENERATION
 
2688
 
TARANDA
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
1
97
9
-
1
 
24·
Sep
-
1
4
 
Additional
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
H
YDRO
 
1
538
 
ABUNDANT
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
M
I
TE
 
D
 
21
06
 
l
·
Oct
-
1
4
 
Main
 
oan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GR
ID
 
99
5
 
ALLIANZ
 
EC
OPOWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
21
05
 
·
Oct
-
1
4
 
M
a
i
n
 
L
o
a
n
 
2
 
M
W
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
1
000
 
TR
 
E
N
ER
GY
 
&
 
AGRO 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
0
7
 
2
0
-
0ct
-
1
4
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
oan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
99S
 
BA(J(BONE
 
ENTERPRISES
 
LIMITE
D
 
2
1
09
 
22
-
0c
t
-
1
4
 
M
a
i
n
 
loan
 
1
0
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRI
D
 
490
3
.
09
 
 
2111
 
22
-
0ct
·
1
4
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4867
 
SAi
 
ACHYUT
H
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
20
 
4
·
Feb
 
1
5
 
Main
 
 
oan
 
S
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
GR
I
D
 
2
450
 
KHARI
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PROJECT
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
211
9
 
5
·
Feb
 
1
S
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
M
W
 
HYDRO
 
1
500
 
RENEW
 
W
I
ND
 
ENERGY
 
(RAJASTHAN
 
ONE)
 
PRIVATE
 
LIM
 
2090
-
1
 
S
 
Ma
r
-
1
5
 
Additional
 
L
oan
 
1
0
MW
 
W
I
N
D
 
4681
 
KHA
NDALERU
 
POWER
 
COMPAN
Y
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
23
 
9
 
Mar
 
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
 
oan
 
6
MW
 
HYDRO
 
2200
 
SRI
 
l<PR
 
I
NDUSTR
I
ES
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2
1
26
 
9
-
Mar·
 
S
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
WI
ND
 
1
038
 
SRI
 
VIJAYEEBHAVA
 
ENTERPRI
 
 
·
Mar
·
1
5
 
Main 
 
oan
 
2.9S
 
MW
 
WI
N
O
 
1375
 
C
AMBRIDG
E
 
ENERGY
 
RESOURCES
 
(P)
 
LTD.
 
21
28
 
·
Mar·
 
S
 
Main
 
Lo
an
 
4
.
23
 
M
Wp
 
SOLA
R
 
R
OO
F
 
T
OP
 
40
68
 
BALAJI
 
ENERGY 
PVT
.
 
TD.
 
21
27
 
1
6
 
Mar
 
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
MW
 
HYDRO
 
1
138
 
BAL
AJI
 
ENERGY
 
PVT
.
LTD.
 
2131
 
1
6
-
Ma
r
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
8
MW
 
H
YDR
O
 
3300
 
R
AYS
 
POWER
 
I
N
FRA
 
PRIVATE
 
L
I
MITED
 
2132
 
1
6
 
Mar
·
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
900
 
ATlANTI
C
 
POWER
 
PVT
.
LTD
.
 
2135
 
2
3
·
M
a
r
 
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
L
o
a
n
 
0
.
6S
 
MW
 
H
Y
DRO
 
S
0
1
 
BHI
LWARA
 
ENERGY
 
LI
M
ITED
 
2
1
40
 
31
 
Ma
r
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
oan
 
7.5
 
M
W
 
HY
D
RO
 
58
50
 
ENE
RGO
 
ENGINEERING
 
PROJE
CT
S
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
42
 
3
1
-
Ma
r
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
5393
 
SlS
 
POWER
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
43
 
3
0
-
A
p
r
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
0
.
0
1
MW
 
B
I
O
MASS
 
8SO
 
SSJ
 
POWER
 
PROJECTS
 
&
 
I
N
F
R
A
S
TRUCTURES
 
PVT.
 
LT
D
.
 
2
1
44
 
2
1
Ma
v
-
1S
 
Main
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
2466.46
 
A
Z
U
RE
 
P
OWER
 
MARS
 
PRIVATE
 
L
I
M
I
TED
 
21
49
 
22
-
Mav
-
1
5
 
Mai
n
 
oan
 
5
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
256
6
.
2
5
 
EAA
M
A
 
ESTATE
 
PVT
.
L
T
D
.
 
2
1
55
 
5
-
A
u
g
-
1
5
 
M
ai
n
 
Loa
n
 
3
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
5SO
 
P
U
R
SHOTAM
 
I
NDUSTR
I
ES
 
LIMITED
 
21
S6
 
S
 
Aug
-
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
624
 
SSNR
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIM
IT
ED
 
2
1
5
7
 
6
-
Au11
 
1
5
 
M
a
i
n
 
oan
 
1
0
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
S21
5
 
RAVINDRA
 
ENE
RGY
 
LIMIT
ED
 
2
1
6
1
 
l
 
A
u
g
·
1
5
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loan
 
3
.
77
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
OFF
 
G
RID
 
2
709
 
DARTYEN
S
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
21
62
 
1
8
 
5
e
p
-
1
5
 
Main
 
oan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4
5
0
 
VAAYU
 
ENERGY
 
LIMI
TED
 
21
69
 
30
 
Se
o
·
1
5
 
Main
 
L
oa
n
 
3
 
MW
 
W
I
ND
 
1
0000
 
MI
NAR
 
RENEWABLE
 
ENERG
Y
 
PROJECTS
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMIT
 
2
1
7
1
 
13
 
0ct
·
1
5
 
Main
 
Lo
a
n
 
8
 
MW
 
HY
D
RO
 
3
600
 
TARANDA
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
P
RIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
1
9
79
-
2
 
1
3
·
0ct
·
1
S
 
Additional 
 
o
a
n
 
3
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
1
2
62
 
MAGN
I
F
I
C
I
E
N
T
 
POWER
 
PR
I
V
A
TE
 
LI
M
I
TED
 
2
1
72
 
5
-
Nov
-
 
S
Main
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4
63
 
ABUNDANT
 
E
NER
GY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
1
73
 
6
-
Nov
-
15
Main
 
Loan
 
1
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
483.2
 
CBC
 
SOLA
R
 
TECHNOLOGIES
 
PVT
.
LTD.
 
2175
 
6
-
Nov
·
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GR
I
D
 
833
 
NEX
TGEN
 
S
OLUX
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
21
74
 
6
·
Nov
-
1
5
 
Main
 
L
o
a
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GR
I
D
 
463
 
l<ESTA
 
HYDR
O 
POWER
 
PVT
.
 
LTD.
 
21
78
 
1
8
·
Nov
 
1
5
 
Main
 
Loan
 
4
.
5
MW
 
HYDR
O
 
2350
 
PREM
I
ER
 
PH
OTOV
O
LT
A
IC
 
MED
A
K
 
P
R
I
VA
T
E
 
LI
M
ITED
 
21
85
 
1
8
 
NOV·
 
5
Ma
i
n
 
L
oan
 
8 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4032
 
CBC
 
SOLAR
 
TECHNOLOGIES
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LIMITED
 
2
1
87
 
1
4
-
De
c
-
1
5
 
M
a
i
n
 
L
o
a
n
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
71
92.31
 
l
<
USUM
 
F
I
NSERVE 
 
P
 
2
1
98
 
l
l
-
Fe
b
-
1
6
 
M
a
i
n  oan
 
2.
1
MW
 
WI
NO
 
1
03S
 
PH
O
TON
 
SOLA
R
 
P
OWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2202
 
7
 
Mar
-
16
Main
 
 
oan
 
S
 
MW
 
SO
LA
R
 
GRID
 
1
6
4
0
 
MAHE
SWARI
 
MI
NING
 
AND
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2
201
 
8
 
Ma
r
-
 
1
6
Main
 
 
oan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
471
S
 
UTRE
C
HT 
SOLAR
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2200
 
8
-
M
a
r
-
1
6
Main
 
Loan
 
1MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
465
 
DU
 
P
O
W
ER
 
(
I
ND
I
A)
 
PV
T
.
L
T
D
.
 
1
9
S
H
 
9·
Mar
-
1
6
A
dd
i
ti
on
a
l
Lo
a
n
 
4
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
1
S60
 
N
EW
 
ERA
 
EN
V
I
RO
 
VENTURES
 
(MA
H
B
UBN
A
G
ARJ
 
PR
I
VA
 
2
20
3
 
9
-
M
ar
 
1
6
M
ain
 
L
o
a
n
 
1
0
 
MW
 
S
O
LAR 
G
R
I
D
 
4744
 
H
I
MALAYAN
 
RENEW
A
B
LE
 
ENERGY
 
PR
I
V
A
T
E
 
LIMITED
 
2
2
1
0
 
31
 
M
a
r
 
1
6
Main
 
L
oan
 
0.6
MW
 
HYDR
O
 
S60
 
PU
R
SH
O
T
A
M
 
I
N
D
U
S
TR
I
ES
 
LIM
I
TED
 
2216
 
2
7
-
Apr
·
1
6
 
Ma
in
 
Lo
an
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
9
2S
 
KAKATIYA
 
I
NDU
S
TR
I
ES
 
PRI
V
ATE
 
LIM
I
TED
 
2220
 
3
1
Ma
y
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
9
 
MW
 
HY
DR
O
 
4060
 
ASIAN
 
fAB
 
TEC
 
LIMI
TED
 
2222
 
2
 
Jun
 
1
6
M
ai
n
 
Loan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
442
2
.
8
 
ASIAN
 
F
A
B
TEC
 
LI
MITED
 
2223
 
2
 
Jun
 
1
6
Main
 
Loan
 
8
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
3637.4
 

 
 
56
 
 
AZ
URE
 
RENEWAB
LE
EN
ERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
MITE
D
 
2226
 
22
-
Ju
n
-
1
6
 
Ma
i
n
 
L
o
an
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
R
OOF
 
T
OP
 
44
95.
07
 
VENSOL
 
(
B
I
DAR)
 
ENERGY 
P
R
I
VATE
 
LIM
I
TED
 
2236
 
4
·
AU&
 
1
6
Mai
n
 
oan
 
3 MW
 
SOLAR
 
G
R
I
D
 
1
 
1
S96
 
VENSOL
 
(NIRNA
)
 
ENERG
Y
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LIMI
TED
 
223
7
 
4
-
Au
g
·
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1
S96
 
 
HARIKRISHNAN
 
P
O
WER
 
AND
 
TECHNOLOGY
 
PRI
VATE
 
LI
 
2240
 
30
-
Aug
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
355
 
ARETE
 
ELENA
 
ENERGY
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2241
 
6
-
Sep
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1
411
 
B
 
G
 
S
UN
 
SOLAR
 
HIRIYUR
 
PRI
V
ATE
 
LIMIT
ED
 
2242
 
6
-
S
ep
-
1
6
 
M
ain
 
Loan
 
3
 
M
W
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1
4
2
0
 
CONTINENTAL
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2243
 
6
-
Se
p
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
1
800
 
PO
O
R
V
AJ
 
S
OLAR
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
T
ED
 
2244
 
6
-
S
ep
-
16
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1
4
2
2
 
.72
 
SAMYAMA
 
JYOTHI
 
SOLAR
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
L
I
M
I
T
ED
 
2245
 
6
-
S
ep
-
16
 
Main
 
Loan
 
3
 
MW
 
SOLAR 
GRID
 
1
 
1
4
1
1.
1
5
 
SUN
 
SOLAR
 
KFP
 
BELLAR!
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMITED
 
2248
 
28
-
Sep
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR GRID
 
1
 
95
1
.
76
 
EMMVEE
 
SOLAR
 
SYSTEMS
 
PRIVA
T
E
 
LIMITED
 
2249
 
1
0
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
485
 
NANDAL
 
FINANCE
 
AND
 
LE
AS
 
I
NG
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
22
50
 
13
-
0
c
t
-
1
6
 
M
a
i
n
 
Lo
a
n
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
RO
O
F
 
TOP
 
4
6
2
 
PREMIER
 
PHOTOVOLTAIC
 
MEDAK
 
PRIVAT
E
 
LI
MITED
 
2251
 
25
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Main
 
L
o
an
 
3
 
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
137
1
B
ELIJ
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITE
 
D
 
22
54
 
26
-
0ct
-
1
6
 
Main
 
L
oan
 
5
 
MW
 
H
YD
R
O
 
2428
 
AAl
OK
 
SOLAR
 
FARMS
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
2
66
 
10
-
J
an
-
17
 
Main
 
 
oa
n
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SO
LAR
 
GRID
 
554
5
 
ABHA
 
SOLARFARMS
 
LIMITED
 
2267
 
10
-
Jan
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
10
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
5545
 
L
U
I
T
 
R
E
NEWABLE
 
P
R
I
V
ATE
 
LI
M
I
T
ED
 
2268
 
1
7
-
Jan
-
1
7
 
M
ai
n
 
Loan
 
0.3
 
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
T
H
ER
MA
L
 
1
1
0
 
ES
 
ENERGY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2275
 
20
-
Feb
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
5325
 
ES
 
SOLAR
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2274
 
20
-
F
eb
-
17
 
Main
 
 
oa
n
 
1
0 
MW
 
SO
LA
R
 
GRID
 
547
5
 
VIVAAN
 
SOLAR
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
MI
TED
 
2277
 
21
-
Feb
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
5
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
2250
 
AGV
 
SOLAR
 
POWER
 
PROJECT
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2284
 
23
-
Feb
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
1
 
1010
 
CLEAN M
A
X
 
ENVIRO
 
ENERGY
 
SOLUTIONS
 
PVT
 
L
TD
 
2299
 
23
-
May
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2.48
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
T
O
P
 
888.
2
 
SAMB
H
AR
 
SALTS
 
LIMI
TED
 
2298
 
2
3
-
M
a
y
-
1
7
 
M
a
i
n
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLA
R
 
GRID
 
500
 
KANDI
 
WIND
 
PARKS
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMITED
 
2300
 
31
-
Mav
-
17
 
Main
 
Loan
 
8
 
MW
 
WIND
 
500
0
 
MADHAV
 
SOLAR
 
(VADODARA
 
ROOFTOP)
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMI
 
2303
 
l
·
Jun
-
1
7
Main
 
Loan
 
4 
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
1
675
 
AZURE
 
POWER
 
MERCURY
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
231
4
 
3
-
Aug
-
1
7
 
Mai
n
 
Loan
 
4 
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
1
750
 
JK
 
PETRO
 
ENER
G
Y
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
231
2
 
3
-
Aug
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
10
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
3986.
5
 
P
REMIER
 
SOLAR
 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
S
 
P
R
I
V
A
T
E
 
LIM
I
TED
 
2321
 
4
-
Sep
-
1
7
 
M
ain
 
Loan
 
1
MW
 
SOLAR
 
ROOF
 
TOP
 
420.6
2
 
ATLANTI
C
 
POWER
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMITED
 
2328
 
13
-
Nov
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
0.3
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
3
2
0
 
SU
N
RUN
 
SOLAR
 
VENTURES
 
UP
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2335
 
2
3
-
Nov
-
1
7
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
 
MW
 
SOLAR 
RO
O
F
 
TOP
 
2
59
 
SE
 
FREI
GHT
 
ANO
 
LOGI
STICS
 
INDIA
 
PRI
VATE
 
LIMI
TED
 
2
3 3
8
 
20
-
Dec
-
17
 
Main
 
Loa
n
 
4.
2
 
MW
 
WIND
 
1
7
50
 
VIVAAN
 
SOLAR
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
2340
 
22
-
Dec
-
17
 
Main
 
Loan
 
2
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
RO
O
F
 
TOP
 
950
 
KHARI
 
HYDRO
 
POWER
 
PROJECT
 
PRIVATE
 
LIMITED
 
21
1
9
-
1
 
1
9
-
Feb
-
1
8
 
Addi
ti
ona
 
I
 
oan
 
3.75
 
MW
 
HYDRO
 
625.
3
 
A
SIAN
 
FAB
 
TEC
 
LIMITED
 
2349
 
1
4
-
Mar
-
1
8
 
Main
 
Loan
 
10
 
M
W
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4350
 
P
OC
HAMPAD
 
C
O
NSTRUCTI
O
NS
 
CO
MPANY
 
PRIVATE
 
LI
 
235
2
 
2
7
-
Mar
-
1
8
 
Main
 
L
o
an
 
4.5
 
MW
 
S
OLAR
 
GRID
 
97
5
 
E
C
OREN
 
CARD
 
E
A
 
POWER 
PRI
VATE
 
LI
MITED
 
2354
 
28
-
Mar
-
1
8
 
Main
 
Loan
 
1
0
 
MW
 
SOLAR
 
GRID
 
4845
 
 
 
 

 
 
57
 
 
Annexure 
VII
 
 
Status of RTS capacity (MW) sanctioned and achievements
 
 
Sr. 
No.
 
Agency/State
 
Sanctioned 
Capacity (R
e-
vised)
 
Installed Capacity reported on online portal
 
Subsidised 
Category
 
Non
-
subsidised 
Category
 
Total
 
1.
 
NREDCAP, Andhra Pradesh
 
67.77
 
29.97
 
16.61
 
46.58
 
2.
 
BREDA, Bihar
 
50.21
 
1.35
 
1.26
 
2.61
 
3.
 
CREDA, Chhattisgarh
 
13.70
 
8.44
 
1.55
 
9.99
 
4.
 
JREDA, Jharkhand
 
35.57
 
7.68
 
1.62
 
9.30
 
5.
 
MPMKVVCL, MPUVN, Madhya 
Pradesh
 
37.02
 
13.96
 
13.30
 
27.26
 
6.
 
MEDA, Maharashtra
 
140.00
 
29.77
 
115.76
 
145.53
 
7.
 
OREDA, Odisha
 
4.03
 
2.70
 
1.65
 
4.35
 
8.
 
TSREDCO, Telangana
 
53.11
 
23.23
 
22.30
 
45.53
 
9.
 
UPNEDA, Uttar Pradesh
 
42.00
 
14.34
 
40.40
 
54.74
 
10.
 
WBREDA, West Bengal
 
48.93
 
6.63
 
11.90
 
18.53
 
11.
 
AEDA, APDCL, Assam
 
24.00
 
2.25
 
1.68
 
3.93
 
12.
 
Dept. of Power, Delhi
 
90.00
 
34.36
 
12.00
 
46.36
 
13.
 
GEDA, Gujarat
 
232.75
 
75.46
 
66.49
 
141.95
 
14.
 
HAREDA, Haryana
 
44.50
 
30.35
 
53.97
 
84.32
 
15.
 
JAKEDA, KREDA, Jammu 
Kashmir
 
66.09
 
2.43
 
0.57
 
3.00
 
16.
 
ANERT, Kerala
 
38.28
 
13.50
 
17.36
 
30.86
 
17.
 
KREDL, Karnataka
 
10.94
 
6.07
 
105.88
 
111.95
 
18.
 
REAP, Puduchery
 
7.02
 
0.70
 
1.00
 
1.70
 
19.
 
PEDA, Punjab
 
20.68
 
13.75
 
37.61
 
51.36
 
20.
 
RRECL, Rajasthan
 
40.00
 
24.39
 
55.35
 
79.74
 
21.
 
TEDA, Tamil Nadu
 
44.50
 
31.14
 
94.20
 
125.34
 
22.
 
UREDA, Uttarakhand
 
46.77
 
18.28
 
45.12
 
63.40
 
23.
 
CREST, Chandigarh
 
28.35
 
19.00
 
5.22
 
24.22
 
24.
 
HIMURJA, Himachal Pradesh
 
15.25
 
1.67
 
2.22
 
3.89
 
25.
 
MANIREDA, Manipur
 
3.22
 
1.90
 
1.33
 
3.23
 
26.
 
Elect. Dept., Andaman & Nicobar
 
3.00
 
1.00
 
0.00
 
1.00
 

 
 
58
 
 
27.
 
Elect. Dept. Lakshadweep
 
1.00
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
28.
 
TREDA, Tripura
 
0.50
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
29.
 
APEDA, Arunachal Pradesh
 
10.00
 
0.00
 
4.12
 
4.12
 
30.
 
ZEDA, Electricity Department, 
Mizoram
 
3.86
 
0.00
 
0.10
 
0.10
 
31.
 
GEDA, Goa
 
1.00
 
0.00
 
0.51
 
0.51
 
32.
 
Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.48
 
0.48
 
33.
 
Daman and Diu
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.39
 
0.39
 
34.
 
Meghalaya
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.08
 
0.08
 
35.
 
Nagaland
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
36.
 
Sikkim
 
0.00
 
0.00
 
0.01
 
0.01
 
37.
 
Other Agencies*
 
804.92
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
2028.95
 
414.32
 
732.04
 
1146.36
 
* 
Achievements of other agencies included in the capacity of respective States/UTs
 
 
 
 

 
 
59
 
 
APPENDIX I
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2019
-
2020)
 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 7
th
 
January, 2021 from 1210 Hrs. to 
 
1310 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘3’, Ground Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension (New 
Building), New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi
 
 
-
    
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
       
SECRETARIAT
 
         
1.     
  
Shri R.C.Tiwari                                  Joint Secretary                      
 
   
2.
 
 
Shri Srinivasulu Gunda         
 
Director
 
   
3.
 
Shri G.C. Prasad                   
 
Additional 
Director
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED (NTPC)
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
     
2.
 
     
3.
 
     
4.
 
     
5
.
 
Shri Arjunlal Meena
 
Shri Janardan 
Mishra
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
 
6.
 
7.
 
8.
 
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh
 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
9.
 
10.
 
11.
 
 
Shri Prasanna Acharya
 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
 
Shri 
Surendra Singh Nagar
 
 
     
1.
 
***** 
                  
-
             
*****
 
     
2.
 
***** 
           
      
 
-
             
*****
 
     
3.
 
***** 
                  
-
           
 
 
*****
 
     
4.   
 
***** 
                  
-
             
*****
 
5.
 
***** 
          
        
-
             
*****
 
     
6.
 
***** 
      
           
 
-
             
*****
 

 
 
60
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, t
he Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised 
them about the agenda for the sitting.  As a first agenda item, the Chairperson proposed for consideration 
and adoption of the  draft reports on the following subjects:
-
 
 
(i)     Airports Authority of India (AAI)
 
 
(ii)    Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL)
 
 
(iii)    Food Corporation of India (FCI)
 
 
(iv)    Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL)
 
 
(v)     NBCC (India) Limited
 
 
(vi)    Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 
 
        
Twenty
-
second Report (
16th LS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Financing of 
 
 
        
Renewable Energy Projects by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited 
 
 
        
(based on  Performance Audit Report No.12 of 2015)”.
 
 
(vii)    Action taken by the Governm
ent on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 
 
         
Twenty
-
fourth Report (16th LS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Review of 
 
 
 
         
Loss Making CPSUs”.
 
  
 
3. 
 
The Committee then considered the aforesaid draft reports and ad
opted it without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairperson to finalize the report on the 
basis of factual verification by the concerned Ministry/Department and consider for presenting the reports 
to Hon’ble Speaker sinc
e Parliament is not in session.
 
(The representatives of NTPC were then called in)
 
 
4.
 
****                                                      ****                                                ****
 
5.
 
****                                                
      
****                                                ****
 
6.
 
****                                                      ****                                                ****
 
7.
 
****                                                      ****          
                                      
****
 
                          
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately).
 
 
/
---------------------
/
 
 
 
 

 
 
61
 
 
APPENDIX II
 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction)
 
Analysis of the
 
Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty
-
second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on
 
Financing of Renewable 
Energy Projects by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (based on 
Perform
ance Audit Report No. 12 of 2015).
 
 
I
 
Total number of recommendations 
 
 
16
 
lI
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
[Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,9,10,11,12,13,15 and 16]
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
14
 
 
 
87.5
 
 
 
lII
 
Observations/Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies                         
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
Nil
 
 
 
Nil
 
IV
 
Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of 
the Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
 
[Sl Nos. 8 and 14]
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
02
 
 
 
 
 
12.5
 
 
V
 
Observations/
Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies 
 
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
Nil
 
 
 
Nil
 
 