i 
 
16 
    
 
 
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY 
LIMITED (NIACL) 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL 
SERVICES) 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2021-22) 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
     COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
      (2021-22) 
 
 
               (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
(NIACL) 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok 
Sabha) titled ‘Loss due to Imprudent Underwriting and lack of proper risk 
assessment (based on Para no. 3.2 of C&AG Report no. 13 of 2019) related to on 
New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL)] 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 March, 2022  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1943(Saka) 


iii 
 
CPU No. 1037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (.....Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India Press, 
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002. 
 
 
  

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)           IV 
INTRODUCTION V 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
  12 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do     
not desire to pursue in view of the Government Replies 
  20 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which     
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
  21 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the       
Government has furnished interim replies  
  22 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting held on 16th February, 2022.                                     23 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
 Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of Committee on 
 Public Undertakings on New India Assurance Company Limited.                               25 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2021-22) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.    Shri Janardan Mishra  
9.    Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu  
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17.  Shri Anil Desai 
18.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
19.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar appointed as Chairperson, COPU w.e.f. 13 August, 2021 vice Smt 
Meenakashi Lekhi appointed as Minister on 07 July, 2021. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari            -        Additional Secretary 
2. Shri  G.C. Prasad  -        Additional Director  
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda        -        Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal           -        Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Haokip Kakai               -        Executive Officer 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings ( 17th Lok Sabha) titled “Loss 
due to imprudent underwriting and Lack of proper r isk assessment” [based on P ara no. 
3.2 of C&AG Report no. 13 of 2019] related to New India Assurance Company Limited. 
 
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 March, 2021. The 
Action taken Replies to all the 5 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received from the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance on 28 October, 
2021. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on        
16 February, 2022.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the  action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR  
  22 March, 2022        Chairperson, 
  01 Chaitra, 1943(S) Committee on Public Undertakings. 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
 REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) titled 'Loss due to 
Imprudent Underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment [based on para no. 3.2 of 
C&AG Report no. 13 of 2019] related to New India Assurance Company Limited which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on the 24th  March, 2021. 
 
2. The Report contained five Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken notes 
have been received from the Government in respect of all the five               
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted  by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 
(Total 05)  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies (Chapter III)  
 Nil        
                                                    (Total 0)  
 
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV) 
 Nil                                
 (Total 0) 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations to which the Go vernment have furnished 
interim replies. (Chapter V)       
  Nil                                                                     
 (Total 0) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance 
to furnish Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report within three months of the presentation of the 
Report to Parliament. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
  

2 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
5.  The Committee in their Ninth Report had recommended the following:- 
 
"The present C&AG Audit Para no. 3.2 of Report No. 13 of 2019 
(Compliance Audit Observation) examined by the Committee relates to 
'Loss due to imprudent underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment' by 
New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL).The Committee were 
informed that the policy in question was governed by Insurance Regul atory 
Development Authority of India (IRDAI) and was issued by NIACL in June 
2013 but was discontinued in November 2015. AppsDaily Solutions Private 
Limited (insured), a mobile application provider sold mobile applications 
through its agents at the mobile sales points. lt offered free insurance cover 
for new mobile handsets provided that the customer bought their application 
within 15 days of purchase of mobile handset. ln the policy, the Company 
collected a total premium of Rs. 33.78 crore against which it  settled claims 
of Rs. 125.10 crore that resulted in loss of Rs. 91.30 crore due to imprudent 
underwriting without the approval of the competent authorities, lack of 
proper risk assessment, insurable interest and not carrying out the actuarial 
valuation of  the policy while fixing the premium rate. On the basis of a 
preliminary enquiry conducted by CVO, NIACL who found that there were 
lapses in the policy, -the matter was referred to CVC. On the advice of CVC, 
major penalty proceedings were initiated against  the then General Manager 
(IT), and the then DGM ln -charge of Regional Office, Bangalore and four 
other officers. The Committee before finalising their observations in their 
report heard the views of the officers from C&AG that conducted the audit, 
and also the views of the representatives of NIACL and the representatives 
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). On the basis 
of the views gathered from all concerned, the Committee is given to 
understand that insurance is a business of u nderwriting the risk but the risk 
has to be a calculated one. lt has to be based on actuarial calculations. Yet, 
the Committee feel that conscious decisions taken complying with all the 
extant rules/ regulations/ guidelines may not get the desired results all the 
times and can also go awry at sometimes. The Committee is aware that 
unlike their counterparts in private companies, officers of public companies 
owe public accountability of their decisions and are answerable to many 
agencies of the Government tha t eventually hampers the entire process of 
quick decision making. The Committee in their report, has therefore, without 
casting any aspersions on the integrity or competence of the officers 
concerned; have rather attempted to address a larger issue of bringing 
improvement in decision making process, emphasizing more and more on 
technological systems to have increased level of transparency and 
accountability for minimizing human errors and risk attached to the 
insurance business".  

3 
 
6.  The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance in their action taken 
reply have stated as follows:- 
 
"NIACL has already embarked on core technology implementation which 
will bring transparency data verification setting up the audit trail of all the 
transactions relating to its business. This includes the issuance of policies 
through the digital mode and post sales service using the technology 
enabled facilities like online intimation and registration of claims for Motor 
claims.  In case of health insurance, the te chnology has been implemented 
through the TPAs approved by IRDAI". 
 
 
REVISION OF PREMIUM RATE AND TERMS OF DEPRICIATION IN FAVOUR OF 
THE INSURED  
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
7.  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to the revision of premium rate and terms of depreciation in favour of the 
insured.:-  
 
"The Committee note that New India Assurance Company had initially 
issued Master Package Policy with an estimated S um Insured (St) of Rs. 5 
crore and a premium of Rs. 6 lakh was collected for the period from 04 June 
2013 to 03 June 2014. The policy was cancelled and reissued twice during 
October, 2013 and February, 2014 after renegotiation of terms in favour of 
the insured despite increasing trend of Incurred Claim Ratio (ICR). NIA CL in 
their response defended their decision stating that the premium rate for the 
first Master Policy was quoted keeping in mind the projected targeted 
turnover of Rs 75 crores . Prevalent mar ket rate at that phase was much 
lower at 0.80% to 0.90% for such similar risks as against the 1.20% + ST 
charged by the Company. The Insured sought a new intermediary to solicit 
the business and for technical reasons (there is no provision to 
modify/change the intermediary during the currency of Policy) hence the old 
master policy had to be discontinued and a new one was issued w.e.f. 15 
October 2013. NIACL clarified that the initial policy was however not 
cancelled but only declarations were discontinued i n the light of New Policy 
issued. While reissuing the policy, the turnover assured was increased to 
Rs. 250/ 300 crore warranting rate adjustment to a little lower rate. Further 
the claim experience at that point of time was not un -favourable. The new 
policy that was effective from 01 February 2014 had many changes in terms 
of pricing viz. an annual turnover of Rs. 1000 crore (Sum Insured) was the 
minimum requirement under the policy with an initial premium to be paid for 
a sum insured value of Rs. 100 cror e and subsequent increase was to be 
effected for similar Rs. 100 crore of Sl. This assured a minimum premium of 
Rs. 11 crore of premium with this change whereas none of such similar 

4 
 
policies in the market during that period had generated such volume of 
premium. The Committee however are not in agreement with the 
explanation given by NIACL for cancellation of the old Master Policy or 
reissuance of the new Policy. This is substantiated by the fact that NIACL in 
another response has stated that the “Master pol icy issued to AppsDaily as 
Group Manager Policy defined 'Insured‟ as - purchaser of mobile handset 
installed with application manufactured and marketed by AppsDaily solution 
Pvt. Limited". ln the given explanation, if the policy had to be discontinued, it 
could only have been discontinued if all the purchasers (Insured in this 
case) of the mobile handset could have sought a new intermediary. The 
committee do not understand as to why the old master policy was 
discontinued on AppsDaily seeking a new intermedi ary when it was not the 
„Insured‟ as defined in the Master Policy. And what was more surprising is 
the officers of NIACL relenting on the request of AppsDaily for change of 
intermediary, and discontinuing the old policy to come out with another new 
policy in favour of AppsDaily. This is admitted by the fact that all the claims 
were settled in favour of the individual insured as defined above and 
reimbursed to AppsDaily.  
The committee feel that adequate precautions should have been taken in 
this case. The committee while hoping that sufficient checks and balance 
must have now been put in place by NIACL on the discretion given to its 
officers implementing policies of the Company so that it is employed for the 
goodwill of the Company and not in favour of someone undeserving".  
 
 
8.  The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken 
reply, have stated as follows:-  
 
"Retail products are priced with guidelines on band -width of discounts that 
can be given based on the declaration an d submission of details by each 
customer.  The technology of the company has been enabled to incorporate 
and identify the pricing of the product based on the underwriting guidelines 
of Head Office and approved by the Competent Authority. 
The approval mecha nism for any special dispensation has already been 
given through various Circulars, stating the authority for giving the approval.  
The robust internal audit mechanism monitors the implementation of such 
guidelines/circulars". 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
9. With regards to the non-maintance of proper records , the Committee, in their 
Ninth Report, had recommended the following to NIACL:-  
 

5 
 
"The committee also find it rather surprising that the documents/papers 
pertaining to the revision of premium and the terms of depreciation were not 
available on record and all decisions related to the proceeding with the 
premium acceptance and revision of terms of depreciation were taken on 
oral consent at the Branch, Divisional and Regional office level. The 
committee feel that such a lackadaisical approach was not only against the 
system of ensuring transparency in public dealings/ business of the 
company but it also raises suspicion on the integrity of the persons involved 
in taking those decisions. The committee is happy to note that in the year 
2015 itself, NIACL issued a list of Do's and Don'ts to all those dealing with 
the mobile insurance, risk assessment and actuarial valuation.  
The committee desire that in future records of the company should be 
maintained properly and major decisions taken on record so that in the 
event of any lapse, problems can be identified and responsibility fixed on 
erring officials".  
 
 
10.  The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken 
reply, have stated as follows:-  
 
"As part of preventive vigilance, the sensitization is done by each technical 
department to follow given set of guidelines.   The periodical checks and 
various disclosure mechanisms like fraud monitoring, enables the Company 
to identify the major deviations and take suitable disciplinary action. 
Instructions are issued to our offices to upload the approval of Competent 
Authority while issuing Policy or endorsement. The adherence to this is 
checked by the Internal auditors and if any deviation is found, the same is 
informed and corrective actions t aken at the earliest. Further, circular has 
been issued to regularize verbal approvals within 7 days.   
Further, the Company also has a Maintenance of Record Policy, approved 
by the Board.  This is diligently followed by all our offices, across India".  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
11.  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to the expediting the completion of inquiry :-  
  
"The committee note that NIACL did not have any kind of lapse or fraud 
warning system to alert them that something wrong or unusual was 
happening in their company. It was only after a complaint was received and 
on a preliminary enquiry by the CVO, the matte r was reported to the CVC 
and the issue of imprudent underwriting and proper risk management came 
to light. Even though when the matter came to light in 2016, the officers 

6 
 
concerned were charge sheeted on the last day of their retirement in 2018 
and the enquiry began in December 2020. The charges framed against the 
officers were primarily of two counts. Firstly, whether the officers had the 
authority to delegate the responsibility or needed to seek the approval of 
the Board in order to delegate those financ ial powers of claim settlement 
and second was regarding the unauthorized settlement of the claims. The 
Committee find the delay in initiation of enquiry quite unusual. The 
Committee understand that the insurance business is a business of 
underwriting and t here could have been an error in the calculation of risk 
and underwriting by the charged officers. But, taking of action on a lapse 
that was detected not through the Company's own internal mechanism but 
through a complaint by an outsider and delay in charg ing the officers and 
initiation of enquiry only substantiates the involvement of the officers of the 
Company while they may not be involved. Although the loss to the 
Company owing to wrong risk assessment was only Rs. 91.32 crore, yet it 
was public money that could have been saved. 
The Committee without casting any aspersions on the integrity or 
competence of the Officers charged or without delving much on the 
possibility of any collusion between the app‟s provider and the insurer; 
desire expediting the completion of the enquiry so that the officers charged 
may come out clean if not guilty or may be punished quickly if they had 
deliberately committed the lapse". 
  
 
12.  The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken 
reply, h ave stated  that he enquiry is in process by the DFS.  Examination of the 
management and defence witnesses is complete and Presenting Officer's report 
awaited. They have further stated that i n light of the report of CVO, NIACL, the matter 
was examined by DFS and major penalty proceedings were initiated against the officers 
concerned. Accordingly, charge-sheets were issued to Shri K.  Sanath Kumar, Ex-CMD, 
NICL (then General Manager and Director, NIACL) who retired on 30.4.2018, and Shri 
C.Narambunathan, Ex Ge neral Manager and Director, NIACL (then DGM), who retired 
on 31.5.2019.  Resultantly, the memorandum of charges has been issued to Shri K. 
Sanath Kumar and Shri C. Narambunathan.  Shri D.K. Mehrotra, Ex -Chairman, LIC of 
India and Shri Ballaswamy, Ex -General Manager, NIACL have been appointed as 
Inquiry Officer (IO) and Presenting Officer (PO) respectively for conducting 
composite/common Inquiry for major penalty proceedings against, the charged officers 
(COs), Shri K. Sanath Kumar, and Shri C.Narambunathan. T he proceedings 
commenced on 14.12.2020 against both the charged officers.  Sh.D.K. Mehrotra, IO has 
informed that the two Charge sheeted employees gave their final statement on  2/9/2021 
which brought the hearings to an end.   The PO has been asked  by the IO to submit his 
report. IO has been requested to  expedite submission of the Inquiry  report in a time 
bound manner considering the extant guidelines of completion of departmental 
proceedings". 

7 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
13.  The Committee, in their N inth Re port, had recommended the following with 
regard to the strengthening of Internal Control Mechanisms:- 
 
"The Committee note that NIACL did not have any concrete internal control 
mechanisms in place to check/detect the lapse before its occurrence. Firstly, 
NIACL did not have detailed justification for fixing of initial rates & subsequent 
revision on record. Secondly, the issue of new policy and it getting renewed 
without the approval of the competent authorities also went unchecked. Thirdly, 
the Company did n ot get the actuarial valuation done which is the basic 
requirement of any risk management in the  non-life insurance business. And 
lastly, the lapse that should have been detected by the Company's own 
mechanism was detected through a complaint lodged from o utside and a 
preliminary enquiry conducted by the CVO, NIACL which is an extended arm of 
the CVC. All these factors resulted in loss of Rs.91.32 crore to the Government 
exchequer which could have been saved. the Committee feel that had there 
been sufficient internal control mechanism to induce advance warnings of any 
unusual activity or frauds could be detected and precious time and public 
money could be avoided. The committee, therefore, recommend NIACL to build 
rationale decision making processes and buil d workable internal warning 
systems depending on its nature of business & functions to detect various kinds 
of frauds/ lapses on the part of the Company. This could be done through  
(i) use of technology embedment into their systems with suitable 
measures enabling data protection". 
14.  The Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken 
reply, have stated as follows:-  
 "The Company has developed a multilayer approach, as under, to ensure the 
Confidentiality, integrity & Availability of Data in line with IRDAI Guidelines. 
 PII (personally identifiable information) data is encrypted while storing. 
 Data while transit is encrypted. 
 Data Masking/De-Identification of PII done for data released for Testing 
 Perimeter security is fortified by deploying Dual OEM firewalls, IPS, WAF etc. 
 SIEM is deployed for event co relation and incident reporting. 
 Endpoints/Servers are deployed with Antimalware, EDR, HIPS, DLP etc. 
 Critical asset access by administrators is managed & monitored by Pr ivilege 
Identity Management (PIM)solution. 
 ISO 27001 Certification of Data Centres is in progress. 
The Company is in the process of procuring other advance security solutions 
such as NBAD (Network behaviour anomaly detection), Data Classification & 
DLP (da ta loss prevention), Database activity monitoring, SOAR (security 

8 
 
orchestration, automation & response), UEBA (User & Entity Behaviour 
Analytics), Packet Forensic etc. 
 The Company has a Chief Risk Officer & Chief Information Security Officer. 
They report to the Risk Management Committee & the Board. Further, quarterly 
updates/issues/concerns on the IT Security & Cyber Security is placed to the 
Risk Management Committee & the Board, for advice or future course of action, 
as & when required".   
 (ii) The Committee in their original Report also stressed that NIACL can 
maintain a data -base to serve its local interest and engage independent 
surveyors and analysers to help in rational decision making. 
In their reply the NIACL submitted that t he Company is having the daily data 
analysis through Surveyor's tracker, claims tracker, and periodical feedback on 
the performance of Surveyors with a rating mechanism with vital rating scheme 
to know the consistency and quality of performance. 
(iii) The Committee further stressed that in future, Risk should be managed 
professionally, and any assessment should be based on actuarial valuation 
supported by research and scientific methodology". 
In response to this the Company in their action taken replies stated that t he risks 
are rated by our Appointed Actuary after the respective line of business owners 
place the proposed product wordings.  The Actuary researches the product 
experience through analytical tools and derives at a rate which is sustainable and 
is affordable to the Policyholders". 
(iv) It was also recommended that t he functioning of the Company and all 
the decisions taken for the customers should be made transparent and 
have sufficient mechanism for fixing of accountability. 
 
NIACL, in their action taken replies, stated that the  Company follows maker -
checker mechanism to have multiple controls for each transaction.  The Financial 
Authority limits up to which transaction can be done by each cadre. The 
respective technical manual, audit manual, accounting ma nual apart from the 
Board Approved Financial Authority identified for each role address to fix 
accountability.   
In the interest of Policyholders and to bring more awareness, the Company uses 
the customer portal wherein specific mention is made of digital discount as per 
the guidelines issued by the Ministry. The Company encourages use of customer 
portal to avail the digital discount apart from the normal price to enable the 
customer to save 10% of premium.  This is as per the digital discount circular of 
the Ministry. 

9 
 
(v) The Committee had also recommended that o nline grievance redressal 
mechanism and other modes of receipt of complaint mechanism of NIACL 
should be strengthened and every complaint should be taken seriously and 
personally looked into by a ma nager/higher level and should be redressed 
to the satisfaction of the customers/client. 
The Company in their replies stated that t he Grievance Redressal machinery is 
three tiered with the Corporate Grievance Cell functioning at the apex level, the 
Regional Grievance Cell at the Regional Office, and the Branch / Divisional 
Grievance Cell at the Branch/ Divisional Office.  While the principal function of 
the Branch/ Divisional Grievance Cell is to redress the Grievances, it is expected 
that the Grievance Cell s at the Regional and Corporate level play a more 
proactive role in not only redressing Grievances, but in minimizing their 
incidence.  These two cells address Grievance not only in terms of their content, 
but also in terms of their context, to discern cir cumstances that give rise to 
repeated Grievances.     
There is a full -fledged Customer Care Department in Head Office monitoring 
grievances registered in all the sources. Grievances registered in CPGRAMS 
and National Consumer Helpline are closely monitored from Head Office and 
redressal of grievances in these  portals are posted from the Head Office only. 
Grievances registered in IGMS and CRM are resolved and posted by Divisional / 
Regional / Head Office. All Regional Offices have a Regional Manager In -charge 
of Customer care and he / she is supported by a Cust omer Care Nodal Office in 
that Regional Office.  
The Company has a dedicated e -mail ID customercare.ho@newindia.co.in for 
getting customer grievances and service related issues and this is monitored by 
the Head Office. With a view to give special attention  to the grievances and 
service related issues of the senior citizens, the Company has a dedicated e -mail 
address seniorcitizencare.ho@newindia.co.in which is also monitored by the 
Head Office.  
Grievance Redressal Machinery works at all the operational lev els. At Branch / 
Micro Unit level, the Office In -charge is the Grievance Redressal Officer. At 
Divisional Office level, the Divisional Manager / Sr. Divisional Manager is the 
Grievance Redressal Officer. At Regional Office, one officer at Senior level 
designated as Grievance Redressal Officer will attend to the Grievance. At Head 
Office level, one officer in the rank of Chief Manager or above will work as the 
Grievance Redressal Officer.   
The Policyholder / the prospect may approach the Policy issuing offi ce first for 
getting the grievance resolved / reply of the query. If satisfactory resolution is not 
received, the Policyholder / Prospect may approach Regional Office Customer 
Care Department and then Head Office Customer Care Department.  
 In our Grievanc e Redressal Policy, there is a provision for Regional Redressal 
Committee at Regional Office level and Corporate Redressal Committee at Head 

10 
 
Office level. The grievances falling within the purview of these committees may 
be referred to them for decision. 
15.1. The Committee while examining C&AG Audit Para No. 3.2 of Report No. 13 
of 2019 related to 'Loss due to Imprudent Underwriting and Lack of proper Risk 
Assessment' by New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL), had observed in 
their report that the Com pany in June 2013 had collected a total premium of      
Rs. 33.78 crore against which it settled claims of 125.10 crore that resulted in loss 
of Rs. 91.30 crore to the Company. The loss that could have been avoided was on 
account of imprudent underwriting,  lack of proper risk assessment, insurable 
interest and the Company not carrying out the actuarial valuation of the policy 
while fixing the premium rate. Surprisingly, the documents/papers pertaining to 
the revision of premium and the terms of depreciation  were not available on 
record and all decisions related to the proceeding with the premium acceptance 
and revision of  terms of depreciation were taken on oral consent at the Branch, 
Divisional and Regional Office level. Shockingly, the lapse that should have been 
detected by the Company's own mechanism was detected through a complaint 
lodged from outside and a preliminar y enquiry conducted by the CVO, NIACL 
which is an extended arm of the CVC. 
 
 
15.2 The Committee without casting any aspersions on the integrity and 
competence of the Officers concerned had made a number of suggestions in their 
report for addressing the lar ger issue of bringing in improvement in decision 
making process and had emphasised on more and more use of technological 
systems to achieve increased level of transparency and accountability for 
minimizing human errors and risk attached to the insurance bu siness. Some of 
the suggestions included proper management of records of major decisions to 
identify problems and fix responsibility of erring officials for the lapse, building of 
rationale decision making processes and workable internet warning systems th at 
will enable to detect various kinds of frauds/lapses on the part of the Company 
through (i) use of technology embedment into the Company's systems with 
suitable measures of data protection, (ii) maintaining of database to serve the 
Company's local inter est and engaging of independent surveyors and analyzers 
to help in rational decision making, (iii) professional assessment of risk 
supported by research and scientific methodology, (iv) ensuring transparency in 
decision making process and (v) strengthening  of grievance redressal 
mechanism, etc. 
 
15.3 The Committee are happy to note from the action taken replies that NIACL 
has acted upon the recommendations of the Committee in right spirit and has 
embarked on core technology implementation to bring transpare ncy in data 
verification. It has also enabled its technology to incorporate and identify the 
pricing of the products based on the underwriting guidelines of Head Office and 
approved by the Competent Authority. As part of preventive vigilance, NIACL has 
sensitized its each technical department to follow given set of guidelines and now 
the Company uploads the approval of Competent Authority while issuing policy 

11 
 
or endorsement. The Company has developed Maintenance of Record Policy 
which has been approved by i ts Board, Besides, the Company has developed a 
multilayer approach to ensure confidentiality, integrity and availability of data in 
line with IRDAI Guidelines and is now undertaking the daily data analysis through 
Surveyor's tracker, claims tracker, and periodical feedback on the performance of 
Surveyor with a rating mechanism including conducting of Actuary researches 
through analytical tools. In addition, the Company is ensuring an efficient three 
tiered Grievance Redressal Mechanism with the Corporate Gr ievance Cell 
functioning at the apex level. The Committee hope that with all these systems in 
place, there would be improvement in decision making process ensuring an 
increased level of transparency and accountability in the functioning of the 
Company so a s the fraud/huge losses can be prevented by the Company in 
future. 
 
15.4 The Committee however note with dismay that although the fraud/lapse 
had come to light in 2016, the concerned officers could be charge -sheeted on the 
last day of their retirement in 2 018/2019 and the enquiry could only begin in 
December, 2020. Eventually, when the hearings in the case has been completed 
on 02 September 2021, the report is still pending with the Inquiry Officer. The 
Committee had expected early completion of the enquiry  so that the charged 
Officers could come out clean if not found guilty or could be punished if they are 
found to have committed the lapse. The Committee would therefore emphasize 
upon immediate completion of the departmental proceedings against the charge 
sheeted officers. 
 
 
**** 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NIACL-OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 The present C&AG Audit Para no. 3.2 of Report No. 13 of 2019 (Compliance 
Audit Observation) examined by the Committee relates to 'Loss due to imprudent 
underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment' by New India Assurance Company 
Limited (NIACL).The Committee were informed that the policy in question was governed 
by Insurance Regulatory Development Auth ority of India (IRDAI) and was issued by 
NIACL in June 2013 but was discontinued in November 2015. AppsDaily Solutions 
Private Limited (insured), a mobile application provider sold mobile applications through 
its agents at the mobile sales points. lt offer ed free insurance cover for new mobile 
handsets provided that the customer bought their application within 15 days of purchase 
of mobile handset. ln the policy, the Company collected a total premium of Rs. 33.78 
crore against which it settled claims of Rs.  125.10 crore that resulted in loss of Rs. 
91.30 crore due to imprudent underwriting without the approval of the competent 
authorities, lack of proper risk assessment, insurable interest and not carrying out the 
actuarial valuation of the policy while fixi ng the premium rate. On the basis of a 
preliminary enquiry conducted by CVO, NIACL who found that there were lapses in the 
policy, -the matter was referred to CVC. On the advice of CVC, major penalty 
proceedings were initiated against the then General Mana ger (IT), and the then DGM 
ln-charge of Regional Office, Bangalore and four other officers. The Committee before 
finalising their observations in their report heard the views of the officers from C&AG 
that conducted the audit, and also the views of the rep resentatives of NIACL and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). On the 
basis of the views gathered from all concerned, the Committee is given to understand 
that insurance is a business of underwriting the risk b ut the risk has to be a calculated 
one. lt has to be based on actuarial calculations. Yet, the Committee feel that conscious 
decisions taken complying with all the extant rules/ regulations/ guidelines may not get 
the desired results all the times and can also go awry at sometimes. The Committee is 
aware that unlike their counterparts in private companies, officers of public companies 
owe public accountability of their decisions and are answerable to many agencies of the 
Government that eventually hampers t he entire process of quick decision making . The 
Committee in their report, has therefore, without casting any aspersions on the integrity 
or competence of the officers concerned; have rather attempted to address a larger 
issue of bringing improvement in decision making process, emphasizing more and more 
on technological systems to have increased level of transparency and accountability for 
minimizing human errors and risk attached to the insurance business. 
  

13 
 
 Reply of the Government 
NIACL has already embar ked on core technology implementation which will bring 
transparency data verification setting up the audit trail of all the transactions relating to 
its business. This includes the issuance of policies through the digital mode and post 
sales service using the technology enabled facilities like online intimation and 
registration of claims for Motor claims.  In case of health insurance, the technology has 
been implemented through the TPAs approved by IRDAI.  
 [Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
(H-12013/01/2021-Ins. II Dated 28.10.2021) 
 
REVISION OF PREMIMUM RATE AND TERMS OF DEPRICIATION IN FAVOUR OF 
THE INSURED 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
2. The Committee note that New India Assurance Company had initially issued 
Master Package Policy  with an estimated Sum Insured (St) of Rs. 5 crore and a 
premium of Rs. 6 lakh was collected for the period from 04 June 2013 to 03 June 2014. 
The policy was cancelled and reissued twice during October, 2013 and February, 2014 
after renegotiation of terms in favour of the insured despite increasing trend of Incurred 
Claim Ratio (ICR). NIAGL in their response defended their decision stating that the 
premium rate for the first Master Policy was quoted keeping in mind the projected 
targeted turnover. Prevalent  market rate at that phase was much lower at 0.80% to 
0.90% for such similar risks as against the 1.20% + ST charged by the Company. The 
Insured sought a new intermediary to solicit the business and for technical reasons 
(there is no provision to modify/ch ange the intermediary during the currency of Policy) 
hence the old master policy had to be discontinued and a new one was issued w.e.f. 15 
October 2013. NIACL clarified that the initial policy was however not cancelled but only 
declarations were discontinu ed in the light of New Policy issued. While reissuing the 
policy, the turnover assured was increased to Rs. 250/ 300 crore warranting rate 
adjustment to a little lower rate. Further the claim experience at that point of time was 
not un-favourable. The new policy that was effective from 01 February 2014 had many 
changes in terms of pricing viz. an annual turnover of Rs. 1000 crore (Sum Insured) was 
the minimum requirement under the policy with an initial premium to be paid for a sum 
insured value of Rs. 100 crore and subsequent increase was to be effected for similar 
Rs. 100 crore of Sl. This assured a minimum premium of Rs. 11 crore whereas none of 
such similar policies in the market during that period had generated such volume of 
premium. The Committee howe ver are not in agreement with the explanation given by 
NIACL for cancellation of the old Master Policy or reissuance of the new Policy. This is 
substantiated by the fact that NIACL in another response has stated that the “Master 
policy issued to AppsDaily as Group Manager Policy defined 'Insured‟ as - purchaser of 
mobile handset installed with application manufactured and marketed by AppsDaily 
solution Pvt. Limited". ln the given explanation, if the policy had to be discontinued, it 
could only have been dis continued if all the purchasers (Insured in this case) of the 

14 
 
mobile handset could have sought a new intermediary. The committee do not 
understand as to why the old master policy was discontinued on AppsDaily seeking a 
new intermediary when it was not the „Insured‟ as defined in the Master Policy. And 
what was more surprising is the officers of NIACL relenting on the request of AppsDaily 
for change of intermediary, and discontinuing the old policy to come out with another 
new policy in favour of AppsDaily. This is admitted by the fact that all the claims were 
settled in favour of the individual insured as defined above and reimbursed to 
AppsDaily. The committee feel that adequate precautions should have been taken in 
this case. The committee while hoping that sufficient checks and balance must have 
now been put in place by NIACL on the discretion given to its officers implementing 
policies of the Company so that it is employed for the goodwill of the Company and not 
in favour of someone undeserving:   
Reply of the Government 
Retail products are priced with guidelines on band -width of discounts that can be given 
based on the declaration and submission of details by each customer.  The technology 
of the company has been enabled to incorporate and identify the  pricing of the product 
based on the underwriting guidelines of Head Office and approved by the Competent 
Authority. 
The approval mechanism for any special dispensation has already been given through 
various Circulars, stating the authority for giving the approval.  The robust internal audit 
mechanism monitors the implementation of such guidelines/circulars. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
(H-12013/01/2021-Ins. II Dated 28.10.2021) 
 
NON-MAINTANCE OF PROPER RECORDS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
3. The committee also find it rather surprising that the documents/papers pertaining 
to the revision of premium and the terms of depreciation were not available on record 
and all decisions related to the proceeding with the premium acceptance a nd revision of 
terms of depreciation were taken on oral consent at the Branch, Divisional and Regional 
office level. The committee feel that such a lackadaisical approach was not only against 
the system of ensuring transparency in public dealings/ business  of the company but it 
also raises suspicion on the integrity of the persons involved in taking those decisions. 
The committee is happy to note that in the year 2015 itself, NIACL issued a list of Do's 
and Don'ts to all those dealing with the mobile insura nce, risk assessment and actuarial 
valuation.  
The committee desire that in future records of the company should be maintained 
properly and major decisions taken on record so that in the event of any lapse, 
problems can be identified and responsibility fixed on erring officials. 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
As part of preventive vigilance, the sensitization is done by each technical department 
to follow given set of guidelines.  The periodical checks and various disclosure 
mechanisms like fraud monitoring, enables the Company to identify the major deviations 
and take suitable disciplinary action. 
Instructions are issued to our offices to upload the approval of Competent Authority 
while issuing Policy or endorsement. The adherence to this is checked by the Interna l 
auditors and if any deviation is found, the same is informed and corrective actions taken 
at the earliest. Further, circular has been issued to regularize verbal approvals within 7 
days.   
Further, the Company also has a Maintenance of Record Policy, app roved by the 
Board.  This is diligently followed by all our offices, across India. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
(H-12013/01/2021-Ins. II Dated 28.10.2021) 
 
EXPEDITING THE COMPLETION OF INQUIRY 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
4. The committee note that NIACL did not have any kind of lapse or fraud warning 
system to alert them that something wrong or unusual was happening in their company. 
It was only after a complaint was received and on a preliminary enquiry by the CVO, the 
matter was reported to the CVC and the issue of imprudent underwriting and proper risk 
management came to light. Even though when the matter came to light in 2016, the 
officers concerned were charge sheeted on the last day of their retirement in 2018 and 
the enquir y began in December 2020. The charges framed against the officers were 
primarily of two counts. Firstly, whether the officers had the authority to delegate the 
responsibility or needed to seek the approval of the Board in order to delegate those 
financial powers of claim settlement and second was regarding the unauthorized 
settlement of the claims. The Committee find the delay in initiation of enquiry quite 
unusual. The Committee understand that the insurance business is a business of 
underwriting and there  could have been an error in the calculation of risk and 
underwriting by the charged officers.  But, taking of action on a lapse that was detected 
not through the Company's own internal mechanism but through a complaint by an 
outsider and delay in charging  the officers and initiation of enquiry only substantiates 
the involvement of the officers of the Company while they may not be involved. 
Although the loss to the Company owing to wrong risk assessment was only Rs. 91.32 
crore, yet it was public money that could have been saved. 
The Committee without casting any aspersions on the integrity or competence of the 
Officers charged or without delving much on the possibility of any collusion between the 
app‟s provider and the insurer; desire expediting the comple tion of the enquiry so that 

16 
 
the officers charged may come out clean if not guilty or may be punished quickly if they 
had deliberately committed the lapse:   
Reply of the Government 
The enquiry is in process by the DFS.  We understand that the examining of the 
management and defence witnesses is complete and Presenting Officer's report 
awaited.  
Reply of Department of Financial Services 
 In light of the report of CVO, NIACL, the matter was examined by DFS and major 
penalty proceedings were initiated against the officers concerned.  
 Accordingly, charge-sheets were issued to Shri K.Sanath Kumar, Ex -CMD, NICL 
(then General Manager and Director, NIACL) who retired on 30.4.2018, and Shri 
C.Narambunathan, Ex General Manager and Director, NIACL (then DGM), who 
retired on 31.5.2019. 
 Resultantly, the memorandum of charges has been issued to Shri K. Sanath 
Kumar and Shri C. Narambunathan. 
 Shri D.K. Mehrotra, Ex-Chairman, LIC of India and Shri Ballaswamy, Ex -General 
Manager, NIACL have been appointed as Inquiry Officer (I O) and Presenting 
Officer (PO) respectively for conducting composite/common Inquiry for major 
penalty proceedings against, the charged officers (COs), Shri K. Sanath Kumar, 
and Shri C.Narambunathan.  
 The proceedings commenced on 14.12.2020 against both the charged officers. 
 Sh.D.K. Mehrotra, IO has informed that the two Charge sheeted employees gave 
their final statement on  2/9/2021 which brought the hearings to an end.   The PO 
has been asked by the IO to submit his report. 
 IO has been requested to  expedite submission of the Inquiry  report in a time 
bound manner considering the extant guidelines of completion of departmental 
proceedings.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
(H-12013/01/2021-Ins. II Dated 28.10.2021) 
 
STRENGTHENING OF INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISMS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
5. The Committee note that NIACL did not have any concrete internal control 
mechanisms in place to check/detect the lapse before its occurrence. Firstly, NIACL did 
not have detailed justification for f ixing of initial rates & subsequent revision on record. 
Secondly, the issue of new policy and it getting renewed without the approval of the 
competent authorities also went unchecked. Thirdly, the Company did not get the 
actuarial valuation done which is t he basic requirement of any risk management in the 
insurance business. And lastly, the lapse that should have been detected by the 
Company's own mechanism was detected through a complaint lodged from outside and 

17 
 
a preliminary enquiry conducted by the CVO, NIACL which is an extended arm of the 
CVC. All these factors resulted in loss of Rs.91.32 crore to the Government exchequer 
which could have been saved. the Committee feel that had there been sufficient internal 
control mechanism to induce advance warnings  of any unusual activity or frauds could 
be detected and precious time and public money could be avoided. The committee, 
therefore, recommend NIACL to build rationale decision making processes and build 
workable internal warning systems depending on its na ture of business & functions to 
detect various kinds of frauds/ lapses on the part of the Company. This could be done 
through  
(i) use of technology embedment into their systems with suitable measures 
enabling data protection. 
Reply of the NIACL 
 The Compa ny has developed a multilayer approach, as under, to ensure the 
Confidentiality, integrity & Availability of Data in line with IRDAI Guidelines. 
 PII (personally identifiable information) data is encrypted while storing. 
 Data while transit is encrypted. 
 Data Masking/De-Identification of PII done for data released for Testing 
 Perimeter security is fortified by deploying Dual OEM firewalls, IPS, WAF etc. 
 SIEM is deployed for event co relation and incident reporting. 
 Endpoints/Servers are deployed with Antimalware, EDR, HIPS, DLP etc. 
 Critical asset access by administrators is managed & monitored by Privilege 
Identity Management (PIM)solution. 
 ISO 27001 Certification of Data Centres is in progress. 
The Company is in the process of procuring other advance securit y solutions such as 
NBAD (Network behaviour anomaly detection), Data Classification & DLP (data loss 
prevention), Database activity monitoring, SOAR (security orchestration, automation & 
response), UEBA (User & Entity Behaviour Analytics), Packet Forensic etc. 
 The Company has a Chief Risk Officer & Chief Information Security Officer. They report 
to the Risk Management Committee & the Board. Further, quarterly 
updates/issues/concerns on the IT Security & Cyber Security is placed to the Risk 
Management Committee & the Board, for advice or future course of action, as & when 
required.   
 (ii) NIACL can maintain a data -base to serve its local interest and engage 
independent surveyors and analysers to help in rational decision making. 
Reply of the NIACL 
The Compa ny is having the daily data analysis through Surveyor's tracker, claims 
tracker, and periodical feedback on the performance of Surveyors with a rating 
mechanism with vital rating scheme to know the consistency and quality of 
performance. 

18 
 
(iii) In future, R isk should be managed professionally, and any assessment 
should be based on actuarial valuation supported by research and scientific 
methodology. 
Reply of the NIACL 
The risks are rated by our Appointed Actuary after the respective line of business 
owners place the proposed product wordings.  The Actuary researches the product 
experience through analytical tools and derives at a rate which is sustainable and is 
affordable to the Policyholders. 
(iv) The functioning of the Company and all the decisions taken for the customers 
should be made transparent and have sufficient mechanism for fixing of 
accountability. 
Reply of the NIACL 
Company follows maker -checker mechanism to have multiple controls for each 
transaction.  The Financial Authority limits up to which transaction can be done by each 
cadre. The respective technical manual, audit manual, accounting manual apart from 
the Board  Approved Financial Authority identified for each role address to fix 
accountability.   
In the interest of Policyholders and to bring more awareness, the Company uses the 
customer portal wherein specific mention is made of digital discount as per the 
guidelines issued by the Ministry. The Company encourages use of customer portal to 
avail the digital discount apart from the normal price to enable the customer to save 
10% of premium.  This is as per the digital discount circular of the Ministry. 
(v) Online g rievance redressal mechanism and other modes of receipt of 
complaint mechanism of NIACL should be strengthened and every complaint 
should be taken seriously and personally looked into by a manager/higher level 
and should be redressed to the satisfaction of the customers/client. 
Reply of the NIACL 
The Grievance Redressal machinery is three tiered with the Corporate Grievance Cell 
functioning at the apex level, the Regional Grievance Cell at the Regional Office, and 
the Branch / Divisional Grievance Cell at t he Branch/ Divisional Office.  While the 
principal function of the Branch/ Divisional Grievance Cell is to redress the Grievances, 
it is expected that the Grievance Cells at the Regional and Corporate level play a more 
proactive role in not only redressing  Grievances, but in minimizing their incidence.  
These two cells address Grievance not only in terms of their content, but also in terms 
of their context, to discern circumstances that give rise to repeated Grievances.     
There is a full-fledged Customer Care Department in Head Office monitoring grievances 
registered in all the sources. Grievances registered in CPGRAMS and National 
Consumer Helpline are closely monitored from Head Office and redressal of grievances 
in these portals are posted from the Head  Office only. Grievances registered in IGMS 

19 
 
and CRM are resolved and posted by Divisional / Regional / Head Office. All Regional 
Offices have a Regional Manager In-charge of Customer care and he / she is supported 
by a Customer Care Nodal Office in that Regional Office.  
The Company has a dedicated e -mail ID customercare.ho@newindia.co.in for getting 
customer grievances and service related issues and this is monitored by the Head 
Office. With a view to give special attention to the grievances and service re lated issues 
of the senior citizens, the Company has a dedicated e -mail address 
seniorcitizencare.ho@newindia.co.in which is also monitored by the Head Office.  
Escalation of grievance:  
Grievance Redressal Machinery works at all the operational levels. At  Branch / Micro 
Unit level, the Office In -charge is the Grievance Redressal Officer. At Divisional Office 
level, the Divisional Manager / Sr. Divisional Manager is the Grievance Redressal 
Officer. At Regional Office, one officer at Senior level designated as Grievance 
Redressal Officer will attend to the Grievance. At Head Office level, one officer in the 
rank of Chief Manager or above will work as the Grievance Redressal Officer.   
The Policyholder / the prospect may approach the Policy issuing office firs t for getting 
the grievance resolved / reply of the query. If satisfactory resolution is not received, the 
Policyholder / Prospect may approach Regional Office Customer Care Department and 
then Head Office Customer Care Department.  
 In our Grievance Redre ssal Policy, there is a provision for Regional Redressal 
Committee at Regional Office level and Corporate Redressal Committee at Head Office 
level. The grievances falling within the purview of these committees may be referred to 
them for decision. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
(H-12013/01/2021-Ins. II Dated 28.10.2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
  

22 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR  
 22 March, 2022        Chairperson, 
 01 Chaitra, 1943(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

23 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2021-2022) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 th February, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to  
1630  hrs. in Committee room „D‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
       SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri R.C. Tiwari                - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda     - Director 
3. 
4.        
Shri G.C. Prasad             -           Additional Director 
Mriganka Achal               -            Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, t he Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the three draft Action Taken  
Reports and to have briefing on the subject „Industrial Finance Corporation of India 
(IFCI) Limited‟ in connection with its comprehensive examination.  The three draft action 
taken reports pertained to :- 
(i)      ****                            ****                                **** 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
3. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
4. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
5. Shri Anil Desai 
6. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
7. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
8.  Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 

24 
 
 
(ii)      ****                            ****                                **** 
(iii)    Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
 of the Committee contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee  on 
 Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) titled „Loss due to Imprudent 
 underwriting and lack of proper risk assessment (based on Para no. 3.2 of 
 C&AG Report no. 13 of 2019) related to on New India Assurance 
 Company Limited (NIACL). 
 
  
3.   The Committee considered these draft action taken reports and adopted it without 
any changes/ modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize the report on the basis of factual verification by the concerned 
Ministry/Department and consider for presenting the reports to Parliament in the coming 
session. 
4. The Committee Secretariat then made a Power -point Presentation on the major 
issues related to the agenda of the sitting. 
                     (The representatives of IFCI Limited were then called in) 
5.     ****                             ****                           **** 
6. ****                           ****                          **** 
7. ****                         ****                             **** 
8. ****                         ****                               **** 
9. ****                        ****                                 **** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.) 
 
(-----------) 
 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2020-21) on New 
India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) 
 
I Total number of recommendations                    5 
 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations  
[ vide Recommendations at  Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 
5]  
   Total           -   05 
 
 
 
 
    Percentage – 100 
 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s replies.                          
 
    Total           -   NIL 
 
 
    Percentage –  NA 
 
  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration.  
 
    Total           -   Nil 
 
 
 
   Percentage – N.A. 
 
   V Observations/Recommendations to which the 
Government has furnished interim replies. 
 
   Total           -   Nil 
 
   Percentage – N.A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 