 
 
i 
 
23 
 
REVIEW OF LOANS TO ROAD PROJECTS RELATING TO INDIA 
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL)  
[BASED ON PARA NO. 5.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 18 OF 2020] 
 
 
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
(IIFCL) 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 

 
 
ii 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
REVIEW OF LOANS TO ROAD PROJECTS RELATING TO INDIA 
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL)  
[BASED ON PARA NO. 5.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 18 OF 2020] 
 
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
(IIFCL) 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Audit Para No. 5.1 of 
C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020 relating to IIFCL) 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 February, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08 February, 2024  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 

 
 
iii 
 
CPU No. ………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (……. Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 
---------- 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)  
INTRODUCTION  
CHAPTER  I REPORT  
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do                
not desire to pursue in view of the Government Replies 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
Government has furnished interim replies  
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 06.02.2024 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 19th Report of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) [Report Based on Audit Para 5.1 Of C&AG Report 
No.18 of 2020 relating to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL)] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2.    Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3.    Shri Anil Firojiya  
4.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
5.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
7.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
10.  Shri Janardan Mishra 
11.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
12.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
13.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
14.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
17.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
18.  Dr. Anil Jain  
19.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20.  Dr. Amar Patnaik  
21.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
22.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 Elected as a Member of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2023-24) for the un-expired portion of 
the term of the Committee vide Bulletin Part-II Para No. 7765 dated 19.12.2023 vice Shri Uday Pratap 
Singh resigned as Member of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 06.12.2023. 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal          -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Jyochnamayi Sinha   -         Director  
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal         -        Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv                          -        Executive Officer 

 
 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2023-24) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-
Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of 
Loans to Road Projects Relating to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
(IIFCL) [Based on Para No. 5.1 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020]’. 
2. The Nineteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20 
March, 2023. The Action Taken Replies to all the 13 Recommendations contained in the 
Report were received from the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) on                  
26 September, 2023.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 6 
February, 2024. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix- I  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee (17th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix -II.  
 
 
New Delhi;   
07 February, 2024  
18 Magha, 1945(S)                                                                       
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR,        
Chairperson, 
    Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
1 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertaking on ‘Review of Loans to Road Projects Relating to 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) (Based on Para No. 5.1 of C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2020)’; which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20th March 2023. It 
contained eleven observations/recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
11 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
Sl. Nos.1, 2 , 4, 6, 7, 10 & 11 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 07) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                       
- NIL   - 
 
 
(Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration.    
Sl. Nos.  8 and 9 
 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total:02) 
 
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                     
Sl. No. 3 and 5 
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total:02) 
 
3. The Committee desires the Ministry of Finance to furnish final Action Taken 
Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I 
of the Report. 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1 & 2) 
5.   The Committee in their Nineteenth Report, had observed and recommended as 
under:- 
“India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) is a public sector financial 
institution established in January 2006 that is wholly owned by the Government 
of India. The Company is mandated and governed by the Central Government 
approved Scheme more commonly known as “SIFTI”. As per SIFTI, IIFCL is 
mandated to provide long term financial assistance to viable infrastructure 
projects that broadly include transportation, energy, water, sanitation, 
communication and social & commercial infrastructure. The present Audit Para 
no. 5.1 of C&AG Report no. 18 of 2020 selected and examined by the Committee 
relates to review of loans to road projects given by IIFCL during the period 2016-
17 to 2018-19. After examination of the CAG para, the views of the Committee 
are in consonance with the findings of the Audit which primarily relates to (i) not 
carrying out due diligence on project before signing of Common Lending 
Agreement (CLA), (ii) non-compliance to the conditions set in the CLAs before 
disbursement of loan, (iii) not incorporating suitable pre-disbursement clauses in 
the CLA to protect IIFCL’s interest, (iv) lenders not giving due cognisance to the 
risks of Right of Way (RoW) availability, (v) weak monitoring of project progress 
due to inadequacies in internal control systems established by lenders, (vi) 
financing of cost overrun without seeking approval from Concessioning Authority, 
(vii) need for tripartite agreements between Concessioning Authority (NHAI), 
Concessionaire (developer) and Lender/ IIFCL/ Banks. Evidently, these 
deficiencies have resulted in NPAs and write offs to a tune of Rs. 2488.27 crore 
in 24 road projects financed by IIFCL mostly under Build Operate and Transfer 
(BOT) contract model on lines of Public Private Partnership(PPP). 
 The Committee have been informed that since inception of SIFTI in 2006, the 
Scheme has so far been revised ten times. These revisions were effected based 
on the experience of IIFCL in the dynamics of the evolving infrastructure 
financing environment. Consequently, the lacunas in BOT model have been 

 
 
3 
 
addressed with the introduction of Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) in 2016. The 
Committee without delving much into the present status of the projects financed 
by IIFCL, have rather attempted to address a larger issue in identifying the 
inadequacies and shortcomings attached to the model itself that resulted in huge 
NPAs. The Committee in their report have stressed the need for (a) tripartite 
agreement, (b) inclusion of pre-disbursement clauses in Common Lending 
Agreements (CLA), (c) outsourcing of termination payments to insurance 
company, (d) restricting concessionaire from allowing any advance other than 
mobilisation advance, (e) need for providing rating to traffic consultants, (f) 
emphasised the importance of site visits, (g) institute measures to address NPAs 
and monitoring the utilization of funds. The observations of the Committee are 
elaborated in subsequent paragraphs. The Committee hope that, with the 
suggested improvements in the system, the risk involved in lending and 
borrowings in road infrastructure projects will be greatly minimised.” 
             
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “No comments were made by the Government on the aforementioned 
 recommendations.” 
 
7. The Committee have commented on these issues in succeeding Para of 
this chapter including need for tripartite agreement, restricting concessionaire 
from allowing any advance other than mobilisation advance and need for 
providing rating to traffic consultants. The Committee hope and trust that 
Ministry will make all out efforts to implement the same in letter and spirit to 
avoid the risk involved in lending and borrowings in road infrastructure projects. 
 
Restricting Concessionaire From Allowing Any Advance Other Than Mobilization 
Advance 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 6 & 7) 
 
 
8.    The Committee in their Nineteenth Report had observed and recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee are surprised to note that IIFCL did not vet the Engineering 
Procurement Construction (EPC) contracts although it had every right to do so 
and did not ensure that the terms of EPC contract was fair, transparent and not 

 
 
4 
 
unduly favourable to the promoter companies. Besides, the concessionaires 
were allowed to extend mobilisation advances to their promoter companies 
without adequate provisions of Bank Guarantees/ en-cashable security and there 
was no independent evaluation / monitoring of the project done as per agreed 
terms / milestones to safeguard its own interest by IIFCL. The Committee are not 
in agreement with the rationale put-forth by IIFCL that in PPP infrastructure 
projects, the contractual/ concessioning obligations of the primary lenders are 
with the borrower at SPV level and not with the sub-contractors/ service 
providers being engaged by the borrower which includes EPC contractor who is 
a sub-contractor of the SPV. 
 
The Committee are of the view that Bank Guarantee (BG) clauses in agreements 
protect the financial interests of lenders and as an industry practice, NHAI is in 
the practice of including the above clauses on advance and BGs in its 
agreements and ICA. Ironically, these issues were never brought to the attention 
of the Lead Banks in any consortium meetings by IIFCL and provisions of the 
Agreements were not properly vetted by lenders to protect their financial 
interests. The Committee, therefore, desire that a mechanism may be developed 
to restrict the Concessionaire from allowing any advance, other than mobilization 
advance, to the EPC contractor, that too backed by sufficient en-cashable 
security, in the possession of the lenders and such advances should be 
recovered in a time bound manner.” 
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:-  
 
“IIFCL has informed this Department that mobilization advance is 
extended a part of term loan which is secured by primary security i.e. 
charge on projects assets including escrow accounts, receivables etc and 
undertaking from sponsor. The mobilization advance is recovered by 
Concessionaire from EPC contractor under running accounts bills, based 
on progress of the projects/milestones as per EPC contract. Generally, no 
other advance is given to EPC contractor. As the mobilization advance is 
extended out of term loan only, the same is secured in nature.” 
 
10.     The Committee hope that no other advance is given to EPC contractor as 
stated by the Ministry in their reply and trust that the Ministry will implement the 

 
 
5 
 
intent of the Committee by developing a mechanism to restrict the 
Concessionaire from allowing any advance, other than mobilization advance, to 
the EPC contractor, backed by sufficient en-cashable security, in the possession 
of the lenders and such advances should be recovered in a time bound manner. 
 
NEED FOR PROVIDING RATING TO TRAFFIC CONSULTANTS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8 and 9) 
 
11.     The Committee in their Nineteenth Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to obtaining No Objection Certificate (NOC) before extending take out finance; 
need for tripartite agreement; and the model concession agreement:- 
“The Committee note that in road financing, the lenders i.e. IIFCL and Banks 
have negligible physical security against the loan dues as the main assets of the 
project viz. land, road and other structures thereon constructed by the 
concessionaire are owned by the Concessioning Authority (mainly NHAI). The 
loan is serviced primarily from toll revenue generated from operations of 
commercially viable road projects completed under BOT model. Hence if toll 
revenue does not start or yield the requisite revenue, the loan becomes 
unserviceable and Non Performing Asset (NPA). Needless to say that availability 
of Right of Way (RoW), realistic projections of traffic and toll collection have 
crucial bearing on the commercial/ financial viability of the road projects. 
Undoubtedly, if the project is commercially/ financially unviable, the risk of the 
Concessionaire/ borrower not being able to service the loan becomes high. The 
severity of the risk involved can be validated from the fact that as on 31 March 
2019, the Gross NPA in road sector projects financed by IIFCL was to a tune of 
Rs. 5,187 crore which was 37.25% of the total outstanding amount. 
The Committee find that overstatement, aggressive traffic studies, 
unrealistic traffic evaluations and revenue projections by traffic consultants are 
the main reasons due to which toll revenue in many road projects have suffered 
severely. Mostly, the revenue forecasts are provided by the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and NHAI does the appointment, evaluation and 
assessment of the traffic consultants. Considering the gravity of risk involved in 
calculating the viability of road projects on the basis of evaluation & projections 
made by traffic consultants, the Committee feel an urgent need for a system of 
rating of the traffic consultants on realistic and pragmatic parameters and that 
such ratings are disclosed in public domain. The system will bring-in more 
reliability, credibility and prudence in work and traffic/ revenue projections made 
by the traffic consultants. At the same time, the system will also immensely help 
the lenders, concessionaires and borrowers to calculate the risk before taking-up 
or financing any road project. The Committee, therefore desire the Government 
to devise ways and means for rating of Traffic Consultants and make available 
the information in public domain."  

 
 
6 
 
12.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Department vide OM dated 13.4.2023 and reminder dated 1.8.2023 
(copy attached) forwarded the suggestion regarding rating of traffic 
consultants, to MoRTH for favourable consideration and submit an Action 
Taken Report, which is yet to be received. IIFCL has also informed that it has 
also taken up this matter with MoRTH, requesting for a suitable action vide 
letter dated 16.6.2023 (copy of letter attached)”.  
 
13.   The Committee while examining C&AG Audit Para 5.1 of Report No.18 of 
2020 based on “Review of Loans to Road Projects Relating to India Infrastructure 
Finance Company Limited (IIFCL)”, highlighted critical vulnerabilities in road 
financing, where lenders like IIFCL and Banks lack physical security due to 
project assets being owned by the Concessioning Authority, mainly NHAI. With 
loans primarily serviced through toll revenue from BOT model projects, the risk 
of loans turning into Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) is high if toll revenue falls 
short. The availability of Right of Way (RoW), realistic traffic projections, and 
shortfall in toll collection greatly influence the commercial viability of road 
projects. Overstated projections by traffic consultants, often appointed and 
evaluated by NHAI, contribute to severe toll revenue discrepancies, leading to 
financial instability. Considering this, the Committee recommended a transparent 
rating system for traffic consultants. The ratings should be available in public 
domain, which will enhance reliability and facilitate informed decision-making by 
lenders, concessionaires, and borrowers in undertaking/financing road projects. 
 
14.  The Committee note that IIFCL acting upon the recommendations of the 
Committee, had forwarded the suggestion regarding rating of traffic consultants, 
to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) for favourable 
consideration but the replies from the Ministry are still awaited. The IIFCL upon 
the direction of DFS had sought opinion of MoRTH on three 
observations/recommendations of the Committee:  
 
(i) Need for Tripartite Agreement: A tripartite agreement involving the 
Concessionaire, Concessioning Authority, and lenders/IIFCL/Banks will 
address the concerns about the unprotected interests of lenders. This will 

 
 
7 
 
enhance legal framework, and provide additional security for financial 
institutions. 
(ii) Outsourcing of termination payments to insurance Company: 
Outsourcing termination payments to an insurance Company, would 
facilitate early payments in terminated projects. This could streamline the 
termination process and reduce delays, ensuring timely compensation in 
case of project termination. 
(iii) Need for providing rating to traffic consultants: A rating system for 
traffic consultants will address the root cause of wrong projections and 
shortfall in toll revenue. 
 
15. The implementation of above recommendations of the Committee will 
enhance transparency and financial security of IIFCL. The Committee desire that 
DFS should take up the matter with the MoRTH for having a transparent rating 
system of traffic consultant in a time-bound manner not later than six months. 
Further, the Tripartite Agreement involving Concessionaire, Concessing 
Authority and IIFCL and outsourcing of termination to Insurance Company may 
be ensured by IIFCL and DFS while financing Road Projects or others. The 
provisions and procedure may be completed before financing next project.   
 
IMPORTANCE OF SITE-VISITS 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
16.     The Committee in their Nineteenth Report had observed and recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that lenders, in coordination with the Concessionaire 
conduct site visits to monitor the progress of work. Such site visits support the 
lenders in verifying the work progress reported by Lenders Independent 
Engineers (LIE), Concessioning Authority and the Concessionaire. As per the 
Credit Policy of IIFCL of 2012 (revised in 2015), the site visits will be arranged by 
the lead bank or the borrower and it was desirable for IIFCL to join the first visit 
before commencing any disbursement. Subsequently, IIFCL was to ensure 
atleast one visit in a year for each project. The Committee, however, observe that 

 
 
8 
 
in four cases viz. SMTL, BPMCPL, AETPL and YATL, although the first site visit 
were conducted by the lead bank before first disbursement, IIFCL did not join the 
visit. Further, in five other cases viz. BKEL, HHPL, NJPL, PSTPL and SSRPL, 
the lenders did not make any site visit before making first disbursement.   The 
first site visit in these cases were conducted after a lapse of 2 to 18 months from 
the date of first disbursement. The Committee take a serious note of the casual 
response given by IIFCL that the site visits could not be conducted due to paucity 
of manpower and office exigencies and that as per the revised Company’s Credit 
Policy of 2016 and 2018, the latest inspection report of lead bank can be 
obtained, examined and kept in record. The Committee is of the view that site 
visits are one of the key elements instituted for effective monitoring of the project 
for securing project viability and ensuring quality of loan assets and hence 
required resources should have been put in place in larger interest of IIFCL as 
well as to ensure the viability of projects. IIFCL should not solely depend on the 
report of Lead Bank or any other consortium lender, but rather, should evolve a 
suitable mechanism for regular monitoring of the projects that they finance. 
17. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
“IIFCL has informed this Department that the observations of the Committee 
have been noted for compliance, and suitable provisions regarding site visits 
have been incorporated in IIFCL’s credit policy. IIFCL has stated that site visits 
are conducted by IIFCL for all the projects at various stages of development. As 
lead lender, pre-sanction site visits are taken up as part of appraisal process. For 
other cases, site visits are taken up either before sanction or prior to 
disbursement.  
For projects under construction, site visits are conducted as the construction 
progresses, in addition to obtaining Lender’s Independent Engineer (LIE) reports. 
These site visits not only help in assessing the project progress but  also verifying 
the contents of LIE report on a broader level. The LIE report  covers various 
aspects, including detailed physical progress, land acquisition status, utility 
shifting, status of various permissions and approvals, availability of construction 
material (like stone chips, sand etc in the vicinity). Additionally, it comments on 
financial progress, including Running Account  (RA) bills. The visiting team also 
interacts, inter alia, with company officials at the site to understand the ground 
situation better.  

 
 
9 
 
 IIFCL has further submitted that during construction period, LIE reports are 
 obtained before each disbursement, and their contents are analysed 
 and recorded in the LCN/disbursement notes. After implementation, site visits 
 are carried out to assess assets status and discussions are held with 
 company officials to comprehend the ongoing business and physical/financial 
 progress. This comprehensive approach facilitates proactive asset monitoring 
 and the implementation of necessary steps. 
IIFCL has also informed that it has developed Online Project Monitoring system 
(OPMS), for monitoring of the projects, which is currently in the pilot phase. IIFCL 
submitted that through OPMS, 9 site visits have been  conducted in 7 projects 
under various sector such as Road, Power, Port, Metro.  
18. The Committee are happy to note that IIFCL has developed Online Project 
Monitoring System (OPMS), for monitoring of the projects, which is currently in 
the pilot phase. IIFCL submitted that through OPMS, 9 site visits have been 
conducted in 7 projects under various sector such as Road, Power, Port, Metro.  
The Committee are of the view that site visits are one of the key elements 
instituted for effective monitoring of the project for securing project viability and 
ensuring quality of loan assets. Therefore, they desire that the outcome of OPMS 
and site visits undertaken by the company on the ground which have resulted in 
positive outcome may be shared with the Committee. 
------ 

 
 
10 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Overview 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1 & 2) 
 
        India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) is a public sector financial 
institution established in January 2006 that is wholly owned by the Government of India. 
The Company is mandated and governed by the Central Government approved 
Scheme more commonly known as “SIFTI”. As per SIFTI, IIFCL is mandated to provide 
long term financial assistance to viable infrastructure projects that broadly include 
transportation, energy, water, sanitation, communication and social & commercial 
infrastructure. The present Audit Para no. 5.1 of C&AG Report no. 18 of 2020 selected 
and examined by the Committee relates to review of loans to road projects given by 
IIFCL during the period 2016-17 to 2018-19. After examination of the CAG para, the 
views of the Committee are in consonance with the findings of the Audit which primarily 
relates to (i) not carrying out due diligence on project before signing of Common 
Lending Agreement (CLA), (ii) non-compliance to the conditions set in the CLAs before 
disbursement of loan, (iii) not incorporating suitable pre-disbursement clauses in the 
CLA to protect IIFCL’s interest, (iv) lenders not giving due cognisance to the risks of 
Right of Way (RoW) availability, (v) weak monitoring of project progress due to 
inadequacies in internal control systems established by lenders, (vi) financing of cost 
overrun without seeking approval from Concessioning Authority, (vii) need for tripartite 
agreements between Concessioning Authority (NHAI), Concessionaire (developer) and 
Lender/ IIFCL/ Banks. Evidently, these deficiencies have resulted in NPAs and write offs 
to a tune of Rs. 2488.27 crore in 24 road projects financed by IIFCL mostly under Build 
Operate and Transfer (BOT) contract model on lines of Public Private Partnership(PPP). 
The Committee have been informed that since inception of SIFTI in 2006, the Scheme 
has so far been revised ten times. These revisions were effected based on the 
experience of IIFCL in the dynamics of the evolving infrastructure financing 
environment. Consequently, the lacunas in BOT model have been addressed with the 
introduction of Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) in 2016. The Committee without delving 
much into the present status of the projects financed by IIFCL, have rather attempted to 

 
 
11 
 
address a larger issue in identifying the inadequacies and shortcomings attached to the 
model itself that resulted in huge NPAs. The Committee in their report have stressed the 
need for (a) tripartite agreement, (b) inclusion of pre-disbursement clauses in Common 
Lending Agreements (CLA), (c) outsourcing of termination payments to insurance 
company, (d) restricting concessionaire from allowing any advance other than 
mobilisation advance, (e) need for providing rating to traffic consultants, (f) emphasised 
the importance of site visits, (g) institute measures to address NPAs and monitoring the 
utilization of funds. The observations of the Committee are elaborated in subsequent 
paragraphs. The Committee hope that, with the suggested improvements in the system, 
the risk involved in lending and borrowings in road infrastructure projects will be greatly 
minimised. 
 
            Reply of the Government 
 
No comments were made by the Government on the aforementioned recommendations. 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para no. 7 of Chapter –I) 
 
Inclusion Of Pre- Disbursement Clauses in Commom Lending Agreement (CLA) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
2.     The Committee note that loan was sanctioned by IIFCL without mitigating the risk 
of non-availability of atleast 80% Right of Way (RoW) of the project on the Appointed 
Date before disbursement of first loan installment which was one of the main reasons 
for three loans amounting to Rs. 674.35 crore turning into NPA. IIFCL submitted to the 
Committee that NHAI was declaring Appointed Date without complying with agreed 
terms of providing RoW at the right stages. In many cases NHAI neither made the 
balance RoW available within six months of Appointed Date nor descoped the RoW 
which resulted in erosion of viability of the road projects. The Committee realise that as 
per SIFTI, IIFCL is to finance viable projects only and without the unencumbered RoW 
for construction of road, the viability of the project cannot be established and that in 
itself is a risk. As such, IIFCL was required to safeguard its interest by ensuring 

 
 
12 
 
inclusion of suitable pre-disbursement clauses in the Common Lending 
Agreement(CLA) on pre-availability of RoW and its compliance to mitigate the risk, 
which was not done by IIFCL. The Committee do not agree to the contention of IIFCL 
that as per SIFTI, it was supposed to follow the appraisal carried out by the lead bank 
because Inter Creditor Agreements (ICAs) had a ‘no reliance’ clause which provided 
that the lenders had to undertake their own assessment. Besides, as per SIFTI, IIFCL 
borrowings are guaranteed by the Government of India and hence it was imperative on 
the part of IIFCL to undertake risk assessment comprehensively and enforce suitable 
conditions in contract/ agreements. However, IIFCL failed to include pre-disbursement 
conditions in CLA. In this backdrop, the Committee desire that, in future, IIFCL should 
include loan disbursement conditions in sanction letter/ Common Lending Agreements 
(CLA) on availability of RoW to cover the risks flowing out of restrictive clauses like 
termination payments, conditions in concession agreements or stricter conditions to 
safeguard its financial interest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IIFCL has informed to this Department that it is stipulating the condition of availability of 
RoW as stipulated in Concession Agreement in its sanction and Common Loan 
Agreements (CLA). Hence, the direction of the Committee is complied with.  
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
Restricting Concessionaire From Allowing Any Advance Other Than Mobilization 
Advance 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 6 & 7) 
 
3.   The Committee are surprised to note that IIFCL did not vet the Engineering 
Procurement Construction (EPC) contracts although it had every right to do so and did 
not ensure that the terms of EPC contract was fair, transparent and not unduly 
favourable to the promoter companies. Besides, the concessionaires were allowed to 
extend mobilisation advances to their promoter companies without adequate provisions 
of Bank Guarantees/ en-cashable security and there was no independent evaluation / 
monitoring of the project done as per agreed terms / milestones to safeguard its own 
interest by IIFCL. The Committee are not in agreement with the rationale put-forth by 
IIFCL that in PPP infrastructure projects, the contractual/ concessioning obligations of 

 
 
13 
 
the primary lenders are with the borrower at SPV level and not with the sub-contractors/ 
service providers being engaged by the borrower which includes EPC contractor who is 
a sub-contractor of the SPV. 
 
The Committee are of the view that Bank Guarantee (BG) clauses in agreements 
protect the financial interests of lenders and as an industry practice, NHAI is in the 
practice of including the above clauses on advance and BGs in its agreements and ICA. 
Ironically, these issues were never brought to the attention of the Lead Banks in any 
consortium meetings by IIFCL and provisions of the Agreements were not properly 
vetted by lenders to protect their financial interests. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that a mechanism may be developed to restrict the Concessionaire from allowing any 
advance, other than mobilization advance, to the EPC contractor, that too backed by 
sufficient en-cashable security, in the possession of the lenders and such advances 
should be recovered in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
IIFCL has informed this Department that mobilization advance is extended as a part of 
term loan which is secured by primary security i.e. charge on projects assets including 
escrow accounts, receivables etc and undertaking from sponsor. The mobilization 
advance is recovered by Concessionaire from EPC contractor under running accounts 
bills, based on progress of the projects/milestones as per EPC contract. Generally, no 
other advance is given to EPC contractor. As the mobilization advance is extended out 
of term loan only, the same is secured in nature.  
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para no. 10 of Chapter –I) 
 
Importance of Site-Visits 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
6.   The Committee note that lenders, in coordination with the Concessionaire conduct 
site visits to monitor the progress of work. Such site visits support the lenders in 
verifying the work progress reported by Lenders Independent Engineers (LIE), 

 
 
14 
 
Concessioning Authority and the Concessionaire. As per the Credit Policy of IIFCL of 
2012 (revised in 2015), the site visits will be arranged by the lead bank or the borrower 
and it was desirable for IIFCL to join the first visit before commencing any 
disbursement. Subsequently, IIFCL was to ensure atleast one visit in a year for each 
project. The Committee, however, observe that in four cases viz. SMTL, BPMCPL, 
AETPL and YATL, although the first site visit were conducted by the lead bank before 
first disbursement, IIFCL did not join the visit. Further, in five other cases viz. BKEL, 
HHPL, NJPL, PSTPL and SSRPL, the lenders did not make any site visit before making 
first disbursement.   The first site visit in these cases were conducted after a lapse of 2 
to 18 months from the date of first disbursement. The Committee take a serious note of 
the casual response given by IIFCL that the site visits could not be conducted due to 
paucity of manpower and office exigencies and that as per the revised Company’s 
Credit Policy of 2016 and 2018, the latest inspection report of lead bank can be 
obtained, examined and kept in record. The Committee is of the view that site visits are 
one of the key elements instituted for effective monitoring of the project for securing 
project viability and ensuring quality of loan assets and hence required resources 
should have been put in place in larger interest of IIFCL as well as to ensure the viability 
of projects. IIFCL should not solely depend on the report of Lead Bank or any other 
consortium lender, but rather, should evolve a suitable mechanism for regular 
monitoring of the projects that they finance. 
Reply of the Government 
 
IIFCL has informed this Department that the observations of the Committee have been 
noted for compliance, and suitable provisions regarding site visits have been 
incorporated in IIFCL’s credit policy. IIFCL has stated that site visits are conducted by 
IIFCL for all the projects at various stages of development. As lead lender, pre-sanction 
site visits are taken up as part of appraisal process. For other cases, site visits are 
taken up either before sanction or prior to disbursement.  
For projects under construction, site visits are conducted as the construction 
progresses, in addition to obtaining Lender’s Independent Engineer (LIE) reports. These 
site visits not only help in assessing the project progress but also verifying the contents 
of LIE report on a broader level. The LIE report  covers various aspects, including 
detailed physical progress, land acquisition status, utility shifting, status of various 
permissions and approvals, availability of construction material (like stone chips, sand 
etc in the vicinity). Additionally, it comments on financial progress, including Running 

 
 
15 
 
Account (RA) bills. The visiting team also interacts, inter alia, with company officials at 
the site to understand the ground situation better.  
IIFCL has further submitted that during construction period, LIE reports are obtained 
before each disbursement, and their contents are analysed and recorded in the 
LCN/disbursement notes. After implementation, site visits are carried out to assess 
assets status and discussions are held with company officials to comprehend the 
ongoing business and physical/financial progress. This comprehensive approach 
facilitates proactive asset monitoring and the implementation of necessary steps. 
IIFCL has also informed that it has developed Online Project Monitoring system 
(OPMS), for monitoring of the projects, which is currently in the pilot phase. IIFCL 
submitted that through OPMS, 9 site visits have been conducted in 7 projects under 
various sector such as Road, Power, Port, Metro.  
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 18 of Chapter –I 
 
 
New Measures Instituted To Address NPAs and Monitoring The Utilization of  
Funds 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
7.   The Committee have been informed that IIFCL has instituted several measures to 
address NPAs and monitoring the utilization of funds. The Company has put in place a 
Board approved Management Policy which lays out the Directives and Guidelines for 
time-bound resolution of NPA by taking proactive actions towards close monitoring, 
constant follow-up and evolving suitable modes for early resolution/ recovery of dues in 
line with the prescribed norm/ guidelines of RBI and other applicable statutory/ 
regulatory authorities or directions from the Central Government. IIFCL has set up a 
specialized Recovery and NPA Management Department and has strengthened this 
department with officers with specialized skills in recovery and NPA Management. The 
capacities were further strengthened with external experts including and independent 
High Level Advisory Committee which is chaired by retired Hon’ble Judge of the Madras 
High Court and two former Executive (whole-time) Director of Public Sector Banks and 
Financial Institutions. 

 
 
16 
 
Similarly, to monitor the utilization of funds for further disbursement, IIFCL informed that 
it has taken several measures such as (a) meaningful scrutiny of progress reports, 
balance sheets of borrowers, (b) regular inspection of borrower’s assets, books of 
accounts including ‘no-lien’ accounts maintained with other banks, (c) conducting 
regular on-site visit of the projects, etc. 
 
The Committee appreciate the measures taken by IIFCL and hope that these initiatives 
will keep NPAs under check and also help IIFCL in discharging its role as a pioneer 
lender in financing infrastructure projects. The Committee understand that although 
these initiatives have been taken post audit findings, nevertheless, these measures will 
go a long way in improving and strengthening the functioning of IIFCL. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the committee are factual in nature based on the submissions 
made by IIFCL. The same has been noted.  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
---- 

 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil -  

 
 
18 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
  
Need for Providing Rating to Traffic Consultants 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 8 and 9) 
 
8.   The Committee note that in road financing, the lenders i.e. IIFCL and Banks have 
negligible physical security against the loan dues as the main assets of the project viz. 
land, road and other structures thereon constructed by the concessionaire are owned by 
the Concessioning Authority (mainly NHAI). The loan is serviced primarily from toll 
revenue generated from operations of commercially viable road projects completed 
under BOT model. Hence if toll revenue does not start or yield the requisite revenue, the 
loan becomes unserviceable and Non Performing Asset (NPA). Needless to say that 
availability of Right of Way (RoW), realistic projections of traffic and toll collection have 
crucial bearing on the commercial/ financial viability of the road projects. Undoubtedly, if 
the project is commercially/ financially unviable, the risk of the Concessionaire/ borrower 
not being able to service the loan becomes high. The severity of the risk involved can 
be validated from the fact that as on 31 March 2019, the Gross NPA in road sector 
projects financed by IIFCL was to a tune of Rs. 5,187 crore which was 37.25% of the 
total outstanding amount. 
The Committee find that overstatement, aggressive traffic studies, unrealistic traffic 
evaluations and revenue projections by traffic consultants are the main reasons due to 
which toll revenue in many road projects have suffered severely. Mostly, the revenue 
forecasts are provided by the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and NHAI does 
the appointment, evaluation and assessment of the traffic consultants. Considering the 
gravity of risk involved in calculating the viability of road projects on the basis of 
evaluation & projections made by traffic consultants, the Committee feel an urgent need 
for a system of rating of the traffic consultants on realistic and pragmatic parameters 

 
 
19 
 
and that such ratings are disclosed in public domain. The system will bring-in more 
reliability, credibility and prudence in work and traffic/ revenue projections made by the 
traffic consultants. At the same time, the system will also immensely help the lenders, 
concessionaires and borrowers to calculate the risk before taking-up or financing any 
road project. The Committee, therefore desire the Government to devise ways and 
means for rating of Traffic Consultants and make available the information in public 
domain. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department vide OM dated 13.4.2023 and reminder dated 1.8.2023 (copy 
attached) forwarded the suggestion regarding rating of traffic consultants, to MoRTH for 
favourable consideration and submit an Action Taken Report, which is yet to be 
received. IIFCL has also informed that it has also taken up this matter with MoRTH, 
requesting for a suitable action vide letter dated 16.6.2023 (copy of letter attached).  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para no. 13, 14 and 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
----- 

 
 
20 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Need for Tripartite Agreement 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
9.  The Committee note that IIFCL provides loans to road projects being executed under 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model, based on Concession Agreement (CA) signed 
between a Concessionaire (the developer) and a Concessioning Authority viz. National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI)/State Government Agencies. At present, the lender 
i.e. IIFCL/ Bank is not a party to the concession agreement. So, the agreement between 
the Concessionaire and the Concessioning Authority happens to be a kind of bipartite 
process where lenders have to go for separate approvals with the Concessioning 
Authorities. As such, the lenders interest remains unprotected. Since Lenders/ IIFCL/ 
Banks are key stakeholders in any road project, the Committee is of the view that their 
interest needs to be protected. The Committee feel the need for instituting a system of 
tripartite agreement between Concessionaire, Concessioning Authority and lenders/ 
IIFCL/ Banks. Such tripartite agreements are already prevalent in many progressive 
countries to protect the interest of lenders. The Committee desire the Government to 
make the necessary provision in SIFTI. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The decision to include/execute Tri-partite agreement needs to be taken by the Line 
Ministry i.e. Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways (MORTH). This Department vide 
OM dated 27.12.2021 (based on the recommendation of C&AG) had requested MoRTH 
to consider suggestion favourably. After receipt of the 19th Report of COPU, the 
Department vide OM dated 13.4.2023 and reminder dated 1.8.2023 (copy attached) had 
requested to MoRTH to consider the recommendation favourably and submit an Action 
Taken Report, which is yet to be received. IIFCL has also informed that it has also taken 
up this matter with MoRTH, requesting for a suitable action vide letter dated 16.6.2023 
(copy of letter attached).  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 

 
 
21 
 
Outsourcing of  Termination Payments to Insurance Company 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
10.   SIFTI provides that if a Concession Agreement is terminated by Concessioning 
Authority (NHAI) for concessionaire’s (Contractor) default, a termination payment 
equivalent to 90 % of debt dues would be payable by the Concessioning Authority to the 
Concessionaire, provided that the project is issued the Certificate of Provisional 
Commercial Operation Date (PCOD) by the Concessioning Authority after completion of 
atleast 75% work of the project thereby permitting the Concessionaire to collect toll 
revenue from operations of the project pending completion. The Committee, however, 
find it disheartening to note that although the Ministry has issued a Circular in 2019 that 
termination payments will be available for stalled projects, the Circular has not been 
implemented so far due to which many stalled projects have suffered. Also, for revenue 
shortfall suffering projects, there is a clause in the CA which provides that NHAI can 
give loan for such revenue shortfalls; but this clause has also not been invoked so far. 
Consequently, IIFCL is facing problems in recoveries as most of the termination 
payments are not forthcoming or inordinately delayed by NHAI. For instance, in case of 
SPTPL, notice was issued to NHAI on 28 November 2017 for termination of CA, but as 
on January 2020 the termination payment was still under arbitration. Further, in case of 
SMTL and IVRCL Indore Gujarat Tollways Limited which are one of the top Non 
Performing Accounts of IIFCL, the termination payments were yet to be released. The 
Committee feel that the whole arrangement involves conflicts of interest with edge as 
the power of termination and the power to compensate are with the same Authority, 
NHAI being the Concessioning Authority as well as a termination payment giver. In 
order to ensure that stalled projects do not suffer and termination of CAs are more 
judicious & transparent and termination payments are not unnecessarily delayed, the 
Committee desire that termination payments be outsourced to an Insurance Company 
with NHAI as a subscriber to the insurance premium for such termination payments. In 
case of any eventuality, insurance company can issue the termination payments on time 
and Lenders/ Banking sector or the financial institutions are saved of the inordinate 
delay. 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department vide OM dated 13.4.2023 and reminder dated 1.8.2023 (copy 
attached) had forwarded the suggestion regarding outsourcing the termination payment 
to an Insurance Company, to MoRTH for favourable consideration and submit an Action 
Taken Report, which is yet to be received. IIFCL has also informed that it has also taken 
up the matter with MoRTH, requesting for a suitable action vide letter dated 16.6.2023 
(copy of letter attached).  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
[O.M. No. 6/14/2021-IF-I Dated 18th September, 2023)] 
 
 
New Delhi;   
07 February, 2024  
18 Magha, 1945(S)                                                                       
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR,        
Chairperson, 
    Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
 
Appendix-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 06th February, 2024 from 1015 hrs. to 1040 
hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 147, 3rd Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar    -    Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
3. Shri Janardan Mishra 
4. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
6. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
  
Rajya Sabha 
7. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
8. Dr. Anil Jain 
9. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
10. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
11. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
                                              SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal -  Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
24 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda for the sitting.  The Committee then considered and 
adopted the draft Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on Public Undertaking on ‘Review of Loans to Road Projects Relating 
to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) (Based on Para No. 5.1 of 
C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020)’ without any changes/modifications. The Committee 
authorized the Chairperson for presenting the report during the current session of the 
Parliament. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  

 
 
25 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2023-24) 
on “REVIEW OF LOANS TO ROAD PROJECTS RELATINGTO INDIAINFRASTRUCTURE 
FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) (Based on Para No. 5.1 of C&AG Report No. 18 
of 2020)” 
 
I Total number of recommendations 11
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government Recommendations 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.1,2,4, 6, 7,10 &11] 
Total -  07 
 
 
 
 
Percentage- 63.63% 
 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s 
replies. 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage  – 0% 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and need reiteration. 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 8 & 9] 
Total - 02 
 
 
 
Percentage –18.18% 
 
V Observations/Recommendations to which the 
Government has furnished interim replies. 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3 & 5] 
Total - 02  Percentage –18.18% 
 
 