i 
 
   
20 
 
 
AVOIDABLE LOSS DUE TO EXTENSION OF LOAN IN 
TERMINATED PROJECTS RELATING TO INDIA 
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
[Based on Para No. 5.2 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020] 
 
 
 INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2023-24) 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 


ii 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
AVOIDABLE LOSS DUE TO EXTENSION OF LOAN IN TERMINATED PROJECTS 
RELATING TO INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
 [Based on Para No. 5.2 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020] 
 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Audit Para No. 5.2 of 
C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020 relating to IIFCL]  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 1 August, 2023 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1 August, 2023 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 


iii 
 
CPU No. 1047 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs…… 
 
 
 
© 2023 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in              
Lok Sabha  (…. Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of 
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi- 110002. 

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
11 
CHAPTER III    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do   not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
24 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
26 
CHAPTER V      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies  
27 
 
ANNEXURES* 
ANNEXURE-I Comments on the changes proposed in Model Concession 
Agreement for BOT (Toll) 
30 
ANNEXURE-II Report to be submitted by the internal Fact Finding Team (FTT)  
ANNEXURE-III Report to be submitted by the Fact Finding Team relating to the 
examination of Staff Accountability aspects – Credit Cases 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Ninth sitting held on 26 July, 2023………………………………………...104 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
 Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee on 
 Public Undertakings on India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited………… ……..106 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
7.    Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9.    Shri Janardan Mishra 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
17.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
18.  Dr. Anil Jain 
19.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20.  Dr. Amar Patnaik 
21.  Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
22.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Chander Mohan - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar -  Director  
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal - Additional Director 
4. Shri Dhruv - Executive Officer 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
      I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2023-24) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the 
Committee on Public Under takings (17 th Lok Sabha) on “ Avoidable loss due to 
extension of loan in t erminated projects relating to I ndia Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited (IIFCL) [based on Para no. 5.2 of C&AG R eport No. 18 of 
2020]”. 
 
2. The Seventeenth Report of the Committee  on Public Undertakings (17 th 
Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 1 st August, 2022.  The Act ion Taken Replies to all the 9 Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Department of Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance on 20th March, 2023.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft R eport at their sitting 
held on 26 July, 2023. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix- I 
 
4.      An analysis of the action taken by the Government  on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee      
(17th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR 
26 July, 2023                                   Chairperson,                                 
04 Sravana 1945 (S)                               Committee on Public Undertakings  
 

1 
 
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
seventeenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertaking on „Avoidable Loss 
due to extension of loan in terminated projects relating to India Infrastructure 
Finance Company Limited  (IIFCL) (b ased on C&AG Audit Para No. 5.2 of 
Report No.18 of 2020) ; which  was pres ented to Lok Sabha on 01st August 
2022. It contained nine observations/recommendations. 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the 9 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 06) 
 
(ii) 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Sl. Nos. 1,2 & 9 
 
 
(Chapter III) 
(Total: 03) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration.    
Sl. Nos.  Nil 
 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total:0) 
 
  (iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies and final replies are still 
awaited.                                                      
Sl.No. Nil 
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total:0 ) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance to furnish final Action 
Taken Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs: 
  

2 
 
Obtaining No objection certificate(NoC)before extending take out finance; 
need for tripartite agreement and the model concession agreement and 
‘Noc’ from all concernced 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, 4 & 5) 
5. The Committee in their seventeenth Report, had recommended the 
following with regard to obtaining No Objection Certificate ( NOC) before 
extending take out finance; need for tripartite agreement; and the model 
concession agreement: 
 "The Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit 
Policy 2012, the Company, for affecting Take Out finance, 
'The No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the lender(s), the 
Concessionaire Authority (CA) (if applicable) and the 
Consortium, is to be provided to IIFCL for extending the 
Take Out finance und er the Scheme. This NOC is to be 
arranged by the Borrower Company/ Lender(s) before 
Scheduled Date of Occurrence of Take Out”. Though the 
company has obtained NOC from the existing lenders and 
the consortium, yet it could not do so from the CAs (in this 
case Raipur and Bhilai- Durg Municipal Corporations) as - 
(i) there was no clause /provision/ requirement in the 
Concession Agreement stipulating requirement for taking 
NOC from the CAs by any lender or borrower prior to 
extending Take Out facility by the lenders , 
(ii) even if IIFCL had applied for NOC, the CA had no „locus 
standi‟ to issue NOC to IIFCL. IIFCL being a third party, had 
no direct linkage with the CAs under any agreement. Even 
extant lending banks also had no direct linkage with the CA 
under any agreement. 
(iii) there has not been industry practice where lenders in 
India seek any NOC from Concession Authority for any 
change in financing in terms of Take Out Finance, Refinance, 
or down selling in respect of Infrastructure Projects the 
Company could not obtain CA‟s NOC. 
The IIFCL had disbursed the Take Out amount only to the 
existing banks of the consortium of lenders, as per the 
applicable credit policy, the NOC was required to be 
arranged and obtained from the lenders before scheduled 
date of occurrence of Take  Out. The applicability was to the 
extent of lenders providing the NOC since the Take Out was 
directly between IIFCL and the lending banks. 
Accordingly, in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL‟s 
Credit Policy 2012, IIFCL had obtained No Objection 
Certificates (NOCs) from the consortium of lenders i.e. 
Dhanlaxmi Bank and Catholic Syrian Bank in case of 
RWMPL and Dhanlaxmi Bank and South Indian Bank in case 
of BDWMPL before effecting Take Out in the instant case as 

3 
 
per the requirements. Further, all the le nders have confirmed 
the asset classification as “Standard” before the 
disbursement of loan in both the accounts, as per the norms. 
  
The Committee find this a serious shortcoming in the concession agreement 
and also find it rather surprising for IIFCL not  realizing the need to include a 
clause for obtaining NOC from the respective Concessioning Authorities before 
affecting the Take Out although IIFCL's own Credit Policy 2012 has a provision 
for it. It should have realized this gap in the concession agreeme nts and sought 
to plug the same before effecting Take Out to protect its own financial interest. 
Instead, it relied more on the presumption that NOC would be refused by the 
Concessioning Authorities as it was not covered under any clause in the 
Agreement. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that IIFCL should 
make necessary amendments in its Credit policy to include 
clauses in concession agreements for making 'obtaining of 
NOC from Concessioning Authorities, lender(s) as well as the 
consortium of lenders' a pre-requisite before extending any 
Take Out finance to the borrowers in the Credit Policy/ Take 
Out scheme. The Committee also strongly recommend that 
need for a modified Take Out Finance scheme with suitable 
conditions pertaining to Tripartite Agreement b e incorporated 
in the Credit Policy. IIFCL should ensure that the proposed 
Take Out finance projects having existing Tripartite 
Agreement should have provision for inclusion of IIFCL as 
new or  additional lender in all other  lendings viz. direct 
lending, cr edit enhancement, etc. In cases involving 
Concessioning Authorities, IIFCL should finance only those 
projects where a Tripartite agreement will be entered. 
 
In view of the important role played by Take Out Financing in 
development of Infrastructure sector and to protect the 
interest of the lenders and Take Out financiers , a model 
concession agreement may be drafted/ prepared where in a 
provision for Tri -partite Agreement, as is the norm globally, 
involving Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the 
lenders / Take Out financiers be inserted to enable furnishing 
of NOC to the lenders and Take Out financiers by the 
Concessioning Authorities."  
 
 
6.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“1. As apprised by IIFCL, in light of the above 
recommendations of the Committee, an external expert 
committee has been constituted w.e.f 03.08.2022 to suggest 
modifications to IIFCL‟s credit policy and credit manual. The 
members of the external expert committee include:  

4 
 
a) Sh. Sujit Kumar Varma, Ex Deputy Managing Director 
(DMD), State Bank of India (SBI) 
b) Sh. C M Khurana, Ex CGM Oriental Bank of Commerce 
(OBC) and Ex CGM, IIFCL 
2. The committee since then had the following meetings: 
a) Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit 
Department on 05.08.2022 
b) Meeting with MD, DMD, Chief Credit officer and officers of 
Credit Department on 09.09.2022 
c) Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit 
Department on 17.11.2022 
3. IIFCL has further inform ed that the committee is in the 
process of finalising its detailed recommendations for 
incorporation in credit policy/ credit manual and the same will 
be completed by 30 thJune 2023 through approval by Board 
of Directors of IIFCL.  Once approved, IIFCL will submit the 
relevant extracts of the updated credit policy/ credit manual 
to DFS/CoPU. 
4. With regard to the recommendation on 
drafting/preparing a Model Concession Agreement 
(MCA)wherein the provision for Tri -partite Agreement 
involving Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the 
lenders / Take Out financiers be inserted. It is stated that this 
Department alongwith IIFCL has taken up the matter with 
various Department/Ministries (administering the 
concessioning authorities) on various occasions:  
a) OM d ated 20.01.2020 on Draft Model Concession 
Agreement (MCA) for BOT (Toll) Model for Highway Sector 
b) OM dated 27.12.2021 forwarding the recommendations of 
C&AG on Road Sector. 
c) Background note submitted to Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Transport, Tourism  and Culture in January, 
2021.  
d) IIFCL vide email dated 10.06.2020 forwarding the 
suggestions to MoRTH 
e) IIFCL vide email dated 08.03.2022 forwarding a note 
structural issues pertaining Infrastructure lending to 
Department of Economic Affairs. 
f)    IIFCL vide e mail dated 14.04.2022 forwarding a note 
issues pertaining Infrastructure Sector to Indian Bank‟s 
Association.  
Copy of the above -mentioned OM and email alongwith 
Notes is enclosed at     Annexure-I.” 
 
 
Clarity on stipulated Debt Service Coverage Ratio(DSCR) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
7. The Committee in their Seventeenth Report, had recommended the 

5 
 
following with regard to clarifications on the stipulated Debt Service Coverage 
Ratio:- 
"Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit Policy 2012 the 
Company is empowered to consider the proposals of those 
projects only which have Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) 
of at least 1.00. There was, however no clarity on the period of 
DSCR - a financial year or immediate 12 months period prior to 
effecting the Take Out. IIFCL  
has informed that a Statutory Auditor Certificate duly certifying 
DSCR of 1.16 and 1.20 in case of RWMPL and BDWPL 
respectively for the period of one year from July 2013 to Ju ne 
2014 was obtained while processing the disbursements in the 
account. The Committee tend to agree with the views and 
suggestions of C&AG that quarterly figures are generally 
unaudited ones which may not have authenticity, acceptability 
and may not give as much confidence as that of audited figures 
to the lenders and accordingly recommend that in future, IIFCL 
should rely on audited figures and should also consider the 
available balance sheet figures for considering DSCR in the 
projects.” 
 
8.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have submitted that:  
 
“1. The Department agree with the recommendation of the 
Committee that IIFCL shall rely on the A udited figures and 
Balance Sheet figures while computing Debt Service Coverage 
ratio (DSCR) of the projects under Take Out Finance Scheme. 
Taking note of the observation, IIFCL has appointed a committee 
of external experts to suggest relevant modifications  in its credit 
policy and credit manual. This committee have had 3 meetings 
with the officials of the IIFCL.  
 
2.  IIFCL has informed that the committee is in the process of 
finalising its detailed recommendations for incorporation in credit 
policy/ credit manual and the same will be completed by 30 th June 
2023 through approval by Board of Directors of IIFCL. Once 
approved, IIFCL will submit the relevant extracts of the updated 
credit policy/ credit manual to DFS/CoPU.” 
 
Prudent approach before disbursal of  funds and action  on erring 
officials 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7 & 8) 
9. The Committee had recommended the following with regard t o prudent 

6 
 
disbursal of funds and action on erring officials :- 
"The Committee when asked about sanction of loan to RWMPL 
and BDWPL without obtaining of NOC from the Concessioning 
Authority, IIFCL had stated  that there was no provision or 
requirement in the concession agreement stipulating that NOC 
is to be obtained from respective Concessioning Authorities by 
any lender(s). In another issue regarding sanction and 
disbursement of loan after termination of the project of RWMPL 
and BDWPL,  IIFCL informed the Committee that until August 
2015 there was no information  available to IIFCL about the 
termination of the projects of RWMPL an d BDWPL.  This was 
despite the fact that as per clause no. 6.1 (g) under Article 6 of 
the concession agreements of the project, the respective 
Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) were under 
obligation to intimate the lenders regarding any ter mination or 
event of default that was initiated by the  Concessioning 
Authorities or any breach on part of the concessionaire in the  
said projects. The details of issue of termination notices and 
termination of the  said project, were not provided to the Lea d 
Lender and hence not provided to  the IIFCL during the 
appraisal stage nor during the disbursement state (before  the 
date of Take Out)by the Concessioning Authority which is in 
contravention of the clause 6.1(g) of the Concession 
Agreement. Requirement of NOC not being part of Concession 
Agreement and Take Out Finance Scheme approved by the 
Government of India, IIFCL had disbursed the Take  Out 
amount to the existing banks of the consortium of lenders, the 
NOC was required to be arranged and obtained only f rom the 
lenders before scheduled  date of occurrence of Take Out. 
Accordingly, in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL‟s Credit 
Policy 2012, it as obtained No Objection Certificates (NOCs) 
from the consortium of lenders of both the projects before  
effecting Take Out in the instant case as per the requirements. 
The Committee noted that IIFCL is well in agreement that the 
Concession Authority should inform the existing set of lenders 
in the projects  regarding Termination Notices, which is in 
contravention to clause 6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. 
This is the reason, IIFCL has been professing the  need to have 
a Tri -partite Concession Agreement and a Model Concession  
Agreement for all infrastructure sectors to safeguard lenders‟ 
interest (having  majority financial stake in Infrastructure 
projects), for building the confidence  of lenders and to address 
the issues as highlighted by C&AG in the instant  cases and to 
give impetus to financing the Sunrise sectors including such  
Social Infrastructure sectors. 
The Committee feel that IIFCL should have been more careful 
and vigilant in drafting financial agreements to address the 
issue of termination of projects by the Concessionairre  
Authorities. 

7 
 
 Further, the pre-disbursement site inspection in both the cases 
was done by IIFCL on 17 October 2014, which was after the 
notice of termination of concession agreement (which IIFCL 
stated was unaware) was served and the loan sanctioned. The 
Committee furth er observe that the report of two Committees 
that conducted the staff accountability & fact finding exercise 
and concluded that there was no lapse on any of the officials of 
IIFCL was not made available to C&AG for further analysis 
giving the impression th at the fact finding exercise was more 
like a cover -up exercise as the reports were considered by 
IIFCL's own Managing Director and the fact finding closed at 
his instance. The Committee without casting any aspersions on 
the conduct of the officials involve d or without questioning the 
wisdom of the Board, feel that the IIFCL should have taken 
prudent approach by  
 
 
taking legal action against the Concessioning Authorities 
(Municipal Corporations) for violation of 6.1 (g) of the 
concession agreement to come out clean on their part.” 
 
 10.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“1. IIFCL has informed that it has taken legal action in both the 
cases against the borrowers and Concessioning Authorities 
(Municipal Corporations) for violation of 6.1 (g) of the concession 
agreement through the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) Court, 
Bengaluru & Delhi. The details of the legal proceedings in each 
case is given below:  
 
a) Raipur Waste Management Pvt. Ltd (RWMPL)  
 
The DRT, Bengaluru has awa rded its order in favor of IIFCL The 
DRT through its Recovery Officer (RO) for RC No. 434/2020 on 
23.11.2021 directed, the parties i.e borrower, M/s Raipur Waste 
Management private Limited Project, promoter, M/s Kivar 
Holdings Pvt Ltd and the Authority, Ra ipur Municipal Corporation, 
to pay the sum of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/- with applicable interest as 
against the loan amount of Rs. 13.71 Crore to IIFCL.  
Further, RO on 15.12.2021 vide Demand Notice (DN) directed, 
the parties i.e. borrower, M/s Raipur Waste Management private 
Limited Project, promoter, M/s Kivar Holdings Pvt Ltd and the 
Authority, Raipur Municipal Corporation, to pay the sum of Rs 
17,98,51,762.10/- within 15 days of receipt of the notice, failing 
which the re covery shall be made in accordance with the 
Recovery of Debt Due to banks and financial institution Act 1993.  

8 
 
 
The parties were further ordered by the RO to declare on an 
affidavit the particulars of their assets on or before the next date 
of hearing. 
 
Further, the parties were ordered to appear before the RO on 
21.02.2022 and 12.04.2022. Since the borrower/ parties failed to 
appear in proceedings before the Ld. Presiding officer, DRT 
Bangalore on 12.04.2022 and the Recovery Certificate was 
issued Ex-Parte. As per process, IIFCL has further requested the 
court for reissuance of the updated Demand Notice (DN) for 
recovery against defendants to which the RO directed IIFCL to file 
its application for serving of DN through alternative modes 
including Dasti and paper publications by the next date of hearing 
which is 13.05.2022. This was complied by IIFCL.  
During the hearing before the RO on 13.05.2022, the parties did 
not appear. In view of this IIFCL‟s LLC pleaded before the RO on 
the conduct of the Defendants.  Taking note of the same, the RO 
adjourned the case till 15.09.2022 and gave IIFCL liberty to move 
application for substituted service before the next date and get 
notice issued and delivered to the Defendants. On the basis of the 
liberty granted by the RO , IIFCL has filed the application within 
the timelines. The RO adjourned the case till 12.12.2022. In the 
hearing on 12.12.2022, the defendants did not appear before the 
RO and the RO took note of the previous hearings and granted a 
last opportunity to the defendants and observed that if they do not 
appear on the next hearing, the case may be closed by passing 
the final order. IIFCL has informed that the next date of hearing/ 
listing by the Hon‟ble DRT Court is 02.08.2023. and IIFCL is 
expecting that the Ho n‟ble DRT Court will issue the final order to 
enforce the DRT court order for recovery of entire IIFCL dues as 
detailed above (vide RC No. 434/2020 on 23.11.2021 has issued 
Demand Notice to the parties for recovery of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/-
) in accordance with the Recovery of Debt Due to banks and 
financial institution Act 1993. 
 
b) Bhilai Durg Waste Management Pvt Ltd (BDWMPL) 
There are  standardised process & procedures followed across 
DRT Courts in India.  In view of the favourable order passed by 
DRT, Bengaluru,  in the case of RWMPL , IIFCL expects similar 
favourable order from DRT , Delhifor recovery of its entire dues.  
The case  is under pleading stage at the Registrar Court No. 1. 

9 
 
The next date of hearing/ listing by the Hon‟ble DRT Delhi Court is 
18.05.2023. 
2. It may also be noted that th is Department vide its letter 
dated 07.02.2022 had advised IIFCL to re-examine IIFCL‟s finding 
of no deficiency in its sytems and procedures, while considering 
any gaps i n control measures that may have enabled such non -
adherence, the responsibility for the non -adherence or/and 
enabling gaps and staff accountability.  
 
3. In compliance of the above direction, IIFCL vide email dated 
22.06.2022 informed that re -examination o f the staff 
accountability in the said two accounts w as conducted by team of 
external expert Fact Finding Team, Internal Fact-Finding Team () 
and Central Review Committee. All the three committees on re -
examination have reported that the said two cases do not involve 
issues related to staff accountability. Keeping in view the same, 
the Competent Authority (CA), on 14.06.2022, has approved 
closing the re -examination of staff accountability in the said two 
cases as it does not involve issues related to staff accountability. 
Copy of the IIFCL‟s email, Committee reports in respect Raipur 
Waste Management Private Limited (RSWPL) and Bhilai  Durg 
Waste Management Private Limited (BDWPL) are attached as 
Annexure- II& III.” 
 
11.   The Committee while examining C&AG Audit Para 5.2 of Report No.18 
of 2020 based on ‘Avoidable Loss due to extension of loan in terminated 
projects relating to India Infrastr ucture Finance Company Limited  (IIFCL),  
had observed in their Report that  loans were given to  two 
concessionaires viz. Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL)  
and Bhilai Durg Waste Management Private Limited (BDW MPL) in 
September 2014 by IIFCL under 'Take Out Finance Scheme' after issue of  
notices of termination  by the Concessioning Authority and without 
obtaining NOC from Concessioning Authority  and also without ensuring 
the stipulated Debt Service  Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of the borrowers as 
per their audited annual accounts.  Consequently, these loan accounts 
turned into NPAs. The Committee had, therefore, suggested amendments 
in its Credit P olicy-2012 to include clauses in C oncession Agreements for 
obtaining of ‘NOC’ from Concessioning Authorities, inclusion of IIFCL as 
new or additional lender,  drafting of a model Concession Agreement/Tri-
partite Agreement as per global norms, relying on audited figures  for 

10 
 
considering DSCR  and remaining more vigilant in drafting financial 
agreements, etc. 
 
12. The Committee are happy to note that IIFCL acting upon the 
recommendations of the Committee , has appointed a committee of 
external experts to suggest modifications in it’s  credit policy and Credit 
manual and  hope that above suggestion will be incorporated  in Credit 
Policy and Credit Manual of IIFCL soon.  Further, the Committee would like 
to have a copy of this document and model Concession/Tri -partite 
Agreement. 
 The Committee further expect that DFS and IIFCL shall take up the 
matter with all the stakeho lders such as NHAI, Municipal Corporation and 
others to have a foolproof Tripartite Agreement to be signed in future. 
 
13. The Committee also note that IIFCL has taken legal action, through the 
respective Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) C ourts, against the 
Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) f or violation of 6.1 (g) 
of the Concession A greement. The Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT), 
Bengaluru through its Recovery Officer for RC No. 434/2020 on 23.11.2021 
and 15.12.2021 has directed, the parties to pay a  sum of Rs . 
17,98,51,762.10/- with applicable interest as against the loan amount of Rs. 
13.71 crore to IIFCL.  Further, a case on similar line is pending before  DRT 
against Bhilai Durg Waste Management Private Limited (BDW MPL). The 
Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by IIFCL , would like to be 
informed about  the status of recovery of loan on biannual basis till the 
amount is fully recovered. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
OBTAINING OF NO OBJECTION CERTIFICATE (NOC) BEFORE EXTENDING 
TAKE OUT FINANCE; NEED FOR TRIPARTITE AGREEMENT; AND  THE MODEL 
CONCESSION AGREEMENT. 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 The Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit Policy 2012, the 
Company, for affecting Take Out finance, 'The No Objection Certificate (NOC)  
from the lender(s), the Concessionaire Authority (CA) (if applicable) and the  
Consortium, is to be provided to IIFCL for extending the Take Out finance  under 
the Scheme. This NOC is to be arra nged by the Borrower Company/  Lender(s) 
before Scheduled Date of Occurrence of Take Out”. Though the  company has 
obtained NOC from the existing lenders and the consortium, yet  it could not do 
so from the CAs (in this case Raipur and Bhilai - Durg Municipal Corporations) as 
- 
(i) there was no clause /provision/ requirement in the Concession 
Agreement stipulating requirement for taking NOC from the CAs by any  
lender or borrower prior to extending Take Out facility by the lenders , 
(ii) even if IIFCL had applied for NOC, the CA had no „locus standi‟ to issue 
NOC to IIFCL. IIFCL being a third party , had no direct linkage with the  
CAs under any agreement. Even extant lending banks also had no 
direct linkage with the CA under any agreement. 
(iii) there has not been industry practice where lenders in India seek any  
NOC from Concession Authority for any change in financing in terms of 
Take Out Finance, Refinance, or down selling in respect of 
Infrastructure Projects the Company could not obtain CA‟s NOC. 
Reply of the Government 
 As apprised by IIFCL, in light of the above recommendations of the 
Committee, an external expert committee has been constituted w.e.f 03.08.2022 
to suggest modifications to IIFCL‟s credit policy and credit manual . The 
members of the external expert committee include:  

12 
 
a)  Sh. Sujit Kumar Varma, Ex Deputy Managing Director (DMD), State Bank 
of India (SBI) 
b) Sh. C M Khurana, Ex CGM Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC) and Ex 
CGM, IIFCL 
2. The committee since then had the following meetings: 
a)  Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit Department on 
05.08.2022 
b)  Meeting with MD, DMD, Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit 
Department on 09.09.2022 
c)  Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit Department on 
17.11.2022 
3. IIFCL has further informed that the committee is in the process of 
finalising its detailed recommendations for incorporation in credit policy/ credit 
manual and the same will be completed by 30thJune 2023 through approval by 
Board of Directors  of IIFCL . Once approved, IIFCL will submit the relevant 
extracts of the updated credit policy/ credit manual to DFS/CoPU. 
4. With regard to the recommendation on drafting/preparing a M odel 
Concession Agreement (MCA)wherein the p rovision for Tri -partite Agreement 
involving Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the lenders / Take Out 
financiers be inserted . It is stated that this Department alongwith IIFCL has 
taken up the matter with various Department/Ministries (administering the 
concessioning authorities) on various occasions:  
a) OM dated 20.01.2020 on Draft Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for 
BOT (Toll) Model for Highway Sector 
b) OM dated 27.12.2021 forwarding the recommendations of C&AG on Road 
Sector. 
c) Background note submitted to Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture in January, 2021.  
d) IIFCL vide email dated 10.06.2020 forwarding the suggestions to MoRTH. 
e) IIFCL vide email dated 08.03.2022 forwarding a note structural i ssues 
pertaining Infrastructure lending to Department of Economic Affairs. 
f) IIFCL vide email dated 14.04.2022 forwarding a note issues pertaining 
Infrastructure Sector to Indian Bank‟s Association.  
Copy of the above-mentioned OM and email alongwith Note s is enclosed at 
Annexure-I.  

13 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paras 11 and 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
2. The IIFCL had disbursed the Take Out amount only to the existing banks 
of the consortium of lenders, as per the applicable credit policy, the NOC was  
required to be arranged and obtained from the lenders before scheduled date  of 
occurrence of Take Out. The applicability was to the extent of lenders providing 
the NOC since the Take Out was directly between IIFCL and the  lending banks. 
Accordingly, in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL‟s Credit Policy 2012,  
IIFCL had obtained No Objection Certificates (NOCs) from the consortium of  
lenders i.e. Dhanlaxmi Bank and Catholic Syrian Bank in case of RWMPL and  
Dhanlaxmi Bank and South Indian Bank in case of BDWMPL before effecting  
Take Out in the instant case as per the requirements. Further, all the lenders  
have confirmed the asset classification as “Standard” before the disbursement  of 
loan in both the accounts, as per the norms.  
The Committee find this a serious shortcoming in the concession agreement  and 
also find it rather surprising for IIFCL not realizing the need to include a clause 
for obtaining NOC from the respective Concessioning Authorities before 
affecting the Take Out although IIFCL's own Credit Policy 2012 has a  provision 
for it. It should have realized this gap in the concession agreements  and sought 
to plug the same before effecting Take  Out to protect its own  financial interest. 
Instead, it relied more on  the presumption that NOC  would be refused by the 
Concessioning Authorities as it was not covered under any  clause in the 
Agreement. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that IIFCL should make necessary 
amendments in its Credit policy to include clauses in concession agreements  for 
making 'obtaining of NOC from Concessioning Authorities, lender(s) as well 
as the consortium of lenders' a pre -requisite before extending any Take  Out 
finance to the borrowers in the Credit Policy/ Take Out scheme.  The Committee 
also strongly recommend that need for a modified Take Out Finance scheme 
with suitable conditions pertaining to Tripartite Agreement be  incorporated in the 

14 
 
Credit Policy. IIFCL should ensure that the proposed Take  Out finance projects 
having existing Tripartite Agreement should have provision for inclusion of IIFCL 
as new or additional lender in all other lendings  viz. direct lending, credit 
enhancement, etc. In cases involving Concessioning Authorities, IIFCL should 
finance only those projects where a Tripartite agreement will be entered. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As apprised by IIFCL, in light of the above recommendations of the 
Committee, an external expert committee has been constituted w.e.f 03.08.2022 
to suggest modifications to IIFCL‟s credit policy and credit manual . The 
members of the external expert committee include:  
a)  Sh. Sujit Kumar Varma, Ex Deputy Managing Director (DMD), State Bank 
of India (SBI) 
b) Sh. C M Khurana, Ex CGM Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC) and Ex 
CGM, IIFCL 
2. The committee since then had the following meetings: 
a)  Meeting with Chief  Credit officer and officers of Credit Department on 
05.08.2022 
b)  Meeting with MD, DMD, Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit 
Department on 09.09.2022 
c)  Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit Department on 
17.11.2022 
3. IIFCL has further informed that the committee is in the process of 
finalising its detailed recommendations for incorporation in credit policy/ credit 
manual and the same will be completed by 30thJune 2023 through approval by 
Board of Directors  of IIFCL . Once approved, IIFCL will submit the relevant 
extracts of the updated credit policy/ credit manual to DFS/CoPU. 
4. With regard to the recommendation on drafting/preparing a M odel 
Concession Agreement (MCA)wherein the p rovision for Tri -partite Agreement 
involving Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the lenders / Take Out 
financiers be inserted . It is stated that this Department alongwith IIFCL has 
taken up the matter with various Department/Ministries (administering the 
concessioning authorities) on various occasions:  
a) OM dated 20.01.2020 on Draft Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for 
BOT (Toll) Model for Highway Sector 

15 
 
b) OM dated 27.12.2021 forwarding the recommendations of C&AG on Road 
Sector. 
c) Background note submitted to Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture in January, 2021.  
d) IIFCL vide email dated 10.06.2020 forwarding the suggestions to MoRTH 
e) IIFCL vide email dated 08.03.2022 forwarding a note structural is sues 
pertaining Infrastructure lending to Department of Economic Affairs. 
f) IIFCL vide email dated 14.04.2022 forwarding a note issues pertaining 
Infrastructure Sector to Indian Bank‟s Association.  
Copy of the above-mentioned OM and email alongwith Note s is enclosed at 
Annexure-I.  
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paras 11and 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
3. In view of the important role played by Take Out Financing in development 
of Infrastructure sector and to protect the interest of the  lenders and Take Out 
financiers , a model concession agreement may be  drafted/ prepared where 
in a provision for Tri -partite Agreement, a s is the norm globally,  involving 
Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the lenders / Take Out 
financiers be inserted to enable furnishing of NOC to the lenders and Take  
Out financiers by the Concessioning Authorities. 
Reply of the Government 
 As apprised by IIFCL, in light of the above recommendations of the 
Committee, an external expert committee has been constituted w.e.f 03.08.2022 
to suggest modifications to IIFCL‟s credit policy and credit manual . The 
members of the external expert committee include:  
a)  Sh. Sujit Kumar Varma, Ex Deputy Managing Director (DMD), State Bank 
of India (SBI) 
b) Sh. C M Khurana, Ex CGM Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC) and Ex 
CGM, IIFCL 
2. The committee since then had the following meetings: 

16 
 
a)  Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit Department on 
05.08.2022 
b)  Meeting with MD, DMD, Chief Credit officer and officers of Credit 
Department on 09.09.2022 
c)  Meeting with Chief Credit officer and officers of  Credit Department on 
17.11.2022 
3. IIFCL has further informed that the committee is in the process of 
finalising its detailed recommendations for incorporation in credit policy/ credit 
manual and the same will be completed by 30thJune 2023 through approval by 
Board of Directors  of IIFCL . Once approved, IIFCL will submit the relevant 
extracts of the updated credit policy/ credit manual to DFS/CoPU. 
4. With regard to the recommendation on drafting/preparing a M odel 
Concession Agreement (MCA)wherein the p rovision for Tri -partite Agreement 
involving Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the lenders / Take Out 
financiers be inserted . It is stated that this Department alongwith IIFCL has 
taken up the matter with various Department/Ministri es (administering the 
concessioning authorities) on various occasions:  
a) OM dated 20.01.2020 on Draft Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for 
BOT (Toll) Model for Highway Sector 
b) OM dated 27.12.2021 forwarding the recommendations of C&AG on Road 
Sector. 
c) Background note submitted to Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture in January, 2021.  
d) IIFCL vide email dated 10.06.2020 forwarding the suggestions to MoRTH 
e) IIFCL vide email dated 08.03.2022 forwarding a note structural issues 
pertaining Infrastructure lending to Department of Economic Affairs. 
f) IIFCL vide email dated 14.04.2022 forwarding a note issues pertaining 
Infrastructure Sector to Indian Bank‟s Association.  
Copy of the above-mentioned OM and email alongwith Note s is enclosed at 
Annexure-I.  
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paras 11and 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 

17 
 
CLARITY ON STIPULATED DEBT SERVICE COVERAGE RATIO (DSCR) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
4. Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit Policy 2012 the Company is  
empowered to  consider the proposals of those projects only which have Debt  
Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1.00. There was, however no clarity  
on the period of DSCR - a financial year or immediate 12 months period prior 
to effecting the Take Out. IIFCL has informed that a Statutory Auditor Certificate 
duly certifying DSCR of 1.16 and 1.20 in case of RWMPL and BDWPL 
respectively for  the period of one  year from July 2013  to June 2014  was 
obtained while processing the disbursements in the account. The Committee 
tend to agree with the views and suggestions of C&AG that quarterly figures are 
generally unaudited ones which may not have authenticity, acceptability and 
may not give as much confidence as that of  audited figures to the lenders and 
accordingly recommend that in future, IIFCL  should rely on audited figures and 
should also consider the available balance  sheet figures for considering DSCR  
in the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.  The Department agree with the recommendation of the Committee that 
IIFCL shall rely on the A udited figures and Balance Sheet figures while 
computing Debt Service Coverage ratio (DSCR) of the projects under Take 
Out Finance Scheme. Taking note of the observation, IIFCL has appointed a 
committee of external experts to suggest relevant modifications  in its credit 
policy and credit manual. This committee have had 3 meetings with the 
officials of the IIFCL.  
 
2. IIFCL has informed that the committee is in the process of finalising its 
detailed recommendations for incorporation in credit policy/ credit man ual 
and the same will be completed by 30 th June 2023 through approval by 
Board of Directors of IIFCL. Once approved, IIFCL will submit the relevant 
extracts of the updated credit policy/ credit manual to DFS/CoPU. 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
 

18 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paras 11and 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
PRUDENT APPROACH BEFORE DISBURSAL OF FUNDS AND ACTION  ON 
ERRING OFFICIALS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
5. The Committee when asked about sanction of loan to RWMPL and BDWPL 
without obtaining of NOC from the Concessioning Authority, IIFCL had stated  
that there was no provision or requirement in the concession agreement 
stipulating that NOC is to be obtained from respective Concessioning Authorities 
by any lender(s). In another issue regarding sanction and disbursement of loan 
after termination of the project of RWMPL and BDWPL,  IIFCL informed the 
Committee that until August 2015 there was no information  available to IIFCL 
about the termination of the projects of RWMPL and BDWPL.  This was despite 
the fact that as per clause no. 6.1 (g) under Article 6 of the  concession 
agreements of the project, the respective Concessioning Authorities (Municipal 
Corporations) were under obligation to intimate the lenders regarding any 
termination or event of default that was initiated by the  Concessioning 
Authorities or any breach on part of the concessionaire in the  said projects. The 
details of issue of termination notices and termination of  the said project, were 
not provided to the Lead Lender and hence not provided to  the IIFCL during the 
appraisal stage nor during the disbursement state (before  the date of Take Out) 
by the Concessioning Authority which is in contravention of the clause 6.1(g) of 
the Concession Agreement. Requirement  of NOC not being part of Concession 
Agreement and Take Out Finance Scheme approved by the Government of 
India, IIFCL had disbursed the Take  Out amount to the existing banks of the 
consortium of lenders, the N OC was required to be arranged and obtained only 
from the lenders before scheduled  date of occurrence of Take Out. Accordingly, 
in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL‟s Credit Policy 2012, it has obtained 
No Objection Certificates (NOCs) from the consortium of lenders of both the 
projects before effecting Take Out in the instant case as per the requirements. 
The Committee noted that IIFCL is well in agreement that the Concession 
Authority should inform the existing set of lenders in the projects  regarding 

19 
 
Termination Notices, which is in contravention to clause 6.1(g) of the 
Concession Agreement. This is the reason, IIFCL has been professing the  need 
to have a Tri -partite Concession Agreement and a Model Concession  
Agreement for all infrastructure sectors to safeguard lenders‟ interest (having  
majority financial stake in Infrastructure projects), for building the confidence  of 
lenders and to address the issues as highlighted by C&AG in the instant  cases 
and to give impetus to financing the Sunrise s ectors including such  Social 
Infrastructure sectors. 
The Committee feel that IIFCL should have been more careful and 
vigilant in drafting financial agreements to address the issue of termination  of 
projects by the Concessionairre Authorities. 
Reply of the Government 
1. IIFCL has informed that it has taken legal action in both the cases against 
the borrowers and Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) for 
violation of 6.1 (g) of the concession agreement through the Debt Recovery 
Tribunal (DRT) Court, Bengaluru& Delhi. The details of the legal proceedings in 
each case is given below:  
 
 
a) Raipur Waste Management Pvt. Ltd (RWMPL)  
 
The DRT, Bengaluru has awarded its order in favor of IIFCL The DRT through 
its Recovery Officer (RO) for RC No. 434/202 0 on 23.11.2021 directed, the 
parties i.e borrower, M/s Raipur Waste Management private Limited Project, 
promoter, M/s Kivar Holdings Pvt Ltd and the Authority, Raipur Municipal 
Corporation, to pay the sum of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/- with applicable interest as 
against the loan amount of Rs. 13.71 Crore to IIFCL.  
Further, RO on 15.12.2021 vide Demand Notice (DN) directed, the parties i.e. 
borrower, M/s Raipur Waste Management private Limited Project, promoter, M/s 
Kivar Holdings Pvt Ltd and the Authority, Raipur Municipal Corporation, to pay 
the sum of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/ - within 15 days of receipt of the notice, failing 
which the recovery shall be made in accordance with the Recovery of Debt Due 
to banks and financial institution Act 1993.  
 
The parties were further ordered by the RO to declare on an affidavit the 
particulars of their assets on or before the next date of hearing. 
 
Further, the parties were ordered to appear before the RO on 21.02.2022 and 
12.04.2022. Since the borrower/ parties failed to appear in proceedings before 
the Ld. Presiding officer, DRT Bangalore on 12.04.2022 and the Recovery 
Certificate was issued Ex-Parte. As per process, IIFCL has further requested the 

20 
 
court for reissuance of the updated Demand Notice (DN) for recovery against 
defendants to which the RO directed IIFCL to file its application for serving of 
DN through alternative modes including Dasti and paper publications by the next 
date of hearing which is 13.05.2022. This was complied by IIFCL.  
 
During the hearing before the RO on 13.05.2022, the parties did not appear. In 
view of this IIFCL‟s LLC pleaded before the RO on the conduct of the 
Defendants. Taking note of the same, the RO adjourned the case till 15.09.2022 
and gave IIFCL li berty to move application for substituted service before the 
next date and get notice issued and delivered to the Defendants. On the basis of 
the liberty granted by the RO, IIFCL has filed the application within the timelines. 
The RO adjourned the case til l 12.12.2022. In the hearing on 12.12.2022, the 
defendants did not appear before the RO and the RO took note of the previous 
hearings and granted a last opportunity to the defendants and observed that if 
they do not appear on the next hearing, the case may  be closed by passing the 
final order. IIFCL has informed that the next date of hearing/ listing by the 
Hon‟ble DRT Court is 02.08.2023. and IIFCL is expecting that the Hon‟ble DRT 
Court will issue the final order to enforce the DRT court order for recover y of 
entire IIFCL dues as detailed above (vide RC No. 434/2020 on 23.11.2021 has 
issued Demand Notice to the parties for recovery of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/-) in 
accordance with the Recovery of Debt Due to banks and financi al institution Act 
1993.  
 
b) Bhilai Durg Waste Management Pvt Ltd (BDWMPL) 
There are  standardised process & procedures followed across DRT Courts in 
India. In view of the favourable order passed by DRT, Bengaluru,  in the case of 
RWMPL, IIFCL expects similar favourable order from DRT, Delhi for recovery of 
its entire dues.  The case is under pleading stage at the Registrar Court No. 1. 
The next date of hearing/ listing by the Hon‟ble DRT Delhi Court is 18.05.2023. 
2. It may also be noted that th is Department vide its letter dated 07.02.2022 
had advised IIFCL to re -examine IIFCL‟s finding of no deficiency in its sytems 
and procedures, while considering any gaps in control measures that may have 
enabled such non -adherence, the responsibility for the non -adherence or/and 
enabling gaps and staff accountability.  
 
3. In compliance of the above direction, IIFCL vide email dated 22.06.2022 
informed that re-examination of the staff accountability in the said two accounts 
was conducted by  team of external expert Fact Finding Team , Internal Fact -
Finding Team () and Central Review Committee. All the three committees on re -
examination have reported that the said two cases do not involve issues related 
to staff accountability. Keeping in view the same, the Competent Au thority (CA), 
on 14.06.2022, has approved closing the re -examination of staff accountability 
in the said two cases as it does not involve issues related to staff accountability. 

21 
 
Copy of the IIFCL‟s email, Committee reports in respect Raipur Waste 
Management Private Limited (RSWPL) and Bhilai  Durg Waste Management 
Private Limited (BDWPL) are attached as Annexure- II& III. 
 
 [Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
6. Further, the pre -disbursement site inspection in both the cases was  
done by IIFCL on 17 October 2014, which was after the notice of termination of  
concession agreement (which IIFCL stated was unaware) was served and the  
loan sanctioned. The Committee further observe that the report of two 
Committees that conducted the staff accountability & fact finding exercise and  
concluded that there was no lapse on any of the officials of IIFCL was not 
made available to C&AG for further analysis giving the impression that the fact  
finding exercise was more like a cover-up exercise as the reports were 
considered by IIFCL's own Managing Director and the fact finding closed at his  
instance. The Committee without casting any aspersions on the conduct of the  
officials involved or without questioning the wisdom of the Board, feel that the  
IIFCL should have taken prudent approach by taking legal action against the  
Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporati ons) for violation of 6.1 (g) of  the 
concession agreement to come out clean on their part. 
Reply of the Government 
1. IIFCL has informed that it has taken legal action in both the cases against 
the borrowers and Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) for 
violation of 6.1 (g) of the concession agreement through the Debt Recovery 
Tribunal (DRT) Court, Bengaluru & Delhi. The details of the legal proceedings in 
each case is given below:  
 
a) Raipur Waste Management Pvt. Ltd (RWMPL)  
 
The DRT, Bengaluru has awarded its order in favor of IIFCL The DRT through 
its Recovery Officer (RO) for RC No. 434/2020 on 23.11.2021 directed, the 
parties i.e borrower, M/s Raipur Waste Management private Limited Project, 
promoter, M/s Kivar Holdings Pvt Ltd and  the Authority, Raipur Municipal 

22 
 
Corporation, to pay the sum of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/- with applicable interest as 
against the loan amount of Rs. 13.71 Crore to IIFCL.  
Further, RO on 15.12.2021 vide Demand Notice (DN) di rected, the parties i.e. 
borrower, M/s Raipur Waste Management private Limited Project, promoter, M/s 
Kivar Holdings Pvt Ltd and the Authority, Raipur Municipal Corporation, to pay 
the sum of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/ - within 15 days of receipt of the notice, fa iling 
which the recovery shall be made in accordance with the Recovery of Debt Due 
to banks and financial institution Act 1993.  
 
The parties were further ordered by the RO to declare on an affidavit the 
particulars of their assets on or before the next date of hearing. 
 
Further, the parties were ordered to appear before the RO on 21.02.2022 and 
12.04.2022. Since the borrower/ parties failed to appear in proceedings before 
the Ld. Presiding officer, DRT Bangalore on 12.04.2022 and the Recovery 
Certificate was issued Ex-Parte. As per process, IIFCL has further requested the 
court for reissuance of the updated Demand Notice (DN) for recovery against 
defendants to which the RO directed IIFCL to file its application for serving of 
DN through alternative modes including Dasti and paper publications by the next 
date of hearing which is 13.05.2022. This was complied by IIFCL.  
 
During the hearing before the RO on 13.05.2022, the parties did not appear. In 
view of this IIFCL‟s LLC pleaded before the RO on the conduct  of the 
Defendants. Taking note of the same, the RO adjourned the case till 15.09.2022 
and gave IIFCL liberty to move application for substituted service before the 
next date and get notice issued and delivered to the Defendants. On the basis of 
the liberty granted by the RO, IIFCL has filed the application within the timelines. 
The RO adjourned the case till 12.12.2022. In the hearing on 12.12.2022, the 
defendants did not appear before the RO and the RO took note of the previous 
hearings and granted a last  opportunity to the defendants and observed that if 
they do not appear on the next hearing, the case may be closed by passing the 
final order. IIFCL has informed that the next date of hearing/ listing by the 
Hon‟ble DRT Court is 02.08.2023. and IIFCL is ex pecting that the Hon‟ble DRT 
Court will issue the final order to enforce the DRT court order for recovery of 
entire IIFCL dues as detailed above (vide RC No. 434/2020 on 23.11.2021 has 
issued Demand Notice to the parties for recovery of Rs 17,98,51,762.10/-) in 
accordance with the Recovery of Debt Due to banks and financial institution Act 
1993.  
 
b) Bhilai Durg Waste Management Pvt Ltd (BDWMPL) 
There are  standardised process & procedures followed across DRT Courts in 
India. In view of the favourable order passed by DRT, Bengaluru,  in the case of 

23 
 
RWMPL, IIFCL expects similar favourable order from DRT, Delhi for recovery of 
its entire dues.  The case is under pleading stage at the Registrar Court No. 1. 
The next date of hearing/ listing by the Hon‟ble DRT Delhi Court is 18.05.2023. 
2. It may also be noted that th is Department vide its letter dated 07.02.2022 
had advised IIFCL to re -examine IIFCL‟s finding of no deficiency in its sytems 
and procedures, while considering any  gaps in control measures that may have 
enabled such non -adherence, the responsibility for the non -adherence or/and 
enabling gaps and staff accountability.  
 
3. In compliance of the above direction, IIFCL vide email dated 22.06.2022 
informed that re-examination of the staff accountability in the said two accounts 
was conducted by  team of external expert Fact Finding Team , Internal Fact -
Finding Team () and Central Review Committee. All the three committees on re -
examination have reported that the said two ca ses do not involve issues related 
to staff accountability. Keeping in view the same, the Competent Authority (CA), 
on 14.06.2022, has approved closing the re -examination of staff accountability 
in the said two cases as it does not involve issues related to  staff accountability. 
Copy of the IIFCL‟s email, Committee reports in respect Raipur Waste 
Management Private Limited (RSWPL) and BhilaiDurg Waste Management 
Private Limited (BDWPL) are attached as Annexure- II& III. 
 
 [Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE  
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
7. To stimulate public investment in infrastructure sector, the Government  of 
India set up the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) as a  
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in January 2006 for providing long term 
financial assistance to infrastructure projects. IIFCL in consultation with banks  
and other key stakeholders pioneered and evolved a 'Take Out' financing 
scheme. The scheme was launched on 16 April 2010 and it operates under the  
aegis of 'SIFTI' . The main objective of the Take Out finance scheme is to  
ensure long-term lending and lower the risk in the banking sector because, at  
that particular point of time, when the Take Out finance scheme was launched,  
the concept of public -private partnership was emerging. Banking sector was  the 
main lending source for infrastructure projects and they needed to lessen  the 
risk because infrastructure projects needed long term money, whereas the  
majority of the liability profile of the banks upto 80 percent was f or a short- term 
lending. 
Reply of the Government 
No Comments received from the Ministry 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
8. The present Audit Para no. 5.2 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020, examined 
by the Committee, relates to extending loans under 'Take Out Finance Scheme' 
to two concessionaires viz. Raipur Waste Management Private Limited 
(RWMPL) and Bhilai Durg Waste Management Private Limited (BDWPL) in 
September 2014 by IIFCL. In both the cases the notices of termination were 
issued by the Concessioning Authority before sanctioning of loan/ signing of the 
documents. C&AG observed that   loans to these two concessionaires under the 
Take Out Finance Scheme were disbursed without ensuring compliance of  
critical requirement of obtaining 'No Objection Certificate' from the 
Concessionaire Authorities and without ensuring the stipulated Debt Service  

25 
 
Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of the borrowers as per their audited annual accounts.  
These loan accounts consequently turned NPAs.  The two internal Committees  
set up by IIFCL on staff accountability have not found any lapses on any of the  
officials of IIFCL. The reports of the two Committees, C&AG pointed out, were  
not made available to them for further analysis leading to doubts about the 
credibility of such reports. The Committee, before finalizing their observations  in 
their report heard the views of the officers from C&AG that conducted the  Audit, 
and also the views of the representatives of IIFCL and Department of  Financial 
Services, Ministry of Finance. The eviden ce of the stakeholders, the information 
and clarifications submitted by them, and after internal deliberations led the 
Committee to arrive at the conclusions and make suggestions as mentioned in  
the succeeding paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
No Comments received from the Ministry 
 
IMPROVEMENT MEASURES 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
9. The Committee are happy to note the improvement measures taken by  
IIFCL in the Take Out Take Out Financing Scheme viz. (I) internal due diligence  
and credit appraisal d epartment, (ii) strengthening of its Risk  Management 
Function, (iii) empanelment of independent experts and reputed legal firms, 
(iv) imparting of adequate & continuous technical training and capacity building 
in operational areas, (v) digitization of services and real -time online project 
monitoring system, etc. The Committee hope that these measures will go a long 
way in improving and strengthening the functioning of IIFCL. 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the committee are factual in natur e based on the 
submissions made by  IIFCL. This Department has no comment to offer on the 
same.  
 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services)] 
(O.M. No. 6/15/2021 – IF-I Dated 20.3.2023) 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH  
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND FINAL REPLIES 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                               SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR 
26 July, 2023                                            Chairperson 
04 Sravana, 1945 (S)                         Committee on Public Undertakings  

28 
 
  

29 
 
 

30 
 
 

31 
 
 

32 
 
 

33 
 
 

34 
 
 

35 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


42 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
 

44 
 
 

45 
 
 

46 
 
 

47 
 
 

48 
 
 

49 
 
 

50 
 
 

51 
 
 

52 
 
 

53 
 
 

54 
 
 

55 
 
 

56 
 
 

57 
 
 

58 
 
 

59 
 
 

60 
 
 

61 
 
 

62 
 
 

63 
 
 

64 
 
 

65 
 
 

66 
 
 

67 
 
 

68 
 
 

69 
 
 

70 
 
 

71 
 
 

72 
 
 

73 
 
 

74 
 
 

75 
 
 

76 
 
 

77 
 
 

78 
 
 

79 
 
 

80 
 
 

81 
 
 

82 
 
 

83 
 
 

84 
 
 

85 
 
 

86 
 
 

87 
 
 

88 
 
 

89 
 
 

90 
 
 

91 
 
 

92 
 
 

93 
 
 

94 
 
 

95 
 
 

96 
 
 

97 
 
 

98 
 
 

99 
 
 

100 
 
 

101 
 
 

 
 
Page 102 of 111 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ……… SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2022-
2023) 
 
****                                  ****                                   ****                                              
****  
****                                 ****                                   ****                                            **** 
*****                                  ****                                   ****                                       ****  

 
 
Page 103 of 111 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2023-24)   
 
  MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday , the 26 th July, 2023 from 1530 Hrs. to  
1620 Hrs. in Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
     2.  
     3. 
     4. 
     5. 
     6. 
Dr. Heena Vijay Kumar Gavit 
Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
 
 
Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
Shri Syed Nassir Hussain 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Prakash Javadekar 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
Shri Binoy Biswam 

 
 
Page 104 of 111 
 
                                                                      SECRETARIAT 
1.    Shri Neeraj Semwal                   -         Joint Secretary                     
2.  Shri Santosh Kumar                   -  Director 
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal                        -          Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Mriganka Achal                 - Deputy Secretary 
  
                                                  OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan       -     Dy. C&AG (Commercial) & Chairman, Audit Board 
2. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha                  -     Director General of Audit (Energy) 
3.   Shri Deepak Kapoor                      -     Director General (Commercial - II) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda for the sitting.  The Committee then considered and 
adopted the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) titled 'Avoidable Loss due to extension of loan in 
terminated projects relating to India Infrastructure Fina nce Company Limited (IIFCL) 
(Based on C&AG Audit Para N o. 5.2 of Report No. 18 of 2020)‟ without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalise 
the Report for presenting the Report to Parliament during the current Monsoon 
Session. 
[The representatives of C&AG were, then, called in] 
 
3. XXX    XXX    XXX  
4. XXX    XXX    XXX 
5. XXX    XXX    XXX  
6. XXX    XXX    XXX 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/--------/ 
  

 
 
Page 105 of 111 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON INDIA 
INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL). 
 
I Total number of recommendations   09 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government  
 
[Para Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8] 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
 
 
06 
 
 
 
66.66% 
 
 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s replies    
 
[Para Sl.No. 1, 2 & 9] 
                  
Percentage to total: 
 
 
  
 
 
03 
 
33.33% 
IV Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of 
the Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration  
 
 
Percentage to total: 
 
  
 
 
Nil 
 
 
N.A.  0% 
 
 
V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies  
 
Percentage to total: 
 
  
 
Nil 
 
 
N.A. 0% 
 