 
  
11
 
 
CENTRAL COALFIELDS LIMITED
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
COAL
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS
 
(2021
-
22
)
 
 
ELEVENTH
 
 
REPORT
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 


ii
 
  
 
 
ELEVENTH
 
REPORT
 
      
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS
 
(202
1
-
2
2
)
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
CENTRAL COALFIELDS LIMITED
 
 
    
MINISTRY OF 
COAL
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
04
 
February, 202
2
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on
 
04
 
February, 202
2
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
February
, 202
2
/  
Magha
, 194
3
 
(Saka)
 
 
 
CPU No. 
102
6
 

iii
 
  
CPU No.
1026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs
...... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha 
(.....Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Governme
nt of India Press, Minto Road, 
N
ew Delhi
-
110002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv
 
  
 
 
CONTENTS
 
                        
Page No.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021
-
22)
.....................................................       
 
INTRODUCTION
........................................................................................................
 
(v)
 
(vi)
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report...........................................................................................
 
1
-
12
 
CHAPTER  II
 
Observations/ Recommendations which have been  accepted by the 
Government............................................................................
 
13
-
5
1
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government 
 
Replies...........................................
.................................................
 
5
2
-
55
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration ...........................................
....................
..................
 
5
6
-
5
8
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
 
final replies of the Government are still awaited............................. 
......
  
 
59
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
                     
I
 
OM No. 11028/1/2019
-
PCA 
(Part
-
I) dated 22nd April 2020
 
60
 
                    
II
 
OM No. 11028/1/2019
-
PCA (Part
-
I) dated 26th August  2020
 
61
 
                    
III
 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy of Coal India Limited 2012
 
62
-
71
 
                    
IV
 
Annuity Scheme, 
CIl, 2020 ( In lieu of Direct Employment or One
-
Time 
Monetary Compensation Against Land)
 
 
72
 
                     
V
 
Central Vigilance Commission Circular No. 12/09/20 dated 24 
September, 2020
 
82
 
 
 
APPENDICES
 
                       
I      
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
21 December, 2021
             
8
3
-
85
 
 
                       
II     
Analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/
 
               
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
 
               
CoPU (2020
-
21) on 
'
Central Coalfields Limited (CCL)
.
'
....................
       
        
  
86
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
(2021
-
22)
 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar    
-
   
Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
Lok Sabha
 
2. 
 
Shri 
Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
 
3.
 
Dr.
 
Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
 
4. 
 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
 
5. 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi
 
6. 
 
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam
 
7. 
 
Shri Arjunlal Meena
 
8. 
 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
 
9. 
 
Shri Ram Mohan Naidu 
Kinjarapu
 
10. 
 
Shri Nama
 
Nageswara Rao
 
11. 
 
Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 
12. 
 
Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu
 
13. 
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
 
14. 
 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
15. 
 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
Rajya Sabha
 
16. 
 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
 
17. 
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
18. 
 
Shri Syed Na
sir Hussain
 
19. 
 
Shri Om Prakash Mathur
 
20. 
 
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
 
21. 
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
 
 
    
22. 
 
Shri M. Shanmugam
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
        
1.  
Shri R.C. Tiwari
 
           
-
     
Additional
 
Secretary
 
        
2.  
Shri Srinivasulu Gunda
 
-
     
Director
 
 
        
3.  
Shri G.C. Prasad
 
 
-
     
Additional Director
 
        
4.  Shri Aritra Das
                
-
     
Committee Officer
 
 
 

vi
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
          
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (202
1
-
2
2
) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this 
Eleventh
 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
S
econd Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (
17
th
 
Lok Sabha) on 
'Central Coalfields Limited (CCL)
'.
 
2.
 
The 
Second 
Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 
29
 
Janu
ary, 20
21
.  The Action Taken Replies to all the 
33
Recommendations contained in the Report were received from 
the Ministry of 
Coal
on 
18 July,  2021.
 
3.
 
The Committee (202
1
-
2
2
) considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
sitting held on 
21 December, 2021
. The Minutes of the Sitting are given in 
Appendix
-
I.  
 
4.      
An
 
analysis of 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 
Second 
Report 
(17
th
 
Lok Sabha)
 
i
s given in 
Appendix II.
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
 
 
           
        
    
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR
 
24 January, 2022
 
 
 
 
                       
       
Chairperson
 
4 Magha, 1943 (S)
 
                                    
    
Committee on Public Undertakings
 
 
 

 
  
R E P O R T
 
CHAPTER  I
 
 
 
This Report of the 
Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (17
th
 
Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertaking on 'Central Coalfields Limited' which was presented to 
Parliament on 29th January, 2021. It contained 33 observations/recommendations.
 
 
2.
 
Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respe
ct of all the 33 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows:
-
 
 
(i)
 
Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
Sl.Nos.1.1,1.2, 2.1, 2.2,  3.1,4.1,5.1,6.1,7.1,7.2, 
8.1,9.1,10.1,11
.1,12.1,13.1,15.1, 16.1, 16.2,18.1,19.1,20.1, 
20.2, 21.1,21.2,21.3 & 21.4
 
 
(Chapter II)
 
 
(Total: 
27
)
 
(ii)
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.         
 
 
Sl.No.10.2, 14.1&17.1
 
 
(Chapter III)
 
 
(Total: 3)
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration.   
 
 
Sl.Nos.
2.3, 2.4 and 
10.3
 
 
(Chapter IV)
 
 
 
 
(Total:
3
 
)
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies and final replies are still 
awaited.         
 
 
Sl.No. Nil
 
(Chapter V)
 
 
 
 
(Total:0 )
 
 
3.
 
The Committee desire the Ministry of Coal to furnish the final Action Taken 
Notes/replies in respect of the observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I 
of this Report.
 
The
 
Committee  further desire that a final and comprehensive action 
taken Notes/Replies may also be furnished within 3 months on those 
Observations/Recommen
dations  on which the Government have given incomplete 
reply/information.
 
 
 

2
 
  
4.
 
 
   
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.1)
 
5.
 
The Committee in their Second Report, had recommended the following with regard to 
filling up of the vacancies on the Board of CCL:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that out of the 12 sanctioned posts in the Company’s Board 
of Directors, one post of Director (Pers
onnel) amongst the Functional Directors and 
one post in the category of non
-
official Director is vacant. The Committee further note 
that the Company’s Board is not represented by any ‘Woman Director’ which is not in 
consonance with the provisions of the Co
mpanies Act, 2013.  This is despite the fact 
that the Secretarial Auditor of the Company has been continuously making this 
observations in their reports for the last many years. The Committee thus do no find 
any logical reason for not appointing Women Dire
ctor on the Board of Directors of 
CCL. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the  precise reasons for 
not appointing the Woman Director  in the Board despite the explicit provision for the 
same in the Companies Act, 2013 and its reiteration 
by the auditors for the last many 
years.   The Committee further strongly recommend that all the vacancies on the 
Board be filled up immediately and the provisions of the Companies Act relating to 
appointment of ‘Woman Director’ be complied with without an
y further delay."
 
 
6. 
 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
-
 
 
"As on date the Board of Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) consists of 5 sanctioned 
posts of Independent Directors out of which 4 posts are filled. Out of the 4 
Inde
pendent Directors on the Board of CCL one of the appointee is Mrs. JajulaGowri, 
Advocate who has been appointed on 10.07.2019 for a period of 3 years and thus 
fulfills the criteria for appointing Women Director on the Board of CCL. As regards to 
the vacant
 
post of Director (Personnel) and Independent Director, the post of Director 
(Personnel), CCL is vacant since 01.01.2020 vice Shri. R. S. Mahapatro. The said post 
has been intimated to Public Enterprises Board on 01.01.2020 itself. PESB has also 
advertised
 
the post on 27.01.2020. However, the selection meeting is yet to conducted 
by PESB for the said post. Ministry of Coal has also taken up this matter with newly 
appointed Chairperson, PESB to conduct the pending selection meetings on priority 
basis for Coa
l companies. For the vacant post of Independent Director, Ministry of 
Coal has been continuously reminding Department of Public Enterprises and 
Department of Personnel & Training to fill the vacant posts of Independent Director."
 
 
 
7.     
The Committee had strongly recommended in their original Report for filling up of 
all the vacancies in the  Board of Central Coalfields Ltd.(CCL) immediately.  From the 
reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee observe that one post of Director 
(Perso
nnel) in the Board of Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) has been lying vacant 

3
 
  
since 01 January 2020. The CCL had intimated the vacancy to the Public Enterprises 
Selection Board (PESB) on the same day itself. Surprisingly, despite the Ministry of 
Coal taking
 
up the matter with the Chairperson, PESB, the selection meeting for the 
post is yet to be conducted even after a gap of more than one and half years.  
Similarly, despite continuous reminder to Department of Public Enterprises and DoPT, 
the post of Indepen
dent Director is yet to be filled.  The Committee do not find any 
plausible explanation for non
-
filling up of a crucial post for such a long period 
especially when the tenure of the Directors is well known in advance.  In such a 
situation, the Ministry of 
Coal, Department of Public Enterprises, PESB and DoPT 
should have processed the appointment to the post beforehand so that the new 
incumbent could have joined immediately after the posts fall vacant. The Committee, 
therefore strongly desire that all necess
ary steps be taken immediately by DPE, PSEB 
and DoPT so that the vacant posts on the Board of CCL, which has been lying vacant 
for long
, 
be filled up immediately without any further loss of time.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.2)
 
8.
 
With regard to filling up t
he vacancies of Independent Director on the Board of CCL, 
the Committee in their Second Report had recommended as follows:
-
 
 
"The Committee observe that no Independent Director from the Board of the Holding 
Company i.e. Coal India Limited (CIL) is a Direct
or in the Subsidiary Company i.e. 
CCL which is a mandatory requirement as per the DPE Guidelines on Corporate 
Governance. In response to a query as to why no independent Director of the holding 
company i.e. CIL is on the Board of CCL, the Company informed 
that as per regulation 
24 of SEBI, (Listing Obligation and Disclosure Requirement) Regulations 2015, at 
least one independent director on the Board of Directors of the listed entity shall be a 
director on the board of directors of unlisted material subsidi
ary incorporated in India. 
The regulation defines material subsidiary as one whose income or net worth exceeds 
ten percent of the consolidated income or net worth respectively of the company and 
its subsidiary in the immediately preceding accounting year. 
 
The management of CCL 
in their reply submitted that since CCL is not a material subsidiary of CIL, as such no 
independent Director has been appointed from CIL (Holding Company) on the board of 
CCL.  It appears there is a contradiction in this regard betwe
en DPE Guidelines and 
regulation 24 of SEBI (Listing and Disclosure Requirements), Regulations, 2015. The 
Committee therefore desire the Ministry of Coal to clarify the applicability or otherwise 
of DPE guidelines in this regard. The Committee would also l
ike to be informed as to 
whether the SEBI (Listing Obligation and Disclosure Requirement) Regulations) 2015 
have superseded on this issue the DPE guidelines framed for PSUs ; and also the 
about the applicability of SEBI regulations on companies not listed 
in the  stock 
exchange. "
 

4
 
  
 
9. 
 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
-
 
 
 
"As per the audited financial statement of Coal India Limited (CIL) for the financial year 
2020
-
21, Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) is the material subsid
iary of CIL and the 
Section 24 of SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 
2015 would imply on CCL and one Independent Director from the board of CIL has to 
be appointed on the board of CCL. However, at present on the board of CI
L no 
Independent Director is present. As such, as and when any Independent Director is 
appointed on the board of CIL, he/she will also be appointed on the board of CCL to 
comply with the Section 24 of SEBI(LODR) Regulations, 2015. The issue of appointing 
I
ndependent Director on the Board of CIL is taken up with DoPT
 
& DPE. "
 
 
10.
 
The Committee note that no Independent Director from the Holding Company i.e. 
Coal India Limited (CIL) is a Director in the Subsidiary Company i.e. CCL which is a 
mandatory requirement as per the DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance.  The 
CCL in 
a 
writte
n reply to 
the 
Committee’s query during the examination of the subject, 
had  unambiguously
 
stated that since it was not a material subsidiary of CIL, 
and 
therefore
, no Independent Director was required to be appointed from CIL on the 
Board of CCL. The Mini
stry
 
in their action taken reply
 
on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee
 
have now informed that as per the 
audited financial statement of Coal India Ltd.(CIL) for the year 2020
-
21, the Central 
Coalfields Ltd.(CCL) is a material subsidiary of C
IL and the Section 24 of SEBI (Listing 
Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations 2015 would apply on CCL and 
one Independent Director from the Board of CIL has to be appointed on the Board of 
CCL.  The Ministry has further stated that at present
, there is no Independent Director 
on the Board of CIL and therefore as and when any Independent Director is appointed 
on the Board of CIL, he/she will also be appointed on the Board of CCL to comply with 
Section 24 of SEBI(LODR) Regulations, 2015. The Com
mittee express their displeasure 
over the ca
sual way
 
in which 
the information
 
had been furnished to the Committee 
 
during examination of the subject
. 
 
I
t appears
 
to the Committee that
 
neither 
the Central 
Coalfields Ltd. (
CCL
) 
nor the Holding Company
 
Coal I
ndia Limited (
CIL
)
 
was even 
aware of the status of the Company
 
and as a
 
result, no steps were taken for 
appointment of one independent director in the  Board of CCL from the Board of CIL.  
It is unfortunate that  
none of them including the Ministry ha
d
 
any
 
clarity on whether 
CCL was a material subsidiary of CIL before the financial year 2020
-
21. The Committee,
 
therefore
,
 
caution the Ministry of Coal, Coal India Ltd. and CCL to exercise extra care 
and alertness
 
in future
 
while submitting information to the P
arliamentary Committees. 

5
 
  
The Committee also recommend for
 
immediate appointment 
of 
one 
Independent 
Director
 
of CIL in
 
the Board of CCL to fulfill the requirement under Section 24 of SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations
, 
 
2015.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.3 and 2.4)
 
 
11.
 
The Committee, in para 2.3 of their Second Report had recommended the following 
with regard to appointment of permanent invitees on the board of CCL:
-
 
"The Committee note that there are two ‘permanent invitees’ on the Board of CCL, one 
the Chief Operation
s Manager of the Eastern Railway and the other one Principal 
Secretary (Mines and Geology) of the Government of Jharkhand. The Secretarial 
Auditor has observed that the attendance of the ‘permanent invitees’ in the Board 
meetings has been poor. From the su
bmission of the  Ministry of Coal on this point,  it 
appears that the ‘permanent invitees’ are to simply function as ‘liaison Officers’ with 
the State Governments particularly with regard to land acquisition, forest
-
clearance 
cases, occasional law and orde
r issues relating to industrial relations problems, etc.  If 
this is so, the Committee do not understand why the ‘permanent invitees’ need to 
attend all the Board meetings where the agenda of the meetings could be ‘confidential’ 
or on subjects such as comm
ercial strategies, business operations etc., in which 
presence of ‘permanent invitees’  may not be necessarily required. The Committee 
would like to be apprised as to whether the provision for ‘permanent invitees’ in the 
Board is as per the DPE Guidelines 
or this is independent decision of the Company.  
Further, taking into account the fact that presence of “permanent invitees” may not be 
necessary in all meetings of the Board, the Committee recommend for bringing out the 
guidelines specifying the nature of
 
meetings that need to be attended by the 
‘permanent invitees’. The remuneration if any to be paid to them, their tenure, their 
powers, responsibilities, their terms of reference, etc. should also be clearly brought 
out in the Guidelines."
 
 
12. 
 
The Minist
ry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
-
 
 
"The Permanent Invitees on the Board of CCL/Coal Companies are not considered as 
Directors on these Boards and do not have the voting rights and are not counted for 
the purpose of quorum in the Boa
rd Meeting. Also, there is no provision for any 
remuneration/incentive to Permanent Invitees for attending meetings of CCL. As 
regards, to formulation of guidelines specifying the nature of meetings that need to be 
attended by the 'permanent invitees', Per
manent Invitees like other Directors on the 
Board help the Board to arrive at an appropriate decision on each proposal and they 
are an integral part of the Board. As such, they can be allowed to attend every Board 
meeting." 
 
 
 

6
 
  
13.
 
With regard to appointmen
t of permanent invitees on the board of CCL, the Committee 
in para 2.4 of their Second Report had also recommended asunder :
-
 
 
"The Committee are also apprehensive about whether the ‘permanent invitees’ have 
served the purpose of liaising especially when t
he CCL themselves have stated that 
many of  their major projects have been delayed badly for many years for want of  
environmental & forestry clearances, transfer of ownership, etc.  For instance, the 
projects 
viz.
 
Magadh OC, Amrapali OC, Konar OC which sh
ould have been 
commissioned in 2006 were actually commissioned in 2014/2015 with delay of 
eight/nine years. Similarly,  commissioning of the projects 
-
  
Chadragupta OCP, 
Sanghamitra OCP, Kotre
 
Basantpur
 
Panchmo
 
OCP,
 
etc, are experiencing delays 
primarily f
or want of environmental and forestry clearances. The Committee are thus 
concerned as to how far the ‘permanent invitees’  have been effective in mitigating 
problems arising due to hurdles in getting clearances, land acquisitions, industrial 
relations, law
 
& order, resettlement, etc. The Committee, therefore,  are of the 
considered view that the role of ‘permanent invitees’ needs to be much more effective 
to have meaningful impact on expediting various statutory clearances and resolving 
local problems and t
herefore recommend that Ministry should develop an appropriate 
mechanism for effective and the gainful utilization of the Permanent Appointees who 
are nominated in  the Board."
 
 
14. 
 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated below:
-
 
 
"For commissioning of new projects and expansion of existing ones and for 
sustenance 
 
of production and dispatch, CCL has to be in close touch with the State 
Government and Railways. As such, it is desirable to keep Permanent Invitees for 
keeping a close l
iaison with the State Governments particularly in regard to land 
acquisition, forest clearance cases, occasional law and order issues relating to 
industrial relations problems etc,
 
railway issues. "
 
 
15. 
 
The Committee had recommended for bringing out the 
guidelines specifying the 
nature of meetings that need to be attended by the permanent invitees.  It was also 
desired that the remuneration, tenure, powers, responsibilities etc. of the permanent 
invitees should also be clearly brought out in the guideline
s. The Committee
,
 
however
,
 
observe that the Ministry of Coal has chosen to be silent on the issue of bringing out 
the desired 
Guidelines.  The Ministry of Coal and CCL have also not clarified whether 
the provision for 'permanent invitees' in the Board is a
s per the DPE Guidelines or  it is 
an
 
independent decision of the Company.  The Ministry in their reply have explained 
that the 'permanent invitees' are not considered as Directors and do not have the 
voting rights and are not counted for the purpose of qu
orum in the Board Meetings. 
They are just  meant for keeping a close liaison with the State Governments 
particularly in regard to land acquisition, forest clearance cases, occasional law and 

7
 
  
order issues relating to industrial relation problems, railway is
sues, etc The Committee 
had however observed in their original  recommendation that the 'permanent invitees' 
have not served the purpose of liaising 
as
 
the CCL themselves had stated that many of 
their major projects had been delayed badly for many years fo
r want of environmental 
& forestry clearances, transfer of ownership, etc. The Committee had emphasized for 
bringing out Guidelines to develop a mechanism to bring transparency in their 
functioning and to make effective and gainful utilization of the 'perm
anent invitees' 
nominated on the Board of CCL.  However, the Ministry while submitting reply
,
 
have 
not touched upon any of these issues and have also not submitted any reason or not 
framing the requisite 
G
uidelines as
 
had been
 
recommended by this Committee
.  The 
Committee are not happy
 
with the lackadaisical approach of 
the Ministry 
towards such 
important recommendations of the Committee.
  
The Committee 
 
strongly reiterate their 
recommendation and desire the Ministry of Coal  to bring out at least now the d
esired 
Guidelines   and submit a comprehensive reply 
 
to the Committee
  
at the earliest
.
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7.2)
 
16. 
 
The Committee, in their Second Report had observed and recommended the following 
with regard to performance of wash
e
ries :
-
 
"The Com
mittee further note that the CCL is in the process of  setting up 2 coking coal 
Washeries with a capacity of 7 Million Tons per Year (MTY) and 3 Non coking coal 
washeries with a capacity of 8 MTY on Build Own and Operate (BOO) concept. The 
Committee have b
een  informed that after construction of the new coking coal 
washeries as well as after replacement of the existing old coking coal washeries, CCL 
have planned to produce washed coking coal with 14
-
15% ash content which is used 
in steel production. Since t
he domestic production of the required quality of Coal falls 
short of demand  coming from steel sector, the coking coal with 14
-
15% ash content is 
being imported.  The imported quantity of coal  was to the tune of 52 MTs in 2018
-
19. 
However, after taking i
nto account the fact that coking coal washeries had contributed 
a loss of Rs.122.82 crore during 2018
-
19 and also that there was no demand of the 
washed medium coking coal  during April, 2018 to July, 2018,the Committee are 
unable to comprehend as to how i
t so happened that  on one side the country has 
been importing  huge quantity of  washed coking coal and on the other side there was 
slump in the indigenous demand for the same. The Committee therefore desire the 
CCL to thoroughly analyse this paradoxical 
situation and make a realistic assessment 
of the actual demand and potential customers of washed Coking Coal so that installed 
capacity of the coal washeries are optimally utilized and  the investment in the setting 
up of new coal washeries yield better re
turns. The Committee are of the view that 
these projects assume greater significance in reducing the import dependency on the 
desired quality of coal and therefore recommend that these coking coal and non
-

8
 
  
coking coal washeries needs to be operationalized a
nd run with their maximum  
capacity utilization at the earliest. The Committee are of the opinion  the domestic 
production of the coal by indigenous coal companies  and their use in thermal power  
generation by power companies not only create abundant job 
opportunities, make 
substantial contribution  to GDP but also play a major role in nation building . The 
Committee  therefore feel that a policy intervention is needed for regulating the import 
of coal in such way that our coal reserves are optimally harne
ssed and the  domestic 
production of coal do not adversely suffer and  at the same time  the cost  of the  
thermal power  as well as  of the products of steel  sector do not escalate because of   
the use of the imported coal. The Committee hope that the Go
vernment will take 
initiatives in this regard very soon."
 
 
17. 
 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:
-
 
 
 
"An Inter
-
 
Ministerial Committee (IMC) has been constituted in the Ministry of Coal on 
29.05.2020 for the purpose of coal import substitution. The Representatives from 
Ministry of Power, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Commerce, 
Min
istry of Steel, Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME), Department 
for Promotion of Industry & Internal Trade (DPIIT), Central Electricity Authority (CEA), 
Coal Companies and Ports are members of this IMC. This Committee provides a 
platform f
or discussions on a larger forum with the Administrative Ministries so as to 
guide them to encourage the coal consumers of their respective sector to eliminate 
imports of coal. Nine meetings of the IMX have been held so far. IMC has also 
directed for devel
opment of an Import Data System by Ministry of Coal to enable the 
Ministry of Coal to enable the Ministry to track the imports of coal. 
 
 
 
In a major push towards increase in consumption of domestic coal, the Annual 
Contracted Quantity (ACQ) of power plant
s has been increased upto 100% of the 
normative requirement, in the cases where the ACQ was reduced to 90% of normative 
requirement (non
-
coastal) or where the ACQ was
 
reduced to 70% of normative 
requirement (coastal power plants). There are 79 non
-
coastal power plants where 
there would be increase in ACQ of 10% (around 10.5 MT) and 5 coastal power plants 
where the increase in ACQ would be 30% (around 9 MT). The increase
 
in ACQ would 
ensure supply of more domestic coal to the power plants. 
 
 
 
In addition to the above, some other measures like increase in trigger level of Fuel 
Supply Agreement (FSA) from 75% to 80% for those plants which are having trigger 
level of 755 or 
increased level of supply, Introduction of Facility of Usance LC (Letter 
of Credit) payment mechanism to help the consumer avail credit facility from bank, 
Special Spot auction scheme for the coal importers including the traders, would help in 
curtailing t
he imports of coal. Further, the coal offered for short term under the 
amended provisions of SHAKTI Policy as well as increase in the tenure of the coking 
coal linkages in the Non
-
Regulated Sector linkage auction for a period upto 30 years is 
also expected
 
to have a positive impact towards coal imports substitution."
 
 

9
 
  
18. 
 
The Committee
 
in their original Report had inter
-
alia recommended for 
operationalization and running of coking coal and and non
-
coking coal washeries with 
maximum capacity to reduce impor
t dependency  and  for 
policy intervention  for 
regulating the import of coal in such way that our coal reserves are optimally 
harnessed and the  domestic production of coal do not adversely suffer and  at the 
same time  the cost  of the  thermal power  as
 
well as  of the products of steel  sector 
do not escalate because of   the use of the imported coal
. The Committee 
while 
appreciating the  multi
-
pronged approach adopted by the Ministry of Coal and other 
Ministries/agencies to reduce dependency on importe
d washed coking coal
, 
 
find that 
the reply is silent on the paradoxical situation wherein  on one had the country has 
been importing huge quantity of washed coking coal and on the other hand there was 
a slump in indigenous demand for the same.  It appears 
that  the desired assessment 
of the actual demand and actual customers of washed coking coal has not been 
carried out by the Ministry of Coal.
  
Further, the status of setting up of two (02) coking 
coal washeries with overall capacity of 07 MTY and three (0
3) non
-
coking coal 
washeries of 08 MTY by the CCL is also not known. The Committee feel that the efforts 
of the Ministry of Coal and other Ministries/agencies on reducing dependency on 
imported washed coal would only yield fruitful results if the
 
adequate 
number of 
 
washeries are set
-
up and made operational in the defined timeframe and realistic 
assessment of domestic demand and indigenous supply is made for optimal capacity 
utilisation. The Committee would like the Ministry and CCL to furnish detailed repl
y on 
this count.
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10.3)
 
19.
 
The Committee, in their Second Report had recommended the following with regard to 
cost incurred on HEMM:
-
 
 
"The Committee’s analysis of the data submitted to them by CCL reveals that  the 
Company spent Rs.
 
859 crore on hiring of plant and equipments during 2018
-
19. The 
Company informed that no independent study was undertaken to assess the 
comparative cost effectiveness in hiring of HEMMs or owning these equipments. 
Keeping in view that such huge expenditur
e of  Rs. 859 crore was incurred in one year 
on hiring  plant and equipments, especially when the  CCL owned equipments are not 
being utilised to the full extent in some cases as is evident that  the utilization of all 
HEMM had been much less than 50 % of 
the norms prescribed during the year 2018
-
19, the Committee recommend that detailed note be furnished to the Committee 
explaining inter alia the reasons for hiring equipments when the CCL owned 
equipments were lying unutilized to a large extent and also on
 
the comparative 
effectiveness of hiring vs. owning of HEMM and other related issues."
 

10
 
  
 
20.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as below
-
 
 
 
"Over 99 % of the coal production in CCL comes from opencast mines. All 
 
mines 
 
of 
 
the company 
are run by qualified professionals, who ensure compliance with 
 
statutes. All 
 
opencast mines have shovel dumper combination for removal of 
 
overburden. Surface minershave been introduced for coal mining in Piparwar, Ashok, 
 
Magadh, Amrapali, North Urimari
 
and Karo. 
 
 
 
i. Surface mining in CCL is done by heavy earth moving machineries (HEMM) 
 
owned by CCL or 
 
machines hired by CCL as per the stipulations of the project 
 
report prepared by CMPDIL as a 
 
normal practice. 
 
 
ii. In small patches with limited 
life where departmental machines cannot be deployed 
economically, outsourcing agency are deploye
d based on open tender 
system 
transparently as per provisions of Contract Management Manual of Coal India, with the 
approval of Competent Authority. 
 
 
 
iii. As the life of departmental equipment is quite long (shovel 
–
 
6
-
12 years, 
 
dumpers 
–
 
6
-
9 years) such machines are deployed preferably only in those 
 
patches which are techno economically viable."
 
 
21. 
 
The Committee in their original report had desire
d for a detailed note on the 
comparative cost effectiveness in hiring of HEMMs or other equipments keeping in 
view the huge expenditure CCL is incurring on hiring of equipments every year and 
also on the reasons for hiring equipments when CCL's own equipme
nts are lying 
under utilised to a large extent. The Ministry of Coal in their replies is silent on these 
issues. The Ministry have also not furnished any detailed comparative data on how 
hiring of machinery & equipment is more economical when the Company h
as incurred 
huge expenditure of Rs. 859 crore during 2018
-
19.  The Committee express their 
apprehension as to why CCL is resorting to hiring of machinery & equipment at huge 
cost resulting in adverse impact on  their profits.  As emphasized in their origin
al 
recommendation, the Committee desire that CCL to undertake an independent study to 
assess cost effectiveness in hiring of HEMMs and other equipments even though when 
the HEMMs are available with the Company and also furnish a detailed indicative 
compara
tive chart on the economics of hiring of machines vis
-
a
-
vis purchase of 
machines.  The Committee further desire CCL to furnish valid reasons for huge 
expenditure on hiring of equipment & HEMMs when the same expenditure could be 
used to purchase new HEMMs  
that would  create permanent assets to CCL.
 
 
 

11
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20.2)
 
22.
      
The Committee, in their Second Report had recommended the following with regard to 
safety issues:
-
 
"The Committee express serious concern at the fact that CCL could not fu
lly utilize 
budgetary provisions meant for procuring and maintaining safety equipment resulting 
in surrendering of the funds since 2008
-
09 except 2010
-
11. The capital expenditure 
has not gone beyond 76% since 2008
-
09 except in 2010
-
11 when it spent 162 % o
f 
the budgetary allocation for the purpose. In the remaining years since 2008
-
09, the 
expenditure incurred for purchasing and maintaining safety equipment ranged from 
as low as 2.50 % in 2009
-
10, 4.17% in 2018
-
19, 13.99% in 2013
-
14 and 75.58% in 
2014
-
15. D
espite substantial underutilization of allocated amounts in the previous 
years, higher allocations had continued to be made in the subsequent years only to 
be left underutilized.  The Committee express their serious concern that 
underutilization of funds n
ot only indicate faulty budgetary presumptions but also 
reflect that management has shown scant regard for the safety of the mine workers. 
The reply furnished by the CCL is conspicuously silent and also evasive as to the 
specific reasons for substantial un
der utilization of the funds allocated for safety 
equipment since the year 2008
-
09. The Committee take a serious note of the casual  
approach of the  CCL on this critical  issue which has a direct bearing on the safety 
and security of the mine workers and 
also on the performance of mines. The 
Committee are thus constrained to conclude that had the allocated funds been fully 
utilized for procurement of the safety equipments, the fatality and serious injury 
cases could have been very well minimized substantia
lly if not avoided fully.  The 
Committee therefore desire an explanatory note from the Ministry and CCL on this 
issue.  The Committee further recommend that the CCL should devise a sound 
budgetary system so as to ensure that the funds allocated for such a 
critical area are 
gainfully utilized and the desired results are achieved."
 
23. 
 
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
-
 
 
 
"Budgetary provisions are made for certain critical safety items every year. 
Procurement is delayed due 
to non
-
submission of requisite documents by the 
bidders which is required for finalization of procurement process and non
-
justification 
of the offered price. However, with the introduction of GeM portal, the procurement 
under Capital head is getting stream
lined. We are taking pro
-
active steps for prudent 
budgetary allocation and its utilization."
 
 
24.
 
The Committee had expressed their serious concern over underutilization of the 
funds allocated for procurement of safety equipments year after year particular
ly since 
2008
-
09.  Since underutilization of funds on such a critical area have a direct bearing 
on the safety and security of mining workers, the Committee had desired for an 
explanatory note on this from the Ministry and CCL. The Committee also 
recommend
ed for devising a sound budgetary system for gainful utilization of funds in 

12
 
  
future.  While appreciating the proactive steps taken by the Ministry/CCL for prudent 
budgetary allocation and its utilization, the Committee observe that the desired 
explanatory 
note has not been submitted by the Ministry/CCL. The Committee convey 
their dissatisfaction over non
-
furnishing of the desired explanatory note on 
underutilization of funds earmarked for safety issues for many years in the past. The 
Committee reinforces th
e seriousness of the issue as it has direct bearing on the 
safety & security of the mine workers.  The Committee expect the Ministry and the CCL 
to furnish the desired explanatory note at the earliest to the Committee.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13
 
  
CHAPTER II
 
 
OBSERVATIONS 
/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
 
 
BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
Overview
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.1)
 
The Committee observe that a major event in the history of Indian Coal industry was 
the nationalization of the erstwhile privately owned coal mines in 
two phases. In the first 
phase, the management of coking coal mines was taken over by the Government of India on 
17
th
October, 1971 and these mines were nationalized from 5
th
 
January, 1972. In the second 
phase of nationalization, the management of non
-
cokin
g coal mines in the country, except 
the captive coal mines of two steel plants viz. TISO and IISCO, was taken over by the 
Government on 31
st
January, 1973. These mines were subsequently nationalized with effect 
from 1
st
 
May, 1973 and another state
-
 
owned co
mpany, Coal Mines Authority Ltd. (CMAL) 
came into being with headquarters at Kolkata.  The formation of CMAL witnessed 
regrouping of the coal mines into three division’s viz. Western, Central and Eastern. The 
CMAL with its three divisions continued upto 1
s
t
 
November, 1975 when it was renamed as 
Coal India Limited (CIL) following the decision of the Government of India to restructure the 
Coal industry. The Central Division of CMAL came to be known as Central Coalfields 
Limited(CCL).
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1
.2)
 
 
 
 
 
The Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) is thus functioning as a subsidiary of the Coal 
India Limited (CIL) which came into existence in the present form on 1
st
November, 1975. It 
is presently a Category
-
I Mini Ratna Company with net worth of Rs. 5142.72 Crore and a 
profit of Rs. 1704 Crore. The mining operations of the CCL is spread over 8 districts of 
Jharkhand State covering an area of 2600 sq.km. It has total 
42 operating mines (36 
opencast and 06 underground) and 06 Washeries (04 Coking Coal and 02 Non
-
Coking 
Coal). The CCL has 05 regional workshops and 01centralworkshop. The Committee are 
happy to note that along with maximizing the coal production, one of th
e major objectives of 
the Company is to discharge their corporate obligations for betterment of socio
-
economic 
conditions of the society at large and the communities inhabited around the coalfields in 
particular and also to improve the quality of life of i
ts employees. As has been informed to 

14
 
  
the Committee, the Company envisages to commission new washeries, establish silos, Coal 
Handling Plants (CHPs), conveyor system, railway sidings and to launch many CSR and 
welfare projects for the people in near future
. The Committee hope that the Company will 
achieve its physical and financial targets in all these areas within the stipulated time and 
wish them to make quantum jump in their production and profits in coming years. During 
course of examination of the Cent
ral Coalfields Ltd.(CCL), the Committee touched upon 
many important aspects related to its physical and financial performance, commissioning of 
its high
-
capacity projects, setting up of new coal washeries,  application of latest technology 
in various areas
 
of operation, environmental concerns, re
-
settlement, rehabilitation & 
compensation issues, CSR initiatives, safety measures for miners, etc. on which the 
Committee have given their observations/recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. The 
Committee hope 
that the observations/recommendations and suggestions as given in this 
Report will be implemented in true spirit.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
The observation of the Committee and suggested measures thereon have been 
noted for implementation.
 
 
[Ministry of Co
al, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
 
Board Of Directors
 
 
Filling up the vacancies on the Board and the post of ‘Woman Director’
 
Recommendation 
(
Sl No. 2.1
)
 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that out of the 12 sanctioned posts in 
the Company’s Board 
of Directors, one post of Director (Personnel) amongst the Functional Directors and one post 
in the category of non
-
official Director is vacant. The Committee further note that the 
Company’s Board is not represented by any ‘Woman Direct
or’ which is not in consonance 
with the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013. This is despite the fact that
 
the
 
Secretarial 
Auditor of the Company has been continuously making this observations in their reports for 
the last many years. The Committee thus 
do no
t
 
find any logical reason for not appointing 
Women Director on the Board of Directors of CCL. The Committee would therefore like to be 
apprised of the precise reasons for not appointing the Woman Director in the Board despite 
the explicit provision fo
r the same in the Companies Act, 2013 and its reiteration by the 
auditors for the last many years. The Committee further strongly recommend that all the 
vacancies on the Board be filled up immediately and the provisions of the Companies Act 

15
 
  
relating to app
ointment of ‘Woman Director’ be complied with without any further delay.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
As on date the Board of Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) consists of 5 sanctioned 
posts of Independent Directors out of which 4 posts are filled. Out of the
 
4 Independent 
Directors on the Board of CCL one of the appointee is Mrs. Jajula
 
Gowri, Advocate who has 
been appointed on 10.07.2019 for a period of 3 years and thus fulfills the criteria for 
appointing Women Director on the Board of CCL. As regards to th
e vacant post of Director 
(Personnel) and Independent Director, the post of Director (Personnel), CCL is vacant 
since 01.01.2020 vice Shri. R. S. Mahapatro. The said post has been intimated to Public 
Enterprises Board on 01.01.2020 itself. PESB has also ad
vertised the post on 27.01.2020. 
However, the selection meeting is yet to conducted by PESB for the said post. Ministry of 
Coal has also taken up this matter with newly appointed Chairperson, PESB to conduct the 
pending selection meetings on priority basis
 
for Coal companies. For the vacant post of 
Independent Director, Ministry of Coal has been continuously reminding Department of 
Public Enterprises and Department of Personnel & Training to fill the vacant posts of 
Independent Director.
 
[Ministry of Coal, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
 
Appointment of an Independent Director of CIL on the Board of CCL
 
 
Recommendation 
(
Sl No. 2.2
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that no Independent Director from the Board of the Holding 
Company i
.e. Coal India Limited (CIL) is a Director in the Subsidiary Company i.e. CCL 
which is a mandatory requirement as per the DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance. In 
response to a query as to why no independent Director of the holding company i.e. CIL is 
on
 
the Board of CCL, the Company informed that as per regulation 24 of SEBI, (Listing 
Obligation and Disclosure Requirement) Regulations 2015, at least one independent 
director on the Board of Directors of the listed entity shall be a director on the board o
f 
directors of unlisted material subsidiary incorporated in India. The regulation defines 
material subsidiary as one whose income or net worth exceeds ten percent of the 
consolidated income or net worth respectively of the company and its subsidiary in the
 
immediately preceding accounting year. The management of CCL in their reply submitted 
that since CCL is not a material subsidiary of CIL, as such no independent Director has 

16
 
  
been appointed from CIL (Holding Company) on the board of CCL. It appears there i
s a 
contradiction in this regard between DPE Guidelines and regulation 24 of SEBI (Listin
g and 
Disclosure Requirements), 
Regulations,
 
2015.
 
The
 
Committee
, 
therefore
, 
desire
 
the
 
Ministry
 
of
 
Coal
 
to
 
clarify the applicability or otherwise of DPE guidelines in
 
this regard. The 
Committee would also like to be informed as to whether the SEBI (Listing Obligation and 
Disclosure Requirement) Regulations) 2015 have superseded on this issue the DPE 
guidelines framed for PSUs; and also the about the applicability of SE
BI regulations on 
companies not listed in the stock exchange.
 
 
Reply of the
 
Government
 
 
 
As per the audited financial statement of Coal India Limited (CIL) for the financial year 
2020
-
21, Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) is the material subsidiary of CIL and the Section 
24 of SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 
2015 would 
imply on CCL and one Independent Director from the board of CIL has to be appointed on 
the board of CCL. However, at present on the board of CIL no Independent Director is 
present. As such, as and when any Independent Director is appointed on th
e board of CIL, 
he/she will also be appointed on the board of CCL to comply with the Section 24 of 
SEBI(LODR) Regulations, 2015. The issue of appointing Independent Director on the Board 
of CIL is taken up with DoPT& DPE. 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
 
Physical Performance of CCL
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.1)
 
 
 
The Committee’s analysis of the comparative data on performance of the Company 
from the year of its formation in 1975
-
76 with the financial 
year 
2018
-
19 shows that during 
the last 45 years of the operation of the Company, the Coal production which stood at 22.72 
Million Tons (MTs) in 1975
-
76 has registered a mere three fold increase i.e. to 68.7 MT in 
2018
-
19.Similarly,dispatch which was at 21
.15 MTs in 1975
-
76 has also increased just by 
about three times i.e. to 68.4 MTs in 2018
-
19. However, the productivity in terms of Output 
per Manshift (OMS) has gone up more than eight times, sale price per ton has gone up by 
more than 24 times i.e from Rs
. 61.5 per ton to Rs. 1498 per ton in 2018
-
19. The analysis of 

17
 
  
the data further reveals that the Company took about 35 years to double the production from 
22.72 MTs in 1975
-
76 to 47 MTs in 2009
-
10. In the next three years thereafter till 2012
-
13 
production
 
stagnated at 47/48 MTs. Thereafter, it witnessed continuous increase reportedly 
due to introduction of Kayakalp Model of Governance (KKMG) in the year 2012
-
13. Since 
the year 2013
-
14, the Company has shown continuous improvement in production, dispatch, 
p
roductivity, sales and profits except in the year2017
-
18 where decline in profit was 
reportedly due to evacuation constraints. The Committee observe that during its operation  
in the last 45 years although the productivity has gone up by more than eight ti
mes, the CCL 
has been able to increase its production by a mere three  times which is a clear indication 
that the increase in production is not proportionate to the increase in productivity. The 
Company has unambiguously admitted that (i) most of the mines
 
in CCL are old with 
antiquated equipment and it had opened few mines in the recent past (ii) state of the art 
technology is being used in only few Mines (ii) the application of Information technology in 
the mines is very low which makes the system prone t
o corruption and inefficiency; and (iii) 
on an average employee work for 4 hours in a eight hour shift. The Committee while 
appreciating the management’s frank assessment of the Company’s above mentioned 
constraints which are hampering the company to becom
e more productive and profitable, 
are however perturbed to note that effective measures have not been taken to timely 
address these issues even after the problem areas were clearly identified by the CCL. Even 
the KKMG seems to have not enough measures to c
ounter the abovementioned 
weaknesses. The Committee therefore recommend the CCL to take immediate steps for (i) 
upgradation of their machinery and equipments (ii) use of state of the art technology of 
global standards in their mining operations (iii)extens
ive use  of IT enabled services in all 
divisions (iv) strengthening the vigilance to root out the corruption (v) taking up capacity 
building measures to increase efficiency of the work force (vi) devise the mechanism for 
optimum utilization of the potentia
ls of human resources: and to (vii)introduce suitable 
incentives and disincentives to motivate and discipline the workforce. The Committee would 
like to know the concrete action taken by CCL in this regard.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
(i)
 
Upgradat
ion of machi
nery and equipment
 
 
 
The technologically upgraded requirement is included in the technical specification of 
the HEMM
 
procured by the company. The technical specifications are framed based on latest 
Government circulars and statutory requirements viz. DGMS 
circulars/ notifications and 

18
 
  
ISO/BIS standards. This ensures compliance with the latest operational & safety 
requirements and environmental norms. The technological up
-
gradation has been made in 
the areas of access of operators, operators’ station/cabin, p
rotective structures, controls & 
indicators, starting & stopping system, ergonomics, steering system, brake system, visibility, 
stability, noise reduction, warning devices & safety signs, protective measures & devices for 
moving parts, electrical and elect
ronic systems, fire protection, etc. 
 
 
Apart from the above, equipment
-
wise features are also added in technical 
specifications viz. proximity alarm device, fatigue sensors etc. Latest international emission 
norms for Off Highway equipment is adopted in 
the technical specification. The company has 
shifted from conventional gravity
-
based sprinklers to mist type sprinklers to arrest both 
ground and suspended dust particles.
  
The company remains in touch with the R&D wings of 
known sources of HEMM manufactur
ers.   
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
Use of state of the art technology of global standards in mini
ng operations
 
 
 
Continuous Miner has already been introduced in Churi UGP (0.81 MTY). Piparwar 
UGP (0.87 MTY) and Parej East UGP (0.51 MTY) have been planned with Continuous 
Miner. 
In Patratu A/B/C UGP (5 MTY) longwall technology is proposed. Patratu A/B/C UGP is the 
largest proposed underground mine of the country with capacity of 5 MTY.
 
Eco friendly surface minersare being used for coal winning in Ashok OCP (10 MTY), 
Magadh 
OCP (51 MTY), Amrapali OCP (25 MTY), North Urimari OCP (7.5MTY) and Karo 
OCP (3.5MTY). Surface miner will be introduced in Konar OCP (3.5 MTY) and Purnadih OCP 
(3 MTY) soon. Further, in upcoming opencast mines large size machines and surface miners 
will be
 
introduced to increase productivity where geo
-
mining conditions permit.
 
Coal production from Surface Miner:
 
Coal Production (MT) (Provisional)
 
Year
 
Total Coal 
production
 
from 
Open
 
cast
 
mines
 
Total Coal 
production
 
from 
Surface 
Miner
 
% Coal production from
 
Surface Miner
 
with respect 
to total opencast mines
 
production
 
2020
-
21
 
62.17
 
31.34
 
50.41
 
2019
-
20
 
66.19
 
23.65
 
35.74
 
2018
-
19
 
68.41
 
22.24
 
32.51
 
 
(iii) Extensive use of IT enabled services in all divisions
 

19
 
  
 
Various IT Initiatives have been taken for 
improving overall efficiency of the system 
.The company  has
 
done adequate allocation of funds for creating the required IT 
infrastructure, both hardware and software. Some of the IT enabled services employed by 
CCL to bring efficiency and transparency in 
the functioning of the organization are as given 
below: 
-
 
1
.
 
MPLS
-
VPN based WAN services have been employed to connect the data generation 
points spread across CCL Command areas. Presently 275 points have been 
connected by MPLS VPN based WAN. These are used for providing access to 
applications like e
-
office, Coal Ne
t etc. and also to provide connectivity for real
-
time 
data transfer from Weighbridges to CCL HQ Central server. 
 
2
.
 
CCTV cameras along with networking for centralized monitoring have been provided 
at weighbridges, coal stock, etc. All the CCTV Cameras install
ed and working in CCL 
are IP based and any future installations shall be of the same type i.e. IP based. The 
connectivity of the CCTV Cameras with Area HQ is established in some areas and will 
be implemented in
 
rest of the areas.
 
 
3
.
 
GPS/GPRS based Vehicle Tr
aining System and RFID based boom barriers & readers 
have been employed to track vehicle route, speed and movement of loaded vehicles 
across coalfield areas and challan generation at Weighbridges.
 
4
.
 
Connectivity up to all data generation points for ERP acros
s CCL command area has 
been planned, with provision of MPLS
-
VPN based WAN with site 
-
wise suitable 
bandwidth. One network, which will act as Secondary Network for ERP on 
implementation already exists for 275 no. WAN points, and Work Order has been 
issued f
or 447 no. WAN points of another network which will be used as Primary 
Network for ERP. Both these networks will be used for providing connectivity in 
failover as well as load balancing mode.
 
 
(iv)
 
Strengthening the vigilance to root out the corruption:
 
1
.
 
St
rengthening of Vigilance department by posting adequate number of officials
 
2
.
 
Suggestions for system improvement, system failure observed during course of 
investigation by Vigilance Department is being implemented. 
 
3
.
 
Surprise checks are being carried out from
 
time to time.
 
4
.
 
Continuous effort is being made for vigilance awareness
. 
 
 
(v) 
 
Taking up capacity building measures to increase efficiency of the work force
 
 
Employee capacity building is an ongoing and continuous process, which involves 
learning and development on the part of both the employees and the management. In CCL, 
learning and development activities are carried out by means of training and development 
programs being conducted in
-
house and by sending employees to reputed institutions, out of 
the company. Training programs including on the job training are being conducted at Central 
Excavation Training Institute (CETI), Bhurkunda Technical Training instit
ute (BTTI) and at 
Management Training Center (MTC), HQ, Ranchi under the aegis of HRD dept, CCL. 

20
 
  
Executives are also attending development programs at Indian Institute of Coal Management, 
CIL at Ranchi for upgradation of their managerial skills and leaders
hip abilities.
 
 
For technical capacity building various courses such as Vocational Training in mining 
and other disciplines are being conducted at Group Vocational Training Centers and at BTTI 
&CETI. Skill
 
development for executives, frontline supervisors 
and skill up gradation program 
for non
-
executives has a place in the curriculum. In addition to the in
-
house training activities, 
employees are also attending conferences, training & development programmes outside the 
Company at various reputed institutes 
such as ASCI, Hyderabad.
 
 
Owing to Covid19 pandemic, the participation of employees in such programmes 
remained limited but as a part of capacity building measures following activities were 
conducted observing all the Govt. guidelines and safety measures i
n regard to Covid19. No. 
of employees who attended training programmes during 2020
-
21 is as below:
 

 
Basic training programmes for Heavy Earth Moving Machine Operators) : 100
 

 
Training of employees by Group VTC in 2020
-
21 
 
: 1959
 

 
Vocational training in mining
 
& others(on the job) 
 
: 174
 

 
In
-
house Development programmes for Executives 
 
: 504
 

 
Training programmes Outside company (Webinars)
 
: 143
 
 
(vi) 
 
Devise the mechanism for optimum utilization of the potentials of human 
resources
 
 
Employees joining the company 
on compassionate ground as per the wage agreement 
and those who have joined against land acquisition are being utilized as per their qualification 
and skills. A pool of such candidates has been created for their placement at right job for 
better utilizatio
n as per requirement of the Company. They are also being encouraged to 
appear for departmental exams for better career options and to harness & utilize their full 
potential by taking up appropriate jobs.
 
 
Departmental candidates are being given the first o
pportunity to fill up the vacancies of 
statutory and other critical designations before resorting to external recruitment so that ability 
and potential of existing workforce is fully utilized.
  
The skilled employees of such 
mines/projects where production 
activities have been discontinued are transferred to projects 
as per requirement and their skill is being utilized in a optimum manner. 
 
(viii) 
 
Introduce suitable incentives and disincentives to motivate and discipline the 
workforce
 

21
 
  
CCL management has int
roduced following incentive schemes to motivate the workforce to 
enhance the coal production:
 
Financial Incentives:
 

 
Scheme for improvement of productivity for year 2020
-
21
 

 
Spot incentive scheme for the period from Dec
-
2020 to March
-
2021 
 
Non
-
financial 
incentives:
  
Non
-
financial incentives include 
-
 
public recognition and awards, 
professional development opportunities etc. The company has a well
-
defined Industrial 
Relations (IR) setup and structural meetings are conducted with the representative of 
opera
ting Trade Unions. Important decision regarding workers welfare are taken in  bipartite 
forum at Unit/Area and apex 
–
 
HQ level which motivates employees due to their 
participation in important management decisions. 
 
Executives are covered under the Conduct
 
Discipline and Appeal Rules
 
(CDA Rules) (1978) 
of CIL and its subsidiaries and Non
-
executive employees are governed by Standing Order 
rules applicable in CCL certified under Industrial Standing Order Act which define the 
conditions of employment.
 
 
[Minist
ry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Financial Performance of CCL
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl. No. 4.1)
 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that the CCL has registered a consistent growth in their 
gross turnover which increased from Rs.11781 crore in the year 2014
-
15 to Rs.13659 crore 
in the year 2015
-
16, Rs.14533 crore in 2016
-
17, Rs.15729 crore in 2017
-
18 and Rs.16344 
c
rore in 2018
-
19. The Committee’s analysis however reveals that no similar pattern has 
been noticed in the growth of the net worth and profit of the company. Both these key 
indicators have rather shown a zigzag pattern of their growth during these years. Th
e net 
worth of the Company declined from the level of Rs.5812.38 crore in the year 2014
-
15 to 
Rs.5142.72 crore in the year 2018
-
19. The Committee’s analysis of the data submitted by 
the Company reveals that when the coal production was 48 MT during 2012
-
13
, the net 
profit of the Company was Rs.1886 crore but surprisingly, when the coal production 
increased by 43% in the year 2018
-
19 to the level of 68.7 MT, the profit of the Company 
dipped down to Rs.1704 crore registering a decline of 9.6% compared with th
e figure of the 
year 2012
-
13. The Committee further observe that the coal production, coal offtake, 

22
 
  
productivity in terms of output per man shift and gross turnover of the Company have 
shown consistent growth during the last 10 years but again the similar 
pattern of growth in 
the profitability of the Company is missing as the figures on key parameters of business 
operations of the Company indicate that in the year 2009
-
10, the Gross Turnover was 
Rs.6292 crore which has reached to the level of Rs.16344 crore
 
in the year 2018
-
19, the 
net worth of the Company was Rs.3437.38 crore in 2011
-
12 which has increased to the 
level of Rs.5142.72 crore in the year 2018
-
19. Similarly, the output per man shift (OMS) 
which was 3.66 in the year 2009
-
10 has gone upto the leve
l of 8.09 in the year 2018
-
19 but 
the return on capital employed has come down from 56.60% in the year 2016
-
17 to 48.93% 
in the year 2018
-
19 and contribution to the exchequer has also gone down from the level of 
Rs. 7167.11 crore in 2016
-
17 to 6512.02 cror
e in the year 2018
-
19..  The Committee are 
thus unable to comprehend as to how the Company could not achieve the similar 
consistent growth in their ‘net profit’ and ‘return on capital employed’ during this period 
when the other key indicators of the perfor
mance have shown consistent increasing trend. 
The Committee therefore desire the CCL to undertake a study to find out the precise 
reasons for such inconsistent pattern of their net earnings and profitability particularly 
during the last many years with a v
iew to take necessary measures not only for achieving 
higher growth in their earnings from their business operations but also to increase their 
profitability ratio proportionate to the growth in the gross turnover of the Company.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As observed by the Committee, CCL has registered a consistent growth in Gross 
Turnover whereas no similar pattern has been noticed in the growth of Net Worth and profit 
of the Company. Detail analysis of the fact is produced hereunder: 
 
A
)
 
Turnover and Profit
 
of the Company
 
(Value in Crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Revenue 
from 
Operations 
as per 
Financial 
Statement
 
Provision 
for Coal 
Quality 
Variance 
as per 
IND AS 
115
 
Other 
Operating 
Revenue
 
Total 
Revenue 
from 
Operations 
(Gross 
Turnover)
 
Levies 
(Royalty, 
NMET, 
MMDR, 
GS
T, 
Clean 
Energy 
Cess 
etc.)
 
Net 
Revenue 
from 
Operations 
(Turnover 
Net of 
Levies)
 
Levies as 
% of Net 
Revenue 
from 
Operations 
(Turnover 
Net of 
Levies)
 
(1)
 
(2)
 
(3)
 
(4)
 
(5=2+3+4)
 
(6)
 
(7=5
-
6)
 
(8)
 
2014
-
15
 
11781
 
-
 
278
 
12059
 
2331
 
9728
 
23.96
 
2015
-
16
 
13659
 
-
 
304
 
13963
 
3130
 
10833
 
28.89
 
2016
-
17
 
14900
 
-
 
374
 
15274
 
4499
 
10775
 
41.76
 
2017
-
18*
 
15729
 
236
 
562
 
16527
 
4941
 
11586
 
42.65
 
2018
-
19*
 
16344
 
156
 
951
 
17451
 
5115
 
12336
 
41.47
 

23
 
  
*Note: 
-
 
Provision for Coal quality variance has been adjusted with Sales as per provisions 
of
 
IND AS 115
 
(Value in crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Net Revenue from 
Operations 
(Turnover Net of 
Levies)
 
Total 
Expenses
 
Total expenses 
as % of 
Turnover Net of 
Levies
 
Profit before Tax
 
Profit Before 
Tax as % of 
Turnover Net of 
Levies
 
2014
-
15
 
9728
 
7299
 
75.03
 
2740
 
28.17
 
2015
-
16
 
10833
 
8174
 
75.45
 
3119
 
28.79
 
2016
-
17
 
10775
 
8963
 
83.18
 
2374
 
22.03
 
2017
-
18
 
11586
 
10752
 
92.80
 
1344
 
11.60
 
2018
-
19
 
12336
 
9801
 
79.45
 
2692
 
21.82
 
 
 
As revealed from the above analysis, Gross Turnover includes Levies imposed by 
Central/State Govt 
from time to time and it accounts for substantial part of Gross Turnover. 
Levies as a percentage of Gross Turnover has increased from 23.96% in 2014
-
15 to 41.47% 
in 2018
-
19. Also it has no impact over companies profitability as it is collected from 
custome
rs and deposited to Central/State Exchequer.  Profitability of a company can only be 
determined based on Turnover Net of Levies.
 
 
From the above analysis it is evident that Profit Before Tax as % of Turnover net of 
Levies has gone down from 28.17% in 2014
-
15 to 21.82% in 2018
-
19 and this is mainly due 
to increase in Employee Benefit Expense which was Rs. 3897 Cr in 2014
-
15 and increased 
by 31.60% i.e. upto
 
Rs. 5129 Cr in 2018
-
19. However zigzag pattern in Profit Before Tax as 
% of Turnover net of Levies is 
due to following reasons:
 
1
.
 
In FY 2016
-
17 there was a provision for pay revision of both Executive and Non
-
Executive amounting to Rs. 303 Cr.
 
2
.
 
In FY 2017
-
18 there was a provision for Increase in Gratuity Ceiling from Rs. 10 Lakh 
to Rs. 20 Lakh amounting to Rs
. 900 Cr. and the company had paid Interest of Rs. 102 
Cr on borrowings.
 
 
B
)
 
Turnover and Net Worth of the Company
 
(Value in crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Net Revenue from 
Operations 
(Turnover Net of 
Levies)
 
Net Worth
 
Profit after 
Tax
 
Dividend and 
Dividend 
Distribution Tax
 
2014
-
15
 
9728
 
5812
 
1771
 
427
 
2015
-
16
 
10833
 
5973
 
1915
 
1754
 
2016
-
17
 
10775
 
3245
 
1389
 
4374
 
2017
-
18
 
11586
 
3479
 
790
 
639
 
2018
-
19
 
12336
 
5143
 
1704
 
358
 
Total
 
 
 
 
7552
 

24
 
  
 
 
Net worth of the company comprises of Equity Share Capital and Retained Earnings. 
Dividend and Dividend Distribution Tax is an appropriation of Profit i.e. Profit after Tax as 
reduced by amount of Dividend and dividend distribution tax will become part of 
net worth. 
 
 
CCL has paid Dividend and Dividend Distribution Tax amounting to Rs. 7552 Cr. from FY 
2014
-
15 to FY 2018
-
19 and due to this, growth shown in turnover is not reflecting in Net 
Worth of the company. Even net worth shown a zigzag pattern as the c
ompany paid an 
amount of Rs. 4374 Cr as dividend in FY 2016
-
17 which is much higher than Profit after tax 
earned by the company. In FY 2016
-
17 the company paid dividend and Dividend Distribution 
tax out of accumulated profit resulting in reduction in Net w
orth from Rs.  5973 Cr in FY 
2015
-
16 to Rs. 3245 Cr in FY 2016
-
17.
 
 
C
)
 
Turnover, Net Profit, Production & Output per man shift (OMS)
 
(Value in crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Net Revenue 
from Operations 
(Turnover Net of 
Levies)
 
Total 
Expenses
 
Net 
Profit 
(PAT)
 
Productio
n (MT)
 
Output per 
man shift 
(OMS)
 
2012
-
13
 
8556
 
6578
 
1886
 
48.06
 
4.42
 
2013
-
14
 
8556
 
6666
 
1672
 
50.02
 
4.64
 
2014
-
15
 
9728
 
7299
 
1771
 
55.65
 
5.46
 
2015
-
16
 
10833
 
8174
 
1915
 
61.32
 
6.51
 
2016
-
17
 
10775
 
8963
 
1389
 
67.05
 
7.23
 
2017
-
18
 
11586
 
10752
 
790
 
63.41
 
7.20
 
2018
-
19
 
12336
 
9801
 
1704
 
68.72
 
8.09
 
 
 
As observed by the committee, during the span of 7 years i.e. from FY 2012
-
13 to 
2018
-
19 coal production has increased from 48.06 MT to 68.72 MT (42.99% increase) 
whereas Net Profit (PAT) has been reduced by 9.65%. In
 
this regard this is to submit that 
along with increase in production, Offtake and OMS, cost of production has also shown a 
positive growth. Total cost of the company has been increases by 48.99% in the same 
period and being a labour intensive company the 
major part of cost component is Employee 
Benefit Expenses contributing approx. 51% of total cost. Employee benefit Expenses has 
been increased by Rs. 1606 Cr from 2012
-
13 to 2018
-
19.
 
 
D
)
 
Return on Capital Employed and Contribution to Exchequer
 
 
 
 

25
 
  
(Value in 
crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Profit 
Before Tax
 
Capital 
Employed 
(Re
-
stated)
 
Return on 
Capital 
Employed 
(%)
 
Dividend
 
Dividend 
Distribution 
Tax (DDT)
 
Contribution 
to 
Exchequer 
including 
DDT
 
2016
-
17
 
2374
 
4190
 
56.60
 
3634
 
740
 
7167
 
2017
-
18
 
1344
 
3345
 
41.48
 
531
 
108
 
6567
 
2018
-
19
 
2692
 
5502
 
48.93
 
297
 
61
 
6512
 
 
 
As observed by the committee, Return on Capital Employed has gone down from 
56.60% in 2016
-
17 to 48.93% in 2018
-
19. Capital investment in Tori
-
Shivpur Rail Line Project 
amounting to Rs. 1117 Cr was made during 
this period which resulted in increases in Total 
Capital Employed but return is expected after completion of the project. In the FY 2017
-
18 
there is a dip in Capital Employed due to increase in Current Liability (Advance deposit from 
Customers for sale of 
Coal amounting to Rs. 1600 Cr) on reporting date.
 
 
 
As far as dip in Contribution to Exchequer is concerned it is pertinent to mention that in 
FY 2016
-
17 there was payment of Dividend Distribution Tax of Rs. 740 Cr against Dividend 
of Rs. 3634 Cr.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Need for strengthening of data maintenance system
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl. No. 5.1)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that there is variation in the data submitted before them in 
two separate documents in respect of the Profits Before Tax (PBT) and the Profit After Tax 
(PAT). 
As 
per the data given in the preliminary material, PBT was shown as Rs. 134
4, 
Rs.2374 and Rs. 3119 crore for the years 2017
-
18, 2016
-
17 and 2015
-
16 respectively. 
However, the data presented before the Committee during discussion on 13.11. 2019, PBT 
was shown as Rs.1387, Rs 2371 &Rs. 3103 crore for the years 2017
-
18, 2016
-
17 and 2
015
-
16 respectively. Similarly, the data on PAT submitted to the Committee
 
was
 
shown
 
as
 
Rs.790, Rs.1389andRs.1915crorefor2017
-
18,2016
-
17and 2015
-
16 respectively but the data 
submitted before the Committee during discussion on 13 Nov. 2019, the PAT was show
n as 
Rs. 808, Rs.1387 and Rs. 1923 crore for 2017
-
18, 2016
-
17 and 2015
-
16respectively. The 
Committee are concerned to observe the variation in data submitted by CCL to the 
Committee on two different occasions. The Committee are of the firm opinion that suc
h 
instances make the credentials of the data maintenance system of the company doubtful. 

26
 
  
The Committee, therefore, direct the Ministry/CCL to submit an explanatory note along with 
the reasons for furnishing to the Committee the different sets of data on PA
T & PBT on two 
different occasions and also to take the corrective measures to avoid such reoccurrence in 
future.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
PBT & PAT
 
(Value in crores)
 
Financial 
Year
 
Profit Before 
Tax
 
Profit Before 
Tax (Re
-
stated)
 
Profit After 
Tax
 
Profit 
After 
Tax  (Re
-
Stated)
 
2015
-
16
 
3119
 
3109
 
1915
 
1929
 
2016
-
17
 
2374
 
2371
 
1389
 
1387
 
2017
-
18
 
1344
 
1387
 
790
 
808
 
 
 
Ind As was applicable w.e.f. FY 2016
-
17. As per provisions of Ind AS figures of 2015
-
16 was restated. Accordingly figures of PBT & PAT of 2015
-
16
 
was restated to Rs. 3109 Cr 
and Rs. 1929 Cr respectively.
 
 
Before implementation of Ind AS, Prior period adjustments were required to be 
disclosed separately in the statement of Profit and loss. 
 
 
After implementations of Ind As, as per Para 41& 42 of Ind
 
AS 8, prior period items 
are required to be adjusted retrospectively by restating the earlier prior period presented in 
the Financial Statements. Accordingly figures of FY 2016
-
17 & 2017
-
18 were restated.
 
[Ministry of Coal File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (F
TS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Manpower Management
 
 
Recommendation
 
(Sl.
 
No. 6.1
)
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that despite reduction in their manpower strength 
from the level of 53,305 in the year 2009
-
10 to the level of 40,000 in the year 2018
-
19, the 
CCL have successfully managed to increase the Coal production from the level of 4
7 MT in 
the year 2009
-
10 to the level of 68.7 MT in the year 2018
-
19. The Committee are also glad 
to find out that the output per man shift which was 3.66 in 2009
-
10 has gone up to  the level 
of8.09 in the year 2018
-
19 and the reason attributed to this ach
ievement is stated to be the 
adoption of more mechanized and capital intensive processes in the green field projects. 
The Committee’s analysis further reveals that apart from the manpower engaged on direct 
recruitment, employment is also given to the tenan
ts whose lands are acquired and some 

27
 
  
works are also outsourced. The Committee also observe that with a view to provide 
adequate number of skilled manpower to run the operations of the Company, technical and 
managerial training for upgradation of skills is 
provided and in this regard a pilot project has 
been launched in all subsidiaries of CIL on 15 July, 2016 for imparting training in various 
trades. The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken by the management of CCL 
for  successfully increasing
  
the  output  per  man  shift,  coal production and gross turnover 
despite reduction in the manpower, would desire the CCL(i) to explore the possibility of 
introducing more mechanized processes in different areas of its operations so as to further 
reduce 
the dependability on the manual processes; and (ii) to launch effective capacity 
building measures so as to achieve the better and enhanced output of the human 
resources by their optimum utilization.
 
Reply of
 
the Government
 
 
(i)
 
The company is committed to
 
increasing mechanisation by introducing high capacity 
HEMMs, surface miners, continuous miners, CHP and silos for coal loading.
 
(ii)
 
 
Employee capacity building is an ongoing and continuous process, which involves 
learning and development on the part of 
both the employees and the management. In CCL, 
learning and development activities are carried out by means of training and development 
programs being conducted in
-
house and by sending employees to reputed institutions, out of 
the company. Training program
s including on the job training are being conducted at Central 
Excavation Training  Institute (CETI), Bhurkunda Technical Training institute (BTTI) and at 
Management Training Center (MTC), HQ, Ranchi under the aegis of HRD dept, CCL. 
Executives are also at
tending development programs at Indian Institute of Coal 
Management, CIL at Ranchi for upgradation of their managerial skills and leadership 
abilities.
  
For technical capacity building various courses such as Vocational Training in 
mining and other discipl
ines are being conducted at Group Vocational Training Centers and 
at BTTI & CETI.
 
Skill Development for executives, frontline supervisors and skill up gradation program for 
non
-
executives has a place in the curriculum of MTC, HRD, CCL. In addition to the i
n
-
house 
training activities, employees are also attending conferences, training & development 
programmes outside the Company in various reputed institutes such as ASCI, Hyderabad.
 
Due to Covid19 pandemic, this year the participation of employees in such pr
ogrammes 
remained limited but as a part of capacity building measures following activities were 

28
 
  
conducted observing all the Govt. guidelines and safety measures in regard to Covid19. No. 
of employees who attended training programmes during 2020
-
21 is as be
low:
 

 
Basic training programmes for Heavy Earth Moving Machine Operators) : 100
 

 
Training of employees by Group VTC in 2020
-
21 
 
: 1959
 

 
Vocational training in mining &others (on the job): 174
 

 
In
-
house Development programmes for Executives : 504
 

 
Training progr
ammes Outside company (Webinars): 143
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Commissioning/Performance of 
 
Washeries
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl No. 7.1)
 
 
 
 
The Committee note that CCL has four Coking Coal Washeries and three Non
-
Coking Coal Washeries. The Washeries of CL have contributed Rs.253.90crore towards 
overall profit of the Company during the year 2018
-
19. The Committee further note that the 
productio
n figure of Washed Medium Coking Coal (WMCC) during 2018
-
19 was 8.04 lakh 
tonne as compared to 11.15 lakh tone production in the year 2017
-
18. The washed medium 
coking coal production during April, 2018 to July, 2018 was less due to no demand by 
potential 
customers. The washed non
-
Coking coal production during 2018
-
19 was 66.31 
lakh tone as compared to 60.76 lakh tone production in 2017
-
18. Out of the three Non
-
Coking Coal Washeries, one Washery viz. Kargali Washery was shut down during 2016
-
17 
and 2017
-
18 
and it restarted in April, 2018. During 2018
-
19, the Kargali Washery produced 
1.12 lakh tone of Non
-
 
Coking Coal. The Committee note that out of the remaining two Non
-
Coking Coal Washeries, the GidiWashery produced less than 1 lakh tone of Washed Non
-
Cokin
g Coal and CCL is entirely dependent on its one major Non
-
Coking Coal Washery i.e. 
the Piparwar Washery that produced 64.30 lakh tone of washed Non
-
Coking Coal during 
2018
-
19. Interestingly, it is evident from the figures that most of the profits of CCL ea
rned 
through Washeries was from the lone Piparwar Non
-
Coking Coal Washery. This is 
substantiated by the  fact that the Non
-
Coking Coal Washeries (mostly Piparwar) 
contributed a profit of Rs.376.73 crore and the four Coking coal Washeries contributed a 
loss
 
of Rs.122.82 crore resulting in net profit of Rs.253.91 crore to CCL from its Washeries 
during the year 2018
-
19. The yield percentage of Coking coal Washeries was 35.69% while 
the same of Non
-
Coking Coal Washeries was 97.96%. The Committee would therefore
 
recommend the CCL to investigate into the reasons for such a low yield of the Coking Coal 
Washeries and to take necessary corrective measures immediately for optimum utilization 

29
 
  
of the installed capacity of the Coking coal Washeries not only to achieve be
tter yields from 
these washeries but also to ensure adequate indigenous availability of the better quality 
Coal which will in turn reduce our import dependency on this count to a maximum extent.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Reasons of low yie
ld of the coking 
coal washeries
 
1
.
 
Quality of coking coal fed to washeries
 
has gone down due to depletion of reserves of 
good quality coking coal in mines of the company. The washeries are designed for a 
coking coal feed having ash of 26
-
27 %. i.e. processing of raw coal upto
 
W
-
III grade . The 
contribution of W
-
II & W
-
III grade coal is around 25% of total raw coal feed and rest 75 % 
is of W
-
IV grade and above (ash around 35%).Equipment installed are not equipped for 
handling raw coal of higher grade/ash which is having poor wa
shability characteristics.
  
This has adversely impacted washery performance.
 
2
.
 
All coking coal washeries have outlived their technological life of 18
-
20 years.
 
Steps taken for achieving better productivity/optimum utilization:
 
1
.
 
Renovation of Rajrappa
 
Washery 
amounting to Rs. 40.70 crore (including GST) has been 
planned which will be executed by the 2
nd
 
quarter of F.Y. 2021
-
22.
 
2
.
 
Comprehensive periodic maintenance of different equipments of Kathara
 
Washery has 
been planned. Maintenance work in the plant has start
ed .
 
3
.
 
Comprehensive periodic maintenance of Jigs (Main washing equipment) of Kedla
 
Washery 
has been planned. Maintenance work started.
 
4
.
 
Gidi and Kargali
 
washeries have already been closed due 
to 
safety reasons.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PC
A (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Commissioning/Performance of
 
 
Washeries
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7.2)
 
The Committee further note that the CCL is in the process of  setting up 2 coking coal 
Washeries with a capacity of 7 Million Tons per Year (MTY) and 3 Non coking coal washeries 
with a capacity of 8 MTY on Build Own and Operate (BOO) concept. The Committee
 
have 
been  informed that after construction of the new coking coal washeries as well as after 
replacement of the existing old coking coal washeries, CCL have planned to produce washed 
coking coal with 14
-
15% ash content which is used in steel production. 
Since the domestic 
production of the required quality of Coal falls short of demand  coming from steel sector, the 

30
 
  
coking coal with 14
-
15% ash content is being imported.  The imported quantity of coal  was to 
the tune of 52 MTs in 2018
-
19. However, after t
aking into account the fact that coking coal 
washeries had contributed a loss of Rs.122.82 crore during 2018
-
19 and also that there was 
no demand of the washed medium coking coal  during April, 2018 to July, 2018,the 
Committee are unable to comprehend as t
o how it so happened that  on one side the country 
has been importing  huge quantity of  washed coking coal and on the other side there was 
slump in the indigenous demand for the same. The Committee therefore desire the CCL to 
thoroughly analyse this parad
oxical situation and make a realistic assessment of the actual 
demand and potential customers of washed Coking Coal so that installed capacity of the coal 
washeries are optimally utilized and  the investment in the setting up of new coal washeries 
yield be
tter returns. The Committee are of the view that these projects assume greater 
significance in reducing the import dependency on the desired quality of coal and therefore 
recommend that these coking coal and non
-
coking coal washeries needs to be 
operationa
lized and run with their maximum  capacity utilization at the earliest. The 
Committee are of the opinion  the domestic production of the coal by indigenous coal 
companies  and their use in thermal power  generation by power companies not only create 
abunda
nt job opportunities, make substantial contribution  to GDP but also play a major role 
in nation building . The Committee  therefore feel that a policy intervention is needed for 
regulating the import of coal in such way that our coal reserves are optimall
y harnessed and 
the  domestic production of coal do not adversely suffer and  at the same time  the cost  of 
the  thermal power  as well as  of the products of steel  sector do not escalate because of   
the use of the imported coal. The Committee hope that
 
the Government will take initiatives in 
this regard very soon."
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
An Inter
-
 
Ministerial Committee (IMC) has been constituted in the Ministry of Coal on 
29.05.2020 for the purpose of coal import substitution. The Representatives fr
om Ministry of 
Power, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Steel, 
Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME), Department for Promotion of 
Industry & Internal Trade (DPIIT), Central Electricity Authority (C
EA), Coal Companies and 
Ports are members of this IMC. This Committee provides a platform for discussions on a 
larger forum with the Administrative Ministries so as to guide them to encourage the coal 
consumers of their respective sector to eliminate impor
ts of coal. Nine meetings of the IMX 
have been held so far. IMC has also directed for development of an Import Data System by 

31
 
  
Ministry of Coal to enable the Ministry of Coal to enable the Ministry to track the imports of 
coal. 
 
 
 
In a major push towards in
crease in consumption of domestic coal, the Annual 
Contracted Quantity (ACQ) of power plants has been increased upto 100% of the normative 
requirement, in the cases where the ACQ was reduced to 90% of normative requirement 
(non
-
coastal) or where the ACQ wa
s reduced to 70% of normative requirement (coastal 
power plants). There are 79 non
-
coastal power plants where there would be increase in ACQ 
of 10% (around 10.5 MT) and 5 coastal power plants where the increase in ACQ would be 
30% (around 9 MT). The increa
se in ACQ would ensure supply of more domestic coal to the 
power plants. 
 
 
 
In addition to the above, some other measures like increase in trigger level of Fuel 
Supply Agreement (FSA) from 75% to 80% for those plants which are having trigger level of 
755 o
r increased level of supply, Introduction of Facility of Usance LC (Letter of Credit) 
payment mechanism to help the consumer avail credit facility from bank, Special Spot auction 
scheme for the coal importers including the traders, would help in curtailing
 
the imports of 
coal. Further, the coal offered for short term under the amended provisions of SHAKTI Policy 
as well as increase in the tenure of the coking coal linkages in the Non
-
Regulated Sector 
linkage auction for a period upto 30 years is also expect
ed to have a positive impact towards 
coal imports substitution." 
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
Monitoring of High Capacity Projects for Timely Completion
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 8.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee note that five new high capacity projects of CCL at Sanghmitra, 
Chandragupt, Kotre
-
Basantpur
-
Pachmo, Patratu ABC and Piparwar Phase
-
I are in pipeline. 
The Committee however observe that many Greenfield projects taken up in the past had 
been d
elayed due to various reasons. Greenfield projects such as N.Urimari that had to be 
commissioned in April, 2005 was commissioned in October, 2013 after a delay of more 
than 8 years. Similarly, Greenfield projects namely Magadh, Amrapali, Konar that were to
 
be commissioned in April, 2006 could be commissioned in 2014/2015 after a delay of 
almost 9 years. On being enquired about the monitoring mechanism for these new high 
capacity projects, the Committee have been informed that monitoring mechanism has been 

32
 
  
p
ut in place which inter
-
alia includes (i) monitoring of the activities related to commissioning 
and completion of the projects by a project monitoring team (ii) review of the status of the 
ongoing projects in every meeting of the CCL Board (iii) quarterly 
review of the projects 
costing more than Rs. 150 crore or more than 3MTY capacity by the Secretary, Coal and 
(iv) review of project implementation by the project monitoring group of the Department for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal trade(DPIIT) and als
o by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation(MoSPI). The Committee are happy to note that multi
-
dimensional monitoring mechanism has now been put in place to constantly review the 
progress of the projects at various levels and express their
 
hope that this system will yield 
the desired results. The Committee, nevertheless while taking note of the inordinate delay 
in execution of High Capacity Projects of the CCL in the past, strongly recommend that 
effective steps be taken to put in place a w
ell
-
 
defined mechanism to ensure that all 
statutory/regulatory clearances on issues such as environmental, forest, land acquisition 
etc. are obtained well in time and in case of any unforeseen problems that may arise in 
process of implementation/execution 
of these projects leading to delay in  completion  of 
the projects, the problematic issues need be taken up immediately at the highest levels in 
the hierarchy so as to get timely resolution of the problems and unwarranted delay.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The progress of First Mile Connectivity (FMC) projects is regularly reviewed at 
Ministry level. There are 4 FMC projects of CCL with total capacity of 44.5 MTPA. The 
Tenders of all the 4 projects have already been awarded and all the 4 projects are 
schedul
ed to be commissioned by November, 2023. 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Use of Latest Technology in Coal Production 
–
 
Longwall Technology
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 9.1
)
 
 
The Committee note the various state
-
of
-
art technologies such as adoption of surface 
miners in open cast mines, continuous miners and longwall mining, introduction of rapid 
loading system through Coal Handling Plants (CHP)/Silo in mines, commissioning of 
r
ailway sidings, etc which have helped CCL in increasing their production, mineral 
conservation and maintaining an eco
-
friendly environment. The Committee observe from 
the documents submitted before them that the Longwall Technology is the most productive 
t
echnology as on date across the globe. Although the opencast mining method is 

33
 
  
economical for coal deposits lying upto a certain depth, the Longwall Technology is helpful 
in extraction of deep
-
seated coal reserve more effectively with higher capacity. Furth
er, the 
technology ensures that no extra land for overburden is required and it gives quick access 
to coal through incline promising quick return on investment besides ensuring minimum 
disturbance to land and flora &fauna of the area. The Committee was inf
ormed that CCL is 
going to deploy Longwall Technology in one of its proposed high capacity underground 
mine project at Patratu ABC. Given the advantages of Longwall Technology over open cast 
mining, the Committee recommend that the Company may also explore
 
the possibility of 
using Longwall Technology in other underground mines as well after taking of course 
utmost care of safety and security concerns.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Possibility of using longwall technology in other underground mines having 
deep
-
seated coal deposits with due regards to safety and security concerns is being explored.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Heavy Earth Moving Machinery (HEMM):
 
 
(
a
)
 
Availability of HEMM
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 10.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee’s analysis reveal that over 99 % of coal production of CCL comes 
from open cast mining and surface mining contributes 32% of the entire open cast coal 
production of the company in the year 201
-
19. The Committee 
observe that Heavy Earth 
Moving Machinery (HEMM) such as shovels, dumpers, dozers, and drills deployed in open 
cast mining are eco
-
friendly and pollution reducing equipments. For instance, drilling 
machines have an inbuilt dust suppression system which red
uces pollution in open cast 
mining. The data furnished by CCL about the availability of Heavy Earth Moving Machinery 
(HEMM) such as Shovels, Dumpers, Dozers and Drill shows that more or less they are 
made available as per the norms set by the Company. For 
instance, against the norm of 
80%, 78%, 70% & 67% availability for shovels, Drills, Dozers and Dumpers, the actual 
availability of these machines in terms of percentages stood at 75.2%, 83.3%, 73% and 
72.9% respectively, which is more than the prescribed n
orms in almost all categories 
except in respect of shovels where there was a small shortfall.
 

34
 
  
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
We have achieved CMPDIL norms of availability in respect of Dumper, Dozer & 
Drill and marginally below the CMPDIL norms in respect of 
Shovel.  This is mainly due to 
aging of equipment i.e. EKG & Marion Shovel and Poor Service Support and supply of 
spares from OEMs. This shortfall of availability in respect of Shovel has been overcome by 
adopting best maintenance practices i.e. Condition 
Based Maintenance, Reliability 
Centered Maintenance and by doing Break Down Analysis of critical failures.   This has 
resulted in significant improvement of Availability in respect of Shovels and we have 
achieved 79.2 % in 2020
-
21 as compared to 75.2 % dur
ing 2018
-
19.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Environmental Concerns
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 11.1
)
 
 
     
The Committee observe that mining activities by its very nature leave substantial impact 
on 
environment, human lives, flora and fauna in and around the mining areas. The 
Committee note the various measures taken by the Ministry of Coal and CCL in protecting 
the environment in and around the mines through integrated project planning, mitigation of
 
pollution, conservation of natural resources, restoration of ecology, proper disposal of 
waste, etc. The Committee expect that these measures will continue in a more integrated 
and structured manner so as to address the environmental concerns in effective
 
manner.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
     
Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) is committed to promote sustainable development by 
protecting the environment through integrated project planning, mitigation of pollution, 
conservation of natural resources, restorat
ion of ecology, proper disposal of waste, 
addressing climate change and inclusive growth.
 
The provisions of Coal India Environment Policy, 2018 which reflect the principles of 
sustainable development are followed in Central Coalfields Limited (CCL). The st
eps taken to 
comply the provisions in CCL are as follows
-
 
 

35
 
  
1
.
 
Integrated project planning
-
 
 
 

 
Mines /units of CCL are started, expanded and operated as per provisions of 
Environmental Impact Assessment Notification, 1994 (now superseded by EIA 
notification, 2006) and EIA,2006. The Environmental Impact assessment and 
Environment management plan is p
repared for sustainable mining / operation 
which includes measures to mitigate impacts, pollution control, biodiversity 
conservation, rehabilitation & resettlement of PAPs & mine closure plan. The 
EIA
-
EMP are appraised by MoEF&CC before issuance of Environ
mental 
Clearance (EC) to coal projects. 
 

 
The compliance of the conditions of Environment clearance have been put up in 
public domain.  The six
-
monthly compliance report for all mines/units having EC 
is submitted to Regional office, MoEF&CC, Ranchi and Jhar
khand State
 
pollution control Board. 
 

 
Environment Statement of mines / units of CCL are also submitted to Jharkhand 
State Pollution Control Board and uploaded in Company’s website.
 

 
In compliance of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, prior Forestry 
Clearance is 
also secured from MoEF&CC, in case of projects involving forest land.
 

 
Consent to Establish (CTE) for new and expansion projects and Consent to 
Operate (CTO) for operating units are also secured from Jharkhand State 
Pollution Control Board unde
r Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
and Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 
 
 
2
.
 
Mitigation of Air pollution
-
 
 

 
Monitoring of Environmental Quality:
 
To assess the environmental quality of 
mines / units environmental monitoring is carried out for all the mines / units of 
CCL. Environmental monitoring reports are regularly submitted to JSPCB 
&MoEF&CC. The types of stations monitored are 
–
 
(
a
)
 
Ambient Air Qu
ality & Noise level Monitoring Stations 
–
 
both in Core & 
Buffer Zone;
 
(
b
)
 
Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
–
 
Mine discharge, surface and
 
ground 
water quality.
 
About 6000 samples of Total Particulate Matter in air, 6000 samples 
ofPM2.5in air, 4200 noise sample
s, 2200 water samples (Surface 
water,Effluent water and ground water quality) are analysed every year 
indifferent mines and units of CCL through NABL accredited laboratory of
 
CMPDIL.
 
 

 
Managing air quality in mining area
-
 
 
a
.
 
Introduction of 
surface miners
 
for coal mining instead of shovel dumper 
system. Surface miners have eliminated the need of drilling, blasting and 
crushing of coal. Further all mega projects will also deploy environmentally 
friendly technology of coal winning. 
 
b
.
 
Drilling is another major
 
source of dust in mines and about 117 no. of drills in 
CCL are provided with 
dust extractors /wet drilling mechanism
.
 
c
.
 
All the opencast mines have large capacity mobile sprinklers. About 61 mobile 
sprinklers of 28 KL capacity are deployed and now CCL has t
aken an initiative 
to procure only mist type of sprinklers which are technologically superior to 
normal sprinklers, about 20 mist type sprinklers of 28 KL capacity have already 
been deployed.
 

36
 
  
d
.
 
Providing dust screens at Railway sidings
-
 
Dust screens along ra
ilway 
sidings are now being erected to protect the receptors from dust.
 
e
.
 
Managing air quality at consumer end
-
Two new washeries (New KatharaCoking 
Coal washery and Basantpur
-
Tapin Coking Coal Washery) will beset up which 
will minimize pollution by producing
 
clean coal.
 
f
.
 
FMC projects have been planned in Magadh, Amrapali, North Urimari and 
KonarOCPs. Work order for their construction has already been issued.
 
g
.
 
CCL has installed Particulate Matter (PM10) dust monitors at its 25railway 
sidings in first phase. Proc
urement of 14 Continues Ambient AirQuality 
Monitoring Stations (CAAQMS), road sweeping machines and fogguns will be 
completed in FY 2021
-
22.
 
 
3
.
 
 
Conservation of natural resources
-
 
a
)
 
Afforestation in mines
 
includes reclamation of mined
-
out area, avenue 
plantati
on and block plantation. As on date CCL has planted about 
84
 
lakhs of 
saplings and the biologically reclaimed area is 
2754 Ha
. As per EC conditions 
the density of plantation should be 2500 plants per ha and is being followed in 
CCL. As per condition stipul
ated in EC, monitoring of progress of land 
reclamation in coal mining projects through Remote Sensing is carried out for 
the mines having composite capacity of less than 5 million cubic metres once in 
every three years. The status of land reclamation is mo
nitored every year in 
case of larger projects having composite capacity of more than 5 million cubic 
meters. 
 
b
)
 
Seed Ball Plantation
: Approximate 8 Lakhs Seed balls has been spread over 
Overburden dumps of mines of CCL including Karo OCO, Konar OCP, 
Bhurkunda Colliery, PiparwarArea & Selected DhoriGoM
 
 
After first showers of Monsoons, 1 inch to 3 inch growths can be seen on the 
seed balls spread over OB Dumps. During the financial year 2020
-
21 , about 
44.1 Lakhs seed balls were spread over 34.6 Ha. on
 
overburden dumps at 
several mines of CCL.
 
c
)
 
Mine Water utilization
-
 
An MOU was signed on 30.10.2017 between CIL and 
state Govt. of Jharkhand for utilization of 25250 million gallon of mine water by 
villages situated near mines of Central Coalfields Limited.
 
In Financial year 
2020
-
21, three numbers of NOCs were issued to Drinking Water & Sanitation 
Department, Govt. Of Jharkhand for implementation of Rural Water supply 
scheme in Ramgarh, Hazaribagh and Palamu district. It will benefit 90,728 
number of populat
ions in 40 villages.
 
d
)
 
Rain Water harvesting at projects for ground water recharge.
 
e
)
 
An Eco 
-
Park has been developed over an area of 1.0 Ha of reclaimed land of 
Piparwar OCP. It is proposed to increase the eco
-
park known as Chandra 
Shekhar
 
Vatika over additio
nal 20 Ha of reclaimed land. Foundation stone for 
expansion was laid on the occasion of Vriksharopan
 
Abhiyan, on 23.07.2020.
 
4
.
 
Restoration of ecology
-
 
CCL has undertaken reclamation of about 8 ha. of mined out 
land in Sangam OCP, Braka
 
Sayal Area by developm
ent of grassland with about 20 varieties 
under the guidance of Professor C.R. Babu of Delhi University.
 
 
 
 
 

37
 
  
5
.
 
Alternate livelihood program through development of Pisciculture
-
 
 
 
 
CCL in association with Birsa Agriculture University, Ranchi and CMPDIL started another 
project of development of mine voids filled with water for development of fisheries in 
BarkaSayal Area. It is an example for sustainable closure of mines and for incom
e 
generation of local villagers.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
Tree Plantation
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 12.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that 202957, 128025 and 112500 saplings were planted 
during 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively. The Company informed that the plantation 
activities are outsourced to the State Forestry Department and the routine sensing survey 
and envir
onment monitoring is done by Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
(CMPDI). 
As 
informed to the Committee, the State Forestry Department hands over the 
plantation work with 60% and more survival percentage for further upkeep of the plantation 
after 2
nd
 
year of maintenance. The Committee’s analysis reveals that the CCL had spent 
about Rs.11.76 crore on the plantation work during the last three years and the   CCL   
does not seem to   have any mechanism to ensure that the maximum number of saplings 
plante
d do actually survive and live their full life span. The Committee are of the strong 
opinion that unless the Company ensures the survival of the plants handed over to them 
after 2 years of maintenance period, the tree plantation initiatives would not bring
 
the 
desired results. The Committee recommend that a study be conducted in the historical 
perspective to assess the success of tree
-
plantation scheme by analyzing the data related 
to the number of saplings planted and the number of them actually survived a
fter a certain 
period say five to ten years and the Company, based on the findings of such study, should 
device a structured maintenance system to ensure survival of greater number of planted 
saplings.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
As recommended, a study will
 
be carried out in FY 2021
-
22 to assess the success of 
tree
-
plantation scheme by analyzing number of saplings planted and survival after five years.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 

38
 
  
Slurry Management
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 13.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee have been apprised that fine coal circuit consisting of filter press, 
floatation cell bank and teeter bed separator has been planned for effective recovery from 
slurry. The recovered fine washed coal will be 
blended with the washed coking coal 
produced by main circuit. After assessing the effectiveness of these modern fine coal 
circuits, these technologies may be incorporated in other future coking coal washeries. 
While welcoming these future initiatives to be
 
taken by CCL, the Committee desire that 
slurry be managed through the simple suction technology with pipes/pumps fitted with 
vacuum to draw out slurry as done in many developed countries.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The washing technology to be incorporated
 
in future washeries has been envisaged as 
state
-
of
-
the
-
art technology with introduction of large diameter cyclone, teeter bed separator, 
flotation, filter press and spiral concentrator, etc. at par with international practices with 
close circuit operation
 
and zero effluent discharge to the surroundings.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Thorium Based Power Plants
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 15.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that during course of the examination of the subject, it was 
desired from the Ministry of Coal/CCL to apprise the Committee about the thorium
-
based 
power plants. It has been mentioned that the information has been sought from the 
Depa
rtment of Atomic Energy. The Committee observe that thorium is expected to play a 
significant role in the future energy supply all over the world and Canada has been working 
on it in a big way for the last so many years. The Committee therefore desire that
 
it is high 
time for the country to explore the possibility of harnessing the huge thorium deposits in the 
country for commercial exploitation and for this purpose the Canadian technology may be 
of great help.  The Committee while desiring the Ministry to 
expedite the collection of the 
information from the Department of Atomic Energy and to submit the same to the 
Committee at the earliest, would also like to be apprised of the steps proposed to be taken 

39
 
  
by the Government on the exploration of huge thorium d
eposits in the country for 
commercial use.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
Ministry of Coal has already submitted the requisite information to the Committee 
vide OM No. F.No.11028/1/2019
-
PCA (Part
-
I) dated 22
nd
 
April, 2020 
(Annexure
-
I).
  
Further, Ministry has al
so informed the same to Lok
 
Sabha Secretariat (CoPU) while 
furnishing “Updated information in connection with the examination of
 
the subject '
Central 
Coalfields
 
Limited (CCL)’ vide OM No. 11028/1/2019 
–
PCA dated 26
th
 
August, 2020 
(Annexure
-
 
II).
 
 
The 
updated reply in this regard, as received from Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) is as follows:
 
 
 
Towards exploring the possibility of harnessing huge thorium deposits in the country, 
India Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), a constituent Unit of D
epartment of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) has commissioned a unique facility KAMINI (Kalpakkam Mini 
Reactor), a U233 fuelled, 30 kE, light water moderate and cooled, research reactor at 
Kalpakkam, pioneering the third stage of nuclear programme in the country towar
ds utilizing 
the vast resources of thorium. It is also a national facility for Neutron Radiography of critical 
components in the nuclear and strategic sectors, Neutron Shielding and Neutron Activation 
of materials. The pyro devices in the space programme a
re routinely tested and cleared for 
operation. This facility is also utilized for conduction neutron beam experiments. 
 
 
India has made substantial progress in the Research and Development (R&D) 
activities with regard to Thorium and its application in Nucl
ear Energy. India is the world 
leader in the R&D activities related to Thorium and India Scientists has maximum number 
of publications related to R&D in Thorium and its applications in Nuclear Energy generation. 
From Exploration from various sources to nuc
lear energy generation from Thorium, 
technologically India is highly competitive as compared to many advanced countries. 
 
 
India has alternative resources of Thorium in plenty, which are more economical and 
cost effective as compared to the sources as disc
ussed in the Note. Therefore, the 
technology demonstrated by Canada for recovery of Thorium from Coal mines may not be 
cost competitive to alternate resources available. 
 
 
The thorium is generated from cracking of Monozite in the Monozite Processing 
Plant 
by IREL(India) Limited, a Public Sector Undertaking of Department of Atomic Energy. 
These thorium values are stockpiled in line with safety regulation and guidelines of Atomic 

40
 
  
Energy Regulatory Board for future use in the 3rd stage atomic power programme o
f the 
Country.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Resettlement, Rehabilitation and Compensation Issues
 
 
Recommendation 
(
Sl No. 16.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that CCL has no land acquisition policy of its
 
own. Land for 
CCL is acquired under Land Acquisition Act or Coal Bearing Areas (A&D) Act, 1957. As per 
the information furnished to the Committee, 1326.18 acres of land was acquired by CCL 
during 2018
-
19. However, the authentication
 
of
 
the
 
said
 
land
 
by
 
th
e
 
district
 
authorities
 
has
 
not
 
yet
 
been
 
completed. As a result, the total number of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) 
who are entitled to get compensation against the 1326.18 acres of land acquired has not 
yet been finalised. During the year 2017
-
18, CCL had
 
disbursed compensation to 1933 
affected persons/families. Similarly, in the year 2018
-
19, compensation to 1282 affected 
persons/ families had been given. The Committee are aware of the hard reality that 
people/families uprooted from their land where they 
had lived and earned livelihood for 
many years have to undergo through painful physical, financial and emotional process 
unless and until they are properly rehabilitated. As such, there is a dire need for a time
-
bound rehabilitation and compensation for su
ch people. The Committee therefore 
recommend that a well
-
defined policy be brought out so that the rehabilitation and 
compensation issues related to affected people are addressed in a time bound manner.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
In CCL, well defined R&R P
olicy exist like CIL R&R Policy & Schedule I, II & III of 
RFCTLARR Act to address the R&R & Compensation issues in a time bound manner. 
However, the Schedule time can only be achieved on getting timely submission of 
application along with relevant document
s to the management by the tenants (Copy of the 
CCL R&R Policy is at Annexure
-
III).CCL has started an initiative to consult the tenants 
through its Area/Project Officials forming village committee and also giving notice in writing 
through postal means to m
otivate them to submit the required documents in time.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 

41
 
  
 
Resettlement, Rehabilitation and Compensation issues
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16.2)
 
 
 
The Committee further 
observe that often compensation and rehabilitation is 
delayed for many reasons as has happened in the case of compensation to families for 
1326 acres of land which had been acquired in the year 2018. The Committee are of the 
view that rehabilitation of peo
ple should precede taking over of land. The Committee 
therefore recommend that CCL and Government should coordinate with various Ministries 
like the Ministry of Urban Development for getting quality home under Pradhan Mantri Awas
 
Yojna, the Ministry of Soc
ial Justice and Empowerment and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for 
convergence of various welfare schemes of the Government so that their resettlement 
takes place in real sense and the affected people are properly rehabilitated. The Skill 
development progr
ammes may also organized to impart technical skill to the affected 
people which will facilitate them to seek gainful employment. Taking into account the living 
conditions of the affected people, the Committee are of strong opinion that a proper 
financial p
lanning needs to done and better guidance also needs to be given to the affected 
people so that they gainfully utilize their compensation amounts for providing qualitative 
support to their families, better education to their children, starting new ventures
 
for their 
daily earnings and creating better source of their earnings. The Committee also desire that 
all mines where coal is no longer extracted should be developed as city centres or 
townships which could be home for the PAPs and further the Company may
 
take initiatives 
for setting
-
up Bio fuel plants, converging many Government welfare schemes in their area, 
undertaking CSR activities and generating employment for the displaced persons.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The recommendation given in 16.2 has been n
oted for better resettlement of Project 
Affected People (PAPs).Under CSR initiative, different Skill development programs like 
Computer Training, Driver training, stitching, etc. are being given to the Project Affected 
People.
 
              
Under R&R Polic
y, Annuity Scheme approved by CIL in 2020 
(Annexure
-
IV)
also 
exists for proper financial planning needs of the PAFs.
 
The land, where coal is no longer 
extracted, is being utilized for developing the land as R&R Site, Eco Park, Afforestation, etc.
 
[Ministry 
of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 

42
 
  
Samadhan Kendra
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18.1)
 
 
 
The Committee note that CCL also has a system called ‘Samadhan Kendra’ that 
was setup in 2012 to redress the grievances of 
employees and stakeholders of the 
Company. However, there is no clarity on the nature and distinction between the complaints 
received by the Vigilance Department in normal course under the Whistle Blower Policy and 
through the Samadhan Kendra. The Committe
e find that there is a difference between the 
number of complaints received by the vigilance department and those by the Samadhan 
Kendra. The number of complaints received by Samadhan Kendra during 2018
-
19 were 307 
while during the same year the Vigilance 
Department had received 405 complaints. The 
Committee would therefore like to know whether the complaints received at both the places 
were identical and same or these were altogether different. In case, the complaints received 
at two different places are n
ot the same, the total figure of the complaints will be significantly 
higher which needs serious introspection of the functioning of the officials/departments. The 
Committee further note that the percentage of complaints redressed by the Samadhan 
Kendra ha
s reduced from 100 % in 2012
-
13 to 89% in 2018
-
19. The Committee would also 
like to know the reasons for reduction in redressal rate in 2018
-
19. The Committee also 
desire that the functioning of the ‘Samadhan Kendra’ should be strengthened further so that 
ambitious target to make CCL a zero grievance company is achieved in near future.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Samadhan Cell is a grievance
 
redressal machinery. Samadhan Cell receives 
grievances of general nature relating to service matter, welfare matter, retiral dues, 
employment matter, medical related matter etc. where no vigilance angle is involved. 
 
 
It is pertinent to mention that, Samad
han Cell works for expeditious redressal of 
grievances in consultation with the department to which the grievance is related with.
  
During, 
2018
-
19, the reduction to 89% grievance redressal was primarily due to the fact that, 
grievances were related to old
 
records requiring thorough investigation and enquiries. All 
steps are being taken to strengthen Samadhan Cell to achieve the ambitious target to make 
CCL a zero
-
grievance
 
company.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
J
uly, 2021]
 
 
 
 
 

43
 
  
Strengthening the IT infrastructure
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 19.1
)
 
 
 
 
The Committee are of the view that IT enabled services bring efficiency and 
transparency in the functioning of the organization besides enhanced output of the 
workforce. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that CCL should make adequate 
allocation of funds for creating the required IT infrastructure, both hardware and software, 
with a view to have desired growth in its performance in terms of production, sales, 
produ
ctivity and profits and also effective monitoring of the functioning of the workforce.  
The Committee would also urge that global practices in this regard need to be studied for 
use of upgraded and latest IT techniques in the mining activities and in other
 
functional 
areas of the CCL.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
Some important IT initiatives taken by the company are as under:
 
1
.
 
ERP Solution
-
SAP: 
-
 
Implementation of ERP(SAP) will integrate most of the business 
processes of CCL and optimize the resources for efficient utilization and improved 
productivity. Service provider for the phase
-
II implementation has started their job at CC
L 
in Jan
-
2021. 
 
ERP Centre for the purpose of development and training has already been established 
and it is in operation. 
 
Time bound intermediate milestone activities for the purpose of completing Phase
-
II ERP 
implementing at CCL by August,2021 has alre
ady been finalized.
 
2
.
 
E
-
Auction: 
-
 
To expedite the process of auctioning and to make it more transparent, coal 
is auctioned through e
-
Auction mode.
 
3
.
 
E
-
Procurement: 
-
 
As a part of best and transparent business practice CCL has adopted e
-
procurement mode for th
e purpose of procurement of goods and services through central 
service provider of CIL as well as GeM Portal.
 
4
.
 
E
-
Payment: 
-
 
All the salaries of employees and all bills of employees and vendors are 
being paid by the company through e
-
Payment mode.
 
5
.
 
E
-
Grievance Redressal: 
-
 
CCL has adopted e
-
filing of grievances and acknowledgement 
on redressal thereof to embark upon the business process through IT initiatives.
 
6
.
 
E
-
Invoicing: 
-
 
Real time data transfer from the weighbridges to centralized CCL HQ server 
f
or the purpose of generating GST e
-
Invoice at CCL HQ server is operational.
 
7
.
 
E
-
Office: 
-
 
This e
-
Office project intends to enhance the business process management of 
the organization and aims to improve production, productivity, and increase transparency 
by 
replacing the old manual process with an electronic file system with tracking details.
 
8
.
 
Coal
 
Net:
-
 
In order to improve productivity and efficiency across various business 
processes, Central Server processing through Wide Area Network (WAN) is in operation 
i
n Coal
-
Net (Existing ERP type application software for business functions related to 
Marketing & Sales, Finance, Payroll, PIS and Material Management.)
 
9
.
 
Web Applications: 
-
 
 
a
.
 
Online Complaint System: It is a web based public platform to lodge complaint with 
Vigilance Department of CCL.
 

44
 
  
b
.
 
Grievance Redressal System: A web based public platform to submit grievances to 
Samadhan Cell of CCL.
 
c
.
 
BhishmaPitamah: Online platform for retired employees of CCL to submit their 
grievances related to Pension, PF, Gratuity and 
CIL executive Defined Pension 
Scheme.
 
d
.
 
CPRMSE Web Application: Online platform for retired CCL Employees to check their 
CRPMSE Bills and CPRMSE Closing Balance.
 
e
.
 
Bill Tracking System: Web Portal for vendors to check status and details against their 
Bill Id. 
 
 
10
.
 
   
Mobile Applications: 
-
 
 
a
.
 
Bhisma
 
Pitamah Mobile App: Developed for retired employees of CCL to submit their 
grievances related to Pension, PF, Gratuity and CIL executive Defined Pension 
Scheme. 
 
b
.
 
Women Safety App: Mobile Application designed to instantly
 
share GPS location and 
prompt an automatic phone call to registered phone numbers when in distress.
 
c
.
 
Grahak
 
Sadak
 
KoylaVitran App: Mobile Application to help customers keep track of 
all activities from issuance of Sale Order to physical delivery of coal by
 
road. 
Developed by CIL for all subsidiaries and CCL Chapter is jointly maintained by M&S 
and System Department CCL.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
Safety Issues
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl. 
No. 20.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that one of the objectives of the CCL is maintain high 
standards of the safety and strive for accident free mining of coal. 
As 
informed to the 
Committee, the mine safety is achieved by identification of hazards subsequently its 
mitigation by adopting four steps which includes engineering control, administrative control, 
substitution and elimination. It has also stated that three Safety Committees such as (i) Pit 
Safety Committee (ii) Tripartite Safety Committee and (iii) Bipartit
e safety Committee have 
been constituted and various other safety measures are also taken. The Committee 
however observe that the performance of CCL in respect of various safety parameters such 
as fatalities, serious injuries, fatality rate/MT, serious inj
ury rate/MT, fatality rate per 3 lakh 
man shift and serious injury rate per 3 lakh man shift has been far from satisfactory in the 
year2018
-
19astheincidentsonthesecounts which had declined in 2017
-
18 has seen huge 
surge in 2018
-
19. For instance, the fatali
ty and serious injury cases have gone upto double 
digits i.e. to 10 and 16 respectively in the year 2018
-
19 as against cases in single digit in 
the preceding four years. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons 
for spurt in fatality 
and serious injury cases in 2018
-
19 and also the measures taken by the 
CCL to strengthen the safety parameters so as to save the precious life of their work force.
 

45
 
  
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
In 2018
-
19, there were 4 Nos. of fatalities and 7 Nos. of serious 
injuries in a 
single 
incident
 
resulting into surge in fatality and serious injury cases.
 
The following steps have been taking to strengthen the safety parameters: 
 
1
.
 
Preparation and implementation of risk assessment
-
based Safety Management 
 
 
Plans (SMPs).
 
2
.
 
Formulation and compliance of Site
-
specific Risk Assessment based Standard 
 
 
Operating Procedures (SOPs).
 
3
.
 
Conducting safety audit of mines.
 
4
.
 
Guidelines of Standing Committee meeting, National Safety Conference and 
 
 
CIL Safety Board meeting are followed.
 
5
.
 
Jo
int consultation with employee representatives as well as regulators (DGMS) 
 
 
are organized on safety matters. Safety matters are discussed in Bipartite 
 
 
 
Committee and Tripartite Committee meetings at area and company level.
 
6
.
 
To inculcate safety culture a
nd create awareness up to the grass root level, 
 
 
Annual Mines safety week is organized each year in all mines of Central 
 
 
 
Coalfields Limited: Also, safety drives covering various aspects are conducted 
 
 
throughout the year. 
 
7
.
 
Safety talks are given in al
l mines of CCL at unit level.
 
8
.
 
Introduction of ‘LOTO’ (Lock Out
-
Tag Out) system for enhancing electrical 
 
 
 
safety.
 
9
.
 
To enhance safety awareness, screening & sharing of short safety videos 
 
 
 
based on accidents/incidents is done. Further, Multi
-
media Project
ors (32 nos.) 
 
 
with screen has been provided to the mines of CCL for screening of safety 
 
 
videos to take lesson on how to avert such accidents. 
 
10
.
 
There is Pit Safety Committee in every mine, which meets once in a month to 
 
 
address issues related to safet
y and health of the workers. 
 
 
As a result of all these, there is significant reduction in fatality and serious injuries in 2019
-
20.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 20.2)
 
 
 
The 
Committee express serious concern at the fact that CCL could not fully utilize 
budgetary provisions meant for procuring and maintaining safety equipment
 
resulting
 
in
 
surrendering
 
of
 
the funds
 
since
 
2008
-
09
 
except
 
2010
-
11. The capital expenditure has not 
go
ne beyond 76% since 2008
-
09 except in 2010
-
11 when it spent 162 % of the budgetary 
allocation for the purpose. In the remaining years since 2008
-
09, the expenditure incurred 
for purchasing and maintaining safety equipment ranged from as low as 2.50 % in 20
09
-
10, 
4.17% in 2018
-
19, 13.99% in 2013
-
14 and 75.58% in 2014
-
15. Despite substantial 
underutilization of allocated amounts in the previous years, higher allocations had continued 

46
 
  
to be made in the subsequent years only to be left underutilized. The Commit
tee express 
their serious concern that underutilization of funds not only indicate faulty budgetary 
presumptions but also reflect that management has shown scant regard for the safety of the 
mine workers. The reply furnished by the CCL is conspicuously sil
ent and also evasive as to 
the specific reasons for substantial underutilization of the funds allocated for safety 
equipment since the year 2008
-
09. The Committee take a serious note of the casual 
approach of the CCL on this critical issue which has a dire
ct bearing on the safety and 
security of the mine workers and also on the performance of mines. The Committee are thus 
constrained to conclude that had the allocated funds been fully utilized for procurement of 
the safety equipments, the fatality and serio
us injury cases could have been very well 
minimized substantially if not avoided fully. The Committee therefore desire an explanatory 
note from the Ministry and CCL on this issue. The Committee further recommend that the 
CCL should devise a sound budgetary
 
system so as to ensure that the funds allocated for 
such a critical area are gainfully utilized and the desired results are achieved.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Budgetary provisions are made for certain critical safety items every year. 
Procurement is 
delayed due to non
-
submission of requisite documents by the bidders which 
is required for finalization of procurement process and non
-
justification of the offered price. 
However, with the introduction of GeM portal, the procurement under Capital head is ge
tting 
streamlined. We are taking pro
-
active steps for prudent budgetary allocation and its 
utilization.
 
[Ministry of Coal, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
CSR Initiatives
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 21.1
)
 
 
 
The Committee observe that as per CSR guidelines, CCL was under obligation to 
spend 2% of its profit on CSR activities. The Committee are glad to note that the CSR 
expenditure of Rs. 213 crores during 2015
-
16 was the highest constituting 6.8% of the 
Profit
 
Before Tax (PBT) of that year. However, in the succeeding years, the expenditure 
was much below the basic minimum allocation of 2% of the PBT as prescribed in CSR 
Guidelines as is evident from the fact that the Company spent only 1.8 % on CSR during 
2014
-
 
15, 1.3% during 2016
-
17 and 1.57 % during 2018
-
19. The Committee note that the 

47
 
  
major expenditure of its Rs.172.11 crore during 2015
-
16 was on sanitation. The Committee 
find from the reply of the Company that the huge expenditure on sanitation was made in 
the 
year 2015
-
16 on the instructions of the Ministry of Human Resource Development for 
construction of toilets in government schools under the Swachh Vidyalaya Abhiyan. The 
Committee observe that the Board was competent to decide on the nature of CSR activ
ity 
to be carried out by them but it appears that no action plan is formulated in advance and no 
consultations are held with the stakeholders or the intended beneficiaries before taking up 
the CSR works and as a result thereof, the funds under CSR remain u
nspent year after 
year and the potential beneficiaries were deprived of the benefits they could have got had 
the funds been fully utilized. The Committee therefore recommend that well defined 
mechanism be put in place to undertake CSR activities in a more 
structured manner with 
full utilization of the funds earmarked for CSR with the orientation that the needy and poor 
people are benefitted to the maximum extent. The Committee also desire that under the 
CSR schemes, the CCL should take up works like prevent
ion of contamination of water   
with the use of latest technology, establishing water treatment plants for supply of pure 
drinking water, providing piped water supply and medical facilities to the poor families 
residing in the nearby areas.
 
 
Reply of the G
overnment
 
 
To act in a structured manner, a Standard Operating Procedure for CSR Activities has 
been
 
approved by the CCL Board in its 478th Meeting held on 19.10.2019. The areas of CCL 
have
 
been directed to follow the SoP for implementation of the CSR acti
vities. The SoP 
outlines
 
mechanism for assessment of need, preparation of action plan, implementation, 
monitoring &
 
reporting, etc. CSR Action plan of 
 
CCL
 
is prepared
 
after assessing the local 
needs of the
 
people/community/villages/PAPs/marginalised 
sections of the society in rural 
and remote
 
areas
 
within the command areas of CCL. In addition to action plan of such 
activities identified by
 
CCL, the company has to provide CSR funding of activities related to 
Transformation of
 
Aspirational Districts (TA
DP) programme which are to be planned and 
implemented by District
 
Administration. The action plan thus prepared targeting development 
needs of villagers,
 
specially the poor & marginalised people in command area/state is 
approved for implementation.
 
 
In 
Financial Year 2019
-
20, the total CSR expenditure was Rs. 52.89 Crore, which is
 
approximately 2.48% of the average net profit of last three years. The total CSR expenditure 

48
 
  
during
 
2020
-
21 was Rs.52.75 Crore (as per unaudited figure), which is approximately
 
2.26% 
of the average net profit of last three years.
 
 
The company has undertaken the following works in this regard:
 
1
.
 
Solar powered deep bore wells with water tanks have been installed in villages for 
availability of safe drinking water.
 
2
.
 
RO water plants 
have been installed at different command areas of CCL for use of 
villagers.
 
3
.
 
Activity for provision of piped water supply from mines to nearby village has been 
approved in Action Plan 
 
4
.
 
CCL holds regular medical camps in villages of its command areas. The ex
isting hospitals 
of CCL have ‘Jan Aarogya
 
Kendras’ for addressing the medical needs of poor and 
disadvantaged sections of the society. It is further to mention that since COVID
-
19 
outbreak, four of company’s hospitals are functioning as designated Covid Ho
spitals, as 
per directives of District Administration.
 
5
.
 
CCL has water treatment plants/facilities in its colonies from which nearby villagers are 
also benefitted.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Recomm
endation 
(Sl 
No. 21.2
)
 
 
 
The Committee however appreciate the achievements of the CCL in some of the 
activities undertaken with the funding from CSR. The Committee are glad to note that a 
tribal girl who was trained at the Sports Academy of CCL had won gold medal in Eurasian 
Athle
tic meet and other cadets of the Academy had won 405 medals including 182 gold 
medals in different championships. The Company’s another CSR initiative under “CCL ke 
Lal” and “CCL ke Laadli” wherein many students from the weaker sections of the society 
fina
lly making it to the IITs and Engineering Colleges is also laudable. The Kaya kalp Public 
School at Burku and Dhori especially for providing free education and facilities to the 
children belonging to the poorest of the poor families is also commendable. ex
press their 
hope that the future plans of the Company (i) to open 3 sports centre under Khelo India 
initiative (ii) to install sanitary napkin vending machines with incinerator (iii) to supply 
sanitary pads in 150 schools of CCL areas, and (iv) to supply t
reated water from existing/ 
abandoned mines of CCL to nearby villages, etc. will also be successful with the desired 
results. The Committee, however, desire that with a view to generate local employment and 
also to promote local entrepreneurship, the CCL s
hould launch a flagship programme  by 
extending financial help and other skill trainings to the locals for making bio
-
degradable 
sanitary pads with the use of locally available raw materials like banana leaves and 

49
 
  
bamboo leaves etc. The Committee would lik
e to be apprised of the precise action taken by 
the CCL in this regard.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
A project for installation of 150 Sanitary Napkin Vending Machines and Incinerators in 
schools of CCL command areas was approved by CCL Board. For sustainabili
ty, sanitary 
pads to be used in these machines are to be arranged through SHGs which shall be 
identified/for
med. As per recommendations of H
onorable 
M
embers of Committee project on 
skill trainings to the locals for making bio
-
degradable sanitary pads with 
the use of locally 
available raw materials like banana leaves and bamboo leaves, etc. shall be taken up.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
Recommendation 
(Sl 
No. 21.3
)
 
 
 
The Committee after taking into a
ccount the nature of operations of the Company and 
its impact on the inhabitants in the surrounding areas, desire that the company should 
proactively take up CSR projects for the benefit of the people and their families living in 
nearby areas of the operat
ional mines of the Company. The Committee therefore 
recommend that CCL not only to spend CSR fund to fulfill the minimum obligations as laid 
down in the Companies Act, 2013 for CSR activities but also take up more and more CSR 
activities on their own keepi
ng in view the requirements of the communities/families living 
near by the mines especially the poor and from the marginalised sections of the society. The 
Committee also desire that the maintenance of the physical assets should be taken care of 
regularly.
 
For instance, physical assets like toilets constructed in schools must be 
maintained properly to ensure that they are in usable condition for time to come. It is in this 
context that the Committee would like the CCL to apprise them of the measures taken f
or 
maintenance of the toilets constructed by them under Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. The 
Committee desire the Company to take note of and comply with the observations made by 
the Secretarial Audit on booking of CSR expenditure on actual basis instead of committe
d 
basis.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The CSR expenditure was incurred on projects to cater requirements of the 
communities/families living near mines and on projects undertaken within state of Jharkhand 
as per directives of Centre/State on subjects covered in
 
Schedule VII of Companies Act.
 
 
Recommendation of honorable Committee is noted for compliance in future also.
 

50
 
  
 
As per directives of CCL Board, suitable directives/instructions were requested from 
CIL regarding maintenance of toilets constructed/renovated under SVA. Since no directives 
were received from CIL, CCL could not undertake the maintenance work. As per CIL 
CSR 
policy, the asset created from CSR funds is to be handed over to beneficiaries for its 
subsequent operation, maintenance and use. CCL has handed over the toilets 
constructed/renovated under SVA to school managing committee/school authorities. As per 
no
tification dated 22.01.2021 vide ref. no. CG
-
DL
-
E
-
22012021
-
224640 of Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs regarding Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Amendment 
Rules, 2021, section 7(4) states that: 
 
QUOTE
 
The CSR amount may be spent by a company
 
for creation of acquisition of a capital asset, 
which shall be held by
-
 
(
a
)
 
A company established under section 8 of the Act, or a Registered Public Trust or 
Registered Society, having charitable objects and CSR Registration Number under 
sub
-
rule (2) of rule 
4; or
 
(
b
)
 
Beneficiaries of the said CSR project, in the form of self
-
help groups, collectives, 
entities; or
 
(
c
)
 
a public authority.
 
 
UNQUOTE
 
 
Hence, it is expected that work of cleaning the toilets on daily basis, its upkeep and 
maintenance etc is done by school a
uthorities/local village committees/local bodies with the 
help of district authorities, as required. Being located far away from command area of 
Company/State, construction/maintenance of toilets has practical constraints in ensuring 
maintenance/supervisio
n. It may be appreciated that the responsibility of operation and 
maintenance of the constructed/renovated toilets should be entrusted to the school 
management/local body/district administration with funds of respective state 
government/entities operative 
in state. 
 
 
Amounts transferred to State/Central Government entities/implementing agencies is 
considered as CSR expenditure. However, upon receipt of Utilization Certificate, final 
expenditure shall be reconciled and unspent amount, if any, returned by imp
lementing 
agency shall be deposited in the ‘Unspent CSR Account’ and will be utilized for CSR works 
only in line with Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2021.
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 

51
 
  
Recommendation 
(Sl. 
No. 21.4
)
 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that the Kayakalp Public School which is providing free 
facilities for the education of children of the poorest of the poor families is to draw about 700 
more students from other States who are also needed to be 
provided with the free facilities. 
The Committee therefore recommend that the holding company i.e. Coal India Limited(CIL) 
should explore the possibility of pooling of its own CSR funds with those of its subsidiaries to 
meet the CSR expenditure on this acc
ount. If the CIL is unable to draw enough CSR funds, 
the Government may encourage other CPSUs to pool their CSR funds so that expenditure 
on education and making available other facilities to children of poor families could be 
adequately met. The Committee
 
desire the Company to ensure that the benefits of their 
CSR activities should also reach the remotest areas especially for the families in the 
aspirational districts and to the intended poorest of the poor people/families.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The pro
ject name ‘Kayakalp Public School’, as mentioned in the above 
recommendation, seems to be a misprint. The subject recommendation relates to ‘Sports 
Academy at Hotwar, Ranchi, Jharkhand’.
 
                
NITI Aayog has identified 112 aspirational districts 
of India for assigning preference 
by CPSEs in undertaking CSR activities. CCL operates in 8 districts of Jharkhand (Ranchi, 
Hazaribagh, Chatra, Latehar, Ramgarh, Bokaro, Giridih, Palamu), all of which are among 112 
Aspirational Districts (ADs) of India. CC
L has been undertaking CSR activities in 8 ADs since 
2014
-
15 as a part of its routine CSR. Since the introduction of Transformation of Aspirational 
District Program (TADP) in 2018, four Ads (Chatra, Latehar, Ranchi, Ramgarh) are assigned 
to CCL for funding
 
their projects under CSR. 
 
 
Thus, the expenditure made through company’s routine CSR works in its command 
areas as well as funding of projects of district administration of ADs are all for the benefit of 
the villagers residing in these aspirational districts. Projects/activities are 
selected by 
Company/concerned Aspirational District Administration based on needs of the poor people. 
The recommendation of Committee shall be followed in future also. 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
 
 

52
 
  
CHAPTER III
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
 
Less utilization 
of
 
HEMM
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10.2
)
 
 
The Committee however further observe that  despite the availability of these 
machinery almost as per the norms, their actual utilization  was far short of prescribed norms 
in the year  2018
-
19. For instance, against the utilization norms of 58%, 50%, 45%&
 
40%  for 
Shovels, dumpers, dozers and Drills respectively, the actual utilization was only 40.9%, 
35.4%, 20.8% and 28.2 % in 2018
-
19.   The actual utilization of dozers was less than 50 % of 
the norms and in case of other equipment, it was between 60
-
70% 
only of the utilization 
norms.  The Committee observe that though availability of HEMM is more or less as per the 
norms, their utilization desires a lot to be improved. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the specific reasons for such low utilizatio
n of HEMM with the year
-
wise availability and 
utilization of HEMM during the  last 5 years period and also the impact of such low utilization 
of HEMM on the production of the company. The Committee recommend that  necessary 
measures  need to taken by CCL t
o step up the utilization rates of various equipments of 
HEMM. The Committee also recommend that the machinery owned by  the CCL,  if not  
needed by them  during a particular period of time in a year, may be rented out to other users 
so that  not only the 
machinery remains in use but also the  CCL earns some revenue from 
it."  
 
Reply of the Government
 
In order to improve the utilization of HEMMs, following measures have been taken: 
 
 
 
1. Close liaison with State Govt. for early physical possession of land a
nd for early 
 
grant of CTO. 
 
 
 
2. Monitoring at project level is being done to improve the daily working hours of 
 
HEMMs. Reliability centred maintenance have also been started to improve the 
 
reliability of HEMMs. 
 
 
 
3. Instead of renting out the underutilized equipment to outside companies, we go for 
 
transfer of equipment from one projects/areas to another project/areas based
 
on 
 
internal assessment of mine capacity and suitability of mines to utilize the equipment 
 
optimally. In FY 2018
-
19, 37 nos. of equipment were
 
transferred from one Mine/Area 
 
to other Mines/Areas."
 

53
 
  
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
Recycling of
 
rejects
 
 
Recommendation 
(
Sl No. 14.1
)
 
 
 
The 
Committee note that the ‘rejects’ and ‘ashes’ produced in washeries are e
-
auctioned to local small
-
time businesses engaged in brick trade in the absence of any 
linkage policy. The Committee observe that the washeries of the CCL produced 0.3 lakh 
tons of re
jects and 0.28 lakh tons of slurry
 
every
 
month
 
and
 
the
 
Company
'
s
 
old
 
5.97
 
lakh
 
tons
 
of
 
rejects
 
and
 
2.8 lakh tons of slurry through e
-
auction during the same period. The 
Committee recommend that a linkage policy be developed and also a study be conducted 
on
 
how much quantity of ash and rejects the Company is generating every month and how 
much is in demand for consumption with a view to find suitable markets and potential buyers 
for the ash and rejects generated by the Company.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Earlier, there was linkage of rejects to nearby IPPs (Independent Power Producers), 
due to lower ash % with higher GCV value.  At present due to deterioration in quality of raw 
coking coal, the quality of rejects produced has also deteriorated in respect o
f both ash% & 
GCV. Due to this reason at present rejects produced by CCL washeries are sold through e
-
auction mode. The prospective customers are Sponge Iron, Brick, Cokery Industries etc. 
Rejects sold through e
-
auction generates employment to local Projec
t affected Persons 
during lifting and other related miscellaneous works. It is pertinent to mention that Washeries 
run on close Circuit with zero effluent/waste discharge.
 
Moreover, it is pertinent to highlight that no ash as such is generated from washeri
es. At 
present, rejects are sold through e
-
Auctions through which consumers of various sectors can 
procure such rejects. Further for developing any linkage policy to sell/ dispose rejects 
generated from CCL washeries is a policy matter dealt with by CIL.
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, 
File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18th July, 2021]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54
 
  
Vigilance Initiatives
 
Recommendation 
(Sl. 
No. 17.1
)
 
 
The Committee observe that various vigilance initiatives have been taken up by CCL 
in maintaining transparency
 
and fairness in various processes of operations and 
management of the company. The Committee are however surprised to find that despite 
these initiatives, the number of complaints received every year has been increasing. 
Although, during the last five yea
rs, CCL has imposed 63 major and 102 minor penalties 
on its executives and 30 penalties on its non
-
executives, still during 2018
-
19 alone, about 
405 complaints were received. The Committee further observe that out of the 405 
complaints, a large number of c
omplaints i.e about 92 complaints received were 
anonymous/pseudonymous and had been filed. Out of the remaining 267 complaints, 138 
complaints had been forwarded to HODs/GMs for taking needful action and 175 
complaints were yet to be processed. The Committ
ee are of the firm opinion that Vigilance 
is an important tool of management that ensures orderly conduct of affairs by the 
employees of the organisation and guarantees that all transactions are carried out as per 
procedures laid down thus minimising the s
cope of corruption, malpractice/ misuse of 
authority and funds. The Committee also believe that when large number of 
anonymous/pseudonymous complaints are received, it either reflects the declining faith in 
the vigilance system of the organisation or on th
e officials dealing with it as one of the 
major reasons for lodging
 
anonymous complaints could be either the fear of the 
complainant of facing the adverse consequences thereof or the complainant being a 
genuine whistle blower having threat to his life and 
family if identity is disclosed. 
Nevertheless, the Committee desire that the contents and charges made in the 
anonymous complaints too should be thoroughly verified and if found immaterial, only then 
it should be filed as per the guidelines laid down by th
e Central Vigilance Commission.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The authenticity of the complaints as received in the previous fiscal year in vigilance 
department of CCL, have considerably increased owing to the trust that have been gained 
in the stakeholders 
with consistent fruitful results. A drastic change has been observed 
while analyzing the decrease in the complaints categorized in the anonymous and 
pseudonymous section. The indicative figures are given below :
 
 
 
 

55
 
  
 
 
 
2019
-
20
 
2020
-
2021
 
Number of 
complaints received during the period 
1
st
 
April to 31
st
 
March
 
405
 
464
 
Number of complaints filed being 
Anonymous/Pseudonymous
 
92
 
49
 
Number of complaints taken up for examination / 
verification during the period 1st April to 31st 
March
 
175
 
343
 
Number of 
complaints forwarded to HODs/GMs 
for taking needful action
 
138
 
69
 
 
 
This decrease in the said categories indicates that the trust quotient has significantly 
moved upward, as vigilance department continues to fulfil its goals in curbing corruption 
and 
keeping a check in overall functioning of various disciplines.
 
 
 
Moreover, the anonymous and pseudonymous complaints are dealt with as per the 
provisions laid out by CVC in Vigilance Manual 2017, read with CVC circular No 12/09/20 
dated 12.9.2020 
(Annexure
-
V).
 
 
[Ministry of Coal, File No: PCA
-
11028/1/2019
-
PCA (FTS: 343541) Dated 18
th
 
July, 2021]
 
 
 
 
 

56
 
  
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION
 
 
Permanent invitees on the Board of CCL/ Coal Companies
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.3)
 
 
The Committee note that there are two ‘permanent invitees’ on the Board of CCL, one 
the Chief Operations Manager of the Eastern Railway and the other one Principal Secreta
ry 
(Mines and Geology) of the Government of Jharkhand. The Secretarial Auditor has observed 
that the attendance of the ‘permanent invitees’ in the Board meetings has been poor. From 
the submission of the  Ministry of Coal on this point,  it appears that th
e ‘permanent invitees’ 
are to simply function as ‘liaison Officers’ with the State Governments particularly with regard 
to land acquisition, forest
-
clearance cases, occasional law and order issues relating to 
industrial relations problems, etc.  If this is
 
so, the Committee do not understand why the 
‘permanent invitees’ need to attend all the Board meetings where the agenda of the meetings 
could be ‘confidential’ or on subjects such as commercial strategies, business operations 
etc., in which presence of ‘p
ermanent invitees’  may not be necessarily required. The 
Committee would like to be apprised as to whether the provision for ‘permanent invitees’ in 
the Board is as per the DPE Guidelines or this is independent decision of the Company.  
Further, taking int
o account the fact that presence of “permanent invitees” may not be 
necessary in all meetings of the Board, the Committee recommend for bringing out the 
guidelines specifying the nature of meetings that need to be attended by the ‘permanent 
invitees’. The 
remuneration if any to be paid to them, their tenure, their powers, 
responsibilities, their terms of reference, etc. should also be clearly brought out in the 
Guidelines."
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Permanent Invitees on the Board of CCL/Coal Companies 
are not considered as 
Directors on these Boards and do not have the voting rights and are not counted for the 
purpose of quorum in the Board Meeting. Also, there is no provision for any 
remuneration/incentive to Permanent Invitees for attending meetings of
 
CCL. As regards, to 
formulation of guidelines specifying the nature of meetings that need to be attended by the 

57
 
  
'permanent invitees', Permanent Invitees like other Directors on the Board help the Board to 
arrive at an appropriate decision on each proposal
 
and they are an integral part of the 
Board. As such, they can be allowed to attend every Board meeting." 
 
 
Permanent invitees on the Board of CCL/ Coal Companies
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.
4
)
 
 
 
The Committee are also apprehensive about whether the ‘permanent invitees’ have 
served the purpose of liaising especially when the CCL themselves have stated that many of  
their major projects have been delayed badly for many years for want of  environmen
tal & 
forestry clearances, transfer of ownership, etc.  For instance, the projects 
viz. 
Magadh OC, 
Amrapali OC, Konar OC which should have been commissioned in 2006 were actually 
commissioned in 2014/2015 with delay of eight/nine years. Similarly,  commiss
ioning of the 
projects 
-
  
Chadragupta OCP, Sanghamitra OCP, Kotre Basantpur Panchmo OCP,etc, are 
experiencing delays primarily for want of environmental and forestry clearances. The 
Committee are thus concerned as to how far the ‘permanent invitees’  have 
been effective in 
mitigating problems arising due to hurdles in getting clearances, land acquisitions, industrial 
relations, law & order, resettlement, etc. The Committee, therefore,  are of the considered 
view that the role of ‘permanent invitees’ needs t
o be much more effective to have meaningful 
impact on expediting various statutory clearances and resolving local problems and therefore 
recommend that Ministry should develop an appropriate mechanism for effective and the 
gainful utilization of the Perman
ent Appointees who are nominated in  the Board."
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
For commissioning of new projects and expansion of existing ones and for sustenance 
of production and dispatch, CCL has to be in close touch with the State Government and 
Railways. 
As such, it is desirable to keep Permanent Invitees for keeping a close liaison with 
the State Governments particularly in regard to land acquisition, forest clearance cases, 
occasional law and order issues relating to industrial relations problems etc,
 
ra
ilway issues. "
 
 
Cost incurred on
 
HEMM
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10.3
)
 
 
The Committee’s analysis of the data submitted to them by CCL reveals that  the 
Company spent Rs. 859 crore on hiring of plant and equipments during 2018
-
19. The 

58
 
  
Company informed that no
 
independent study was undertaken to assess the comparative 
cost effectiveness in hiring of HEMMs or owning these equipments. Keeping in view that such 
huge expenditure of  Rs. 859 crore was incurred in one year on hiring  plant and equipments, 
especially 
when the  CCL owned equipments are not being utilised to the full extent in some 
cases as is evident that  the utilization of all HEMM had been much less than 50 % of the 
norms prescribed during the year 2018
-
19, the Committee recommend that detailed note 
be 
furnished to the Committee explaining inter alia the reasons for hiring equipments when the 
CCL owned equipments were lying unutilized to a large extent and also on the comparative 
effectiveness of hiring vs. owning of HEMM and other related issues."
 
 
R
eply of the Government
 
 
 
Over 
 
99 % of the coal production in CCL comes from opencast mines. 
 
All mines
 
         
of
 
the company are run by qualified professionals, who ensure compliance with statutes.
 
All 
opencast mines have shovel dumper combination for 
removal of overburden. Surface miners
 
have been introduced for coal mining in Piparwar, Ashok, Magadh, Amrapali, North Urimari 
and Karo. 
 
 
 
i. Surface mining in CCL is done by heavy earth moving machineries (HEMM) 
 
owned by CCL or machines hired by CCL as 
per the stipulations of the project 
 
report prepared by CMPDIL as a 
 
normal practice. 
 
 
 
ii. In small patches with limited life where departmental machines cannot be 
 
deployed economically, outsourcing agency are deployed based on open 
 
tender
system transp
arently as per provisions of Contract Management Manual of Coal 
 
India, with the approval of Competent Authority. 
 
 
 
iii. As the life of departmental equipment is quite long (shovel 
–
 
6
-
12 years, 
 
dumpers 
–
 
6
-
9 years) such machines are deployed preferably 
only in those 
 
patches which are techno economically viable." 
 
 
 
 

59
 
  
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
 
 
 
-
NIL
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR
 
24 
January, 2022
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Chairperson
 
4 Magha, 1943 (S)
 
 
 
        
                  
Committee on Public Undertakings
 
 
 
 
                      

60
 
  
 
ANNEXURE
-
I
 
 
F.No.11028/1/2019
-
PCA (Part
-
I)
 
Government of India
 
Ministry of Coal
 
(CA Section)
 
****
 
Shastri Bhawan,
 
New Delhi
 
Dated the 22nd April, 2020
 
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
 
 
Subject: 
 
Reply to the Q.12 i.e. "Thorium Based Power Plants" of Additional list of 
 
 
points for obtaining written replies on the subject "Central Coalfields 
 
 
Limited" 
-
reg.
 
 
 
The undersigned is di
rected to refer to Lok Sabha Secretariat's OM No. 66/1/6/2019 
-
COPU dated 06th March 2020 and written replies submitted by this Ministry vide OM of even 
number dated 11.03.2020 on the above mentioned subject wherein it was submitted in 
respect of Q. 12 tha
t “Ministry of Coal has no information on thorium based power plants. 
However, an OM has been sent to Department of Atomic Energy for seeking information. The 
same would be sent to the Committee as soon as it is received from Department of Atomic 
Energy”.
 
 
2.
 
2. The reply to the Q.12 i.e. "Thorium Based Power Plants" of Additional list of points 
for obtaining written replies on the subject "Central Coalfields Limited" (50 copies in English), 
is enclosed as per Annexure for kind perusal and necessary action.
 
 
4. Hindi version will follow.
 
 
Encl. As above.
 
sd/
-
 
(Alka Shekhar)
 
Under Secretary to the Government of India
 
E mail: alka.shekhar@nic.in
 
Telefax No. 011
-
 
23382188
 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat
 
(CoPU), (Smt Memta Kemwal, Director),
 
Parliament House,
 
New 
Delhi
-
110001.
 
 
 
 

61
 
  
ANNEXURE
-
II
 
No. 11028/1/2019
-
PCA
 
Government of India
 
Ministry of Coal
 
(CA Section)
 
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi
 
 
Dated the 26 August, 2020
 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
 
 
 
Subject: Updated information in connection with the examination of the subject 'Central 
 
 
   
Coalfields
 
Limited (CCL)' 
-
regarding. 
 
 
 
The undersigned is directed to refer to Lok Sabha Secretariat OM No. 66/1/6/2019 dated 
05.08.2020 and this Ministry’s OM 
of even number dated 14.08.2020 on above mentioned subject.
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hindi translation of updated replies (date
-
wise) with updation made in red colour in the 
annexures are enclosed herewith for further appropriate action. The details are as follows
:
 
Sr. 
No. 
 
Lok Sabha 
Secretariat’s OM 
dated
 
Replies sent to 
CoPU vide MoC’s 
OM dated
 
 
 
Updated 
Information sent 
vide MoC’s OM 
dated 14.08.2020
 
Hindi translation of 
updated Information 
sent vide MoC’s OM 
dated 14.08.2020
 
1.
 
06.08.2019
 
19.08.2019 
 
Annexure 
I
 
Annexure I
-
 
Hindi
 
2.
 
15.10.2019 
(Additional 
information)
 
24.10.2019 
 
Annexure II
 
Annexure II
-
 
Hindi
 
3.
 
26.12.2019
 
10.01.2020 
 
Annexure III
 
Annexure III
-
 
Hindi
 
4.
 
17.02.2020
 
21.02.2020 
 
Annexure IV
 
Annexure IV
-
 
Hindi
 
5.
 
03.03.2020
 
06.03.2020 
 
Annexure
 
V
 
Annexure V
-
 
Hindi
 
6. 
 
06.03.2020 
(Additional List)
 
11.03.2020 
 
Annexure VI
 
Annexure VI
-
 
Hindi
 
Supplementary reply 
for Point 12. MoC’s 
OM dated 
22.04.2020.
 
No Change.
 
NA
 
 
3.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is informed that Hindi translation of supplementary reply 
for point no. 12 (sr. no. 6 in 
table above) is also enclosed herewith at Annexure
-
VII
-
Hindi.
 
 
 
4.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is also informed that in reply of point no. 22 of Annexure 
–
 
III 
 
of English sent to CoPU vide 
MoC’s OM dated 14.08.2020; under the heading “
Selection Process
” may be read as 
“The cadets 
of the sports academy have so far won 596 medals including 280 gold medals in different 
championships.”
 
 
 
 
5.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This issues with the approval of the Secretary (Coal). 
 
 
Enclosures: 
 
As above (7)
 
(Annex
-
 
I 
to VII
-
 
Hindi)
 
 
 
(Alka Shekhar)
 
Under Secretary to the Government of India
 
E mail: alka.shekhar@nic.in
 
Telefax No. 011
-
 
23382188 
 
Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
(CoPU), (Shri R C Tiwari, JS), 
 
Parliament House, New Delhi
-
110001
 
(Email
-
id: comm.pub@sansad.nic.in ).
 

62
 
  
ANNEXURE
-
I
II
 
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT 
 
POLICY OF COAL INDIA LIMITED 2012
 
Preamble :
 
 
The location & quality of coal reserves, and their distance from major consumers 
determines to a great extent the selection of mine sites. For reserves that are c
lose to the  
surface, opencast mining has proven to be the most efficient mining method. Opencast mines 
require relatively large area of land. Population growth, particularly in India’s eastern region, 
has made it increasingly difficult for the subsidiary 
coal companies to acquire the land they 
need for expanding their operations under the present Resettlement & Rehabilitation Policy, 
2008 of Coal India. 
 
 
 
The resettlement and rehabilitation policies followed by the subsidiary companies have 
evolved over 
time and undergone numerous changes in response to changing 
circumstances. As and when the Central or State Governments enact amendments to the 
Land Acquisition Act issue new guidelines and rehabilitation, as per its requirement Coal 
India reviews and modi
fies its resettlement & rehabilitation policy taking into account
 
the 
changing conditions in coal producing areas.
 
 
In addition to compensation for land coal companies provide Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement (R&R) package for project affected persons to 
compensate for loss of 
livelihood. Apart from compensation for house site, house, tree, cow shed, cost of shifting etc. 
employment is also provided to land oustees. In addition to this, efforts are made to 
rehabilitate them by construction of houses, build
ings roads, streets, schools, providing water 
etc. wherever feasible. However, demand for both more land compensation& better R&R 
package has been raised by project affected persons and has been highlighted in various 
Parliamentary Committees. Coal Compani
es often have to face representations and 
agitations by these land oustees
 
who obstruct the smooth
 
working of existing mines and 
come in the way of expansion of new projects.
 
 
In the past, subsidiaries found it relatively easy to acquire land, if they were
 
able to 
offer employment. Partly because of this practice, subsidiaries have built up as largely 
unskilled labour beyond their needs. This has contributed to the heavy losses and many 
mines are incurring and has also affected their efficiently and viabili
ty. The subsidiaries may 
still need to hire people in selected locations and continue to give preference to those whose 
livelihood will be affected by coal mining operations. However, increasingly subsidiaries will 
need to develop other ways and means to c
ompensate land owners and others adversely 
affected by their projects and give them the option to choose which method of compensation 
best suits their needs. Greater emphasis will also need to be given to community 
requirements like schools, hospitals etc.
 
Only proper resettlement & rehabilitation will elicit 
the required cooperation of project affected people and make it possible for Coal India to 
acquire land it needs to fulfill the ever increasing demand of coal for the economic 
development of the Countr
y.
 

63
 
  
The purpose of the Resettlement & Rehabilitation Policy 2012  is to revise and provide 
greater flexibility to the basis principles for the resettlement and rehabilitation of people 
affected by coal mining projects i.e. Project Affect People (PAPs). It a
ttempts to consolidate 
the different resettlement and rehabilitation practices that are being followed by subsidiaries 
as per the different State Land Acquisition Acts and various decisions of the Coal India  
Board and to modify the Policy of  2008 so as t
o give the Board of the subsidiary Companies 
greater flexibility to deal more effectively with resettlement and rehabilitation issues and 
determine the rehabilitation packages best suited to local needs in line with this policy. The 
provisions of the Natio
nal Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy, 2007 and the Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation & Resettlement Bill, 2007 have also been kept in mind while 
framing the policy.
 
While Coal India’s basic philosophy for compensating land
-
 
losers and other project affe
cted 
people remains substantially unchanged, the revised policy emphasizes the need to cultivate 
and maintain good relationships with the people affected by Coal India’s projects stating as 
early as possible. It also underscores that the subsidiaries have 
responsibility towards the 
land oustees whole livelihood is often taken away. On the other land, subsidiaries need to 
project themselves more effectively against unjustified claims, redundant manpower and 
swelling Wage Bills. To this end, the statement pro
poses that subsidiaries prepare detailed 
resettlement and rehabilitation action plans (RAPs) that clearly identify, at an early stage, the 
entitlements of the people affected by coal projects and enables them to exercise a choice 
between various options. T
he concept of Annuity in lieu of compensation / employment is 
also being introduced to mitigate , if not eliminate the ever dependence of Project Affected 
Families (PAFs) on CIL for provision of employment.
 
(1)  The revised Resettlement& Rehabilitation Pol
icy, 2012 is based on the deliberations of 
the inter Ministerial Committee set up vide OM 490191 / 2011 
–
 
PRIW 
-
1 dated 01..07.2011 
of Ministry of Coal, deliberations of the CMDs meet held on 05.03.2012 at New Delhi and has 
been approved by the CIL Board i
n its 279
th
 
meeting held on 12thh & 13
th
 
March, 2012.
 
 
(2)       Objectives and general principles of Coal India’s Resettlement & Rehabilitation 
Policy
-
 
2012
 
A
.
 
To re
-
visit CIL’s existing R&R Policy 2008 and evolve a PAP friendly policy by 
incorporating such 
provisions of the National Policy and The Draft Land 
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill
-
 
2011 as considered suitable in 
light of the growing difficulties many subsidiaries face in land acquisition.
 
B
.
 
To accord the highest priority for avoiding
 
or minimizing disturbances of the local 
population while taking decisions to open new mines or expand existing ones too 
(exploring alternatives sites and project designs) and to ensure that wherever 
people are likely to be adversely affected by a project,
 
the subsidiaries will prepare 
resettlement & rehabilitation action plans for the project.
 
C
.
 
To ensure a humane, participatory, informed consultative and transparent process 
for land acquisition for coal mining and allied activities with the least disturbanc
es 
to the owners of the land and other effected families.
 
D
.
 
To provide just & fair compensation to the affected families whose land has been 
acquired or proposed to be acquired or are affected by such acquisition and make 

64
 
  
adequate provisions for loss of live
lihood of such affected persons including their 
rehabilitation & resettlements. 
 
E
.
 
To ensure that the cumulative outcome of compulsory acquisition should be that  
the affected persons become partners in development leading to an improvement 
in their post acq
uisition social & economic status and matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
 
F
.
 
Through the preparation of resettlement & rehabilitation action plans, subsidiaries 
will safeguard that project
-
affected people improve or at least regain their former
 
standard or living and earning capacity after a reasonable transition  period. The 
transition period is to be kept to a minimum. Howeve
r 
until all the actions specified 
in the rehabilitation plan have been completed.
 
G
.
 
Involuntary resettlement is conceived 
and executed as a development programme 
with project
-
affected people being provided sufficient resources & opportunities to 
share in a project’s benefits. The efforts of subsidiaries are complementary to the  
Governments scheme in rural development and the
 
concurrence, approvals and 
support from concerned Government authorities will be sought.
 
H
.
 
In parallel, subsidiaries will work closely with non
-
government organizations of 
proven repute which are legally constituted and recognized & also have the 
confidence
 
of the project
-
affected people in the preparation& implementation of 
rehabilitation plans.
 
I
.
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) : Activities shall be intensified in and around 
the villages where land is being acquired in accordance with the SCR Policy of
 
Coal India.
 
J
.
 
Actual implementation of R&R package must follow a detailed survey of the 
project
-
affected villages to formulate the list of persons / families affected by the 
project, nature of the affect, the likely loss of income etc.  For this purpose, if
 
necessary, the services of a reputed NGO with an impressive record of integrity 
and performance may be engaged. 
 
3.
SCOPE
 
This Policy may be called ‘Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy of Coal India Limited 
–
 
2012 “ 
It extends to the Coal India Limited an
d its subsidiary companies in India. It shall come into 
force from the date of its approval of the CIL Board and its applicable to all cases in which 
land is taken after the date of approval by the CIL Board. While implementing the policy it is 
to be ensur
ed that the provisions of the concerned Acts applicable and Rules mentioned 
there under shall not be violated. 
 
4.Definitions 
–
 
(a)     “ 
affected family
 
“ means
 
(i) a family whose primary place of residence or other property or source of livelihood is  
ad
versely affected by the acquisition of land (including direct negotiation) for a   project or 
involuntary displacement for any other reasons; or 
 

65
 
  
(ii) any tenure holder, tenant, lessee or owner  of other property, who on account of    
acquisition of land (
including plot in the abadi or other property) in the affected area  or other 
wise, has been involuntarily displaced from such land or other property; or
 
 
(iii) any agricultural or non
-
agricultural labourer, landless person (not having homesteads 
land, 
agricultural land, or either homestead or agricultural land) rural artisan, small trader or 
self
-
employed person, who has been residing or engaged in any trade, business, occupation 
or vocation continuously for a period of not less than three years  preced
ing the date of 
declaration of the affected area, and who has been deprived of earning his livelihood or 
alienated wholly or substantially from the main source of his trade, business, occupation or 
vocation because of the acquisition of land in the affecte
d area or being involuntarily 
displaced for any other reason.
 
 
(b)
 
“
famil
y”  includes a person, his / her spouse, minor sons, dependant
 
daughters, minor 
brothers, unmarried sisters, father, mother residing with him or her and dependent on him / 
her for the
ir livelihood; and includes “ nuclear family” consisting of a person, his / her spouse 
and minor children. Provided that where there are no male dependants, the benefit due to a 
land loser may devolve on dependent daughter nominated by the land loser.
 
 
(c 
)
 
“ 
land owner
 
“ includes any person 
–
 
 
 
(
i
)
 
Whose name is recorded as the owner of the land or part thereof in the records of the 
concerned authority; or 
 
(
ii
)
 
Who is entitled to granted Patta rights on the land under any law of the State including 
assigned lands ; or 
 
(
iii
)
 
Who has been declared as such by an order or the court or District Collector.
 
 
(d)
Displaced person
 
-
 
means and includes any person who is deprived
 
of his homestead on 
account of acquisition. Provided that the person / family who does not ordinarily reside in the 
homestead land acquired for the project can be termed “ Displaced “ but he will be eligible for 
compensation only for homestead and not for
 
livelihood. 
 
 
(e)
 
Ordinarily resides shall mean residing in the homestead  / acquired land for a period more 
than 6 months every year for at least the preceding 5 years.
 
 
5.
 
Socio
-
economic Survey and preparation of RAP
 
 
A baseline socioeconomic survey wil
l be carried out to identify the PAPs who are enlisted to 
receive benefits in line with Coal India’s Resettlement & Rehabilitation Policy. This survey will 
be conducted within two months of notification under relevant land acquisition acts by the 
subsidiar
ies with the help of reputed independent institutional agencies, who are well versed 
with the social matrix of the area. 
 
 
 
 
The basic objective of the socio
-
economic study will be to generate baseline 
data on the social and economic status of the populati
on who are likely to lose their means of 

66
 
  
livelihood or homestead due to the acquisition of the land for the project. The data base will 
be used to formulate a viable and practical Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) for the affected 
persons in line with their
 
entitlements. Digital Satellite Maps would also be prepared or the 
project Area freezing the dwelling units and habitations existing at the time of negotiation for 
Land Acquisition wherever feasible. The RAP will also address the following 
–
 
 
(A)
   
 
Imple
mentation, Monitoring & Evaluation, Dispute Mechanism 
 
The rehabilitation action plan will address the following : 
 
i
)
 
The project design, including an analysis of alternative designs aimed at avoiding or 
minimizing resettlement 
 
ii
)
 
Socio
-
economic survey and 
activities to ensure restoration of incomes of PAPs in line 
with Coal India’s Resettlement & Rehabilitation Policy.
 
iii
)
 
Description of the institutional and other mechanisms for provision of entitlements 
 
iv
)
 
Time Table for the acquisition and preparation of the r
esettlement site(s)
 
v
)
 
The cost and budgets for the resettlement and rehabilitation of PAFs
 
vi
)
 
Project specific arrangements to deal with grievances of PAFs and 
 
vii
)
 
Time tables, benchmarks and arrangements for monitoring the resettlement and 
rehabilitation effort.
 
The RAP will be formulated in consultation with PAPs and State Governments.
 
(B)      Environment Impact Assessment (EIA)
 
will be conducted as per any law, rule and 
regulation of the locality in which the land has been acquired. 
 
 
6.
 
Eligibility Criteria 
–
 
(A)     
Eligibility Criteria for Economic Rehabilitation Benefits 
 
 
This benefit shall accrue only to Entitled Project Affected Person. Entitled Project 
Affected Person shall be one from the following categories
 
(
i
)
 
Persons from whom land is acquired including
 
tribal cultivating lands under 
traditional rights.
 
(
ii
)
 
Persons whose homestead is acquired.
 
(
iii
)
 
Sharecroppers, land lessees tenants and day laborers
 
(
iv
)
Tribal dependent on forest produce as certified by the District Forest Officer / 
Revenue Authorities.
 
(B)        Eligibility criteria for Resettlement benefits 
 
1.
Only a Displaced family / person shall be eligible for resettlement benefits  
 
2.     A family/ person shall be termed displaced and hence eligible benefits if  such 
family person has been a perm
anent resident and ordinarily residing in the project 
area on the date of publication of notification u/s 9 of CBA (A&D) Act 1957 / u/s 11 of 
L.A. Act, 1894/or    on the date of the land vested with the State / Central Government 
as the case may be 
 
and 
 
(
a)         On account of acquisition of his / her homestead land / structure is displaced 
from such areas 
 
or
 
(b)     He / she is a homestead less or land less family / person who has been / is 
required to be displaced. 
 
 
 

67
 
  
7. Census & Identification of di
splaced families 
 
1.
     
Within two months of publication of notice u,/s 4 (1) of the Land acquisition Act, or 
u/s 7 (1) of CBA (A&D) Act, 1q957 for acquisition of land or the project a census would 
be undertaken in the manner to be decided by the Collecto
r / Project authority for 
identification of displaced families and for preparing their socio economic profile and 
list of eligible persons for the purpose of receiving Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Benefits. 
 
2.
   
A  photo identify  card to each entitled p
roject affected person shall be issued 
under the signature of the Collector / Propjet Authority concerned indicating the 
following particulars.
 
 
a
)
 
Name of the village / GP / PS
 
b
)
 
Name Father’s name and address
 
 
of the head of the family
 
c
)
 
Category of entitlement 
 
d
)
 
Whether SC / ST / OBC / General 
 
e
)
 
Age, Sex, Educational qualification
 
 
of the members of the family
 
 
8.        
Types of Compensation and Rehabilitation Entitlement 
 
 
Option to the land losers regarding Rehabilitation &
 
Resettlement Benefit 
–
 
The  land 
losers shall have the option for Rehabilitation &Resettlement benefits in accordance with the 
awards for each affected family in terms of the entitlements passed by the Concerned 
Collector of the state or as per this Polic
y with the consent of the concerned collectors.
 
 
8.1          Eligibility and compensation 
 
 
The table below shows the compensation &
 
rehabilitation benefits will be offered by the 
subsidiaries for each Project Affected Person or family, affected by one of their projects. 
Evidence to the effect that a person is a legitimate PAP will need to be provided in the form of 
a written legal doc
ument or reference to a record, such as a revenue officer certificate, 
electoral roll, ration card or school record. 
 
 
Category of Persons 
affected by the Project
 
Compensation & Rehabilitation entitlement option 
 
 
Provisions 
 
(i)
Persons (including 
tribals 
cultivating land under 
traditional rights) from whom 
land is acquired.
 
All land owners with titles will receive monetary 
compensation for the land acquired from them. The 
value of the land is determined on the basis of 
prevailing legal norms. 
In re
spect of tribals  cultivating 
land under traditional rights, authentication of land 
held under traditional rights by State Authorities will be 
necessary
. In addition to above the following shall 
apply.
 
 
 
 

68
 
  
Category of 
Persons 
affected by 
the Project
 
Compensation & Rehabilitation entitlement option 
 
 
Provisions 
 
 
A).Land compensation
-
Land compensation shall be paid as per the 
provisions of the concerned Act or State Government notification. 
Where no notification of the State Government is available 
the 
concerned subsidiary Board may decide on the rate of compensation 
keeping in view the compensation provided by the neighboring 
states. Authentication of land held under traditional rights by state 
authorities will be necessary.
 
     
In addition to abov
e Solatium will be paid as per provisions of the 
concerned Act / as imposed by the concerned State Government.
 
      
Escalation of land compensation
-
 
Escalation will be paid as per 
provisions of the concerned Act / as imposed by the concerned State 
Governm
ent or Escalation art the rate of 12% per annum for a 
maximum period of three years.
 
(B) Employment provisions
: Apart from payment of the land 
compensation employment may be given in the following manner
 
1)
The maximum total number of employments that may b
e provided 
to the land losers would be limited to the total numberof acres of land 
acquired divided by two. However, employments will be released in 
proportion to the land possessed. 
 
2)
For every two acres of land one employment can be considered.
 
 
3)     
  
Subsidiaries of CIL may give an option to the land losers 
 
having less than two acres of land to club together their land to the 
extent of two acres and nominate one of the land losers among the 
groups or their dependent for employment under package deal
 
or 
employment under descending order system by preparing the list of 
eligible land oustees in the descending order of land lost subject to 
the cut off equivalent to the total number of permissible employments 
or any other method with the approval of the r
espective Board of the 
subsidiary.
 
4)
The land loser must be a domiciled resident / Mool  Niwasi  and 
the certificate to this effect shall be issued by the concerned State 
Authority. 
 
5)
The modalities for offering employment shall be such as 
 
may be approve
d by the Board of Subsidiary companies as per the 
unique conditions of the subsidiary provided that:
 
 
a)          The initial employment shall be given with pay of 
 
Category
-
1 pay scale of NCWA with training period of 6 months. 
 
  
b)    In the seniority list, the seniority of the appointee shouldbe 
reflected in appropriate manner in order to keep the senior most as 
senior. 
 
  
c)     The land loser trainees shall be posted as per requirement,
 
including underground duties.
 
 
 
 

69
 
  
Categ
ory of 
Persons 
affected by the 
Project
 
Compensation & Rehabilitation entitlement option 
 
 
Provisions 
 
 
(
C ) Lumpsum Monetary Compensation
 
     
1.      All the land losers who are not eligible for employment  as 
above shall be entitled to receive compensation in lieu of 
employment at the rate of Rs. 5,00,000 /
-
 
(Five lakhs) for each acre 
of land on pro
-
rata basis.
 
      
2.      Land losers wh
o are offered employment as per principle
 
 
specified in point No.( 8  (i) B)above will have the option either to 
opt for employment  or to forego employment and opt for monetary 
compensation at the rate of Rs. 5,00,000/
-
 
(five lakhs) for each 
acre of land 
on pro
-
rata basis with minimum of Rs. 50,000 (Fifty 
thousand) provided that the employment thus surrendered shall not 
be available for offer to any person and will stand lapsed from the 
total sanctioned number of employments as specified in point No.( 
8 (i
) B1). 
 
     
3.     The land losers who have clubbed their land in Package 
Deal can claim employment for only one land loser of the clubbed 
two acres of land and remaining land losers of the package cannot 
claim either employment or lump sum monetary compe
nsation in 
lieu of the land contributed by them.
 
 
     
4.        Annuity
-
 
All land losers who are entitled to get lump sum
 
monetary compensation may opt for payment of compensation 
amount in the form of annuity made payable to the land losers 
monthly, annu
ally or at such intervals (not less than one year) as 
may be opted for by him. The annuity be paid for a maximum 
period extending to 60 years of age or the life of the project for 
which the land has been acquired, whichever is earlier. 
 
Note:
A person recei
ving a job forgoes all claims to above 
compensation and a person receiving above compensation forgoes 
all claims to employments.
 
 
 
(ii)
Person 
whose 
homestead is 
acquired 
 
I
.
 
Compensation for homestead shall be paid as the standard 
valuation method of the LA 
Act of the concerned state 
Government. 
 
II
.
 
One time lump sum payment of Rs. 3,00,000/
-
 
(three lakhs) 
shall be paid in lieu of alternate House site. Assistance  in 
designing shifting allowance  for construction of cattle shed. 
Monetary compensation for construction of work shed etc. . 
The compensati
on shall be paid to displaced persons only 
after vacation and demolition of the homestead  / work shed 
etc. 
 
III
.
 
 
Subsistence allowance : Each affected displaced family will 
get subsistence allowance at the rate of 25 days (minimum 
agricultural wage) per month
 
for one year.
 
 
 

70
 
  
Category of 
Persons 
affected by the 
Project
 
Compensation & Rehabilitation entitlement option 
 
 
Provisions
 
(iii
)Sharecroppe
rs  land lessees, 
tenants and day 
labourers 
 
The subsidiary will assist PAP to take up non farm self employment 
th
rough petty contracts or formation of co
-
operatives if such co
-
operatives will not be entitled for awarding  work as per manual for 
lack of experience the said co
-
operative will be facilitated by 
awarding small jobs to acquire experience after relaxation o
f the 
Subsidiary Boards. Manual pertaining to experience after getting 
report of the timely completion/ quality / of the awarded jobs from 
the concerned Department or contractors. 
 
 
Contractors will also be persuaded to give job to eligible PAPs on a 
prudential
 
basis, where feasible as per terms of contract. 
 
 
(iv)
Landless 
tribals.Tribal 
dependent on 
forest produce.
 
The subsidiary will assist PAP to establish non farm self 
employment through the provision of infrastructure petty contracts 
or formation
 
of co
-
operatives and encourage provisions of jobs with 
contractors. Contractors will be persuaded  to give jobs to eligible 
PAPs on preferential basis where feasible. 
 
 
-
 
In addition the subsidiaries will shift the tribal community as 
a 
 
unit and provide fa
cilities to meet the specific  needs of the tribal 
community that will allow them to maintain their unique cultural 
identity. 
 
 
-
 
Tribal affected family will be given one time financial 
assistance 
 
of 500 days of MAW for loss of customary right or usages of 
forest 
produce. Loss of customary rights needs to be authenticated by the 
district authority. 
 
-
 
Tribal affected families resettled out of the district shall be 
given 
 
25% higher rehabilitation and resettlement benefit. 
 
 
9.
 
Resettlement
 
&
 
Rehabilitation Committee 
–
 
A committee will be constituted at project 
level under the chairmanship of the Collector to be called the Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Committee with the following objectives to monitor and review the progress of implementatio
n 
of the Rehabilitation and Resettlement scheme and to carry out post implementation social 
audits in consultation with the village pachyat in rural areas and municipality in urban areas in 
the manner will be decided by the concerned State Government. 
 
I
.
 
To 
approve the list of land losers and other PAPs;
 
II
.
 
To  approve the list of persons eligible to be offered employment as per R&R Policy.
 
III
.
 
To approve the detailed Rehabilitation Plan for the project in consultation with the 
displaced persons and Gram Sabhas.
 
IV
.
 
To 
expedite issue of  domicile
 
certificates and other necessary documentation required 
for State Authorities.
 

71
 
  
V
.
 
To monitor and review the progress of the Rehabilitation Scheme grant of benefits and 
handing over of possession of land in a smooth manner.
 
VI
.
 
To facil
itate the land acquisition process in any other manner as may be required 
including resolution of disputes.
 
VII
.
 
To carry out post implementation social audit in consultation with the authorities. 
 
 
10.
   
Community facilities 
–
 
The subsidiary will provide at th
e resettlement site a school, road 
with street light, pucca drain, pond, dug well and  or tube well for drinking water supply, 
community center, place of worship, dispensary, grazing land for cattle and play ground. 
Similar infrastructural  facility, if ne
cessary will be extended to the host locality. The 
community facilities & services would be available to all residents of the area, including PAPs 
and the host population. 
 
 
The approach for operation of community facilities would be flexible and all effor
ts will be 
made to involve the State & local self Government / Panchayat for operating the facilities. To 
achieve this subsidiaries will pursue with these agencies to ensure the same. The planning of 
the community facilities and their construction should b
e undertaken in consultation with the 
affected community. 
 
 
11. 
Corporate Social Responsibilities
 
–
 
This should be as per Company’s Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Policy. 
 
12.
  
Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism
 
–
 
 
This RAP will be monitored and ev
aluated periodically after the completion of the land 
acquisition process.
 
 
I
.
 
The resettlement and rehabilitation activities are the responsibility of a separate group 
both at the project and corporate level, which will be constituted for planning, 
implement
ation, monitoring and evaluation of the Rehabilitation Action plan. At the 
corporate level the group will be headed by a senior manager, whereas at the project 
an executive of the rank of manager will head the group. The project group should 
have at least 
one member with social science qualification / experience and skills. 
 
II
.
 
The project will closely interact with the State authorities during the implementation of 
the RAP. Although the subsidiaries will develop the plots ands infrastructural facilities 
in th
e resettlement colony &actively implement the RAP assistance of State Authorities 
will be taken for administrative services such as allotment of land, implementation will 
be planned , monitored and corrective measures will be incorporated in the RAP, if 
ne
eded. In addition to the State Government the PAPs the village leaders including the 
Pradhans and NGOS will be consulted and associated with the implementation of the 
RAP.
 
III
.
 
The resettlement and rehabilitation cell at the corporate level will evaluate the 
im
plementation of the RAPP after its completion. 
 
 
13.    Flexibility to the Subsidiary
 
Companies 
–
 
The subsidiary companies boards have 
been authorized to approve necessary modifications in the R&R Policy with reference to 
unique conditions at the concerned
 
subsidiaries as the policy is not exhaustive. 
 

72
 
  
 
 
 
                                 
 
                                                                                                               
ANNEXURE IV
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme, CIL, 2020
 
(In Lieu of Direct Employment or One
-
Time Monetary Compensation 
Against Land)
 
 

73
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 September, 2020
 

74
 
  
 

75
 
  
 

76
 
  
 

77
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme of CIL, 
2020
 
 
 
A.Circumstantial
:
 
 
Keeping in view the need for more efficient and cost competitive the coal companies are 
moving towards outsourcing mode instead of departmental mode of operation. This would 
result in reduction in employment opportunity in the company. Further, in most of the cases 
of land acquisition, the demand for employment exceeds the employment opportunity 
available in the mine/ project. As such, the possibilities of providing employment
 
to the land 
oustees are becoming difficult for the company.
 
Annuity may be a responsive alternate method in lieu of providing employment as well as 
maintaining sustainable resource of livelihood to the affected families.
 
 
 
B.Scope:
 
 
 
This annuity scheme shall be implemented in lieu of employment claim by the eligible 
affected family against land acquisition. All such entitled Affected Family shall opt for 
annuity and forgo the job benefit or one time monetary compensation in lieu of em
ployment 
against acquired land by entering into an agreement with project authority.
 
 
C.
Legal obligation about Annuity
:
 
 
As per Second Schedule {See Sections 31(1), 38(1) & 105(3)} of the Right To Fair 
Compensation And Transparency In Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation And Resettlement Act, 
2013 (RFCTLARR Act 2013);
 
Quote
 
:
 
 
“The appropriate Government shall ensure that the affected families are provided with the 
following options:
 
 
(a) where jobs are created through the project, after providing suitable training and skill 
 
development in the required field, make provision for employment at a rate not lower than the 
 
minimum wages provided for in any other law for the time being in fo
rce, to at least one
 
 
 
 
 

78
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme of CIL, 2020
 
 
 
member per affected family in the project or arrange for a job in such other project as may be 
required; or
 
(b) onetime payment of five lakhs rupees per affected family;
 
or
 
 
(c) Annuity policies that shall pay not less than two thousand rupees per month per family for 
twenty years, with appropriate indexation to the CPI for Agricultural Labourers’.”
 
Unquote
 
Therefore, annuity is a legally tenable alternative option in lie
u of employment against 
acquired land.
 
 
D.
Entitlements for Annuity
;
 
 
The following category of beneficiaries may opt for Annuity in lieu of Job/ Employment or one 
time monetary compensation:
 
 
I.All land owner whose land is  acquired will be eligible for compensation for land as specified 
 
 
in the First schedule of RFCTLARR Act, 2013 or,  determined as per the clarification given 
 
 
by MoC vide letter No. 43020/25/2015
-
PRIW
-
I dt.04
-
08
-
2017 and Le
tter No.43020/25/2015
-
 
 
PRIW
-
I dt. 30
-
03
-
2018 respectively or, Negotiated Land Value in case of Direct purchase of 
 
 
land whichever is applicable.
 
 
II.An affected family whose land or other immovable property has been acquired & possessed 
 
 
by the company 
and eligible for employment as per respective State Policy.
 
 
III.An affected family, may be a non
-
title holder, whose primary source of livelihood was 
 
 
dependent on the land acquired for more than three years prior to the date of acquisition and 
 
 
stand a
ffected by the acquisition of land, as certified by the State Government authorities.
 
 
IV.
 
The Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers who have lost any of their forest 
 
 
rights recognized under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional For
est Dwellers 
 
 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 due to acquisition of land as authenticated by the 
 
 
District Authority of the concerned State Government.
 
 
 

79
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme of CIL, 2020
 
 
 
E.Benefits to be provided:
 
Category
 
Annuity
 
I.
All   land   owner   whose   land   is 
 
 
acquired   will   be   eligible   for
 
compensation for land as specified in 
 
the First schedule of RFCTLARR 
 
Act, 2013 or,  determined as per the 
 
clarification given by MoC vide letter 
 
No. 
43020/25/2015
-
PRIW
-
I  dt.04
-
 
08
-
2017 
 
and 
 
Letter 
 
No.43020/25/2015
-
PRIW
-
I  dt. 
30
-
 
03
-
2018 respectively or, Negotiated 
 
Land   Value   in   case   of   Direct 
 
purchase   of   land   whichever   is 
 
applicable
.
 
 
 
Or,
 
 
 
 
 
II.An affected family whose land or 
 
 
other immovable property has been
 
acquired   &   possessed   by   the 
 
company    and    eligible 
 
for 
 
employment as per respective State 
 
Policy.
 
Land compensation as per First Schedule of RFCTLARR 
Act 201
3 in case of land acquired under CBA (A&D) Act 
or, determined as per the clarification given by MoC vide 
letter No. 43020/25/2015
-
PRIW
-
I dt.04
-
08
-
2017 and Letter 
No.43020/25/2015
-
PRIW
-
I dt. 30
-
03
-
2018 respectively or, 
Negotiated Land Value in case of Direc
t purchase of land 
whichever is applicable.
 
Plus (+)
 
Annuity at the rate of Rs 150/
-
 
per decimal of land 
 
lost in lieu of Employment subject to minimum Rs. 
 
2000/
-
 
per month and maximum of Rs 30000/
-
 
per 
 
month for the period of Thirty years or life of project 
 
whichever is higher with 1 % incremental growth on 
 
every year on total annuity or Annual indexation to 
 
the   Consumer   Price   Index   for   Agricultural 
 
Labourers over Rs.2000.00/
-
 
whichever is 
higher.
 
Or,
 
An affected family whose land or other immovable 
 
property has been acquired & possessed by the 
 
company and become eligible for employment as 
 
per respective State Policy and opt for annuity in lieu 
 
of employment or one time monetary compensa
tion 
 
will get Rs 30000/
-
 
per month for the period of 
 
Thirty years or life of project whichever is higher 
 
with incremental growth as mentioned above.
 
In case of death of land owner the annuity may be paid to 
 
his/her successor/ nominee for the rest period or equally 
 
distributed  amongst  all  the  successors.  Modalities  of 
 
distribution of annuity amount in case of death of land 
 
owner may be determined by the respective Subsidiary 
 
Board.
 
 
 
 

80
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme of CIL, 2020
 
 
 
Category
 
Annuity
 
III. 
 
An affected family may be a non
-
 
title   holder,   whose   primary 
 
source    of    livelihood    was 
 
dependent on the land acquired 
 
for more than three years prior to 
 
the date of acquisition i.e. date of 
 
notification u/s 
9 (1) of CBA 
 
(A&D)   Act 
1957   and   stand 
 
affected  by  the  acquisition  of 
 
land, as certified by the State 
 
Government authorities
.
 
 
 
IV. 
 
The Scheduled Tribes and other
 
traditional forest dwellers who 
 
have lost any of their forest rights 
 
recognized under the Scheduled 
 
Tribes   and   Other   Traditional 
 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 due to 
 
acquisition 
 
of 
 
land 
 
as 
 
authenticated   by   the   District 
 
Authority of the concerned State 
 
Government
.
 
 
 
Not less than Rs 2000/ 
-
 
per month upto life of the project 
 
or 20 years whichever is higher with appropriate indexation 
 
to the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers.
 
 
 
Note:
 
All above entitled Affected Family shall have to opt for annuity and forgo the benefit of 
job/ 
employment by entering into an agreement with project authority.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81
 
 
 
Annuity Scheme of CIL, 2020
 
 
 
Additional Benefits
:
 
 
 
 
Respective Subsidiary Board may consider the       
following additional benefits to the Affected 
 
Families who opt annuity in lieu of employment                     
keeping in view the financial viability of the 
 
project:
 
a)
  
Imparting skilled development 
training or cost of such training.
 
b)
  
Group insurance benefits.
 
c)
  
Group Mediclaim benefits.
 
d)
  
Special additional incentive to those who opt for and  give 
possession of their land 
 
 
(including home stead land) within one month from the 
announcement of project 
 
 
specific annuity scheme under this Scheme.
 
 
Flexibility
:
 
 
Subsidiary Board is authorized to modify the increment 
provision of Annuity in view of 
financial  viability  and  
prev
ailing  unique  condition  of  the  project,  provided  such 
modification is not in conflict with prevailing Central/State Law 
or rules.
 
 
In case of any circular/guideline issued by Central/State 
Government regarding annuity in lieu of employment or one 
ti
me monetary compensation the same would be effective from 
the date of issue and it will have an overwriting effect on the 
Annuity Scheme.
 
 
 

82
 
 
ANNEXURE V
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
ANNEXURE V
 


83
 
 
APPENDIX
-
I
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON PUBLIC 
UNDERTAKINGS (2021
-
2022)
 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21
st
 
December, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 
 
1515  hrs. in Room No ‘147’, 3rd Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
 
 
-
    
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
 
       
SECRETARIAT
 
1.
 
Shri R.C. Tiwari                     
-
 
       
Additional Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri G.C. Prasad                   
-
 
       
Additional Director
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, t
he Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following four draft 
Action Taken Reports:
-
 
(i)        Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
L
OK 
S
ABHA
 
2.
 
3.
 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu
 
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit
 
4.
 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi
 
5.
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi
 
6.
 
Shri Janardan Mishra
 
7.
 
Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma
 
8.
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh
 
9.
 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas
 
       
RAJYA
 
SABHA
 
 
10.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
11.
 
Shri M. Shanmugam
 
 
 

84
 
 
 
of the Committee contained in the First Report of the Committee on Public 
 
Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on Airports Authority of India.
 
(ii)      Action Taken by the Government
 
on the Observations/Recommendations 
 
of the Committee contained in the Second Report of the Committee on 
 
Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on Central Coalfields Limited 
 
(CCL).
 
(iii)      Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendati
ons 
 
of the Committee contained in the Third Report of the Committee on 
 
Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on Food Corporation of India.
 
(iv)     Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
 
of the Committee contained in the Eight
h Report of the Committee on 
 
(17th Lok Sabha) on National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) 
 
Limited.
 
 
  
 
3. 
 
The Committee then considered and adopted the aforesaid reports one by one 
without any modifications. The Committee then authorized the Chairperso
n to finalize 
the aforesaid Draft Reports on the basis of factual verification by Ministries/Departments 
concerned and present the same to Parliament.
 
                             
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
------------
 
 
 

85
 
 
APPENDIX II
 
(Vide para 3 of
 
the Introduction)
 
ANALYSIS OF THE 
A
CTION TAKEN BY 
G
OVERNMENT ON THE 
O
BSERVATIONS/ 
R
ECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
S
ECOND 
R
EPORT OF THE 
C
OMMITTEE ON 
P
UBLIC 
U
NDERTAKINGS ON 
CENTRAL COALFIELDS LIMITED
.
 
 
I
 
Total number of recommendations 
 
 
33
 
lI
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 
[Para 
Sl.Nos.1.1,1.2, 2.1, 2.2,  3.1,4.1,5.1,6.1,7.1,7.2, 
8.1,9.1,10.1,11.1,12.1,13.1,15.1, 16.1, 16.2,18.1,19.1,20.1, 
20.2, 21.1,21.2,21.3 & 21.4
]
 
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
27
 
 
 
 
 
81.82
 
 
 
lII
 
Observations/Recommendation which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies   
 
 
[Para 
Sl.No.10.2, 14.1&17.1
]
 
                 
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
 
9.09
 
IV
 
Observation/Recommendation in respect of which replies of 
the Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
[
Para 
Sl Nos. 
Sl.Nos.
2.3, 2.4 and 
10.3
]
 
 
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
 
 
9.09
 
 
V
 
Observations/
Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies 
 
 
Percentage to total:
 
 
 
 
Nil
 
 
Nil
 
 