 
 
          
 
 
 
„REVIEW OF LOSS MAKING CPSUs‟ 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
RE 
RE
P 

ii 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
 (2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF LOSS MAKING CPSUs 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND  
ENTERPRISES  
(DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Review of Loss Making 
CPSUs] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.01.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.01.2021  
 
 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 January, 2021/  Magha, 1942(Saka ) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) iv 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………… vi 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER  II       Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
19 
CHAPTER  III   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
41 
CHAPTER IV    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
42 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies 
47 
ANNEXURES 
ANNEXURE-I       POINT NO. 3 PREVIOUS REPORT OF COPU ON THE SUBJECT:            53 
       RESPONSE OF DPE  
ANNEXURE-II     POINT NO. 5. (i): ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT WITH REGARD TO           61       
FUNCTIONING OF CPSUs 
ANNEXURE-III    POINT NO.5. (ii): ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT WITH REGARD TO          63       
FUNCTIONING OF CPSUs 
ANNEXURE-IV    POINT NO. 7: CASE STUDY OF 12 IDENTIFIED CPSUs BY THE          65       
COMMITTEE 
ANNEXURE-V    POINT NO. (ii): DELAY IN CASH & SUPPORT AND OTHER APPROVALS  
BY THE GOVERNMENT                                                                                                           70 
ANNEXURE-VI    POINT NO. 12: OUTDATED PLANTS & MACHINERY/OBSOLETE          
TECHNOLOGY                                                                                                         71 
ANNEXURE-VII   POINT NO. 13: DIVERSIFICATION                                                            76 
ANNEXURE-VIII  POINT NO. 15: DELAY IN PAYMENT OF DUES/VRS PACKAGES          79 
ANNEXURE-IX  17(i): SURPLUS LAND AND ASSET SALE OF LOSS-MAKING PSUS                  
THROUGH NBCC                                                                                             84 
ANNEXURE-X     POINT NO. 18: CASH RECEIVED THROUGH MONETIZATION OF ASSETS                    
OF LOSS MAKING CPSEs                                                                                                     89 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 7.1.2021…………………………………………………...91 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained in the 
Twenty-fourth Report of CoPU on Review of Loss Making   
 CPSUs………………………………………………………………………………………94 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2020-21) 
 
 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.   Dr.Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
3.   Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4.   Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
5.   Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
6.   Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7.   Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.  Shri Janardan Mishra  
9.   Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu  
10.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh  
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Prasanna Acharya  
17.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
18.  Shri Anil Desai  
19.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar  
20.  Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
21.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C. Tiwari           -     Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda -     Director  
3. Shri G.C. Prasad  -     Additional Director 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2020 -21) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Review of Loss Making CPSUs”.  
 
2. The Twenty -fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2018 -19) was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2018.  The Action Taken Replies to all the 11 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Heavy Indust ries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on 4 September, 2019. 
 
3. The Committee  (2020-21) considered and adopted the draft Report at  their sitting held on 7 January, 
2021.  
 
4. The Observations/recommendations of the Committee based on the analysis of the action taken reply 
submitted by the Ministry on Tw enty-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee have been given in 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations given by the 
Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
New Delhi;                    MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
7 January, 2021               Chairperson 
17 Pausha, 1942 (S)                        Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER  I 
  R E P O R T 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report of the Committee on Public Undertaking 
on 'Review of loss making CPSUs' which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2018.  
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the Nineteen 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government                                                                          
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 19                                                
 
 
(Chapter II)  
(Total 12) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Sl. No.  Nil                                                                             
 
 
(Chapter III) 
(Total: Nil) 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee.    
Sl. No. 10, 16.                                                                           
 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total 2) 
 
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies.                                                      
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 9 and 18.                                                                    
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total 5) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the response to their comments in Chapter I of this Report should be 
furnished to them expeditiously. The Committee further desire that the final replies need to be furnished 
to the Committee expeditiously in respect of the Observ ations/Recommendations given in the original 
Report for which interim replies have been given by the Ministry. The Committee find from the replies 
submitted to them that the Ministry had consulted Niti Aayog  on recommendation of the Committee 
relating to reimbursement to CPSUs serving a public purpose in remote areas but the ministry has yet to 
receive the opinion of the Aayog. Similarly, the Ministry has still been awaiting the response of NITI 
Aayog on many recommendations/observations of the Committee o n crucial issues like (i) improving 
financial health of CPSUs/rehabilitation of CPSUs - recommendation no. 3, (iii) formulating a policy to 
regulate and monitor the financial health of the CPSUs - recommendation no. 4, and (iv) formulating a 

2 
 
uniform definition of 'strategic' for identification/ categorization of CPSUs – recommendation no.6, etc.  
Similarly the DPE has yet to receive the response of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) on the 
issue of  merger of BSNL & MTNL -recommendation no. 9. The Committee desire that DPE should obtain 
the pending replies of the concerned Departments at the earlies t and submit  the final replies on the 
recommendations on which interim replies have been given.  The Committee further desire that replies 
on the issues co mmented upon by the Committee in this Report be specifically furnished to the 
Committee within the prescribed time limit so that comprehensive view could be tak en on various 
important issues. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Gov ernment on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Need for shift in perspective 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
5.  The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
'(A)  The Committee acknowledge the fact that PSUs were set up to serve certain broad macro -
economic and social objectives, and hence should not be compared with the commercially -run 
companies. Further, it, undoubtedly, was upon the CPSUs to reach out to far -flung corners of the 
Country to generate employment and create necessary infrastructure to pave way for others to venture 
out there. The Committee feel that CPSUs have successfully fulfilled these objectives. At the time of 
independence, there was a genuine need for the Go vernment to set up PSUs to run industries as a 
sizeable part of the economy was agriculture -based. Liberalization of economy has come a long way 
and the Committee’s examination has revealed that the margins of most of the PSUs, which already are 
under pressure to be more efficient, pale in comparison to their private counterparts, who have become 
far more capable of running globally competitive businesses. Even the DPE acknowledged the fact in 
their Survey (2016 -17) that many CPSUs which did not evolve with  liberalization and opening up of 
economy lost ground very quickly to private companies. PSUs in the telecom sector are facing a hyper 
competitive market with 6 -7 major private operators. Pharma PSUs like Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, 
IDPL, etc. are also facing a very stiff competition from foreign companies, particularly, the Chinese ones. 
In certain other sectors like light and heavy engineering products, the PSUs like SAIL are in dire need of 
constant technology upgradation to keep pace with the market demands and compete with the multi -
national companies. 
 
The Committee feel that all the PSUs, which the Government plans to retain, need to perform better and 
maintain decent key ratios, in order to sustain faith of the consumer market on their capabilities and 
therefore the Government has to ensure that the pr inciples of corporate governance must be applied 
and adhered to by their Boards.The Committee recommend that the Government should examine these 
aspects in all seriousness, refrain from undue delays in decision -making and realistically assess the 
need to r etain PSUs in select sectors. The Committee would also desire the Government to examine 
certain global models followed by Countries like China, Sweden, Malaysia, Vietnam or Thailand to 
manage their PSUs and turning those around based on certain successful models suitable for their 

3 
 
respective countries, be it a holding company model/creation of a watchdog model/privatization model or 
bureaucratic insulation and transparency model.  
 
(B) The Committee find that in April, 2018, the DPE had organized wide rangi ng deliberations at the 
level of CPSUs and their administrative Ministries finally culminating in a CPSU Conclave headed by the 
Prime Minister, which deliberated on financial reengineering and innovation in CPSUs, among other 
issues. The Committee desire the Government to furnish a detailed note to them in the matter as well as 
progress on the action plan proposed to be prepared by DPE for laying down the road map to achieve 
identified targets by CPSUs.  
 
(C) On the issue of CPSUs serving the social objecti ves and their area of operations include far -flung 
areas, one of the expert organization who deposed before the Committee was of the view that in the 
exceptional instances of a CPSU having to serve a broader public need as Government instrument, the 
amount so involved may be reimbursed by the Government to the CPSUs. The Committee tend to agree 
with the views of the expert organization in this regard and would like the Government to consider this 
aspect. 
 
6.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Ente rprises (Department of Public Enterprises) in their action 
taken reply have stated as follows:- 
'(A) The Companies Act, 2013 has detailed provisions relating to corporate governance which are also 
applicable to CPSEs. DPE has also issued Guidelines on Corp orate Governance for CPSEs from the 
year 2010. These guidelines cover issues such as composition of Boards, Audit Committee, Subsidiary 
companies, disclosure, Code of conduct and ethics, risk management and compliance. In order to 
ensure that principles of corporate governance are adhered to by CPSEs, DPE is grading CPSEs based 
on their compliance with Guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs and has made it part of MoU 
evaluation exercise.   
 
As per the existing provisions under Allocation of Business Rules and Transaction of Business Rules of 
Government of India, CPSEs function under the administrative control of line Ministries/ Departments 
who continuously monitor the performance of CPSEs for timely intervention, if required. Department of 
Public Enterprises acts as a nodal coordinating Department and issues broad policy guidelines on the 
matters of performance improvement and evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation and personnel 
management, etc.  to bring about certain degree of uniformity among  CPSEs. Besides DPE, all 
guidelines issued by other concerned Departments such as Department of Investment and Public Asset 
Management (D IPAM), Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) and NITI Aayog on various financial 
matters are also followed by CPSEs. 
 
(B) (a)It is submitted that during address at CPSE Conclave held on 9 th April, 2018, Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister had, inter -alia, posed five challenges to CPSEs, viz (i) maximizing geo -strategic reach of the 
CPSEs, (ii) minimizing import bill of the country, (iii ) integration of innovation and research amongst 
CPSEs, (iv) CSR expenditure on single theme, and (v) new development model for the country. All 

4 
 
CPSEs had been requested to prepare their Action Plans to address the challenges posed by Hon‟ble 
Prime Minister and other recommendations emerging from CPSE Conclave. 
 
(b) A meeting regarding review of action plan of CPSEs of 7 important sectors (Petroleum & Gas, Coal, 
Mines, Steel, Power, Heavy Industry & Defence Production) was held under the Chairmanship of 
Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 05.11.2018. In order to facilitate real -time uploading and monitoring of the 
progress of Action Plans of CPSEs at the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department level and 
above, DPE has developed a Dashboard and all the concerned Ministries/Departments and CPSEs 
have been asked to upload relevant information on this Dashboard through their respective nodal 
officers on a continuous basis. About 140 CPSEs have uploaded the status of fulfilment of targets 
proposed under respective act ion plans on the DRISHTI dashboard.  A CoS meeting was held on 
9.5.2019 to assess the status of implementation of action plans and  decision points of the review 
meeting taken by the PM and broadly it has been decided that the action plans will continue  t o be 
monitored by the respective administrative Ministries/ Departments as well as CoS periodically.  
 
(C)  As the issue involved financial implications, D/o Expenditure and NITI Aayog had been consulted by 
DPE on the observations of the Committee.  
 
(a)The gist of the views of D/o Expenditure (DoE) is given below: 
D/o Expenditure vide OM dated 19.3.2019 has stated that the initial action in this regard is to be taken 
by the administrative Ministry of PSU. The administrative Ministry is to submit proposal to  the competent 
authority. DoE after examining the proposal conveys its views to the administrative Ministry.  DoE‟s role 
in this case is limited to comments and recommendations on the proposals of the administrative 
Ministry.  
Hence, it is evident from the  comments of DoE that in such an eventuality, the concerned administrative 
Ministry has to  formulate proposal for the approval of the competent authority in consultation with DoE.  
(b) The information from NITI Ayog is awaited. The Committee will be appris ed on receipt of the reply 
from NITI Aayog.' 
 
7. The Committee in their original report had inter alia observed that the Government should 
realistically assess the need to retain PSUs in select sectors and for this certain global models should be 
examined.  The Committee had also observed that the Govern ment should ensure that the principles of 
Corporate Governance must be applied and adhered to by the Boards of CPSUs.  The Committee observe 
that in their Action Taken reply, the Ministry has informed that the Companies Act, 2013 has detailed 
provisions re lating to corporate governance which are also applicable to CPSEs. DPE has also issued 
Guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs from the year 2010. These guidelines cover issues such 
as composition of Boards, Audit Committee, Subsidiary companies, disc losure, Code of conduct and 
ethics, risk management and compliance. In order to ensure that principles of corporate governance are 
adhered to by CPSEs, DPE is grading CPSEs based on their compliance with Guidelines on Corporate 
Governance for CPSEs and has made it part of MoU evaluation exercise.  The Committee desire that strict 
evaluation of physical and financial performance of the CPSUs along with constant monitoring of their 

5 
 
financial health need to be made by the DPE so that necessary remedial measure s could be taken in time 
for incipient sick and weak CPSUs.  The Committee also desire that performance audit of the CPSUs need 
to be made regularly preferably on half yearly basis so that any alarming signal in decline of their 
performance could be notice d and structured timely intervention could be made in the system  to rescue 
the incipient CPSUs. 
 
8. The Committee further observe that the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) acts as a nodal 
coordinating Department and issues broad policy guidelines for  CPSUs on the matters of their 
performance improvement and evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation and personnel 
management, etc. to bring about certain degree of uniformity among CPSEs. Besides DPE, all guidelines 
issued by other concerned Departmen ts such as Department of Investment and Public Asset 
Management (DIPAM), Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Department of Expenditure (DoE) and NITI 
Aayog on various financial matters are also followed by CPSEs.  The Committee note that Hon'ble Prime 
Minister while addressing the CPSEs conclave on 9 April 2018 posed five types of challenges to CPSEs. A 
meeting to review the action plan of CPSEs was thereafter held on 5 November 2018.  As informed to the 
Committee, in order to facilitate realtime uploadin g and monitoring of the progress of Action Plans of 
CPSEs at the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department level and above, DPE has developed a 
Dashboard and all the concerned Ministries/Departments and CPSEs have been asked to upload relevant 
information on this Dashboard through their respective nodal officers on a continuous basis. The 
Committee, however are perturbed to note that although there are more than 300 CPSUs, but only 140 
CPSUs have responded by uploading the status of fulfilment of target s proposed under respective action 
plans on the DRISHTI dashboard. The Committee therefore desire that all the Ministries/Departments and 
CPSEs need to be regularly reminded for uploading of requisite information so that monitoring can be 
done on realtime basis and effective assessment of the progress of Action Plans of CPSEs can be made. 
The Committee also desire to be informed whether further meetings of the Committee of Secretaries 
(CoS) which was supposed to be convened periodically to assess the status  of implementation of action 
plans were held after 9 April 2019 and if so, the decisions/outcome of the meeting(s) may be 
communicated to the Committee. The Committee further desire that the highest possible authority in the 
administrative Ministry as well as in the CPSUs  should be made responsible for ensuring compliance of 
the guidelines on Corporate Governance. 
 
9. The Committee observe that the indigenous aware of healthcare facilities is of paramount 
importance of any nation.   The Committee, in this con text, are of the strong opinion that pharma sector  
plays a very important role to keep the nation healthy and strong, and this has been quite apparent during 
the current pandemic when the need for strong indigenous pharma companies has been realized with 
more intensity.T he Committee  therefore recommend that pharma sector should b e categorised as a 
„strategic sector‟ and necessary follow up action needs to be taken accordingly. 
 
  

6 
 
Air India 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
10.  The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
'With regard to the status of Air India, the Committee note that as per the information furnished by DPE, 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28th June, 2017 has given in 
 principle approval for considering strategic dis investment of Air India and its five subsidiaries and 
constitution of Air India Specific Alternative Mechanism (AISAM) to guide the process of strategic 
disinvestment from time to time and decide treatment of unsustainable debt of Air India; hiving off of 
certain assets to a shell company; demerger and strategic disinvestment of three profit making 
subsidiaries; the quantum of disinvestment; and the universe of bidders.  
 
In this connection, the Committee recall that this Committee and various other Parliame ntary Committees 
too, apart from C&AG, had examined Air India at different points of time and given valuable 
suggestions/recommendations. However despite efforts to implement Turnaround Plan and bring it back 
to normalcy, the PSU functioned under a large d ebt burden which became unmanageable and increased 
to gigantic proportions year after year. From the information furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
through DPE, it is noted that NITI Aayog listed the various issues while recommending disinvestment  of 
Air India which inter alia include continuous losses and huge accumulated losses with a cash deficit of 
around Rs.200-250 crore per month mainly on account of the huge debt  service burden; the Turn Around 
Plan focusing only on equity infusion without any plan for re -engineering the processes and not 
recommending any structural changes or changes in the methods of appointment at senior levels of 
management, long freeze on recruitment of staff other than pilot and cabin crew which left Air India 
deprived of fresh talent new ideas, shrinking Air India market share and aviation is not a strategic priority 
business. The Committee also find that it has specifically been mentioned by NITI Aayog that the losses 
of Air India can also be attributable to the decis ion of merger taken in 2007 wherein two very different 
organizations with dissimilar equipment and Human Resources practices were intended to be merged.  
 
The Committee understand that it has been planned to disinvest Air India and the process in this regar d is 
undergoing. While noting the status of disinvestment of Air India, the Committee hope that the process 
would be completed expeditiously. The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the fate 
of debts and liabilities on the disinvestment of Air India.'   
 
11.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) in their action 
taken reply have stated as follows:- 
'In this regard, reply received vide OM dated 29.3.2019 from Ministry of Civil Aviation  is given below: 
 
a) Keeping in view the fact that no bid was received for strategic disinvestment of Air India, Air India 
Specific Alternative Mechanism (AISAM), in its meeting held on 18th June 2018, had, inter alia, decided 
that once the global economic  indicators including oil prices and the forex regime stabilize, the option of 

7 
 
strategic disinvestment of Air India should be brought before AISAM, for deliberating the future course of 
action. 
b)  The debt & liabilities & Air India will be dealt with in a ccordance with the decisions taken during a 
meeting chaired by the Hon‟ble Finance Minister which was held on 7th September 2018 on the subject, 
“The Plan for Operational and Financial Efficiency in Air India” in which, the following proposals were, 
inter alia, deliberated upon and approved:- 
(i) A total debt amounting to Rs 29,464 crore would be transferred from Air India Ltd to the Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) viz Air India Assets Holding Co Ltd forthwith.  
(ii) Remaining debt and current net liability w ill remain with Air India. Debt allocation between AI and 
SPV to be revisited at a later date closer to disinvestment. 
(iii) A Cash Support of Rs 3975 crore to Air India, inclusive of Rs 1630 crore already infused in AI in 
the financial year of FY 2018-19. 
(iv) To provide a Govt. Guarantee of Rs 7600 crore, inclusive of Rs 3000 crore already provided to AI 
in FY 2018-19, to raise new debt for payment of stretched liabilities. 
(v) An additional amount of Rs 1300 crore to be provided to the SPV to meet the in terest liability on 
the transferred debt. 
(vi) From FY 2019 -20, the entire interest on the debt of Rs 29464 crore, transferred to the SPV, 
would be serviced by the Govt. 
 c)      It is stated in this regard that a SPV namely Air India Asset Holding  Limited had already been 
created on 22.01.2018 and the Union Cabinet, in  its meeting held on 28.02.2019, has granted ex -post 
facto approval for  creation of the same.   
d)   Further, regarding monetization of assets, it was decided in the above stated meeting that since 
transferring assets may involve other issues like stamp duty, the disposal of assets is to be done by 
MOCA/AI management. AI will open an escrow account t o park the sale proceeds for paying debt 
transferred to SPV. It is stated in this regard that the assets of Air India are being monetized while they 
continue to be with Air India where all sale proceeds from monetization of assets are credited. These 
proceeds are utilized only to retire those debts that are proposed to be transferred to SPV.  
e) It is further stated that the proposal for payment of Rs.1300/ - crore to Air India Limited for 
repayment of loan has since been approved by Ministry of Finance and payment has been made to Air 
India Limited in Financial Year 2018-19.' 
 
12. The Committee observe from the reply submitted by the Ministry that since no bid was received 
for strategic disinvestment of Air India, Air India Specific Altenative Mechanism (AISAM) in their meeting 
held on 18 June 2018 had inter -alia decided that once t he global economic indicators including oil prices 
and the forex regime stabilize, the option of strategic disinvestment of Air India should be brought before 
AISAM for deliberating the future course of action. The Committee further note that several propo sals 
were deliberated upon and approved in the meeting held by the Finance Minister on 7 September 2018 on 
the issue of debt & liabilities of Air India. One of the crucial decision taken was to transfer the total debt 
amounting to Rs. 29,464 crore  from Ai r India Ltd. to the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) viz. Air India 
Assets Holding Co. Ltd and from FY 2019 -20, the entire interest on the debt of Rs.29,464 crore transferred 
to SPV would be serviced by the Government.  The Committee was also informed that th e SPV namely Air 

8 
 
India Asset Holding Ltd. had already been created on 22.01.2018 and to Union Cabinet in its meeting held 
on 28.02.2019 had granted ex-post-facto approval for creation of the same.  With regard to monetization of 
assets of Air India, the Co mmittee was informed that since transferring assets of Air India may involve 
other issues like stamp duty, the disposal of assets is to be done by the Ministry of Civil Aviation / Air 
India management.  It was also decided that Air India will open an escro w account to park the sale 
proceeds for paying debt transferred to SPV.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the updated 
status of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
13. The Committee further observe that despite many concrete steps  taken by the Government to 
address the huge debt burden of Air India, its strategic disinvestment plan has not witnessed much 
progress so far. Meanwhile the debt burden and losses of the beleaguered airlines has ballooned. During 
2018-19 alone, Air India has incurred a loss of Rs. 8475 Crore which constitutes about 26.79 % of the total 
losses made by the Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs). As per the Public Enterprises 
Survey(2018-19) brought out by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), Air I ndia is the second 
largest loss making CPSU after BSNL.  The Committee however observe that during the current pandemic 
when other airlines could not come to rescue, it was only Air India which brought Indian citizens from 
foreign countries and thus its imp ortance was realized during this crisis in a bigger way.   The Committee 
also observe that the aviation sector being of strategic importance, the country needs to have its own 
national air carrier which could be relied upon during the crisis.The Committee therefore urge the 
Government to maintain a fine balance between the national interest of having its own airlines and overall 
health of national carrier.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made so far and the 
latest developments about the status of Air India. 
 
Delay in cash & support and other approvals by the Government 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
14.  The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
'(A) The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that investment in a PSU is made on 
commercial considerations with a view to sustain the growth and viability of the company. However 
during their examination of the subject, the Committee noticed sever al instances of Government 
investments /support not reaching well in time to loss making PSUs and the inventories of the PSUs 
becoming obsolete in the process. Some such instances of delay were as under:  
 
(i)In the case of Instrumentation Limited, a PSU, which suffered in post -liberalization era i.e. after 1994 
when it was declared sick. In this case, a rehabilitation scheme could only be approved in 1999, i.e. five 
years after declaration of its sickness, and even afterwards, the scheme could not be imple mented fully 
which led to the inventory and manpower of the company becoming worthless. The Company was 
further unable to implement their Modified Revival Scheme of 2010 due to the time overrun of over 13 
months in sanction of the scheme and no cash suppor t for the same. Besides, even though IL has been 
closed, its Kota unit employees steadily have not been paid their dues in full.  

9 
 
 
(B) (i)In MTNL, the pension bill of employees accumulated to Rs.10,900 crore for which the Government 
has to step in due to t he weak financial position of the company. However, the liabilities have not been 
settled in the last four years despite the Government decision to pay it in January, 2014.  
 
(ii) In another case, BSNL informed the Committee about their time taking and cumbersome process of 
procurement and long wait for Government’s decisions due to which they lost the ground on GSM front.  
 
(iii) In FACT, a revival proposal placed before BPRSE in 2013 was delayed leading to severe financial 
crunch forcing the Company to stop fertiliser production in 2015-16. 
 
Hence, the Committee feel that while it is no secret that the PSUs are running with huge support from 
the Government Exchequer, it is also a fact that delays in taking decisions on the part of the 
Government plunged these PSUs further into uncertainties as well as deterioration in respect of 
performance. The Committee are convinced that in today’s fast -paced business environment, crucial 
decisions on PSUs remaining long pending in the administrative Ministries/Departm ents would harm the 
companies beyond repair. In this connection, the DPE stated that the concerned administrative 
Ministries of the CPSUs are expected to take concrete steps to ensure that decisions on proposals are 
accorded in a time-bound manner. The Com mittee, while reiterating the view, also note the suggestions 
given by experts that the Government may work out categories like restructuring, monetizing assets, 
technological upgradation etc. on which decision of either the Boards of the loss -making PSUs,  the 
Administrative Ministry or a Group of experts could be considered final and acted upon urgently. The 
Committee desire the Government to consider these suggestions and come out with measures to 
prevent delays. They desire to be apprised of such efforts , envisaged to minimize delays with respect to 
decisions on crucial matters concerning loss-making PSUs.'  
 
15.  The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  in their 
action taken reply have stated as follows:- 
'(A).  In this regard, Department of Heavy Industry has intimated on 20.3.2019 that whenever any 
proposal for financial support/ investment etc. is received from CPSEs, the Department follows the 
timeline stipulated for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC ) / Cabinet approval. At times, inter -
ministerial consultations may take some time, but the status of such important proposals is monitored in 
the weekly Senior Officers Meeting (SOM) in DHI. All efforts are made for speedy disposal of such 
proposals. As f ar as Instrumentation Limited is concerned, the Kota Unit of the company has already 
been slated for closure and process of closure is in full swing. Payment of salary, wages, VRS/VSS and 
other dues of all employees of Kota Unit has been completed, except for 7 employees.  The Palakkad 
Unit of the company is being transferred to Kerala Government. 
 
(B).a) As the observations of the Committee pertain to CPSEs under D/o Fertilizers (DoF) and D/o 
Telecommunications (DoT), DPE has sought the views of these Depa rtments alongwith D/o Heavy 
Industry which has many loss making CPSEs functioning under it.  

10 
 
 
b) Department of Fertilizers has informed about the efforts made in this regard. The details are given 
in Annex- V. Information from Department of Telecommunicati ons (DoT) is awaited on this issue. The 
response of DoT will be communicated to the Committee as soon as it is received.  
 
c)  On this matter, Department of Heavy Industry has intimated on 20.3.2019 that whenever any 
proposal for financial support/ modernis ation etc. is received from CPSEs, the Department follows the 
timeline stipulated for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) / Cabinet approval. At times, inter -
ministerial consultations may take some time, but the status of such important proposals is monito red in 
the weekly Senior Officers Meeting (SOM) in DHI. All efforts are made for speedy disposal of such 
proposals. 
 
d) To expedite the decision making and to streamline the multiple mechanisms with respect to 
revival/ restructuring sick/ loss making CPSEs , the Government wound up Board for Reconstruction of 
Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) in November, 2015. Subsequent to the decision of the Government 
(7.10.2015) for winding up of BRPSE, DPE has issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 on “Streamlining the 
mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/ incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector 
Enterprises”. As per the guidelines, the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department is now 
responsible to monitor sickness of CPSEs functioning under them and take timely redressal measures 
for revival/ restructuring/ disinvestment of sick/ loss making CPSEs with the approval of the competent 
authority.' 
 
16.   The Committee in their initial recommendation had noted several instances of Government 
investments / support not reaching well in time to loss making PSUs and the inventories of the PSUs 
becoming obsolete in the process. The Committee cited Kota Unit of I nstrumentation Limited (IL) as an 
instance where dues of employees of the Unit had not been paid in full. The Committee also cited 
instances like MTNL whose liabilities had not been settled for four years and BSNL losing on GSM front 
due to delay by the Go vernment in taking decision on procurement.  In case of, FACT, the revival 
proposal placed before the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BPRSE) in 2013 was 
delayed leading to severe financial crunch forcing the Company to stop fertilize r production in 2015 -16.  
In their action taken reply, the Government has informed that the closure process of the Kota unit is in 
full swing and except for 7 employees, all dues have been paid. Regarding MTNL and BSNL, it has been 
stated that the Departme nt of Telecommunication(DoT) is yet to respond.  On FACT, the Committee have 
been informed that NITI Aayog has submitted the draft study report on “feasibility of merger of FACT & 
MFL with other fertilizer units of Department of Fertilizers and options for  financial restructuring of MFL 
and FACT” which is under examination.  The Committee, however, observe that there is no clarity on the 
future course of action especially when in the meeting on 16 November 2018, none of the participants viz. 
the fertilizer units have shown interest in absorption/ merger of FACT/MFL with them due to their 
negative net worth. The Committee would like a clarification in this regard alongwith the details of 
conclusive action taken in the matter.  
17. The Committee observe that a s per the DPE Survey 2018 -19, BSNL is the top -most loss making 
CPSU that incurred a loss of Rs. 14904 Crore and similarly MTNL has made a loss of Rs. 3390 Crore. 

11 
 
BSNL and MTNL together make -up 57.83% of the total losses incurred by the loss making CPSUs du ring 
the year 2018 -19. The Department of Heavy Industries (DHI) in its response to DPE have stated that  at 
times Inter -ministerial consultations may take time, but the status of such important proposals is 
monitored in the weekly Senior Offices meeting (SOM) of DHI. DPE has stated that subsequent to winding 
up of BRPSE on 07.10.2015, it has issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 on 'streamlining the mechanism for 
revival and restructuring of sick/ incipient sick and weak CPSEs'. As per the guidelines, the concern ed 
administrative Ministry/Department is now responsible to monitor sickness of CPSEs functioning under 
them and take timely redressal measures for revival/restructuring/disinvestment of sick/loss making 
CPSEs with the approval of the competent authority.  The Committee further learn that Cabinet has 
approved on 26.10.2019 for revival of BSNL and MTNL by reducing the employees cost, administrative 
allotment of spectrum for 4G services, debt restructuring by raising of sovereign guarantee bonds, 
monetisation of assets and in principle approval for merger of BSNL and MTNL. Since BSNL and MTNL 
constitute the major portion of the losses made by the loss making CPSUs, the Committee desire that 
decision on these CPSUs need to be executed in a time -bound manner to avoid further accumulation of 
losses.  The Committee would also like to be informed of the present status of the implementation of the 
cabinet decision on BSNL & MTNL and desire that the system of holding of Senior Officers meetings 
(SOMs) every week in ev ery Ministry/Department as reportedly is being done in Department of Heavy 
Industries should be followed by all the Ministries and Departments so that important proposals are 
monitored regularly to timely address the critical issues. 
 
18.       In view of the long delays experienced in addressing the concerns of sick PSUs leading to further 
deterioration of the quality and also the value of the inventories due to administrative and procedural 
reasons, the Committee, referring to the suggestions given by the  experts, had desired in their original 
report that „the Government may work out categories like restructuring, monetization of assets, 
technological upgradation, etc., on which a decision of either the Boards of loss making PSUs, the 
Administrative Ministry, or a Group of Experts could  be considered final and  acted upon urgently. The 
reply of the Ministry, however, is conspicuously silent on this suggestion. The Committee  observe that it 
seems that most CPSUs were allowed to be sick because of long delay s in addressing their problems  
and also  being trapped in the quagmire of requirement of decisions by multiple  authorities. The 
Committee thus feel that a single authority/level should be identified in one organisation whose decision 
should be treated as final.  The Committee  while reiterating their recommendation made on this issue 
desire the Government to give serious consideration on the suggestion given by the experts in this 
regard as it will reduce the multiple layers involved in the process and make  the decision making fast 
tracked about the sick PSUs. 
 
 
Delay in payment of dues/VRS packages 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
19.   The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
  

12 
 
'The Committee are extremely pained to note that PSUs like HMT, IL, HAL, RDPL, etc. have been 
unable to pay even the full salaries to their employees for years together. Further, most of such PSUs 
are not in a position even to discharge their VRS liabilities for willing employees without the  
Government’s support. The Committee are perturbed not only at the bleak future the employees of the 
closed/under closure loss -making PSUs but also at the plight of their dependents who are facing 
avoidable daily hardships due to nonreceipt of salaries or VRS packages. Surprisingly, NITI Aayog has 
also not made any estimate on the full implications of VRS nor they proposed any budgetary provision 
for utilization in the event of closure of these CPSUs. The Committee further observe that there are 
large number of employees in loss making PSUs who are in the younger age bracket and being a highly 
skilled workforce and qualified professionals, are eager to work towards turnaround of their company’s 
fortune but are unable to do so due to acute shortage of working  capital. The Committee feel that the 
Government must give serious considerations on all such issues in a specified time frame with a view to 
not only utilize the skilled work force of loss making PSUs but also save their dependents from a life of 
misery and despair. In a nutshell, the Committee would emphasize that it is a humanitarian issue for the 
Government as dependents of such employees suffer the most when a PSU becomes incapable of 
disbursing their salaries/completing VRS packages/or when the employ ees lose their employment due 
to closure of the PSU. Hence, they desire that all administrative Ministries handling loss -making PSUs 
must not delay clearing of dues of their employees. The Government must prioritize cash support for the 
same, if required. The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest PSU -wise position of pending dues 
of the employees, period of pendency and the action taken/required to settle the same.'  
 
 
20.        The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the 
aforesaid issue responded as under:- 
 
a) DPE has issued detailed guidelines on 14 th June, 2018 on time bound closure of sick/ loss 
making CPSEs and disposal of movable and immovable assets. These guidelines, inter -alia, provide that 
in the event of closure, the VRS/VSS package will be worked out at 2007 notional pay scales (irrespective 
of the fact that CPSEs could be in pre -revised pay scale of 1997 or 1992 etc.). Further, the estimation of 
financial requirement for such a packag e for payment of wage/salary etc. will be worked out in a time 
bound manner by the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department/ CPSE and the details of the same 
will be included in the Cabinet Note for seeking budgetary grant from the Government of India . Further, 
time lines have also been prescribed for the M/o Finance, D/o Expenditure to release the funds to meet 
the above estimated requirement of funds once the Cabinet decision has been taken for closure of a 
CPSE. An oversight committee at the level o f NITI Aayog has also been provided in the guidelines to 
monitor the status of closure of CPSEs and steps involved in the same. In respect of HMT, IL, HAL, IDPL 
and other CPSEs for which decision have been taken for closure, the details of pending dues of 
employees have been sought from the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department vide OM No. 
CRR/02/13/0024/2014-JS(VRS) dated 7.2.2019. 
 
b) The observation of the Committee has also been brought to the notice of concerned Ministries/ 
Departments of loss making CPSEs. The reply received from D/o Pharmaceuticals, D/o Commerce, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  M/o Petroleum 

13 
 
& Natural Gas, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Tourism, D/o Heavy Industry, M /o Civil Aviation, D/o 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region,  Ministry 
of Power,  Ministry of Steel,Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Department of Fertilizers has 
been compiled under Annex-VIII. 
 
 
21. The Committee observe that DPE had issued guidelines on 14 June 2018 on time bound closure of 
sick/loss making CPSEs and disposal of movable and immovable assets. An oversight committee at the 
level of NITI Aayog has also been provided in  the Guidelines to monitor the status of closure of CPSEs 
and steps involved in the same.  However, despite the guidelines and the provision of an oversight 
committee at the level of NITI Aayog, the Committee observe from the information furnished by DPE i n 
Annexure-VIII to the reply that although most of the CPSUs have taken right steps in this direction but 
dues of employees of some of the CPSUs are yet to be finally settled. The Department of Pharmaceuticals 
has sent a Cabinet note on 5 February 2019 see king upfront budgetary support as loan for meeting the 
outstanding liabilities of CPSEs under closure (IDPL and RDPL) and also for waiver of Central 
Government loan (principal and interest). In case of CPSEs under strategic disinvestment (Hindustan 
Antibiotics Limited), budgetary support has been sought for settlement of employees dues, VRS, One 
Time Settlement with Banks and waiver of Central Government loan (principal and interest). Similarly, 
dues of employees in M/s Braithwaite & Company Ltd (BCL), HMT Watches (Ranibagh), Air India, 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited(HOCL), Hindustan Flurocarbons Limited (HFL), Birsa Stone Lime 
Company Limited (BSLC) are still pending. The Committee desire that the final settlement of dues of 
employees of these CPSUs be  expedited and a report indicating the action taken and the latest status 
submitted to the Committee.  
 
CRR Scheme of DPE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
22.  The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
 
'As regards rehabilitation of affected/discharged employees of closed PSUs, the Committee note that the 
DPE has been implementing the CRR (Counseling, Retraining and Redeployment) Scheme since 2001 -
02 which was modified in 2016 to bring in collaboration wi th the National Skill Development Corporation. 
While the Committee would like to be apprised of the actual outcome of this scheme and the benefits it 
accrued to the employees of the loss making PSUs, they fail  to see the relevance of skill development for  
those affected/ discharged employees of commercial companies, who are already possessing high 
technical qualifications and are no more in  the   younger age   bracket, since  the basic   objective of the   
Government’s various  skill  development  program s, like Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana, 
SANKALP, UDAAN, etc. as of now, is largely to train young population/non -literates/neo-literates/school 
dropouts/ undergraduate etc. in various trades/skills. At its best, the contractual employees of the PSUs 
can benefit by gaining additional or enhanced skills under CRR which could open up new and better 

14 
 
employment opportunities for them. The Committee feel that the scope of CRR Scheme should be 
broadened to include such employees as the CRR Scheme is presently  applicable only on separated 
employees of loss making PSUs and only one dependent of VRS optees, in case the optee is not 
interested. The Committee are also in doubt whether ‘redeployment’ of trained employees under the 
scheme proved beneficial enough to the employees of closed loss making PSUs since the CRR Scheme 
does not guarantee it. Besides out of the 1576 candidates trained under the scheme in 2016 -17, only 887 
persons i.e. hardly 50% could be redeployed under self/wage employment. Hence, the Committ ee desire 
to have a detailed note from DPE on whether these aspects have been taken care of, while modifying the 
CRR scheme with the collaboration of NSDC as well as on the overall impact of CRR Scheme on 
employees of loss-making PSUs.    
 
23. The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the aforesaid 
issues responded as under:-  
a) Prior to 2016 -17, CRR Scheme was implemented by Nodal Agencies through Employees 
Assistance Centres (EACs) in various parts of t he country. Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) on 15.7.2015 notified Common Norms in order to bring about uniformity and 
standardization in the implementation of various Skill Development Schemes by different Central 
Ministries / Departments.  
 
b) Accordingly, with a view to broaden the network of Training Providers and also to follow 
standardized methodology of training, design and delivery, CRR Scheme is being now implemented in 
collaboration with National Skill Development Corporatio n (NSDC) under  Ministry of Skill Development & 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE). Training is imparted to VRS optees/their dependents as per common norms of 
NSDC. 
 
c)        NSDC being a facilitator ensures that all training programmes are as per Qualification Pack (QP) / 
National Occupational Standard(NOS), standards set forth by the Sector Skills Council(SSC) resulting in 
certification as per certification standards. National Occupational Standards (NOS) specify the standard 
of performance, knowledge and understand ing when carrying out a particular activity in the workplace, 
while Qualification Pack (QP) is a set of NOSs, aligned to a job role available in each industry sector.  
This also helps in augmenting redeployability under the CRR Scheme.  
 
d)     Earlier, benefit of the CRR Scheme was available to VRS optees only. Now, the benefit of the 
scheme can be extended to the dependent of VRS optee in case the later does not want to avail the 
scheme. Such  an amendment has also broadened the coverage as well as oppo rtunities of 
redeployment under CRR because of faster learning and acquisition of skills in the younger generation. 
Further, while micro credit and financing in case of trained VRS optees for self -employment is 
challenging, it is comparatively easier in case of dependents. 
 
e)      The target group of the CRR scheme is very unique and distinct from other skill development 
schemes of the Government. Mostly, VRS/VSS optees are above 50 years of age. Given the typical 

15 
 
target group, the redeployment under the C RR Scheme is a challenge. However, it is being continuously 
followed up with NSDC for undertaking long duration intensive training programmes as well as residential 
training programmes under CRR Scheme to enhance redeployment percentage.  
 
f) With regard to Committee’s recommendations to include contractual employees of CPSEs, it may 
be submitted that as per the extant policy, CRR scheme is applicable to only those employees of CPSEs 
who are eligible and separated under VRS/VSS and it may not be feasible to cover contractual 
employees under the CRR Scheme as such. 
 
g) Further, as mentioned in reply to point 15 earlier, in order to make VRS/VSS package more 
remunerative, the guidelines dated 14.06.2018 issued by DPE stipulate that for CPSEs under closure, the 
VRS/VSS package will be worked out at 2007 notional pay scales (even if that CPSE could be in the pre -
revised pay scale of 1997 or 1992 etc.). Availing skill training benefits of the CRR Scheme is an add -on 
benefit to the employee or his/her dependent. 
 
 
24. The Committee had recommended in their original report to include contractual employees of 
CPSEs in the Counselling, Retraining and Redeployment (CRR) scheme.  DPE has however informed that 
as per the extant policy, CRR scheme is applicable to only tho se employees of CPSEs who are eligible 
and separated under VRS/ VSS and it may not be feasible to cover contractual employees under the CRR 
scheme. DPE has also clarified that the target group of the CRR scheme is very unique and distinct from 
other skill development schemes of the Government.  It has also been stated that mostly VRS/ VSS 
optees are above 50 years of age and given the typical target group, the redeployment under the CRR 
Scheme is a challenge. As per the employment figures furnished earlier to the Committee, only 887 
persons could be redeployed out the 1576 trained during 2016 -17.  The Committee in this backdrop feel 
that the objective of CRR scheme may not be effectively achieved if all employees of VRS/VSS trained 
under CRR Scheme are not g ainfully redeployed.  The Committee observe that many of the VRS/ VSS 
optees have already put in considerable number of years of service acquiring the required skill set to 
discharge their jobs effectively and efficiently. Majority of the VRS/VSS optees be ing in their late 40s and 
50s may not be employed by the private companies despite their training and possessing skill sets due 
to their higher hiring costs and also their age factor.  Hence it is not surprising that all those who had 
availed the training under CRR scheme may not have been employed. Very few may have opted for self 
employment as investment of capital is required for starting their own ventures.  It is in this context the 
Committee had suggested that the CRR Scheme should be opened for contr actual employees of these 
sick PSUs to enable them to employ themselves gainfully elsewhere.  The Committee, therefore while 
reiterating their recommendation made in this regard in the original report suggest that CRR scheme may 
be made applicable to the c ontractual employees also of sick PSUs and if need arises, the relevant 
guidelines should be suitably amended  so that they could be benefitted from skill development 
programme and entrepreneurship scheme of the Government of India.   
25. The Committee in their original report had also desired to be apprised of with the detailed note on 
the actual outcome of the CPR Scheme and the benefits accrued therefrom to the separated employees 
of loss making PSUs.  The Committee however observe that the desired detail ed note on these issues 

16 
 
has not been submitted by the Ministry.  As per reply of the Ministry, the CRR Scheme had been started 
in the year 2001 -02 and was modified in 2016.  The Committee is of the view that since the CRR Scheme 
has been in operation for t he last 20 years, it is high time for its objective evaluation in terms of its utility 
to the separated employees of sick PSUs.  The Committee therefore desire the Ministry to undertake the 
requisite evaluation of the scheme and submit the requisite detail ed note to the Committee at the earliest.  
The Committee desire that the performance evaluation of this schem e needs to be done by C&AG also to 
find out the efficacy of the scheme. 
 
Surplus land and asset sale of loss-making PSUs through NBCC 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
26.  The Committee in their Twenty-fourth Report had recommended as follows:- 
 
'(A) Most of the CPSUs have large monolith -type integrated production facilities in prime locations. 
Although the loss -making CPSUs do not have the powers to monetize their surplus land and assets 
themselves, the Committee note that since most of these PSUs had a huge bank of land assets at prime 
locations, i.e. Mumbai, Delhi, Jaipur, Ooty, etc. in the country, the Government decided that loss making 
companies could identify and share details of such surplus land/property assets for sale, which could 
generate substantial revenue, instead of lying idle, owing to halt/slowdown of production in the loss -
making company. The Committee further note that Nati onal Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), 
appointed as the Land Management Agency (LMA) by the Government, has since been engaged in this 
task by 10 loss -making PSUs only, in response to the EOI sent by NBCC to 74 loss -making PSUs. 28 
such PSUs have s teadily declined the EOI of NBCC. The Committee examined the details of the few 
properties owned by MTNL, Air India, HMT Watches and IL, which are currently at various stages, albeit 
none finalized, of being sold/redeveloped.  
 
From their examination, the Committee find that the process of monetization of assets of loss making 
CPSUs is hardly progressing fast as these properties have not generated requisite interest among 
potential buyers. To cite an instance, the Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Committee that 
the tenders for auction of surplus lands of HAL, IDPL and BCPL have been uploaded on the web portal 
of M/s MSTC, the auctioning agency, since May, 2017 and inspite of the Department writing thrice to 
every Government Department, State Govern ments, 24 leading CPSUs and 7 Insurance Companies 
last year, as well as, extension of last date for receiving the bids, not a single bid was received till date. 
The Committee have been categorically informed by the Department that in view of lack of respon se to 
bids for land and asset sale of pharma companies, there is delay in meeting their liabilities resulting in 
delay in the closure of IDPL and RDPL/strategic sale of HAL and BCPL. Besides, as informed by the 
NBCC, most of the loss-making PSUs have declined to avail their services.  
 
(B) In the opinion of the Committee, the task of monetizing intangible assets of loss making PSUs is a 
complex matter and needs expertise. In fact, the C&AG, in their Report No. 40 of 2016 stated that Air 

17 
 
India Ltd. failed to  achieve the target of monetization of their assets due to improper selection of 
properties not based on actual feasibility of monetization and in their recommendation, hinted on the 
absence of proper title deeds as well as limiting provisions/conditions i n the lease agreements of assets 
of the PSU thereby impacting their monetization. The Committee hence desire the Government to pay 
attention to these aspects, while reviewing their policy on sale/monetization of surplus land and assets 
of the loss making PSUs, as well as to ensure that such decisions are in tandem with the prevailing land 
acquisition laws. Besides the Committee would like to emphasize for making the process of 
monetization of assets including land of loss making PSUs transparent. With regar d to sale of land of 
loss making PSUs, the Committee would like to be apprised whether the Government has explored any 
future requirement of the land & assets, currently identified for sale, by such loss -making PSUs, which 
are slated to be revived, and not  closed, because acquiring the assets of such scale and at prime 
locations again may not be possible in future.'  
 
27. The Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) on the aforesaid 
issues responded as under:-  
 
'(A) This observation/ recommendation of the Committee relates to administrative Ministries/ 
Departments of loss making CPSEs in 2016 -17. DPE had written to the respective administrative 
Ministries/ Departments for furnishing comments thereon. Department of Pharmaceuticals (in respect of  
IDPL,RDPL,HAL and BCPL), Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals(in respect of Hindustan 
Organic Chemicals Limited and Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited), Ministry of Railways (in respect of 
M/s Braithwaite & Co. Ltd ), Mi nistry of Coal(in respect of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and Western 
Coalfields Ltd.),  Department of Heavy Industry(in respect of Hindustan Cables Ltd., Instrumentation 
Ltd., HMT Bearing Ltd., HMT Watches Ltd. and  Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd.), Department of 
Defence Production (BEL -THALES Systems Ltd.) and Department of Fertilizers (about Projects and 
Development India Limited, Madras Fertilizers Ltd., Fertilisers And Chemicals Travancore Ltd.) have 
replied in this regard. The gist of the replies is given in Annexure-IX. 
 
(B) a) DPE closure guidelines dated 14.6.2018 were prepared after inter -ministerial consultation with 53 
Ministries/ Departments/Govt. bodies including Department of Expenditure, DEA, and DIPAM. As per 
the DPE closure guidelines issued on 1 4.6.2018, Land Management Agency (LMA) is the CPSE, such 
as NBCC/ EPIL is nominated by the administrative Ministry/ Department/ the Board of the CPSE under 
closure to manage, maintain and assist in disposal of land. The function of LMA are given in para 5 of 
the closure guidelines. 
 
b) Further, the DPE closure guidelines issued on 14.6.2018 provides that in case, the CPSE is a 
subsidiary of another CPSE and if the assets are required by such holding company, the same may be 
transferred to the holding company at book value, in consultation with the State Government. Similarly, if 
assets are required by the administrative Ministry/ Department for its own use, the same may be 
transferred to it at book value. In respect of remaining assets, guidelines as m entioned in subsequent 
paras, i.e., 4.2 and 4.3 shall apply. 
 

18 
 
c) In the guidelines, priority has been provided for use of land of CPSEs under closure for affordable 
housing projects across the country, in case of its suitability for this purpose. The land identified for 
affordable housing shall undergo the process of disposal as per the guidelines of Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs in this regard and the remaining land will be sold as per the priority given below to 
public authorities: 
 
 (i) Central Government departments 
  (ii) State Government departments 
  (iii) Central Government bodies/ CPSEs and State Government bodies/   
 PSEs. 
 
d) In case of sale of land to Central or State PSEs/ Bodies/ Authorities, a limited bidding process 
may be adopted in a physical format or on e -platform. In case, no offer is received from the above, the 
disposal of immovable assets is to be done in a transparent process through the auctioning agency to 
any entity with the approval of competent authority.' 
 
28. The Commit tee note that despite the Government appointing NBCC/ EPIL as Land Management 
Agency (LMA) and their best efforts, properties of loss making CPSUs have not generated enough 
interest among potential buyers.  Due to the  delay or lack of interest among buyer s, the loss making 
CPSUs are facing difficulties in meeting their liabilities. As per the information furnished by DPE in 
Annexure –IX to their reply, sale of surplus land of IDPL and RDPL is yet to materialize. Similarly, the land 
of Burn Standard Company  Ltd. of  the Ministry of Railways, could not be disposed of due to restriction 
imposed by National Company Law Appellate Tribunal.  Further, sale of land/properties of Hindustan 
Cables Limited, Instrumentation Limited are yet to materialize.  The Committe e desire that 
disposal/monetization of land assets of loss making CPSUs be fast -tracked so that closure of the loss 
making CPSUs can be done faster and their liabilities met at the earliest.  However, the Committee  
observe that a large number of CPSUs were  established quite at a distance from the main cities but due 
to fast urbanization, the cities got expanded and these CPSUs now are within the city limits  andas a result 
thereof, the landed properties of these CPSUs have got richer valuation.   Moreover, the land owned by the 
CPSUs are otherwise also  their very precious fixed assets which has consistently seen upward market 
valuation and therefore the Committee reemphasize that Government should exercise extra care and 
caution when giving finality to the pro posal for disposing/ monetizing land of loss making CPSUs as 
acquiring of land of such scale and at same/similar prime locations, in future, may not be possible either 
due to heavy cost associated with it or on account of non availability of land in these locations. 
 
***** 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
  
Overall Loss Scenario 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that in the last seven decades, CPSUs have contributed significantly towards 
making India self -reliant in their respective fields. In addition to physical assets, they have developed significant 
competencies with regard to human resources, intellectual property, research etc. and have always served the 
national priorities. They further note that as per the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) Survey 2016 -17, the 
total financial investment in all CPSUs stood at `12,50,373 crore a s on 31.3.2017, compared to `11,61,019 crore 
as on 31.3.2016, recording a growth of 7.70%. So far as the total investment in 77 loss making CPSUs is 
concerned, the data furnished by DPE a s on 2014 -15 was to the tune of `1,36,673.05 Crore and accumulated 
losses in these 77 loss making CPSUs was `1,18,556.89 Crore. As regards performance, the DPE Survey 
showed that the total income of all CPSUs during 2016 -17 was `18,21,809 crore compared to `17,64,232 crore in 
2015-16, showing a growth of just 3.26%. The pro fit of profit -making 174 CPSUs showed a growth of 5.28% in 
2016-17. The loss of 82 loss -making CPSUs, although showed a decrease in loss by 18.58% in 2016 -17, yet it 
stood at `25,045 crore and the number of loss -making CPSUs also increased from 79 in 2015 -16 to 82 in 2016 -
17. 
From the analysis of the profit and loss figures of CPSUs given in the DPE Survey (2016 -17), the 
Committee observe that while CPSUs in few sectors like Mining, Power, Steel and Petroleum & Natural Gas 
continue to hold a dominant market  position, most of the CPSUs in other sectors have been continuously making 
losses over the years. The overall scenario of the performance of Central Public Sector Undertakings is rather 
insipid now. From the Sector -wise key ratios of CPSUs, as per the DPE  Survey (2016 -2017), the Committee 
observe an alarming trend in the CPSUs operating in two key sectors namely Agriculture and Services. CPSUs in 
Agriculture Sector showed all ratios like Return on Net Worth, Return on Equity, Return on Assets, Net Profit 
margin and PBIT margin mostly in the negative i.e. - 11.82%, -11.82%, -2.08%, -3.08% and a meagre 5.61% 
respectively. The CPSUs in Services sector also did not show an impressive performance with the figures at 
5.27%, 5.26%, 1.20%, 3.99% and 12.31% on these  parameters during 2016 -17. The Return on Net Worth of 
CPSUs during 2016 -17 was only 13.53% in manufacturing sector and only 15.53% in mining and exploration 
sector, despite the DPE terming these CPSUs  as „better performing‟ companies. The overall loss of  the CPSUs 
during 2016-17 was staggeringly high i.e. `25,045 crore. In the view of the Committee, these figures are tell -tale 
signs of the incipient sickness most of the CPSU are suffering from, in the present times and the pathetic 
comparisonagainst priva te and commercially -run companies in all the above sectors. The Committee are 
particularly concerned that the Return on Assets by all CPSUs ranged between - 2.08% to a maximum of 7.99%, 
which indicates the urgent need on the part of the management of the CP SUs for optimum utilization of their 
assets to generate better earnings. This is particularly significant in the backdrop of the fact that the CPSUs own 
valuable landed properties at prime locations and also they enjoy the privilege of having support of th e 
Government.  (Page No.116-118 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a)  The concerns of the Committee have been brought to the notice of the concerned administrative 
Ministries/ Departments of CPSEs and also the CPSEs vide DPE OM dated 28.3.2019 to take note of the 
observations of the Committee and for taking appropriate measures for optimum utilization of their assets to 
generate earnings. 
 
b) In this regard, Department of Atomic Energy has stated that the Return on Assets (RoA) of Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) was 4% in 2016 -17 and 5 % in 2017 -18. Efforts to improve the RoA is a 
constant endeavor at NPCIL. It is also stated that generally the RoA of power sector companies, irrespective of  
whether they are in th e public sector or private sector tends to be relatively lower when compared to sectors like 
services, manufacturing, etc. due to the large asset base of infrastructure, plant and machinery, etc. required for 
power generation and the regulated electricity tariffs in the country. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
Need for shift in perspective 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the fact tha t PSUs were set up to serve certain broad macro -economic and 
social objectives, and hence should not be compared with the commercially -run companies. Further, it, 
undoubtedly, was upon the CPSUs to reach out to far -flung corners of the Country to generate employment and 
create necessary infrastructure to pave way for others to venture out there. The Committee feel that CPSUs have 
successfully fulfilled these objectives. At the time of independence, there was a genuine need for the Government 
to set up PSUs to run industries as a sizeable part of the economy was agriculture -based. Liberalization of 
economy has come a long way and the Committee‟s examination has revealed that the margins of most of the 
PSUs, which already are under pressure to be more efficien t, pale in comparison to their private counterparts, 
who have become far more capable of running globally competitive businesses. Even theDPE acknowledged the 
fact in their Survey (2016 -17) that many CPSUs which did not evolve with liberalization and openi ng up of 
economy lost ground very quickly toprivate companies. PSUs in the telecom sector are facing a hyper competitive 
market with 6 -7 major private operators. Pharma PSUs like Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, IDPL, etc. are also 
facing a very stiff compet ition from foreign companies, particularly, the Chinese ones. In certain other sectors like 
light and heavy engineering products, the PSUs like SAIL are in dire need of constant technology upgradation to 
keep pace with the market demands and compete with the multi-national companies. 
 
The Committee feel that all the PSUs, which the Government plans to retain, need to perform better and 
maintain decent key ratios, in order to sustain faith of the consumer market on their capabilities and therefore the 

21 
 
Government has to ensure that the principles of corporate governance must be applied and adhered to by their 
Boards. The Committee recommend that the Government should examine these aspects in all seriousness, 
refrain from undue delays in decision -making and realistically assess the need to retain PSUs in select sectors. 
The Committee would also desire the Government to examine certain global models followed by Countries like 
China, Sweden, Malaysia, Vietnam or Thailand to manage their PSUs and turning thos e around based on certain 
successful models suitable for their respective countries, be it a holding company model/creation of a watchdog 
model/privatization model or bureaucratic insulation and transparency model. (Page No.118 -119 of the 24 th 
Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The Companies Act, 2013 has detailed provisions relating to corporate governance which are also 
applicable to CPSEs. DPE has also issued Guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs from the year 2010. 
These guid elines cover issues such as composition of Boards, Audit Committee, Subsidiary companies, 
disclosure, Code of conduct and ethics, risk management and compliance. In order to ensure that principles of 
corporate governance are adhered to by CPSEs, DPE is gra ding CPSEs based on their compliance with 
Guidelines on Corporate Governance for CPSEs and has made it part of MoU evaluation exercise.   
 
b) As per the existing provisions under Allocation of Business Rules and Transaction of Business Rules of 
Government of India, CPSEs function under the administrative control of line Ministries/ Departments who 
continuously monitor the performance of CPSEs for timely intervention, if required. Department of Public 
Enterprises acts as a nodal coordinating Department and issu es broad policy guidelines on the matters of 
performance improvement and evaluation, autonomy and financial delegation and personnel management, etc.  to 
bring about certain degree of uniformity among CPSEs. Besides DPE, all guidelines issued by other conce rned 
Departments such as Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (D IPAM), Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA) and NITI Aayog on various financial matters are also followed by CPSEs.  
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) 
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
(ii) The Committee find that in April, 2018, the DPE had organized wide ranging deliberations at the level of 
CPSUs and their administrative Ministries finally culminating in a CPSU Conclave headed by the Prime Minister, 
which deliberated on financial reengineering and innovation in CPSUs, among other issues. The Committee 
desire the Government to furnish a detailed note to them in the matter as well as progress on the actio n plan 
proposed to be prepared by DPE for laying down the road map to achieve identified targets by CPSUs.(Page 
No.119 of the 24th Report of CoPU).             
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) It is submitted that during address at CPSE Conclave held on 9 th April, 2018, Hon‟ble Prime Minister had, 
inter-alia, posed five challenges to CPSEs, viz (i) maximizing geo -strategic reach of the CPSEs, (ii) minimizing 

22 
 
import bill of the country, (iii) integration of innovation and research amongst CPSEs, (iv) CSR expenditure on 
single theme, and (v) new development model for the country. All CPSEs had been requested to prepare their 
Action Plans to address the challenges posed by Hon‟ble Prime Minister and other recommendations emerging 
from CPSE Conclave. 
 
b) A meeti ng regarding review of action plan of CPSEs of 7 important sectors (Petroleum & Gas, Coal, 
Mines, Steel, Power, Heavy Industry & Defence Production) was held under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister on 05.11.2018. In order to facilitate real -time uploading and monitoring of the progress of Action Plans of 
CPSEs at the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department level and above, DPE has developed a Dashboard 
and all the concerned Ministries/Departments and CPSEs have been asked to upload relevant i nformation on this 
Dashboard through their respective nodal officers on a continuous basis. About 140 CPSEs have uploaded the 
status of fulfilment of targets proposed under respective action plans on the DRISHTI dashboard.  A CoS meeting 
was held on 9.5.20 19 to assess the status of implementation of action plans and  decision points of the review 
meeting taken by the PM and broadly it has been decided that the action plans will continue  to be monitored by 
the respective administrative Ministries/ Departments as well as CoS periodically. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
(iii) On the issue of CPSUs serving the social objectives and their area of operations include far-flung areas, 
one of the expert organization who deposed before the Committee was of the view that in the exceptional 
instances of a CPSU having to serve a broader public need as Government instrument, the amount so involved 
may be reimbursed by  the Government to the CPSUs. The Committee tend to agree with the views of the expert 
organization in this regard and would like the Government to consider this aspect. (Page No.119 - 120 of the 24 th 
Report of CoPU)           
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As the issue involved financial implications, D/o Expenditure and NITI Aayog had been consulted by DPE 
on the observations of the Committee.  
 
a) The gist of the views of D/o Expenditure (DoE) is given below: 
 
D/o Expenditure vide OM dated 19.3.2019 has stated that the initial action in this regard is to be taken by 
the administrative Ministry of PSU. The administrative Ministry is to submit proposal to the competent 
authority. DoE after examining the proposal c onveys its views to the administrative Ministry.  DoE‟s role in 
this case is limited to comments and recommendations on the proposals of the administrative Ministry.  
 

23 
 
Hence, it is evident from the comments of DoE that in such an eventuality, the concerned  administrative Ministry 
has to  formulate proposal for the approval of the competent authority in consultation with DoE.  
 
b) The information from NITI Ayog is awaited. The Committee will be apprised on receipt of the reply from 
NITI Aayog. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) 
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 7, 8 & 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Role of the government with regard to functioning of CPSUs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
It has come out during the course of deliberations that keeping in view the changing scenario whereby 
private sector is operating in every area barring some strategic fields and PSUs are not able to sustain the tough 
competition by the private sector, the whole concept of need of CPSUs in the changing scenario is being 
reviewed by the Government. As stated by NITI Aayog, all CPSUs except under those in the strategic areas are 
eligible to be considered for strategic disi nvestment. The experts have also suggested, before the Committee, 
about setting up of new CPSUs to be considered by the Government only in (i) areas of strategic significance, (ii) 
market failure including rare instances when there could be threat of priva te sector monopoly; or (iii) to carry out 
functions taken on by the Government but acquiring the freedom, managerial capabilities and responsiveness of a 
corporate entity (for instance skill development or job creation). After due analysis of the prominent  loss-making 
PSUs, the Committee tend to agree with the views of NITI Aayog and experts on the issue of retaining CPSUs not 
working so well and on the question of setting new CPSUs in the changing market scenario and would like the 
Government to undertake a thorough evaluation of CPSUs by the Government periodically, say every three years 
and keep the Committee apprised. (Page No.122-123 of the 24th Report of CoPU)    
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The observation of the Committee has been brought to the no tice of the concerned administrative 
Ministries/ Department of loss making CPSEs vide DPE OM dated 21.1.2019 to take appropriate measures. 
Besides, NITI Aayog has also been informed on 21.1.2019 about the observation of the Committee. In this regard, 
the reply  has been received from D/o Pharmaceuticals , M/o Railways , D/o Defence Production, M/o Health & Family 
Welfare, D/o Heavy Industry, Ministry of Home Affairs,  Ministry of Coal, Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals and Ministry of Steel. A gist of  replies received  is given in Annex-II 
 
b) Besides above, as per the guidelines issued by DPE on 29.10.2015 on revival / restructuring of CPSEs, the 
administrative Ministries/ Departments concerned are responsible for monitoring the performance of CPSEs 
functioning under them and taking timely redressal measures/ formulation of plans for revival/ restructuring/ 
disinvestment/ closure of sick/ loss making CPSEs in consultation with stakeholders and after obtaining the 
approval of the competent authority, implement the plan.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
(ii) The Committee observe that the NITI Aayog in their submission mentioned thatGovernment should not 
engage itself in manufacturing /producing goods and services where the competitive markets have already come -
up. The Committee tend to agree with the suggestion of NITI Aayog and feel that the Government should act as a 
„regulator‟ or a „facilitator‟. The Committee further observe that given the current dynamic environment, whether in 
terms of market, customer or technology, the ability to make rapid decisions is critical hence the Committee opine 
that Boards of the CPSUs must be empowered comprising expert s to enhance quality of decisions, overall 
management supervision and governance so as to ensure speedy decision making. An intense competition is a 
hallmark of any vibrant sector. Often in such cases, the customer / citizen is the beneficiary. The Committ ee 
agree with the view expressed by the CII that as long as no player has received an advantage by undue means, 
and new or small players are not hindered due to regulatory reasons, the Government should permit market 
forces to shape the sector. Should inte nse competition result in consolidation of players, regulations such as the 
Competition Act, should prevent anticompetitive or monopolistic practices.  (Page No. 123 of the 24 th Report of 
CoPU).   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The Boards of CPSEs comprise of (i) full time functional, (ii) part -time government and (iii) part -time non-
official Directors. The Government has taken steps for professionalization of Boards of CPSEs which include, (a) 
laying down guidelines for appointment of requisite number of functional, government and non-official Directors on 
the Boards of CPSEs, (b) prescribing criteria in terms of age, educational qualifications and experience for 
persons to be considered for appointment as non -official Directors on the Boards of CPSEs. The prescribed 
criteria, inter-alia, provide that retired Government officials, ex -CMDs/ CEOs/ Directors of CPSEs, academicians/ 
Directors of Institute and Professors, Professionals of repute having relevant domain experience, forme r or 
serving CEOs/Directors of private companies and persons of eminence with proven track record from Industry, 

25 
 
Business or Agriculture or Management are eligible to be considered for such appointment subject to fulfilment of 
laid down conditions/ procedu re, (c) organizing orientation programmes for capacity building of non -official 
Directors of CPSEs, (d) capacity building of Government Directors of CPSEs which has been institutionalized 
through programmes being organized by Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, etc. 
 
b) On the observation of the Committee, views/ comments of Ministry of Power, Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting and Department of Fertilizers have 
been received which a re at Annex-III. Both Ministry of Power and Ministry of Steel have apprised that the Board 
of CPSEs under their respective Ministries have experts in the technical fields pertaining to their area of 
operations so as to enhance the quality of decisions.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Case study of 12 identified CPSUs by the Committee 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee undertook comprehensive examination to find out the actual reasons for some of the 
PSUs suffering huge losses, on case -to-case basis, by shortlisting 12 major such PSUs. Apart from these PSUs, 
views of their administrative Ministries were also heard and information obtained from them by the Committee. 
The analysis of the inputs received in this regard is as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Company & 
year of 
incorporation 
Year since 
when 
incurring 
losses 
Turnover 
(2016-17) 
Investment  
made     (in 
crore) 
 
Support 
provided 
(in 
crore) 
Reasons for losses Status 
 
1 Instrumentation 
Limited (1964) 
1991-92 213.41 
(2015- 
16) 
146.06 26545.21 Globalization of the 
Indian economy, 
excessive 
manpower and 
shortage of 
working capital. 
Kota unit to be 
closed and 
Pallakad unit to be 
transferred to 
Kerala 
Government. 
2 HMT Ltd. (1953) 2010-11 22.9 1536.07 2403.66 Rising costs, 
technology gap, 
market conditions, 
working capital 
constraints etc. 
 
(i). Closure of 
Tractor division 
approved by 
Cabinet.  
(ii). 3 subsidiaries 
HMT watches, 
HMT  Chinar 

26 
 
Watches & HMT 
bearings approved 
for closure by 
CCEA 
3 Hindustan    
Paper 
Corporation 
Limited (1970) 
2009-10 182.89 1098.83 588.81 Non-availability of 
bamboo, ban on 
mining of coal in 
Mizoram etc. 
Both the units of 
HPCL are stopped 
for non -availability 
of working capital 
and  payment of 
salaries 
4 BSNL (2000) 2009-10 28403 15626.57 30604.28 Payment of       
spectrum charges, 
legacy issues, 
social obligations 
etc.  
As per guidelines  
5 MTNL (1986) 2009-10 
barring 
2013-14 
3552.46 7641.31 954.16 High cost of 3G 
spectrum, High 
employee cost, 
stiff competition, 
manpower 
issues, high 
maintenance 
cost, upgradation 
and modernization 
Revival plan  
submitted to DoT 
on 06.04.2017 is 
under active 
consideration 
6 SAIL (1973) 2015-16 209268 23218.01 - Adverse market 
conditions, 
increase in coal 
prices, Adverse 
impact of levy of 
contribution to 
DMF and NMET, 
increase in 
salaries, higher 
interest charges, 
higher 
depreciation 
Expected to earn 
profit 
7 HSCL (1964) Since last 30 
years 
1196.05 70.00 1593.9 Low recruitment 
for last 25 years, 
low consumption 
of steel, 
The Company 
generated 
netprofit of Rs. 
30.19 crore during 
2015-16 for the 

27 
 
first time in 30 
years. The 
Company has  
been taken over 
by NBCC  w e f  
1.4.2017  
8 FACT (1943) 1998-99 1942 2417.56 3639.75 Delay in 
implementing the 
revival package, 
changes in policy, 
not addressing 
policy anomalies 
in time, closure of 
urea plant, non -
operation of urea 
& caprolactam 
plant and working 
capital cost etc.  
Financial 
restructuring 
package 
submitted to the 
Department of 
Fertilizers 
9 HAL (1954) 1973-74 10.73 441.83 324.55 Increase in 
prices of 
petroleum 
products, interest 
liability, non -
revision of prices 
by DPCO 
Under 
disinvestment 
10 BPRL (2006) Company 
under 
construction 
- 4967.10 -  Company under 
construction 
11 Air India (2007) 2007 22146.00 62766.13 26545.21 Legacy issues, 
unprofitable 
routes, stiff 
competition, high 
operating cost, 
accumulated 
interest, 
cumbersome 
procurement 
method, phasing 
out old aircrafts  
Under 
disinvestment,   
the Company         
its operations on a 
Going Concern 
Basis.  
12 SPMCIL (2006) 2014-15 only - 1182.49 - Price adjustment 
made in 2014 -15 
The Company 
earned profit 

28 
 
concerning to the 
earlier years due to 
revision of selling 
price of circulating 
coins and Postal 
items 
retrospectively 
during 2016-17 
 
The aforesaid inputs as received from the concerned CPSUs /Administrative Ministries / DPE indicates a 
sorry state of affairs with regard to the present status of major CPSUs which were backbone of various sectors of 
the economy at one point of time and had contributed immensely to the country. Although the reasons varied from 
enterprise to enterprise, some common reasons for losses in CPSUs as emerged during the course of 
deliberations are old and obsolete plant and machinery, outdated technology, low capa city utilization, high interest 
burden, excess manpower, weak marketing strategies, lack of business plans, dependence on Government 
orders and decisions and delays therein, shortage of working capital, high cost of production etc. Even when the 
major CPSUs continued running on losses, the Committee are concerned to note that no efforts were made on 
the part of DPE, the nodal Ministry for CPSUs to make some analytical study concerning loss making CPSUs as 
is apparent from the reply of the Department whereby  their response was negative on a specific query enquiring 
as to whether any case study was undertaken on CPSUs continuously making losses or any analysis undertaken 
regarding closure / revival /disinvestment of loss -making CPSUs. Nevertheless, the Committ ee strongly 
recommend for undertaking a scientific study in this regard through learnings from the past experiences so that 
the mistakes committed in the past are not repeated.  
 
With regard to loss making CPSUs not working well and incurring huge losses over a long period of time, 
the Committee would like the Government to consider for closure of these loss making CPSUs. The Committee 
find that many of the loss making CPSUs have a number of subsidiaries some of them are running on losses and 
some of them are making profits. The Committee would, therefore, like to recommend that the performance of the 
subsidiaries of loss making CPSUs should be thoroughly analyzed to have a comprehensive view on the overall 
performance of the Undertakings which would facili tate the Government to take sound decision on the 
disinvestment /closure of specific units of the loss making CPSUs.   (Page No. 126 -128 of the 24 th Report of 
CoPU).  
Reply of the Government 
 
a) CPSEs operate under dynamic economic environment which creates challenging situations having a 
bearing on the performance. To address the challenges, CPSEs need to continuously respond by way of 
appropriate plans/ policy formulation and their timely implementation. CPSEs those did not evolve fast, lost 
ground.  As the reasons for losses/ sickness in CPSEs vary from enterprises to enterprise, different strategies are 
required for revival. Therefore, no common strategy is applied to all the enterprises. Further, CPSEs are 
organized sectorally under the control of sectora l/ line Ministries. The study can be taken up by the sectoral 
Ministries, to address the losses/ sickness in respect of the CPSEs under their domain, if required, keeping in 
mind the problems faced by the particular sector. Accordingly, the observations of  the Committee have been 
brought to the notice of concerned administrative Ministries/ Departments vide DPE OM dated 21.1.2019.  

29 
 
b) Besides above, it is also submitted that DPE, as a general policy making Department to all CPSEs, has 
issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 for streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick/ incipient sick 
and weak CPSEs. These guidelines contain provisions for taking pro -active measures for ensuring efficient 
functioning of the CPSEs. T he administrative Ministries/ De partments are responsible for monitoring the health of 
their respective CPSEs and take timely mid -course correction and other measures to arrest the sub -optimal 
performance of their CPSEs. The guidelines also provide principles on which administrative Mini stries/ 
Departments shall draw revival/ restructuring plans of their CPSEs.  These guidelines are to be implemented by 
the concerned administrative Ministries/ Departments. 
c)   The subsidiaries of CPSEs, if registered in India, are also categorized as CPS Es. The observations of the 
Committee regarding  analyzing of the performance of the subsidiaries of loss making CPSUs have been brought 
to the notice of the concerned administrative Ministries/ Department of CPSEs vide DPE OM dated 21.1.2019 to 
take note of the observations of the Committee and take appropriate measures accordingly.  In this regard, 
the gist of the reply received from Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Steel and 
Department of Fertilizers is given in Annex-IV. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
AIR INDIA 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
With regard to the status of Air India, the Committee note that as per the information furnished by DPE, 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28th June, 2017 has given in principle 
approval for considering strategic disinvestment of Air India and its five subsidiaries and constitution of Air Ind ia 
Specific Alternative Mechanism (AISAM) to guide the process of strategic disinvestment from time to time and 
decide treatment of unsustainable debt of Air India; hiving off of certain assets to a shell company; demerger and 
strategic disinvestment of th ree profit  making subsidiaries; the quantum of disinvestment; and the universe of 
bidders. 
 
In this connection, the Committee recall that this Committee and various other Parliamentary Committees 
too, apart from C&AG, had examined Air India at different po ints of time and given valuable suggestions/ 
recommendations. However despite efforts to implement Turnaround Plan and bring it back to normalcy, the PSU 
functioned under a large debt burden which became unmanageable and increased to gigantic proportions y ear 
after year. From the information furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation through DPE, it is noted that NITI Aayog 
listed the various issues while recommending disinvestment of Air India which inter alia include continuous losses 
and huge accumulated losses with a cash deficit of around Rs.200 -250 crore per month mainly on account of the 
huge debt service burden; the Turn Around Plan focusing only on equity infusion without any plan for re -
engineering the processes and not recommending any structural  changes or changes in the methods of 
appointment at senior levels of management, long freeze on recruitment of staff other than pilot and cabin crew 
which left Air India deprived of fresh talent new ideas, shrinking Air India market share and aviation is not a 
strategic priority business. The Committee also find that it has specifically been mentioned by NITI Aayog that the 

30 
 
losses of Air India can also be attributable to the decision of merger taken in 2007 wherein two very different 
organizations with dissimilar equipment and Human Resources practices were intended to be merged.  
 
The Committee understand that it has been planned to disinvest Air India and the process in this regard is 
undergoing. While noting the status of disinvestment of Air India, the C ommittee hope that the process would be 
completed expeditiously. The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about the fate of debts and 
liabilities on the disinvestment of Air India. (Page No. 129-130 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In this regard, reply received vide OM dated 29.3.2019 from Ministry of Civil Aviation is given below:  
 
a)        Keeping in view the fact that no bid was received for strategic disinvestment of Air India, Air India Specific 
Alternative Mechani sm (AISAM), in its meeting held on 18th June 2018, had, inter alia, decided that once the 
global economic indicators including oil prices and the forex regime stabilize, the option of strategic disinvestment 
of Air India should be brought before AISAM, for deliberating the future course of action. 
 
b)    The debt & liabilities & Air India will be dealt with in accordance  with the decisions taken during a meeting 
chaired by the Hon‟ble Finance Minister which was held on 7th September 2018 on  the  subject,   “The Plan for 
Operational and Financial Efficiency in Air India” in which, the following proposals were, inter alia, deliberated 
upon and approved:- 
 
i) A total debt amounting to Rs 29,464 crore would be transferred from Air India Ltd to the Special Purpose  
Vehicle (SPV) viz Air India Assets Holding Co Ltd forthwith.  
 
ii) Remaining debt and current net liability will remain with Air India. Debt allocation between AI and SPV to 
be revisited at a later date closer to disinvestment. 
 
iii) A Cash Support of Rs 3975 cror e to Air India, inclusive of Rs 1630 crore already infused in AI in the 
financial year of FY 2018-19. 
 
iv) To provide a Govt. Guarantee of Rs 7600 crore, inclusive of Rs 3000 crore already provided to AI in FY 
2018-19, to raise new debt for payment of stretched liabilities. 
 
v) An additional amount of Rs 1300 crore to be provided to the SPV to meet the interest liability on the 
transferred debt. 
 
vi) From FY 2019 -20, the entire interest on the debt of Rs 29464 crore, transferred to the SPV, would be 
serviced by the Govt. 
 

31 
 
c)      It is stated in this regard that a SPV namely Air India Asset Holding Limited had already been created on 
22.01.2018 and the Union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 28.02.2019, has granted ex -post facto approval for 
creation of the same.   
d)        Further, regarding monetization of assets, it was decided in the above stated meeting that since 
transferring assets may involve other issues like stamp duty, the disposal of assets is to be done by MOCA/AI 
management. AI will open an escrow account t o park the sale proceeds for paying debt transferred to SPV. It is 
stated in this regard that the assets of Air India are being monetized while they continue to be with Air India where 
all sale proceeds from monetization of assets are credited. These proce eds are utilized only to retire those debts 
that are proposed to be transferred to SPV.  
e)      It is further stated that the proposal for payment of Rs.1300/ - crore to Air India Limited for repayment 
of loan has since been approved by Ministry of Finance  and payment has been made to Air India Limited in 
Financial Year 2018-19. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 12 &13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Need for autonomy for efficient functioning of CPSUs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
Although DPE during the course of deliberations have emphatically stated giving adequate autonomy to 
CPSUs/their Boards in the matters of recruitment as well as procurement of machinery or participation of strategic 
tenders, from the evidences of CPSUs, the Committee gathered that most of the CPSUs did not have the desired 
authority or independence in decision making especially in the matt ers of recruitment, procurement, or even in 
devising marketing strategies. Besides, even though lacking the desired independence, the CPSUs were being 
held responsible for losses which, in many cases, were the outcome of decisions that were taken by the 
Government. As stated by the CPSUs during evidence, the merger of IAL & AIL, the shifting of huge number of 
employees from other Departments/PSUs to MTNL and HSCL, the compulsion to MTNL to take part in auction of 
spectrum, were some such decisions which adv ersely dented the performance of these CPSUs, though, in their 
replies, the administrative Ministries of the CPSUs have claimed to have given independence to the CPSUs in 
their functioning. The CPSUs also faced procurement hurdles due to cumbersome procedu res which normally 
their private counterparts did not face.  
 

32 
 
The Committee feel that unless the CPSUs are given the desired level of independence which their 
counterparts in the private sector have, they will not be able to compete in the market. The Committee, therefore, 
emphasize for giving sufficient autonomy to CPSUs so as to enable them to compete in the market particularly 
with the private players. The expert organizations who deposed before the Committee was of the view that the 
CPSUs‟ Board mus t be sufficiently empowered to take nearly all strategic decisions such as formation or 
dissolution of partnerships/ Joint ventures, mergers/ acquisitions, appointment of CEO, creation of below -board 
level positions, etc. and such a Board should be given a  fixed term to make them more accountable and in the 
event of any lapses, accountability must be fixed for the Board/concerned Ministry/Department in their respective 
areas. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at the acti on taken stage. (Page No. 
134-135 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The CPSEs are governed by their Boards which have complete authority for making decisions in respect 
of day -to-day functioning of respective companies. For example, the Boards are competent to make all 
appointments at below Board level and handle all HR re lated issues of below Board level employees. It has also 
to be appreciated that the CPSEs cannot be completely on the same footing as private sector companies as in 
the case of private sector companies, the promoters/owners of the company are usually also on the Boards of 
their companies.  Moreover, unlike private companies, profit maximization is not the sole motive in the case of 
CPSEs. In the case of CPSEs, the Government is the majority owner of CPSEs‟ equity and the Government 
appoints Board level func tionaries to run/manage the company on behalf of the Government. Therefore, the 
management of CPSEs cannot be expected to discharge ownership functions which should continue to be 
discharged by the Government, being majority shareholder.  
b) The Government being the majority shareholder retains the right to undertake strategic decisions which 
have long term implications for the future of the company. It is also worthwhile to mention that CPSEs are funded 
by public money and it is essential to have a proper oversight mechanism with regard to management of CPSEs. 
Further, most of the CPSEs operate in critical areas of the economy such as Coal, Oil, Power, Atomic Energy, 
Defence Production, Fertilizers, etc. making it imperative that such CPSEs continue to foll ow laid down 
regulations, laws, etc. such as RTI, CVC guidelines, procurement guidelines, most of which are not applicable in 
the case of private companies. 
 
c) The Government has also implemented Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna schemes for CPSEs through  which 
enhanced financial and operational powers have already been delegated to the Boards of these CPSEs in the 
areas of capital expenditure, investment in joint ventures/subsidiaries, entering technology joint venture or 
strategic alliances and to obtain  by purchase or other arrangement technology and know -how, human resources 
development, raise debt from domestic and international markets, undertake mergers & acquisitions, etc. Subject 
to prescribed limits and conditions. Presently there are 8 Maharatna,  16 Navratna and 74 Miniratna CPSEs.  
Thus, it may be seen that the Government has delegated powers for even strategic decision making in some of 
the areas to the Boards of CPSEs.   
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) 
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 

33 
 
 
 
Outdated plants & machinery/obsolete technology 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
Technology is one of the key issues while assessing a PSU. During the examination, the Committee 
noted that in several lossmaking PSUs, the technology being used became simply outdated with passing of time. 
PSUs like Hindustan Photo Films, HMT, etc. lost relevance only due to outdated technology and products. The 
Committee were informed during the evidence that som e of these PSUs which had production based on obsolete 
technology, like HMT tried to stay afloat by diversifying from watch segment to tractor segment but failed to keep 
up the competition with private companies, and this process ultimately multiplied thei r liabilities, and finally they 
could not survive. The products of Hindustan Photofilms became outdated on account of shifting of market 
demand to digital films and the PSU had to closed down as their equipment and infrastructure was not suitable for 
digital products. Obsolete technologies have dented the performance as well the image of the telecommunication 
sector PSUs too. In fact one of the reasons for service -sector loss-making PSU MTNL receiving complaints from 
its customers is that their systems do n ot operate on the 4 G spectrum technology and hence call -drop or similar 
issues are consistently occurring leading to frustration among customers resulting in their decision for shifting to 
other telecom service companies. As regards BSNL, way back in the year 2015, the C&AG of India in their Report 
No. 20 (Union Government -Communications & IT Sector) had commented upon the failure by BSNL to provide 
good quality GSM mobile network at competitive tariffs leading to erosion of its subscriber base and loss of  
assured revenue of  ` 100 crore. Even the Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Committee that the 
reasons for Pharma CPSUs going under loss include outdated plant and machinery and obsolete technology.  
 
In this background, the Committee are of the c onsidered view that for sick/loss -making CPSUs 
particularly working in complex technology sectors, a group of experts need to be consulted, ideally as soon as 
the company starts losing market for their products, to explore and recommend timely updation of technology for 
their turnaround, alongwith captive/preferential purchase of products/services of such companies by the 
Government departments/CPSUs, at least till the desired effect of turnaround is achieved. The Committee desire 
that this aspect must be c onsidered by the Government, particularly the Ministries/Departments like Heavy 
Industries, which have the large number of loss -making PSUs, and requisite action is taken. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the same at the action taken stage. (Page No. 136-137 of the 24th Report of CoPU).  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of concerned Ministries/ Departments 
of loss making CPSEs.  As specific mention has been made about D/o Heavy Industry in th e observation/ 
recommendation, the reply received from DHI in this regard is at Annex-VI. The reply received from others such 
as D/o Defence Production, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare , M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas, M/o Railways, M/o 
Civil Aviation, D/o  Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Development of North Eastern 

34 
 
Region, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Department of 
Fertilizers is also given in the same Annex-VI. 
 
b) The DPE guidelines dated 29.10.2015 issued on revival/ restructuring of CPSEs provide for engagement 
of expert agency by the government which has experience and expertise of technology of the sector in which 
such CPSE is functioning for preparation of the future road map of the CPSE.  As per the guidelines, due 
emphasis shall be placed on the ability of the CPSE to adapt to new technology to assess its relevance and 
functioning. The guidelines provides that the business plan for revival/ restructuring of CP SEs inter alia  be based 
on a road map for technology adoption/ upgradation in line with the business plan strategy for viability and 
sustainability over period of time. The guidelines provide for options for adopting requisite technology and up -
gradation of the same as per requirement through various management options including JV, disinvestment or 
privatisation to be factored into the operational restructuring plan. The options of merger or de -merger of various 
operations in line with the proposed busine ss plan to ensure continuous procurement of new technology and its 
up-gradation have also been provided under the guidelines. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
Diversification 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
During the examination of the subject, the Committee took note of many loss -making PSUs resorting to 
diversification of their businesses to stay afloat. The experts who deposed before the Committee  were of the view 
that leaving the core business to diversify into businesses not in -sync with their core strengths by some of the sick 
PSUs, could not help in checking and reversing the loss -making trend at all. In this connection, the Committee 
concur with the views of the DPE that diversification into new products/avenues is a business decision to be taken 
by the management of a company and for the same, the Company should do SWOT (Strength, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities and Threat) analysis, plan accordingl y and acquire new expertise in the new areas so that 
downside risk is minimized. Further the dynamics of the sector and the overall market scenario should be kept in 
mind while considering diversification. While the Boards of the CPSUs are expected to keep  the factors 
mentioned above in mind, the Committee feel that the administrative Ministries need to ensure requisite autonomy 
to the Boards of CPSUs to take such decisions with due caution, preferably in related/desired fields, and carry 
those forward. (Page No. 137-138 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The observations of the Committee regarding the need for administrative Ministries to ensure requisite 
autonomy to the Boards of CPSUs to take decisions on diversification into new pr oducts/ avenues, have been 

35 
 
brought to the notice of the concerned administrative Ministries/Department of CPSEs vide DPE OM dated 
21.1.2019 to take note of the observations of the Committee and take appropriate measures accordingly.  
 
b) The reply received from Ministry of  Railways,Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  D/o Defence Production, 
D/o Heavy Industry, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Power, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Steel,Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Depar tment  of Fertilizers on this recommendationis compiled 
and given in Annex-VII. 
 
c) The Government has also implemented Maharatna, Navratna and Miniratna schemes for CPSEs through 
which enhanced financial and operational powers have already been delegated to the Boards of these CPSEs in 
the areas of capital expenditure, investment in joint ventures/ subsidiaries, entering technology joint venture or 
strategic alliances and to obtain by purchase or other arrangements technology and know -how, human resources 
development, raise debt from domestic and international markets, undertake mergers & acquisitions, etc. subject 
to prescribed limits and conditions. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Manpower issues 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
Rationalization of manpower in PSUs has always been an issue with the PSUs. The total employee 
strength of all CPSUs, as per the DPE Survey (2016 -17) is 11.31 lakh, excludi ng contract workers. The 
Committee have observed that unscientific management of the manpower has proved to be one of the reasons 
for PSUs like IL, MTNL, Air India etc. suffering thin profit margins which ultimately led these companies into 
perpetual sickn ess. The need to instill corporate culture/ proper work culture among employees has also been 
highlighted during the examination of service sector loss making PSUs like MTNL. Hence, the Committee feel that 
the PSUs must have a rationalized manpower with co mmitment towards work. The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the Government and Boards/Management of PSUs must ensure to motivate employees to drive profit 
and innovation at work. (Page No.138 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DPE has forwarded the Committee‟s, observation to all the administrative Ministries/ Departments for 
compliance of the same by CPSEs on 7 th February, 2019. Besides this, the wage revision policy effected by DPE 
at periodical intervals also provides for „Perfo rmance linked Pay‟, which is linked to profit made by a CPSE to 
keep the employees motivated. 
 

36 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
Delay in payment of dues/VRS packages 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee are extremely pained to note that PSUs like HMT, IL, HAL, RDPL, etc. have been unable 
to pay even the full salaries to their employees for years together. Further, most of such PSUs are not in a 
position even to discharge their VRS liabilities for willing employees without the Government‟s support. The 
Committee are perturbed not only at the bleak future the employees of the closed/under closure loss -making 
PSUs but also at the plight of their dependents  who are facing avoidable daily hardships due to nonreceipt of 
salaries or VRS packages. Surprisingly, NITI Aayog has also not made any estimate on the full implications of 
VRS nor they proposed any budgetary provision for utilization in the event of closu re of these CPSUs. The 
Committee further observe that there are large number of employees in loss making PSUs who are in the younger 
age bracket and being a highly skilled workforce and qualified professionals, are eager to work towards 
turnaround of their  company‟s fortune but are unable to do so due to acute shortage of working capital. The 
Committee feel that the Government must give serious considerations on all such issues in a specified time frame 
with a view to not only utilize the skilled work force  of loss making PSUs but also save their dependents from a life 
of misery and despair. In a nutshell, the Committee would emphasize that it is a humanitarian issue for the 
Government as dependents of such employees suffer the most when a PSU becomes incapa ble of disbursing 
their salaries/completing VRS packages/or when the employees lose their employment due to closure of the PSU. 
Hence, they desire that all administrative Ministries handling loss -making PSUs must not delay clearing of dues of 
their employees. The Government must prioritize cash support for the same, if required. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the latest PSU -wise position of pending dues of the employees, period of pendency and the action 
taken/required to settle the same.(Page No. 139-140 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) DPE has issued detailed guidelines on 14th June, 2018 on time bound closure of sick/ loss making CPSEs 
and disposal of movable and immovable assets. These guidelines, inter -alia, provide that in the event of closure, 
the VRS/VSS package will be worked out at 2007 notional pay scales (irrespective of the fact that CPSEs could 
be in pre -revised pay scale of 1997 or 1992 etc.). Further, the estimation of financial requirement for such a 
package for payment of wage/salary etc. will be worked out in a time bound manner by the concerned 
administrative Ministry/ Department/ CPSE and the details of the same will be included in the Cabinet Note for 
seeking budgetary grant from the Government of India. Further, time lines have also been prescribed for the M/o 
Finance, D/o Expenditure to release the funds to m eet the above estimated requirement of funds once the 
Cabinet decision has been taken for closure of a CPSE. Anoversight committee at the level of NITI Aayog has 
also been provided in the guidelines to monitor the status of closure of CPSEs and steps invol ved in the same. In 
respect of HMT, IL, HAL, IDPL and other CPSEs for which decision have been taken for closure, the details of 
pending dues of employees have been sought from the concerned administrative Ministry/ Department vide OM 
No. CRR/02/13/0024/2014-JS(VRS) dated 7.2.2019. 

37 
 
 
b) The observation of the Committee has also been brought to the notice of concerned Ministries/ 
Departments  of loss making CPSEs. The reply received from D/o Pharmaceuticals, D/o Commerce,  Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas, 
Ministry of Railways,  Ministry of Tourism, D/o Heavy Industry, M/o Civil Aviation, D/o Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, Ministry of Power,  Ministry 
of Steel, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Department of Fertilizers has been compiled 
under Annex-VIII. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-
Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Surplus land and asset sale of loss-making PSUs through NBCC 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
Most of the CPSUs have large monolith -type integrated production facilities in prime locations. Although 
the loss -making CPSUs do not have the powers to monetize their surplus land and assets themselves, the 
Committee note that since most of these PSUs had  a huge bank of land assets at prime locations, i.e. Mumbai, 
Delhi, Jaipur, Ooty, etc. in the country, the Government decided that lossmaking companies could identify and 
share details of such surplus land/property assets for sale, which could generate sub stantial revenue, instead of 
laying idle, owing to halt/slowdown of production in the loss -making company. The Committee further note that 
National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), appointed as the Land Management Agency (LMA) by the 
Government, has since been engaged in this task by 10 loss -making PSUs only, in response to the EOI sent by 
NBCC to 74 loss -making PSUs. 28 such PSUs have steadily declined the EOI of NBCC. The Committee 
examined the details of the few properties owned by MTNL, Air Ind ia, HMT Watches and IL, which are currently at 
various stages, albeit none finalized, of being sold/redeveloped.  
 
From their examination, the Committee find that the process of monetization of assets of loss making 
CPSUs is hardly progressing fast as thes e properties have not generated requisite interest among potential 
buyers. To cite an instance, the Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Committee that the tenders for 
auction of surplus lands of HAL, IDPL and BCPL have been uploaded on the web porta l of M/s MSTC, the 
auctioning agency, since May, 2017 and inspite of the Department writing thrice to every Government 
Department, State Governments, 24 leading CPSUs and 7 Insurance Companies last year, as well as, extension 
of last date for receiving the  bids, not a single bid was received till date. The Committee have been categorically 

38 
 
informed by the Department that in view of lack of response to bids for land and asset sale of pharma companies, 
there is delay in meeting their liabilities resulting in delay in the closure of IDPL and RDPL/strategic sale of HAL 
and BCPL. Besides, as informed by the NBCC, most of the loss -making PSUs have declined to avail their 
services. (Page No.141 -142  of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This observa tion/ recommendation of the Committee relates to administrative Ministries/ Departments of loss 
making CPSEs in 2016 -17. DPE had written to the respective administrative Ministries/ Departments for 
furnishing comments thereon. Department of Pharmaceuticals  ( in respect of  IDPL,RDPL,HAL and BCPL), 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals(in respect of  Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited and Hindustan 
Fluorocarbons Limited), Ministry of Railways (in respect of M/s Braithwaite &  Co. Ltd ), Ministry of Coal(in respect 
of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and Western Coalfields Ltd.),  Department of Heavy Industry(in respect of Hindustan 
Cables Ltd., Instrumentation Ltd., HMT Bearing Ltd., HMT Watches Ltd. and  Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd. ), 
Department of Defence Production (BEL -THALES Systems Ltd.) and Department of Fertilizers (about Projects 
and Development India Limited , Madras Fertilizers Ltd.,  Fertilisers And Chemicals Travancore Ltd. ) have replied 
in this regard. The gist of the replies is given in Annex-IX. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
(ii) In the opinion of the Committee, the task of monetizing intangible assets of loss making P SUs is a 
complex matter and needs expertise. In fact, the C&AG, in their Report No. 40 of 2016 stated that Air India Ltd. 
failed to achieve the target of monetization of their assets due to improper selection of properties not based on 
actual feasibility of monetization and in their recommendation, hinted on the absence of proper title deeds as well 
as limiting provisions/conditions in the lease agreements of assets of the PSU thereby impacting their 
monetization. The Committee hence desire the Government t o pay attention to these aspects, while reviewing 
their policy on sale/monetization of surplus land and assets of the loss making PSUs, as well as to ensure that 
such decisions are in tandem with the prevailing land acquisition laws. Besides the Committee would like to 
emphasize for making the process of monetization of assets including land of loss making PSUs transparent. With 
regard to sale of land of loss making PSUs, the Committee would like to be apprised whether the Government 
has explored any future requirement of the land & assets, currently identified for sale, by such loss -making PSUs, 
which are slated to be revived, and not closed, because acquiring the assets of such scale and at prime locations 
again may not be possible in future. (Page No. 143 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) DPE closure guidelines dated 14.6.2018 were prepared after inter -ministerial consultation with 53 
Ministries/ Departments/Govt. bodies including Department of Expenditure, DEA, and DIPAM. As per the DPE 
closure guidelines issued on 14.6.2018, Land Management Agency (LMA) is the CPSE, such as NBCC/ EPIL  is 

39 
 
nominated by the administrative Ministry/ Department/ the Board of the CPSE under closure to manage, maintain 
and assist in disposal of land. The function of LMA are given in para 5 of the closure guidelines.  
 
b) Further, the DPE closure guidelines issued on 14.6.2018 provides that in case, the CPSE is a subsidiary 
of another CPSE and if the assets are required by such holding company, the same ma y be transferred to the 
holding company at book value, in consultation with the State Government. Similarly, if assets are required by the 
administrative Ministry/ Department for its own use, the same may be transferred to it at book value.  In respect of 
remaining assets, guidelines as mentioned in subsequent paras, i.e., 4.2 and 4.3 shall apply.  
 
c) In the guidelines, priority has been provided for use of land of CPSEs under closure for affordable 
housing projects across the country, in case of its suitability for this purpose. The land identified for affordable 
housing shall undergo the process of disposal as per the guidelines of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in 
this regard and the remaining land will be sold as per the priority given below to public authorities: 
 (i)   Central Government departments 
(ii)State Government departments 
(iii)Central Government bodies/ CPSEs and State Government bodies/ PSEs.  
 
d) In case of sale of land to Central or State PSEs/ Bodies/ Authorities, a limited bid ding process may be 
adopted in a physical format or on e -platform. In case, no offer is received from the above, the disposal of 
immovable assets is to be done in a transparent process through the auctioning agency to any entity with the 
approval of competent authority. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee find that whereas a private company has autonomy to dispose of some of its assets 
including land to come out from the worst scenario when the company is in great losses and is not able to 
manage its debt liabilities, in case of a CPSU such au tonomy is not there. DPE in this regard has emphatically 
justified the present policy of the Government stating that CPSUs have been set up with public funds and 
Government is the majority shareholders in these CPSUs and therefore, it may not be appropriat e to empower the 
Boards of CPSUs to monetize their assets. Keeping in view the present scenario of ever -evolving technology and 

40 
 
tough competition in the market that a CPSU has to work and the present scenario of more and more CPSUs 
falling sick, the Commit tee feel that the aforesaid policy need to be relooked by the Government. (Page No. 143 -
144 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) was requested for giving its views in 
this regard.  Regarding giving autonomy “to the CPSUs to dispose of some of its assets including land to come 
out from the worst scenario when the company is in great losses and is not able to manage its debt 
liabilities”,DIPAM has  informed on 26.4.2019 that the Cabinet in its meeting on 28 th February, 2019 has approved 
procedure and mechanism for Asset Monetization for CPSEs/PSUs/other Government Organizations and 
Immovable Enemy Properties.  The aim of putting this framework in place is that assets belonging to Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs)/Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)/other Government Organizations and of 
Immovable Enemy Property, which hold a huge potential for wealth generation for overall economic development 
of the country should be appropri ately monetized over a period of time.    This Policy framework, inter alia, lays 
down the institutional framework for monetization of identified non -core assets of CPSES under strategic 
disinvestment.  Moreover, any sick/loss making CPSEs can also adopt t his framework with the approval of 
competent authority.  As per DIPAM, the amount received by GoI from assets monetization will be counted as 
disinvestment proceeds. DIPAM has further stated that the comments of CoPU have been noted. The 
observations have already been incorporated within the approved framework.  
 
b) The receipts of disinvestment are credited to National Investment Fund (NIF). The NIF is utilized for the 
purposes viz. (a) Subscribing to the shares being issued by the CPSEs on rights basis, s o as to ensure that 51% 
ownership of the Government in CPSEs is not diluted. (b) Preferential allotment of shares of the CPSE to 
promoters as per SEBI (Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2009 so that Government 
shareholding does not  go down below 51% in all cases where the CPSE is going to raise fresh equity to meet 
their Capex program. (c) Recapitalization of public sector banks and public sector insurance companies so as to 
strengthen them through further capital infusion towards a chieving the Basel III norms. (d) Investment by 
Government in RRBs/IIFCL/ NABARD/Exim Bank; (e) Equity infusion in various Metro projects; (f) Investment in 
Bhartiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited and Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. and (g) Investment in  Indian 
Railways towards capital expenditure. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW 
OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Delay in cash & support and other approvals by the Government 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that investment in a PSU is made on commercial 
considerations with a view to sustain the growth and viability of the company. However during their examination of 
the subject, the Committee noticed several in stances of Government investments /support not reaching well in 
time to loss making PSUs and the inventories of the PSUs becoming obsolete in the process. Some such 
instances of delay were as under:  
 
(i) In the case of Instrumentation Limited, a PSU, which suffered in post-liberalization era i.e. after 1994 when 
it was declared sick. In this case, a rehabilitation scheme could only be approved in 1999, i.e. five years 
after declaration of its sickness, and even afterwards, the scheme could not be implement ed fully which 
led to the inventory and manpower of the company becoming worthless. The Company was further 
unable to implement their Modified Revival Scheme of 2010 due to the time overrun of over 13 months in 
sanction of the scheme and no cash support fo r the same. Besides, even though IL has been closed, its 
Kota unit employees statedly have not been paid their dues in full. (Page No. 132 -133 of the 24 th Report 
of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In this regard, Department of Heavy Industry has intimated on 20.3.2019 that whenever any proposal for 
financial support/ investment etc. is received from CPSEs, the Department follows the timeline stipulated for 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) / Cabinet approval. At times, inter -ministerial consultations may take some 
time, but the status of such important proposals is monitored in the weekly Senior Officers Meeting (SOM) in DHI. 
All efforts are made for speedy disposal of such proposals. As far as Instrumentation Limited is concerned, the 
Kota Unit of the company has already been slated for closure and process of closure is in full swing. Payment of 
salary, wages, VRS/VSS and other dues of all employees of Kota Unit has been completed, except for 7 
employees.  The Palakkad Unit of the company is being transferred to Kerala Government. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 

43 
 
(ii) In MTNL, the pension bill  of employees accumulated to  ` 10,900 crore for which t he Government has to 
step in due to the weak financial position of the company. However, the liabilities have not been settled 
in the last four years despite the Government decision to pay it in January, 2014.  
 
(iii) In another case, BSNL informed the Comm ittee about their time taking and cumbersome process of 
procurement and long wait for Government‟s decisions due to which they lost the ground on GSM front.  
 
(iv) In FACT, a revival proposal placed before BPRSE in 2013 was delayed leading to severe financi al 
crunch forcing the Company to stop fertiliser production in 2015-16. 
 
Hence, the Committee feel that while it is no secret that the PSUs are running with huge support from the 
Government Exchequer, it is also a fact that delays in taking decisions on th e part of the Government plunged 
these PSUs further into uncertainties as well as deterioration in respect of performance. The Committee are 
convinced that in today‟s fast -paced business environment, crucial decisions on PSUs remaining long pending in 
the administrative Ministries/Departments would harm the companies beyond repair. In this connection, the DPE 
stated that the concerned administrative Ministries of the CPSUs are expected to take concrete steps to ensure 
that decisions on proposals are accorded in a time-bound manner. The Committee, while reiterating the view, also 
note the suggestions given by experts that the Government may work out categories like restructuring, monetizing 
assets, technological upgradation etc. on which decision of either th e Boards of the loss -making PSUs, the 
Administrative Ministry or a Group of experts could be considered final and acted upon urgently. The Committee 
desire the Government to consider these suggestions and come out with measures to prevent delays. They 
desire to be apprised of such efforts, envisaged to minimize delays with respect to decisions on crucial matters 
concerning loss-making PSUs.  (Page No. 133 -134 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) As the observations of the Committee pertain to CPSEs u nder D/o Fertilizers (DoF) and                         
D/o Telecommunications (DoT), DPE has sought the views of these Departments alongwith D/o Heavy Industry 
which has many loss making CPSEs functioning under it.  
 
b) Department of Fert ilizers has informed about the efforts made in this regard. The details are given in 
Annex- V. Information from Department of Telecommunications (DoT) is awaited on this issue. The response of 
DoT will be communicated to the Committee as soon as it is received. 
 
c)   On this matter, Department of Heavy Industry has intimated on 20.3.2019 that whenever any proposal for 
financial support/ modernisation etc. is received from CPSEs, the Department follows the timeline stipulated for 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) / Cabinet approval. At times, inter-ministerial consultations may take some 
time, but the status of such important proposals is monitored in the weekly Senior Officers Meeting (SOM) in DHI. 
All efforts are made for speedy disposal of such proposals. 

44 
 
d) To expedite the decision making and to streamline  the multiple mechanisms with respect to revival/ 
restructuring sick/ loss making CPSEs, the Government wound up Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) in November, 2015 . Subsequent to the decision of the Government (7.10.2015) for winding 
up of BRPSE, DPE has issued guidelines on 29.10.2015 on “Streamlining the mechanism for revival and 
restructuring of sick/ incipient sick and weak Central Public Sector Enterprises”. As per the g uidelines, the 
concerned administrative Ministry/ Department is now responsible to monitor sickness of CPSEs functioning 
under them and take timely redressal measures for revival/ restructuring/ disinvestment of sick/ loss making 
CPSEs with the approval of the competent authority. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see para 16, 17&18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
CRR Scheme of DPE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
As regards rehabilitation of affected/discharged employees of closed PSUs, the Committee note that the 
DPE has been implementing the CRR (Counseling, Retraining and Redeployment) Scheme since 2001 -02 which 
was modified in 2016 to bring in collaboration with the National Skill Development Corporation. While the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actual outcome of this scheme and the benefits it accrued to the 
employees of the loss making PSUs, they fail to see the  relevance of skill development for those affected/ 
discharged employees of commercial companies, who are already possessing high technical qualifications and 
are no more in the younger age bracket, since the basic objective of the Government‟s various ski ll development 
programs, like Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana, SANKALP, UDAAN, etc. as of now, is largely to train young 
population/non-literates/neo-literates/school dropouts/undergraduate etc. in various trades/skills. At its best, the 
contractual employees of the PSUs can benefit by gaining additional or enhanced skills under CRR which could 
open up new and better employmentopportunities for them. The Committee feel that the scope of CRR Scheme 
should be broadened to include such employees as the CRR  Scheme is presently applicable only on separated 
employees of loss making PSUs and only one dependent of VRS optees, in case the optee is not interested. The 
Committee are also in doubt whether „redeployment‟ of trained employees under the scheme proved b eneficial 
enough to the employees of closed lossmaking PSUs since the CRR Scheme does not guarantee it. Besides out 
of the 1576 candidates trained under the scheme in 2016 -17, only 887 persons i.e. hardly 50% could be 
redeployed under self/wage employment.  Hence, the Committee desire to have a detailed note from DPE on 
whether these aspects have been taken care of, while modifying the CRR scheme with the collaboration of NSDC 
as well as on the overall impact of CRR Scheme on employees of loss -making PSUs. ( Page No. 140-141 of the 
24th Report of CoPU). 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) Prior to 2016 -17, CRR Scheme was implemented by Nodal Agencies through Employees Assistance 
Centres (EACs) in various parts of the country. Ministry of Skill Development &  Entrepreneurship (MSDE) on 
15.7.2015 notified Common Norms in order to bring about uniformity and standardization in the implementation of 
various Skill Development Schemes by different Central Ministries / Departments.  
 
b) Accordingly, with a view to br oaden the network of Training Providers and also to follow standardized 
methodology of training, design and delivery, CRR Scheme is being now implemented in collaboration with 
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) under  Ministry of Skill Developme nt & Entrepreneurship 
(MSDE). Training is imparted to VRS optees/their dependents as per common norms of NSDC.  
 
c)        NSDC being a facilitator ensures that all training programmes are as per Qualification Pack(QP) / National 
Occupational Standard(NOS),  standards set forth by the Sector Skills Council(SSC) resulting in certification as 
per certification standards. National Occupational Standards (NOS) specify the standard of performance, 
knowledge and understanding when carrying out a particular activity  in the workplace, while Qualification Pack 
(QP) is a set of NOSs, aligned to a job role available in each industry sector.  This also helps in augmenting 
redeployability under the CRR Scheme.  
 
d)     Earlier, benefit of the CRR Scheme was available to VR S optees only. Now, the benefit of the scheme can 
be extended to the dependent of VRS optee in case the later does not want to avail the s cheme. Such an 
amendment has also broadened the coverage as well as opportunities of redeployment under CRR because of  
faster learning and acquisition of skills in the younger generation. Further, while micro credit and financing in case 
of trained VRS optees for self-employment is challenging, it is comparatively easier in case of dependents.  
 
e)      The target group of  the CRR scheme is very unique and distinct from other skill development schemes of 
the Government. Mostly, VRS/VSS optees are above 50 years of age. Given the typical target group, the 
redeployment under the CRR Scheme is a challenge.  However, it is being  continuously followed up with NSDC 
for undertaking long duration intensive training programmes as well as residential training programmes under 
CRR Scheme to enhance redeployment percentage. 
 
f) With regard to Committee‟s recommendations to include contra ctual employees of CPSEs, it may be 
submitted that as per the extant policy, CRR scheme is applicable to only those employees of CPSEs who are 
eligible and separated under VRS/VSS and it may not be feasible to cover contractual employees under the CRR 
Scheme as such. 
 
g) Further, as mentioned in reply to point 15 earlier, in order to make VRS/VSS package more remunerative, 
the guidelines dated 14.06.2018 issued by DPE stipulate that for CPSEs under closure, the VRS/VSS package 
will be worked out at 2007 notional pay scales  (even if that CPSE could be in the pre -revised pay scale of 1997 or 

46 
 
1992 etc.). Availing skill training benefits of the CRR Scheme is an add -on benefit to the employee or his/her 
dependent.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises) 
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 24 & 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 

47 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM 
REPLIES 
 
Previous Report of CoPU on the subject: response of DPE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
The issue of making timely investment to counter sickness among PSUs has constantly engaged the 
attention of Parliamentary Committee on Public Undertakings. The Committee recall that way back in the year 
1997, in their 11th Report on “Sickness in CPSUs” and later in its Action Taken Report, COPU had recommended 
to pay special attention to PSUs adversely affected by economic reforms and make all possible efforts to improve 
their fi nancial health. On the issue of rehabilitation of PSUs, the Committee in their Action Taken Report had 
observed in this regard that there should be no hesitation on the part of the Government to make the required 
investments. The CoPU in the Action Taken R eport had desired to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Government in the matter. Now after a lapse of around 20 years, when the status in this regard was sought from 
DPE, the Department, in the replies received on 12th January 2018, has tried to shift  the responsibility to the 
concerned administrative Ministry/Department of the respective CPSU. It has been stated that the concerned 
Ministry / Department take redressal measures on a case to case basis with the approval of the competent 
authority in consultation with Ministry of Finance and NITI Aayog. Not only that instead of following the matter and 
apprising the Committee of the status, the nodal Department requested to NITI Aayog and Department of 
Expenditure to furnish their views directly to the Committee. 
 
The Committee express their utter unhappiness over the fact that the DPE not only was unable to furnish 
a final reply to the recommendation of the COPU made 20 years back but also tried to escape their 
responsibilities by stating that the Ministry  of Finance and NITI Aayog were asked to „directly‟ send their views to 
the Committee. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to the reasons for this lack of interest displayed by 
DPE on such a vital matter, when DPE being the nodal Department, is manda ted for coordinating the matters of 
general policy and also for monitoring the performance of all CPSEs. The Committee view such lackadaisical 
approach of DPE very seriously and desire the Government to send an explanatory note to them on these matters 
within a period of 3 months. (Page No.120-121 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DPE has furnished reply vide OM No. DPE/6(160)/2018 -Fin dated 28.2.2019 to the Lok Sabha 
Secretariat for apprising the Committee in this regard. A copy of the same is enclosed at Annex-I. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 

48 
 
Role of NITI AAYOG  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee observe that in the wake of a growing number of loss -making PSUs, the Government in 
their Budget announcement (2016 -17) entrusted the task to NITI Aayog for identifying such PSUs and giving 
recommendations for their strategic sale, disinvestment or closure. They also note that despite DPE being the 
nodal Department for PSUs as well as the administrative Ministries of each PSU being entrusted with the task of 
identifying their sick PSUs respectively and preparing restructuring plans for them, no significant progress could 
be witnessed in the performance of these PSUs. Hence, now the NITI Aayog has been examining the sickness of 
PSUs and solely recommending on their closure / disinvestment / sale etc.The Committee hope that while NITI 
Aayog is given the mandate to recommend on loss -making PSUs, they would also be formulating a much -needed 
policy to regulate and monitor the financial health of the country‟s PSUs that emphasizes on a top -rated 
management, employees‟ welfare and control over extra overhead expenditure in the companies and woul d like 
to be apprised in this regard. (Page No.121-122 of the 24th Report of CoPU). 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As the issue relates to NITI Aayog, DPE has sought the views of it. Information is awaited from NITI 
Aayog. The Committee will be apprised on receipt of the reply from NITI Aayog. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
Strategic disinvestment of CPSUs 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note from the information furnished by DPE that out of 79 loss making CPSUs (as on 
2015-16), NITI Aayog recommended strategic disinvestment for 36 CPSUs. Out of which, the Government has 
given „in-principle‟ approval for strategic disinvestme nt of 24 CPSUs or their units. The Committee are surprised 
to note that out of these 24 CPSUs, only 8 CPSUs have been shown in the list of loss making CPSUs which 
indicates that majority of the CPSUs selected for disinvestment are actually profit making en tities. The Committee 
was informed that all CPSUs except those in the strategic areas are eligible for strategic disinvestment. However, 
divergent opinions were expressed before the Committee as to what constitute „strategic‟ areas. NITI Aayog was 
of the v iew that CPSUs serving national security purposes, sovereign or quasisovereign functions could be 
categorised as „strategic‟ CPSUs and must be retained by the Government. The Department of Heavy Industries 
(DHI) was of the view that CPSUs providing essenti al goods and services and holding dominant market positions 
in petroleum, power, steel, mining and transportation sectors are „strategic‟. Bharat Petro Resources Limited 

49 
 
(BPRL), a wholly owned subsidiary of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) that is engaged in Oil and 
Gas exploration in India and overseas supporting a national policy, considered itself a „strategic‟ CPSU. MTNL 
and BSNL that are operating in the telecommunication sector also consider themselves of „strategic‟ importance. 
The Disinve stment Commission has classified CPSUs that operate in the “strategic” category such as (i) arms 
and ammunition, and allied items of defence equipment, defence aircrafts and warships, (ii)atomic energy, (iii) 
minerals specified in the schedule to Atomic En ergy (Control of Production and Use) Order 1953, and (iv) Railway 
transport. Further, NIPFP, an expert organization who deposed before the Committee is of the view that CPSUs 
that are performing critical functions related to production of defence equipment  or nuclear power production are 
strategic. 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that even the NITI Aayog had not held any consultations with 
CPSUs before arriving at the definition of „strategic‟. The Aayog, as per their own submissions, relies upon the 
definition provided in the year 1997 by the erstwhile Disinvestment Commission and the 14th Finance 
Commission. The Committee are worried as to how the criteria laid down almost two decades ago would still be 
serving the purpose particularly when divergent opinions on the definition of „strategic‟ have been coming forth 
from CPSUs/ Departments of the Government. 
 
The Committee thus feel that, in the event of the Government itself not having a uniform parameter for 
categorising CPSUs as „strategic‟ it would b e difficult for them to arrive at any conclusion whether a particular 
CPSU is to be retained by the Government, closed or divested. In such a scenario, the Committee recommend 
the Government to work out a uniform definition/parameters of „strategic‟ for cl assification of CPSUs.  (Page No. 
124-125 of the 24th Report of CoPU)     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) As the issue relates to NITI Aayog and DIPAM, views of the Department/ Govt. body were sought.   
DIPAM has informed vide OM dated 26.4.2019 that in the ongoing cases of strategic disinvestment, NITI Aayog 
has been mandated to identify the CPSEs for strategic disinvestment. Criteria for identification of CPSEs for 
Strategic Disinvestment is not based on profitability. NITI Aayog has classified CPSEs into “high priority” and “low 
priority” based on (a) National Security (b) Sovereign function at arm‟s length, and (c) Market Imperfections and 
Public Purpose, for the purpose of strategic disinvestment. The CPSEs falling under “low priority” are cov ered for 
strategic disinvestment. 
 
b) The reply from NITI Aayog in this regard is awaited. The Committee will be appraised on receipt of the 
reply from NITI Aayog. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 

50 
 
Merger/takeover of sick PSUs (MTNL & BSNL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee have noticed diametrically opposite results out of the merger/takeover of sick PSUs. It 
emerged during the course of deliberati ons with various CPSUs/Ministries that while the merger of two loss -
making PSUs i.e. Air India and Indian Airlines did not work well and the proposed merger of IL with BHEL failed to 
materialise, the takeover of Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd. (HSCL ), a loss -making PSU by a profit 
making PSU like NBCC seems showing positive results. With regard to the merger of AIL & IAL into NACIL, the 
Committee would like to recall that in their Report No.18 of 2011, the C&AG termed the merger of AIL & IAL into 
NACIL as „ill -timed, without proper justification and synergized operation, without HR integration, delayed and 
having serious uncertainties‟. The NITI Aayog also mentioned that the losses of Air India can also be attributable 
to the decision of merger taken in 2007 wherein two very different organizations with dissimilar equipment and 
Human Resources practices were intended to be merged. 
 
The Committee gathered the impression from the deliberations with MTNL , during their examination of 
loss making CPSUS, that the merger of two PSUs, biggest loss -making ones, in the communication sector, i.e. 
BSNL and MTNL, was under consideration of the Government. The Committee were informed that such a merger 
would pave the way for Pan -India presence, leveraging combined  capacity, reduction in fixed costs, avoidance of 
duplication of facilities etc. However, in the later communication, the Committee have been apprised by MTNL 
that no such possibility has been examined at MTNL‟s level, merging of MTNL with private entities  is possible if 
the shareholding of Government of India is brought down to less than 50% by offering the same to private telecom 
operators through strategic disinvestment route and since MTNL is a listed company, the SEBI and other 
regulations including co mpany laws are to be followed, DPE, the nodal Department of CPSUs was not aware of 
any such development and sought the views of DoT which didn‟t respond on the specific query sent by the 
Secretariat. In the backdrop of the fact that in a very similar scena rio, the Government‟s decision to merge two 
heavy loss -making PSUs, Indian Airlines and Air India didn‟t work very well, the Committee caution the 
Government to analyze all the factors before taking any decision on the merger of two CPSUs, particularly in the 
context of merger of two biggest loss making CPSUs, MTNL & BSNL whose combined financial liabilities during 
2016-17 was a whopping `2403873 lakh, the combined manpower of both PSUs is a staggering figure of 224367 
persons and also various procedural la pses have been pointed out in the case of MTNL and BSNL by C&AG of 
India in their several commercial reports, e.g. Report No. 12 of 2008, Report No.17 of 2014, Report No.20 of 
2015, Report No. 55 of 2015 and Report No. 29 of 2016. Besides, these PSUs are w orking under oligopolistic 
market structure where there is stiff competition from private companies. (Page No. 130 -132 of the 24 th Report of 
CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As the issue relates to D/o Telecommunication (DoT) and DIPAM, DPE sought the views of these 
Departments.  
 

51 
 
a) DIPAM vide OM dated 26.4.2019 on the observation of the Committee r egarding CoPU‟s caution 
particularly in the context of merger of two biggest l oss making CPSUs, MTNL and BSNL, has stated that DIPAM 
has not received any recommendation for merger of MTNL and BSNL. DIPAM has further stated that NITI Aayog, 
in its fifth tranche has made the following recommendation w.r.t. MTNL: 
 
 “ NITI Aayog notes t hat it would be difficult to strategically disinvest MTNL in its present condition 
given that it was saddled with huge losses, a big debt burden and a large workforce. NITI Aayog's 
recommendation for MTNL is as follows. First, it is recommended that the fu nction of providing 
secure communications to Lutyens Delhi should be hived off from MTNL and it should be run as a 
vertical of the DoT. Second, it is recommended that MTNL must immediately exit its investments in 
Mauritius and Nepal. Third, MTNL should hiv e off its tower business and strategically disinvest that 
business entity. What remains in MTNL should be closed down. The Department of Telecom may 
present a strategy along these lines to NITI Aayog and DIPAM/CGD within 30 days.”  
 
b) The reply from Depart ment of Telecommunications (DoT) is yet to be received. On receipt of reply from 
DoT, the Committee will be apprised. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that cash received through the monetization of assets of loss making 
CPSUs would be deposited in a separate account. The Committee in this regard would like to be apprised about 
the amount deposited so far and the mechanism developed for use of such resources. (Page No. 143 of the 24 th 
Report of CoPU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the information available with DPE, 19 sick/ loss making CPSEs / their units have been approved 
for closure. The details of proceeds from monetization of assets of loss making CPSEs will be available with the 
administrative Ministries/ Departments of these CPSEs. The observation of the Committee has been brought to 
the notice of concerned Ministries/ Departments of 1 9 loss making CPSEs/ units of CPSEs approved for closure 
by the Government. The information received from D/o Commerce, M/o Railways, D/o Pharmaceuticals, Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, D/o Heavy Industry and D/o Chemicals and Petrochemicals in this regard 
is given in Annex-X. The response in this regard, when received from the remaining Ministries/ Departments, the 
Committee will be apprised. 
 

52 
 
 Further, as per the guidelines issued on 8.3.2019 by DIPAM regarding asset monetization of CPSEs, the 
amount received by GoI from asset monetization will be counted as disinvestment proceeds. In the case of identified 
non-core assets of the CPSEs under strategic disinvestment and divestment of the Enemy Properties in the custody of 
the CEPI, 100% of the proceeds of the monetization will be treated as disinvestment proceeds. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industry and Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)  
O.M. No. DPE/6(160)/2018-Fin dated 11.06.2019] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   MEENAKASHI LEKHI 
7 January, 2021               Chairperson 
17 Pausha, 1942 (S)                      Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

53 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
3. PREVIOUS REPORT OF COPU ON THE SUBJECT: RESPONSE OF DPE  
Observation of the Committee Serial No.3 of 24th Report 
The issue of making timely investment to counter sickness among PSUs has constantly engaged 
the attention of Parliamentary Committee on Public Undertakings. The Committee recall that way back in 
the year 1997, in their 11th Report on “S ickness in CPSUs” and later in its Action Taken Report, COPU 
had recommended to pay special attention to PSUs adversely affected by economic reforms and make all 
possible efforts to improve their financial health. On the issue of rehabilitation of PSUs, th e Committee in 
their Action Taken Report had observed in this regard that there should be no hesitation on the part of the 
Government to make the required investments. The CoPU in the Action Taken Report had desired to be 
apprised of the action taken by th e Government in the matter. Now after a lapse of around 20 years, when 
the status in this regard was sought from DPE, the Department, in the replies received on 12th January 
2018, has tried to shift the responsibility to the concerned administrative Minist ry/Department of the 
respective CPSU. It has been stated that the concerned Ministry / Department take redressal measures on 
a case to case basis with the approval of the competent authority in consultation with Ministry of Finance 
and NITI Aayog. Not only  that instead of following the matter and apprising the Committee of the status, 
the nodal Department requested to NITI Aayog and Department of Expenditure to furnish their views 
directly to the Committee. 
 
The Committee express their utter unhappiness ove r the fact that the DPE not only was unable to 
furnish a final reply to the recommendation of the COPU made 20 years back but also tried to escape their 
responsibilities by stating that the Ministry of Finance and NITI Aayog were asked to „directly‟ send t heir 
views to the Committee. The Committee are unable to comprehend as to the reasons for this lack of 
interest displayed by DPE on such a vital matter, when DPE being the nodal Department, is mandated for 
coordinating the matters of general policy and als o for monitoring the performance of all CPSEs. The 
Committee view such lackadaisical approach of DPE very seriously and desire the Government to send 
an explanatory note to them on these matters within a period of 3 months.  (Page No.120-121 of the 24 th 
Report of CoPU).              
 
Reply of the Government  
In order to address the problem of sickness among CPSEs, the Government had set up the erstwhile BRPSE 
in 2004, inter alia, to address the issue of reviving and restructuring of sick CPSEs. However, the recommendations 
of BRPSE were advisory in nature and the final decision regarding their acceptance rested with the administrative 
Ministries/ Departments.  Based on the recommendations of BRPSE, the Government had approved revival of 47 
CPSEs and closure of  9 CPSEs during its existence  envisaging total fund/ non -fund based assistance of Rs.41727 
crore (cash assistance of Rs.11135 crore and non -cash assistance of Rs.30592 crore) . Details are given in Annex. 
Later on in 2015, in order to further streamline the multiple mechanisms for revival of sick CPSEs, the BRPSE was 
wound up in November, 2015 as per the decision of the Government dated 7.10.2015.  
To streamline the process of r evival/ restructuring of CPSEs, DPE issued guidelines on 29.10.2015. These 
guidelines laid down the criteria for classification of a CPSE as sick, incipient sick and weak and  also outlined the 
timely redressal measures which were to be taken by the Minist ry/ Department in this regard.  As per the guidelines, 
administrative Ministries were required to oversee the performance/ health of its CPSEs. Based on this assessment, 

54 
 
the administrative Ministry was required to initiate the process for preparation of re vival/ restructuring plans of  sick/ 
incipient sick CPSEs based on the principles given in the guidelines.The Ministries are also responsible for the 
implementation of these plans after approval of the competent authority. The main objective of these guidel ines was 
to ensure timely intervention by the administrative Ministries to effectively counter sickness of their CPSEs. DPE is a 
policy laying Department and the onus of implementation of these guidelines lies with the concerned administrative 
Ministry/ Department. 
 
As per the available information in DPE, the Government on 21.5.2015 has approved  the financial 
restructuring of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corpn. Ltd. (BVFCL) and setting up of a new brown field Ammonia -
Urea complex at Namrup through Joint Venture. Government has also approved on 25.5.2016 the financial 
restructuring of Hindustan Steelwork Construction Ltd.  and its takeover by NBCC (India) Ltd. In case of Konkan 
Railway Corporation Ltd., Government has sanctioned 2 nd financial restructuring on 15.12.2017 to improve the 
networth of the Company. Further, the Government has approved on 3.10.2018 in case of NEPA Ltd. budgetary 
support for revival and mill development plan (RMDP), etc. and disinvestment of the company on RMDP completion.  
 
As regard the observation of the Committee, it is submitted that these were received in DPE on 22.12.2017 
with a request to furnish replies by 1.1.2018. Since, these related to many Ministries, the same were circulated to 
them for their inputs. Observation at  Para 19 of Chapter 1 of the 1 st Report of  CoPU (1998-99) relating to investment 
in CPSEs was sent to NITI Aayog, DIPAM / D/o Expenditure on 27.12.2017/ 29.12.2017 for comments/ views. They 
were reminded again on 29.12.2017/3.1.2018 to expedite the replie s. However, till finalization of DPE‟s reply on the 
Committee‟s observations, the response of DoE and NITI Aayog on para19 was not received. Accordingly, in order to 
avoid delay, it was decided to send the reply to remaining parts of the recommendations ma de in the 1 st report of the 
CoPU alongwith requests to the defaulting Ministry/ Government organization to send their part of the reply/ 
comments to Lok Sabha Secretariat directly under intimation to DPE. There was no lack of interest on the part of DPE 
but it was done to ensure expeditious furnishing of replies to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.  
 
 Accordingly, DPE replied to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 11.1.2018 wherein, the views/ comments of the other 
Ministries consulted namely D/o Fertilizers, DIPAM and Divisi ons of DPE were included and further reminders were 
issued to D/o Expenditure and NITI Aayog on 11/ 16.1.2018 to send their part of the reply/ comments to Lok Sabha 
Secretariat directly under intimation to DPE. This factual matter was brought out by DPE in  the ATR, while furnishing 
DPE‟s reply. It is also emphasized that DPE had made sincere efforts to reply to the recommendations of CoPU. 
Recommendations of CoPU are processed in DPE with due diligence and reply is prepared in consultation with the 
other stakeholders in a time bound manner.  
 
As the reply of NITI Aayog and D/o Expenditure has still not been received, DPE has again requested them on 
21.2.2019 to give their comments on the observations of the Committee on Public Undertakings made at para 19 of  
the 1 st Report by 25 th February, 2019. The information is still awaited. The Committee will be apprised as soon as 
reply is received from them.  
*** 
 
  

55 
 
CASH AND NON-CASH ASSISTANCE APPROVED BY THE GOVERNMENT/HOLDING COMPANIES  
 
S.  
No. 
Name of the 
Administrative 
Ministry/Department/ 
CPSE 
 
Date of 
approval of 
the 
Government 
Broad gist of the 
approval of the 
Government 
Assistance approved 
(Rs. in Crore) 
 Cash a Non-
Cash b 
Total 
 Department of Heavy 
Industry 
   
1 Hindustan Salts Ltd. 4.5.2005 Revival as a PSE.  
The feasibility of 
forming a joint venture 
company for the 
management of salt 
factory may also be 
considered by D/o 
Heavy Industry. 
4.28 73.30 77.58 
2 Bridge & Roof Co. (India) 
Ltd. 
25.8.2005 Revival as a PSE 60.00 42.92 102.92 
3 BBJ Construction Co. Ltd. 16.6.2005 Revival as a PSE   -- 54.61 54.61 
4 HMT Bearings Ltd.* 29.12.2014 Closure   7.40 43.97 51.37 
5 Praga Tools Ltd. 20.10.2005 Revival through 
financial restructuring 
and  merger with  HMT 
Machine Tools Ltd. 
5.00 209.71 214.71 
6 Heavy Engineering 
Corporation Ltd. 
15.12.2005 Revival as a PSE 102.00 1116.30 1218.30 
7 Cement Corporation of 
India Ltd. 
9.3.2006 Revival as a PSE. 
Closure of non-
operating units and. 
Revival of 3 operating 
units. 
184.29 1267.95 1452.24 
8 Richardson & 
Cruddas(1972) Ltd. 
9.3.2006 Revival through Joint 
Venture/disinvestment 
- - - 

56 
 
9 Tungabhadra Steel 
Products Ltd.*      
29.12.2014 Closure - - - 
10 Bharat Pumps and 
Compressors Ltd.  
7.12.2006 Revival as a PSE 3.37 153.15 156.52 
11 HMT Machine Tools Ltd. 1.2.2007/ 
28.2.2014 
 
Revival through 
financial restructuring  
and  JV formation with 
majority shareholding 
being held by JV 
partner 
859.04 196.38 1055.42 
12 Bharat Heavy Plate 
Vessels Ltd. 
26.11.2007 Revival through 
financial restructuring 
& takeover by BHEL 
34.00 665.61 699.61 
13 Andrew Yule & Co. Ltd. 22.2.2007 Revival as a PSE 87.06 458.14 545.20 
14 Instrumentation Ltd.  11.2.2009 Revival as a PSE 48.36 549.36 597.72 
15 Tyre Corporation of India 
Ltd. 
19.4.2007/ 
6.11.2008 
Revival through Joint 
Venture/disinvestment 
-- 815.59 815.59 
16 NEPA Ltd. 6.9.2012 Revival as a PSE 234.18 634.94 869.12 
17 Scooters India Ltd. 31.1.2013 Revival as a PSE 90.38 111.58 201.96 
18 HMT Ltd. 18.4.2013 Revival as a PSE 447.92 635.56 1083.48 
19 Bharat Ophthalmic Glass 
Ltd.  
16.6.2006 Closure 9.80 -- 9.80 
20 Bharat Yantra Nigam Ltd. 11.10. 2007 Closure 3.82 7.55 11.37 
21 Hindustan Photo Films 
Manufacturing Company 
Ltd.  
28.2.2014 Closure 181.54 -- 181.54 
22 HMT Watches Ltd. 29.12.2014 Closure -- -- -- 
23 HMT Chinnar Watches 
Ltd. 
29.12.2014 Closure -- -- -- 
24 Hindustan Cables Ltd. 29.12.2014 Closure -- -- -- 

57 
 
 Ministry of Mines      
25 Hindustan Copper Ltd. 26.6.2007 Revival as a PSE -- 612.94 612.94 
26 Mineral Exploration 
Corporation Ltd. 
27.7.2006 Revival as a PSE - 104.64 104.64 
 Ministry of Shipping      
27 Central Inland Water 
Transport Corporation Ltd. 
1.12.2005 Revival through Joint 
Venture/disinvestment
. 
73.60 280.00 353.60 
28 Hooghly Dock &Port 
Engineers Ltd. 
13.10.2011 Revival through Joint 
Venture. 
286.81 631.30 918.11 
 Department of Defence 
Production 
     
29 Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. 24.12.2009/ 
23.3.2011 
Revival through 
financial restructuring 
& transfer from M/o 
Shipping to M/o 
Defence 
452.68 372.22 824.90 
 Ministry of Steel   
30 MECON Ltd. 8.2.2007 Revival as a PSE 93.00 23.08 116.08 
31 Bharat Refractories Ltd. 24.4.2008 Revival through 
financial restructuring & 
merger with SAIL 
-- 479.16 479.16 
 Ministry of Textiles    
32 National Textile 
Corporation Ltd. 
2.5.2005 
 
 
Revival as a PSE. 
Revival of 22 mills as 
PSE units and handing 
over 2 mills to 
Government of 
Pondicherry. 
39.23 - 39.23 
33 British India Corporation 
Ltd. 
9.6.2011 Revival as a PSE 338.04 108.93 446.97 
34 National Jute 
Manufactures Corporation 
19.3.2010/ Running of Kinnison & 
Khardah in West 
517.33 6815.06 7332.3

58 
 
Ltd. 25.11.2010 Bengal and Rai 
Bahhadur Hadrut Mill, 
Katihar in Bihar by 
NJMC and closure of 
remaining three mills, 
i.e. National, Union and 
Alexendra.   
9 
 Department of 
Pharmaceuticals 
     
35 Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 9.3.2006 Revival as a PSE 137.59 267.57 405.16 
36 Bengal Chemicals 
&Pharmaceuticals Ltd.  
21.12.2006 Revival as a PSE 207.19 233.41 440.60 
 Department of 
Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals 
     
37 Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Ltd. 
9.3.2006 Revival as a PSE 250.00 110.46 360.46 
38 Hindustan Fluorocarbons 
Ltd. 
20.07.08 Revival as a PSE by its 
Holding Company 
12.53 56.52 69.05 
39 Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. 27.7.2006 Revival as a PSE - 267.29 267.29 
 Department of Fertilizers    
40 Fertilizers & Chemicals 
(Travancore) Ltd. 
30.3.2006 Revival as a PSE - 670.37 670.37 
41 Brahmaputra Valley 
Fertilizer Corpn. Ltd. 
21.5.2015 Financial restructuring 
and setting up of a new 
brown field Ammonia-
Urea complex at 
Namrup within the 
existing premises of 
BVFCL through Joint 
Venture 
-- 588.16 588.16 
 Department of Scientific 
& Industrial Research 
     
42 Central Electronics Ltd. 3.8.2006 Revival as a PSE - 16.28 16.28 

59 
 
 Department of 
Agriculture & Co-
operation 
     
43 State Forms Corporation 
of India Ltd. 
3.1.2008 Revival as a PSE 21.21 124.42 145.63 
 Ministry of Railways    
44 Konkan Railway 
Corporation Ltd. 
4.12.2008 Revival as a PSE 857.05 3222.46 4079.5
1 
45 Bharat Wagon 
&Engineering Company 
Ltd. 
26.6.2008/ 
7.2.2008/ 
2.7.2009 
Revival through 
financial restructuring & 
transfer to M/o 
Railways 
59.45 136.08 195.53 
46 Braithwaite & Company 
Ltd. 
29.12.2005 Revival through 
financial restructuring & 
transfer to M/o 
Railways 
4.00 280.21 284.21 
47 Burn Standard Company 
Ltd. 
10.6.2010 
 
Transfer of (i) 
Refractory unit at 
Salem to SAIL under 
M/o Steel and (ii) 
administrative control  
of BSCL (excluding 
Refractory unit at 
Salem) to M/o Railways 
on “as is where is” 
condition with financial 
restructuring. 
75.43 1139.16 1214.5
9 
 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
     
48 National Projects 
Construction Corporation 
Ltd. 
26.12.2008 Revival as a PSE -- 646.89 646.89 
 Ministry of Housing & 
urban Poverty 
Alleviation 
    
49 Hindustan Prefab Ltd. 20.8.2009 Revival as a PSE -- 128.00 128.00 

60 
 
 Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting 
     
50 National Film 
Development Corporation 
Ltd. 
16.9.2010 Revival as a PSE 3.00 28.40 31.40 
 Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas 
     
51 Biecco Lawrie Ltd. 25.4.2011 Revival as a PSE -- 59.60 59.60 
 Ministry of Development 
of North Eastern Region 
     
52 North Eastern Handicrafts 
and Handlooms 
Development Corporation 
Ltd. 
21.2.2013 Revival as a PSE 8.50 83.06 
 
91.56 
 Department of 
Telecommunications 
     
53 ITI Ltd. 12.2.2014 Revival as a PSE 3986.00 170.79 4156.79 
 Ministry of Coal      
54 Eastern Coal Fields Ltd. 5.10.2006 Revival as a PSE by its 
Holding Company 
-- 2470.77 2470.77 
55 Bharat Coking  Coal Ltd. 25.2.2010 Revival as a PSE by its 
Holding Company 
1350.00 3428.55 4778.55 
 Department of 
Commerce 
     
56 STCL Ltd. 13.8.2013 Closure -- -- -- 
 Total    11135.0
8 
30592.40 41727.48 
a Cash Assistance  involve budgetary support through equity/loan/grants  
b Non-cash Assistance involve waiver of interest, penal interest, GOI loan, Guarantee fee,  
 conversion of loan into equity/debentures etc.   
*     Earlier approved for revival, now approved for closure. 
***

61 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
POINT N0. 5. (i): ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT WITH REGARD TO FUNCTIONING OF CPSUs -Gist of views/ 
comments received from Ministries/ Departments with respect to loss making CPSEs functioning under them . 
 
D/o Pharmaceuticals:  D/o Pharmaceuticals has informed that i n the pharmaceutical sector, the private 
sector is well developed and able to supply medicines for domestic market and is a big 
exporter too. As such, the Government has taken a decision to close/disinvest pharma 
CPSUs.  
 
M/o Railways: Cabinet has approved closure of Burn Standard Co. Ltd. on 4.4.2018. In respect of Braithwaite & 
Co. Ltd. (BCL), M/o Rai lways has stated that the CPSE  is strategically very important for Indian Railways for both 
wagon body rebuilding and manufacture of special types of wagons. It has specialized infrastructure and skills for 
manufacturing/rebuilding wagons/wagon components.  BCL being a PSU, provides flexibility to Indian Railways in 
developing new designs and have successfully made special wagons for cement customers, for carrying liquefied 
natural gas, for NTPC etc.   
 D/o Defence production: As on 31.3.2017,  BEL-THALES Sys tems Limited, a Joint Venture Company  under 
D/o Defence production  incurred loss in 2016 -17. D/o Defence production  has informed that BEL-THALES 
Systems Limited (BTSL) is a Joint Venture Company (JVC) between Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) and Thales 
group, France incorporated on 28 th August 2014. The objective of BTSL is to design, develop, market, supply and 
support of civilian & select defence radars for Indian &global markets with technology inputs from Thales and 
utilizing existing production faci lities of BEL. The Company in the last few years, scouted for and bagged orders 
for maintenance of radars installed in India and with the execution of these orders, will be able to break even and 
show a reasonable profit for the year (FY 2018 -19). Additionally, the Company is undertaking to manufacture sub -
assemblies for the offset requirements of the Thales France in the coming years. For this, negotiations are in an 
advanced stage and orders are expected by end of February/early March 2019. BTSL will not only have strong 
order book, but also will be profitable in the coming years. 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare: In pursuance of the decision of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) for 100% disinvestment of M/s HLL Lifecare Ltd, the process for disinvestment has already been initiated. 
HLL Biotech Ltd. was set up as 100% subsidiary of M/s HLL Lifecare for establishing Integrated Vaccine Complex 
at Chengalpattu (TN) for manufacturing the vaccines to support the Universal Immunization Program of Go vt. of 
India. It is to be de-merged from HLL Lifecare before disinvestment. 
 
D/o Heavy Industry: D/o Heavy Industry has informed that NITI Aayog from time to time evaluates/ analyses the 
performances of CPSEs and recommends further course of action like closure/disinvestment/ merger etc.  
Ministry of Home Affairs: Ministry of Home Affairs  has informed that Delhi Police Housing Corporation 
Limited (DPHC) has been set up with approval of Cabinet with the objectives to develop the capacity for 
faster utilization of outlays for construction of houses and Police Station Buildings. The main activities of the 
Corporation are to acquire land with or without buildings, undertake construction and maintenance of 
houses, offices or other buildings etc. Accordingly, the role of DPHC basically is that of a facilitator'. However, 
the observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance whenever become necessary.  
Ministry of Coal: Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) and Western Coalfields Ltd  (WCL), the subsidiaries of Coal 
India Ltd., under M/o Railways made loss in 2016 -17. Ministry of Coal has informed about the actions/ measures 

62 
 
taken for growth and profitability of BCCL and Western Coalfields Ltd WCL. The measures are expected to result 
in higher production and also growth in its bottom line and EBITDA margins significantly in both the companies.  
In fact, BCCL has already started earnings profits and the latest results for the third quarter, ending 31st 
December 2018 of the financial year , 2018-19, shows a profit before tax of Rs.238.55 crore and profit after tax of 
Rs.199.14 crore.  WCL has also been earning profits in every quarter of FY 2018 -19 and the total profit after tax 
earned till 9 months, ending 31.12.2018 of the financial year,  2018-19, is Rs.184.45 crore.  The company has a 
net reserves/retained earnings of about Rs.770 crore as on 31.12.2018. In view of above, BCCL and WCL do not 
call for any disinvestment/closure. 
 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals:  There is only one P etrochemical PSU under administrative 
control of this Department i.e. Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (BCPL) which has been listed as one of 
the loss making CPSEs during the year 2016 -17. With regard to losses in BCPL in 2016 -17, it is stated that BCPL 
has implemented the Assam Gas Cracker Project which is an offshoot of Assam Accord. The plant was 
commissioned on 2 nd January, 2016 and dedicated to the Nation on 5 th February, 2016 for the speedy all round 
economic development of Assam. During the year 2016 -17, the plant was undergoing initial stabilization phase, 
for which there was no provision in its project cost. Besides, the plant also faced inadequate supply of feedstock 
by M/s OIL & M/s NRL and could operate at 37% capacity only. Therefore, due to reasons beyond the control of 
BCPL the company was in adverse liquidity situation during 2016 -17. However, thereafter the plant has started 
generating profits from 2017-18 onwards with operation at 78% capacity. In the current year, 2018 -19, the plant is 
operating at more than 100% capacity generating sufficient cash to meet its operations.  
 The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is also making efforts to impro ve the profitability of the 
company. The balance capital subsidy of Rs. 4990 crore out of Rs. 5,239.45 crore has already been released to 
BCPL upto 2018-19. A Coordination Committee set up under the co-chairmanship of Secretary, DCPC. Secretary, 
MoPNG takes a review of feedstock issues from time to time.  
 
Ministry of Steel: Ministry of Steel has furnished information as under: 
 
9.1 J &K  Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. :  It is joint venture company of NMDC Ltd and JKML, 
Govt. of J&K. JKMDC had initiat ed action for setting up of a  30000 TPA Dead Burnt Magnesia (DBM) Plant at 
Panthal, J&K and 124000 TPA Magnesite Mine. The issue of NoC from Vaishno Devi Shrine is under 
consideration. Keeping in view of the recommendations of NITI Aayog, the Board of Dir ectors of NMDC on 
21.8.2017 had approved winding up of the subsidiary, JKMDC Ltd. Subsequently, JKML vide letter dated 
7.9.2017 inter alia stated that their Board had resolved that JKMDC/NMDC come up with business friendly 
proposals to facilitate making of  appropriate decision on future of Panthal Magnesite Project by the administrative 
Ministry of NMDC Ltd and J&K Minerals Ltd.  Adviser to Hon‟ble Governor & Chairman of the Committee advised 
NMDC to give a presentation before the Board members of Shri Mata Vaishno DEVI Shire Biard. 
9.2 Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd.:  Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd has been transferred 
to Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs in 2017. 
 
*** 

63 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
POINT N0. 5. (ii): ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT WITH REGARD TO FU NCTIONING OF CPSUs  
1. Ministry of Power: Ministry of Power on the observation of the Committee has informed that Boards of 
Power Sector CPSUs consist of full time directors having expertise in the technical fields pertaining to area of 
operation of the CPSUs concerned as well as director having domain knowledge in the areas of HR and Finance. 
Further, the boards also consist of government nominee and non -official directors having domain knowledge of 
government policies, management, finance, etc. 
2. Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region:   Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
has apprised with regard to their 2 loss making CPSEs viz. North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development 
Corporation Ltd.(NEHHDC) and  North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited ( NERAMAC) 
as under:  
 
2.1 North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC) :Presently in the 
Board of NERAMAC, there are Directors having expertise in agri -horti sector and agriculture sectors and the MD 
has vast experience in Agriculture Marketing. However the proposal for reconstitution of the Board of Directors 
considering the nature of business and the industry in which its operates is in consideration in the Ministry of 
DoNER. 
2.2 North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd.: The Company has seven 
Directors on Board including one Functional Directors as on date. There are two Non -official Directors on the 
Board of the Company. 
 
3. Ministry of Steel: Ministry of s teel has stated that Boards of CPSEs under Ministry of Steel are 
empowered and comprise of experts to enhance the quality of decisions. On the observation of the Committee, it 
has furnished information in respect of the following CPSEs on the observation o f the Committee: 
3.1 Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL): The Board of Directors of Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), a 
Government Company under the provisions of Companies Act, 2013, comprises of five Functional Directors 
including Chairman, two Government Nominee Directors and eight Independent Directors. The Independent 
Directors have always been well qualified with rich and commendable experience in diverse fields such as 
Banking, Finance, Taxation, Economics, Industry, Administration, Academic s, Personnel, Operations, Raw 
Materials, Commercial, etc. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) a „Maharatna‟ Public Sector Undertaking, 
is governed by Government Guidelines on various aspects of its functioning. All procedures, Rules and 
Regulations have been codified in line with Government Policies and Regulations. 
3.2 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL): RINL Board comprises 5 (five) Functional Directors, 2 (two) Govt. 
Directors at the level of Special Secretary & Financial Adviser and Joint Secretary a nd from Ministry of Steel 
and 3(three) Independent Directors. The Board of Directors bring in expertise from various fields to enhance 
quality of decisions, overall management, supervision and governance thereby ensuring speedy decision 
making. Board meeti ngs on an average are held every alternative month. The Board is also assisted by 
various specific purpose Board Sub Committees (BSC) like Board Sub Committee on Marketing (BSCOM); 
Board Sub Committee on Raw Material Security & Joint Venture and Acquisitio n; and Board Sub 
Committee for Expansion & Related Projects.  All BSCs comprises of the three Independent Directors as 
Members/Chairman and the recommendations of the BSCs are put up to the Board for faster decision 
making. 

64 
 
3.3 The Bisra Stone Lime Company  Limited (BSLC): BSLC Board comprises 3 (three) Directors including 
one Director at the level of Dy. Director General from Ministry of Steel  bringing lot of expertise from various 
fields to enhance quality of decisions, overall management, supervision and  governance thereby ensuring 
speedy decision making. Board meetings are held every quarter. The Board is also assisted by senior level 
executives of RINL for faster decision making. 
4. Ministry of Information & Broadcasting: Ministry of Information & Broad casting has informed that  at 
present there is one independent director on the Board of National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) who is 
expert in the field of cinema.   The appointment of two independent directors having the requisite expertise in the 
cinema was put on hold as the matter of merger of NFDC, CFSI & other organization was under discussion.   At 
present, an expert committee has been formed vide office order dated 29.01.2019 for rationalization of various 
media units in the Ministry which includes NFDC. 
5. Department of Fertilizers:  Department of Fertilizers has informed that  Board of a CPSE comprise of 
functional Directors, independent Directors and Government nominee Directors. The appointment of Board level 
incumbents is being done as per th e extant guidelines of DPE/DoPT through an open selection process 
conducted by PESB.  Independent Directors are also eminent professionals, academicians, Directors of 
Institutes/Heads of the Department and Professors. Senior officers of Government of India , posted in the 
Department are nominated as Government nominee Directors. 
 
 
***  

65 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
POINT N0. 7: CASE STUDY OF 12 IDENTIFIED CPSUS BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
1. Ministry of Coal:  In this regard, M/o Coal which  has informed about the actions/ measures taken for 
growth and profitability of subsidiaries of Coal India Ltd. viz., Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) and Western 
Coalfields Ltd (WCL), which made loss in 2016 -17.The measures are expected to result in higher production and 
also growth in its bottom line and EBITDA margins significantly in both the companies.  BCCL has already started 
earnings profits and the latest results for the third quarter, ending 31st December 2018 of the financial year, 2018 -
19, shows a profit after tax of Rs.199.14 crore.  WCL has also been earning profits in every quarter of FY 2018 -19 
and the total profit after tax earned till 9 months, ending 31.12.2018 of the financial year, 2018 -19, is Rs.184.45 
crore.  The company has a net reserv es/retained earnings of about Rs.770 crore as on 31.12.2018. In view of 
above, BCCL and WCL do not call for any disinvestment/closure. 
 
2. Ministry of Railways: RITES Infrastructure Services Ltd (RISL) a wholly owned subsidiary of RITES Ltd. 
was incorporated in 2010 with main objectives of construction of Multi - Functional Complexes (MFC) on various 
Railway stations.  Since, none of the MFCs developed by the Comp any was found commercially viable, and there 
was no business in hand and securing of new business was not foreseen in the near future, the Board of 
Directors of RITES Ltd (the holding company) in its meeting held in January, 2016 decided to wind -up RISL, after 
handing over MFCs to Zonal Railways. To facilitate winding up process, all the assets and liabilities of RISL were 
taken over by RITES Ltd. Liquidator has been appointed in 2016 -17.  Ministry of Railways are making all efforts to 
expedite the process of winding up, which is in advanced stage. 
3. Ministry of Power: W ith respect to the subsidiaries of NTPC and POWERGRID which incurred loss in 
2016-17, Ministry of Power has informed as under: 
3.1 Kanti Bijli Utpadan Nigam Ltd .: It is a wholly owned subsid iary of NTPC Ltd. It is not a loss making 
company. 
 
3.2 Partratu Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd . A joint venture between NTPC (74%) and Jharkhand Bijli Vitran 
Nidam Limited (26%) for constructing 24000 MW (3x800 MW) project in Jharkhand. It has not yet commenced  
operation and hence not made any losses. 
 
3.3 NTPC Electricity Supply Co. Ltd.:   NTPC hold 10% in this subsidiary. The company is in the process of 
winding up and its assets and liability have been transferred to NTPC w.e.f. 1 st April, 2015. 
3.4 POWERGRID NM Transmission Ltd., POWERGRID Unchahar Transmission Ltd. and POWERGRID 
Vizag Transmission Ltd.: These mentioned as loss making companies in 2016 -17 are wholly owned subsidiaries 
of POWERGRID. These 3 companies have been acquired as Special Purpose Vehic le for implementation and 
revenue earning of projects by POWERGRID through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) route. All these 
projects have since been completed and started commercial operation in 2016/2017. POWERGRID Unchahar 
Transmission Ltd. and P OWERGRID Vizag Transmission Ltd. have posted profit in 2017 -18 and have also paid 
dividend to its parent company. As on date POWERGRID NM Transmission Ltd. is not earning profit. the main 
reasons for loss in POWERGRID NM Transmission Ltd. is delay in grant  of license, extreme severe ROW 
problems, consequently blocking of investment for a considerable period without earning tariff / revenue on the 
same, despite completion of one element (765 kV D/C Nagapattinam – Salem line) of the project. However, it is 

66 
 
expected that upon receipt of transmission tariff and relief towards increase in cost towards delay in grant of 
transmission license and delay due to severe Right -of-Way (ROW) problems, POWERGRID NM Transmission 
Ltd. shall also start earning profits. It may be seen that the recommendations of COPU are being taken care of by 
POWERGRID. 
 
3.5 The performance of the organization including its subsidiaries is continuously reviewed and analyzed by 
top Management of NTPC and POWERGRID and Ministry of Power. 
4. Ministry of Steel: Ministry of steel on the observation of the Committee has furnished the information in 
respect of the following loss making CPSEs: 
4.1 Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL): The performance of SAIL has improved over years and is submitted 
as below: 
(a) The financial results of the Company for the last 5financial years (i.e. 2013 -14 to 2017-18) and 9M, 
2018-19     
(Rs. In crores) 
Year Turno
ver 
(Gros
s) 
Gross 
Margin 
(EBIDTA)  
Interest Depreciation Exceptional
/Abnormal  
Items Gain  
(-)/Loss (+) 
Profit(+)/ Loss 
(-) before Tax 
(PBT) 
Tax Net 
Ptrofit(+
)/  Loss 
(-) after 
Tax 
(PAT) 
    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7= (3-4-5-6) 7 8= (6-7) 
13-14 51866 4853 968 1717 -1056 3225 608 2616 
14-15 50627 5586 1454 1773   2359 266 2093 
15-16 43294 -2204 2300 2402 -101 -7008 -2986 -4021 
16-17 49180 672 2528 2680 -315 -4851 -2018 -2833 
9M 17-
18 41486 2528 1906 2216 
-351 -1945 
-648 
-1297 
17-18 58297 5184 2823 3065 -56 -759 -277 -482 
9M 18-
19 47944 7806 2352 2494 
-335 2626 
915 
1710 
 

67 
 
(i) Performance during the Financial Year (FY) 9M 18 -19:  In the Current Nine Months, the turnover 
(gross) at Rs. 47944 crore is higher  by 16% as compared to corresponding period of last year (CPLY), due to  
increase in Net Sales Realisation (NSR) of Saleable Steel of 5 Integrated Steel Plants  (24%). During th e Current 
Nine Months, the Profit before Tax and after Tax at Rs. 2625.55 crore and Rs. 1710.42 crore reflects substantially 
higher performance over CPLY.  
(ii) Further, in order to meet the challenges of adverse business environment, a Company -wide turnaround 
exercise named „SAIL Uday‟ was initiated during 2016 -17.  As a part of the „SAIL Uday‟ exercise, SAIL engaged 
M/s Boston Consulting Group (BCG), a leading global Management Consultant, to study the health of the 
Company, suggest suitable measures for its turnaround. The Consultant submitted „Comprehensive Turnaround 
Roadmap‟ Report  in 2017. The Roadmap contains recommendations encompassing various functional areas of 
the Company including Raw Materials, Production, Sales & Marketing, Supply Chain & Lo gistics, Man power & 
Productivity etc. SAIL is presently in the process of implementation of the recommendations which are expected 
to contribute towards improvement in the Company‟s performance.    
 
(b) As regards strategic investment the following is submitted: 
 
On 27th October, 2016, the Government of India has accorded „in -principle‟ approval for strategic 
disinvestment of three units of SAIL viz. Salem Steel Plant (SSP), Visvesvaraya Iron & Steel Plant (VISP) and 
Alloy Steels Plant (ASP). The entire pr ocess of the Strategic Disinvestment is being overseen by an Inter -
Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted by the Ministry of Steel and chaired by the Secretary, Steel. Chairman, SAIL 
and Director (Finance), SAIL are members of the IMG.SAIL Board in its 439th meeting held on 9th February, 
2017 accorded „in -principle‟ approval for the strategic disinvestment of the above steel Plants. Various 
intermediaries/ advisers have been appointed to facilitate strategic disinvestment of these units. The strategic 
disinvestment process is presently underway.  
 
(c )  Further as regards the closure of Subsidiaries of SAIL, the following is submitted:  
 
1 Chhattisgarh Mega Steel 
Limited 
Planned for Exit 
In line with the decision of the SAIL Board, Government of 
Chhattisgarh on August 14, 2017 has been communicated that 
SAIL shall not make any further investment in the project. 
2 SAIL - Jagdishpur Power Plant 
Limited 
Application has been filed with Registrar of Companies (ROC) 
for Voluntarily Winding Up of the Company.  
3 SAIL Sindri Projects Limited Application has been filed with Registrar of Companies (ROC) 
for Voluntarily Winding Up of the Company 
4. IISCO Ujjain Pipe & Foundry 
Company Limited 
Under official liquidation 
 

68 
 
4.2 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL): RINL made profits consecutively since FY 2002 -03 to FY 2014 -15. 
The company however, incurred losses in 2015 -16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 as mentioned below due to down 
turn of steel industry and more specifically for long products segment: 
                                                                                          (Rs. In Crs) 
Year 2015-16 16-17 17-18* 
Profit After Tax(PAT) (-)1421 (-)1263 (-)1369 
* After considering exceptional item of Rs.541.05 cr on account of enhancement of Gratuity limits 
from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.20 Lakhs. 
 
(i) With stabilization and ramp up of production from Expansion & Modernization units, RINL has been 
achieving continuous growth in production, sales and Labour Productivity etc, in the last 3 years and the 
current year, as per the details given below: 
SNo. Item 2015-16 2016-
17 
2017-18 2018-19 
 (till  Feb‟19) 
Achievement Growth  
over 
CPLY 
1 Saleable Steel („000 
tons) 
3513 3847 4500 4479 12 
2 Labour Productivity 
(t/man-yr) 
345 375 451 487 10 
3 Steel Sales Volume 
(„000 tons) 
3703 3702 4488 4328 9 
4 Gross Sales (incl Trial 
Run sales) 
12,271 12,706 16,618 18,515 # 28 # 
# Provisional 
 
(ii) With increase in volumes and cost reduction measures, the company could reduce the loss of gross 
margin from Rs.664 Crs in 2015 -16 (as per IND AS) to Rs.264 Crs in 2016 -17 and to positive gross 
margin of Rs.346 Crs in 2017 -18. Further, with certain improvement in market scenario, the company 
could generate positive gross margin of Rs.1520 Crs (provisional) with a PBT (Profit Before Tax) of Rs. 
84 Crs in 2018-19 (upto Dec, 2018). 
4.3 MECON Ltd.:  MECON got a study conducted by an External Management Agency, M/s Deloitte, to review 
its business and other functions. Based on the report, MECON re-organised its structure, improved its HR processes 
and worked on other critical observations for overall improvement. MECON Limited has earned a Profit after Tax 

69 
 
(PAT) of INR 58 Crores during the FY 2017 -18 and is neither a loss making nor a sick CPSU. The Net Worth of 
the company has improved and there is positive balance of Reserve & Surplus and Net Worth.  
4.4 The Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited (BSLC): Three companies under the erstwhile Bird Group of 
Companies, were brought under RINL, considering the need of RINL for captive mines.  One of these companies, 
M/s Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited has been making losses due to various reasons such as lack of worki ng 
capital, surplus manpower etc. Niti Aayog‟s committee on Sick / Loss making and Non -performing CPSEs has 
recommended „Merger with parent CPSE‟. The report of internal committee of RINL inter alia did not favour 
merger.Turnaround of the company is consid ered possible through VRS for 400 employees and clearance of 
outstanding liabilities. The revival plan submitted by BSLC was reviewed by Ministry of Steel on 20/02/19, wherein 
it was felt that other options may be exhausted before seeking budgetary support .  Accordingly, actions are being 
taken. 
5. Department of Fertilizers : Department of Fertilizers has mentioned about providing financial assistance 
to Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd  (FACT) from time to time and the present status of revival / 
restructuring of FACT. In this regard, it has stated that FACT was given a plan loan of Rs. 1000 Cr. to provide 
immediate financial relief in March, 2016.    Administrative approval for sale of 169.67 acres of land to Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) was granted by Department of Fertilizers on 23.3.2018 which resulted in 
realization of approx. Rs. 420 Crores for FACT. 
A draft Cabinet Note for financial restructuring of FACT was circulated for Inter -Ministerial Consultations on 
23.2.2018.  DoF further s tated that thereafter , a higher level meeting was held on 10.8.2018. Based on the 
directions received during the meeting, NITI Aayog has submitted the draft study report on “feasibility of merger of 
FACT & MFL with other fertilizer units of D/o Fertilizers  and options for financial restructuring/ revival of MFL and 
FACT” to this      Department for comments. The same is under examination.  
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
  

70 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
POINT N0. 10 (ii): DELAY IN CASH & SUPPORT AND OTHER APPROVALS BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1) Department of Fertilizers: Department of Fertilizers (DoF) with regard to FACT has informed the 
following: 
i) Based on the recommendations of erstwhile BRPSE (wound up in November, 2015), DoF submitted 
note for CCEA on 17.4.2014. As per the directions of Cabi net, revised note for consideration of CCEA 
was circulated for inter -ministerial consultation(IMC) on 3.7.2014. D/o Expenditure (DoE) did not concur 
with the restructuring proposal of FACT.  DoE stated that FACT should work out a plan with its own 
internal resources for restructuring. Thereafter, Cabinet note was further revised and circulated for IMC 
in 2015. PMO requested DIPAM in June, 2015 to visit plant and make independent recommendations in 
the matter. Meanwhile, to avert immediate financial crisis i n FACT, plan loan of Rs. 1000 Cr. was 
provided in March, 2016. 
 
ii) A draft Cabinet Note for financial restructuring of FACT was circulated for Inter - Ministerial Committee 
on 23.2.2018. 
 
iii) Administrative approval for sale of 169.67 acres of land to Bharat Petro leum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) 
was granted by this Department on 23.3.2018 which resulted in realization of Approx. Rs. 420 Crores 
for FACT. 
 
iv) Thereafter, a higher level meeting was held on 10.8.2018. Based on the directions received during the 
meeting, following action has been taken: 
 
a) D/o Fertilizers has de -linked the proposal of sale of land from FACT to Govt. of Kerala from 
financial restructuring proposal. The advance copies of Cabinet Note seeking approval for “Sale 
of 481.79 acres of land held by FACT t o the Government of Kerala and utilization of the sale 
proceeds of approx. Rs. 970 Crores by FACT” was submitted to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO on 
07.01.2019. 
 
b) A meeting was held on 16.11.2018 with NFL, RCF, MFL, FACT and IFFCO to explore the 
possibility of merger of FACT and MFL. None of the participant Company has shown their interest 
in absorption/merger of FACT/MFL with them due to the negative net worth of MFL and FACT.  
 
c) NITI Aayog has submitted the draft study report on “feasibility of merger of FACT  & MFL with 
other fertilizer units of D/o Fertilizers and options for financial restructuring/ revival of MFL and 
FACT” to this      Department for comments. The same is under examination.  
***  

71 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
POINT N0. 12: OUT DATED PLANTS & MACHINERY/ OBSOLETE TECHNOLOGY 
 
1. D/o Heavy Industry: D/o Heavy Industry vide OM dated 20.3.2019 has intimated that for experts‟ 
guidance, Non-Official Independent directors are being appointed in the CPSEs from time to time who are experts 
in the relevant field so as to benefit from their expertise and experience. 
 
2. D/o Defence Production: BEL-THALES Systems Limited (BTSL) is the CPSE which had incurred loss in 
2016-17. D/o Defence Production has informed that BTSL, a Joint Venture Company (JVC) between Bharat 
Electronics Limited (BEL) and Thales group, France set up to Design, Develop, Market, Supply and Support of 
Civilian & select Defence Radars for Indian & Global markets with technology inputs from Thales and utilizing 
existing production facilities of BEL. Two majo r developmental projects (1. Multi Tracking Pharos Radar & 
2.Passive Radar) were initiated at BTSL with design and development support from Thales/BEL. While Passive 
Radar has a good market potential in the domestic market, Pharos Radar needs to be introdu ced in the 
international market. Thales Netherland is pursing with International navies for Pharos Radars. D/o Defence 
Production has stated that BTSL will not only have strong order book, but also will be profitable in the coming 
years. 
 
3. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare:  HLL Biotech Ltd and HLL Lifecare Ltd. under Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare incurred loss in 2016 -17.HLL Biotech Ltd. is yet to start commercial production. With regard to 
HLL Lifecare Ltd., the Ministry of Health & Family Welfar e  has informed that the Company has been earning 
profit since inception i.e. 1966, except for the last two years.  Profitability has been affected due to capitalization 
of the new units.  In addition to manufacturing activities, the company is doing the s ocial sector intervention 
projects.  The Company had already engaged the services of an external leading consultant to   prepare 
Turnaround Strategies for the Company and based on their recommendations, detailed action plan has been 
prepared and is being i mplemented with definite timelines and responsibility. The company has been accorded 
captive status for supply of condoms and other contraceptives for the National Family Welfare Programme.  
 
4. M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas: With respect  the observations of the Committee, M/o Petroleum & 
Natural Gas  has given information about the Prize Petroleum Company Limited and HPCL Biofuels Limited as 
per below: 
 
(a) Prize Petroleum Company Limited (PPCL): Actions taken by PPCL in Oil & Gas Assets  at Australia are 
as under:- 
 
i) Upgradation of Satellite Communication Systems between offshore platform and onshore gas processing 
plant. 
ii) Replacement of Gas Turbines and upgradation of engines which are used for power generation at 
Offshore Platform and at Onshore gas processing plant respectively. 
iii) Replacement of PABX systems at onshore Gas processing plant. 

72 
 
iv) Deployment of Operational Technology Cyber Security Tool to further harden the defences against 
potential cyber-attacks.  
 
Actions taken by PPPCL to enhance the Oil & Gas production (which inevitably declines over the time by its 
nature) in Oil & Gas assets at Australia are as under:- 
 
i) Installation of Compressor and Condensate Pumping module at offshore platform to prolong the life of 
field, aiming to maximize hydrocarbon recovery. 
ii) Wireline intervention aiming at sustaining production levels. 
 
Action taken on loosing market for products: 
 
i) PPCL is selling high demand product(s) i.e. Crude Oil/Condensate, Gas, LPG etc. and has entered into 
long term contract(s) with reputed buyer(s). 
ii) Necessary arrangements have been exploited such as parallel contract with alternate buyer to protect the 
company from unforeseen events at delivery locations and thus ensuring continuous delivery/sale of its 
product(s), especially Condensate. 
iii) In respect of domestic operations, PPCL has entered into service contract with ONGC. For service fee 
not meeting the operating expenses, PPCL has taken up for increase in service fee under the provisions 
of contract. 
 
(b) HPCL Biofuels Limited (HBL) : Plant & Machinery/technology were capitalized during the FY 2011 -12, are 
just 7 years old and having useful life of 15 to 25 years. Both the plants at Sugauli and Lauriya are having 
state of the art technologies. Further, HBL regularly reviews the scope of change  in equipment „s and spare 
parts, technology upgradation and capital projects related to Plant and Machinery.  
 
5. Ministry of Railways: On the observation of the Committee, Ministry of Railways has informed as under:  
 
5.1 M/o Railways with reference to M/s Braithwaite & Co. Ltd.(BCL) has intimated that a Committee was 
formed at BCL and  most of the outdated machines had been condemned/ disposed and new machines like CNC 
plasma, semi -automatic welding machines,  bending  etc . have already been introduced for upgradation of 
technology.  ERP also has been introduced for effective administrative management.  
 
5.2 Ministry of Railways with regard to M/s. Sidcul Concor Infra Company Limited (SCICL), a loss making 
CPSE, has informed that the domestic operation of the company at Multi Modal Logistics Park, Pantnagar 
commenced on 28.11.2015.  The EXIM operation began on 17.09.2016 and as Company is new, all the office 
equipments are updated.  The machinery used for the operatio ns is on third party contract and contractor has 
provided the required machinery as per our requirement.  The issue of obsolete or outdated technology does not 
arise. 
 
5.3 Ministry of Railways with regard to M/s. Fresh & Healthy Enterprises Limited (FHEL),  a loss making 
CPSE, has informed that the company was incorporated in 2006.  It was one of the first Controlled Atmosphere 
(CA) Store in the country.  The technology & machinery were best at that point in time.  The refrigeration system, 
the core to the c ompany operation is still relevant and technologically sound. Company is in process of modifying 

73 
 
its facility to suit the changed industry needs and also updating the plant, machinery & technology by making 
additional investment.  The management has decide d to Re -Engineer/revival of the facility in two phases, i.e., 
modification of the existing facility by converting CA store into Chiller, Bonded Cold Store Warehouse and CA 
Store with mezzanine floors in Phase -I which is already operational; and addition of  bonded warehousing Deep 
Freeze and traditional Cold Store in Phase -II which will be implemented in 2019 -20. The Re -engineered facility 
will also cater to all kind of customers like farmers, traders, importers & exporters.  Hence the issue of obsolete or 
outdated technology does not arise. 
 
6. M/o Civil Aviation:  Air India operates in the Service Sector and machinery/equipment in its area of 
operations are primarily Aircraft. The company‟s aircraft are primarily recent acquisition of latest state of the art  
technology which has also been acquired with the support of Govt. Guarantees. Even the leased aircraft which 
are currently being obtained to expand its operations are being acquired on operating lease and are the latest 
aircraft in terms of their life and technology. 
 
7. D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals: D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals has informed that there are two 
Chemical sick/ loss making PSUs under the administrative control of the D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals viz. 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) and Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL), subsidiary company 
of HOCL). HOCL had two manufacturing units located at Rasayani (Maharashtra) and at Kochi (Kerala). After 
implementation of restructuring plan for HOCL, all plant operations at Rasayani u nit have been closed down 
except the strategically important Concentrated Nitric Acid (CNA)/ Di -nitrogen Tetroxide (N 2O4) plant which has 
been transferred to the Department of Space/ISRO. While the Kochi unit, that has plants to manufacture Phenol, 
Acetone and Hydrogen Peroxide, will continue operations, „in principle‟ approval has also been accorded by the 
Govt. for strategic disinvestment of HOCL through DIPAM after the process of disposing land and other 
unencumbered assets of Rasayani Unit is completed.  
 
8. Ministry of Coal: On the observation of the Committee, Ministry of Coal has informed about the actions/ 
measures taken for growth and profitability of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) and Western Coalfields Ltd 
(WCL).It is stated that t he measures are expected to result in higher production and also growth in its bottom line 
significantly in both the companies.   
 
9. Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region:   Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
has apprised with regard to their 2 loss making CPSEs viz. North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development 
Corporation Ltd.(NEHHDC) and  North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC).  
 
9.1 North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited ( NERAMAC):  It is an Agro -horti 
based marketing corporation and not involved in complex technology sector. NERAMAC has four processing 
plants which are presently not in operation  due to non-viability of operation and due to obsolete and outdated 
technologies and lack of funds for its revival. The Company has recently reviving one of the processing plant 
for Ginger Processing under PPP mode and trying for other plants also under PP P mode. 
9.2 North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development Corporation Ltd. (NEHHDC):  The NEHHDC is a 
Trading and Marketing Company. The NEHHDC undertakes marketing and trading of handlooms and 
handicrafts products of the North Eastern States. Such marketing activities are carried out through setting up 

74 
 
of Emporia/Regional Sales Promotion Offices as well trough exhibitions, expos and fairs. The Company has 
not acquired any plant and machinery during the past ten years. 
 
10. Ministry of Power: Ministry of Power on the observation of the Committee has informed as under:  
 
10.1 Partratu Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. and Kanti Bijli Utpadan Nigam Ltd.:   These two companies are 
subsidiaries of NTPC. Partratu Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (PVUNL) decommissioned its 325MW unit and 
construction of 3 units of 800 MW each has been started with the latest techn ology. Similarly, the old units of 
Kanti Bijli Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (KBUNL) were modified and new units were added to reach its present capacity of 
610 MW.  
 
10.2 POWERGRID NM Transmission Ltd., POWERGRID Unchahar Transmission Ltd. and POWERGRID 
Vizag Transm ission Ltd. : These companies are wholly owned subsidiaries of POWERGRID. These 3 
companies have been acquired as Special Purpose Vehicle for implementation and revenue earning of 
transmission projects of POWERGRID through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) route for implementation 
of transmission projects. The technology used in the transmission line is latest and not obsolete.  
 
11. Ministry of Steel: Ministry of steel on the observation of the Committee has furnished the action taken 
measures in respect of the following loss making CPSEs under its control: 
11.1 Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL): 
i) In order to maintain predominance in the steel sector and to face global competitiveness, SAIL has drawn 
up an Expansion Plan for its five integrated steel  plants at Bhilai, Bokaro, Rourkela, Durgapur & Burnpur 
and Special Steel Plant at Salem. Besides capacity enhancement of its crude steel capacity from 12.8 
Million tonne per annum (Mtpa) to 21.4 Mtpa, the plan adequately addresses the need of SAIL Plants 
towards eliminating technological obsolescence, energy saving, enriching product mix, pollution control, 
developing mines & collieries to meet higher requirement of key inputs with matching infrastructure 
facilities to support higher production volumes.  
ii) Under the Modernization & Expansion, SAIL has undertaken latest state -of-the-art technologies like 7m 
tall Coke Oven Batteries with coke dry quenching, high volume (more than 4000 m3) Blast Furnaces with 
Top Pressure Recovery turbines, auxiliary fuel inject ion & Cast House slag granulation plants, Steel 
Melting Shops with latest steel making, refining and casting technology and state of the art rolling mills 
viz. coupled Pickling and Tandem mill for cold rolled products, Universal Rail Mill for longer rails (upto 260 
m), 4.3m wide Plate Mill etc.  
iii) Apart from the above for regulatory compliance, system improvement, energy conservation, modification/ 
replacement/ debottlenecking etc.  SAIL is also implementing various Addition, Modification and 
Replacement (AMR) projects.  
 
11.2 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL): 
i) RINL has taken up the modernization & up -gradation programme to rejuvenate the health of existing 
operating units of 3.0 MTPA stage viz., Blast Furnaces, LD Converters of Steel Melt Shop, Sinter 

75 
 
Machines and auxiliaries at a cost of about Rs. 4,000 Cr to comply with the latest environmental norms 
and improve the efficiency of operation. 
ii) RINL has completed the modernization of its existing major production facilities as detailed below:  
­ Modernization of BF-1&2 has been completed in July‟14 and Oct‟17 respectively. 
­ SMS-1 Converters A, B & C were revamped and commissioned in Mar‟16, Oct‟16 and May‟17 
respectively. 
­ Revamp of Sinter Machine-1 has been completed in July‟17.  Revamp of Sinter Machine-2 will 
be taken up duly considering optimum production model with respect to 3 Blast Furnaces 
operation. 
 
iii) Due to adoption of copper staves in Blast Furnaces the volume of the furnaces got increased from 3200 
cum to 3800 cum resulting in increase in Hot Metal production by 1.0 MTPA from both the furnaces. 
Accordingly, the Liquid Steel production capacity is enhanced by 1 MTPA with the addition of one more 
Converter and Caster which were commissioned in Mar‟16 & Dec‟17 respectively.  
 
12. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting: As far as National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) is 
concerned, the Corporation has taken timely action to upgrade its technology. The Corporation has also taken 
action to convert the celluloid format of films to Digital format and the process is sti ll continuing.   NFDC has also 
upgraded its technology from Avid to First Cut Pro to DaVinci Resolve etc. in time. NFDC dispensed with its 
obsolete technology like Celluloid film subtitling machinery, Arriflex -III Camera etc.  The details of technology up 
gradation done and their impact is as follows: 
i) Back up Process. Installation of Centralized Data Storage system has resulted in every employee is 
now able to save all important data storage and able to share with Head of the Departments.  
ii) Software upgradation in the recent past has resulted in access to fast network and able to give result 
in quickest possible time. 
iii) Set up online Vendor Empanelment Process a Web based MS SQL at NFDC Delhi Regional Office. 
iv) Film Facilitation Office  (FFO) launched FFO Web Porta l on 20th Nov,2018 which will enable online 
submission of applications for International film makers but also enlists India.  
v) The Corporation also taken action to convert the celluloid format of our films to Digital format and the 
process is still in progress which has resulted in easy access and can preserve for long period.  
vi) The corporations also upgraded its technology from Avid to First Cut Pro to DaVinci Resolve etc which 
has helped to carryout postproduction in -house, and convert films (Media) to the fo rmat as per the 
requirement of various digital platforms like Amazon, Hot star, TATA Sky, Reliance etc.  
13. Department of Fertilizers: Department of Fertilizers has stated that  Fertilizers Sector is a controlled 
Sector. Therefore, there is no loss of marke t share as far as the products of the Companies are concerned. 
However, the up gradation is being done time to time as & when required.  
 
*** 

76 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
POINT NO.  13: DIVERSIFICATION 
 
1. M/o Railways: M/o Railways has informed that Braithwaite & Co. Ltd. with consultation of administrative 
Ministry has already diverted its business and new line of steam locomotives reconditioning, stainless steel 
benches, twin pipe retrofitments, wagon repair onsite activities have already been started which has resul ted in 
more than 150% jump in overall turnover in current year as compared to 2017 -18. 
2. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare: HLL Lifecare Ltd. had already engaged the services of an external 
leading consultant to do the SWOT analysis and to prepare Turna round Strategies for the Company and based 
on their recommendations, detailed action plan has been prepared and is being implemented with definite 
timelines and responsibility. 
 
3. D/o Defence production: BEL-THALES Systems Limited (BTSL) is a Joint Ventur e Company (JVC) 
between Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) and Thales group. The objective of BTSL is to Design, Develop, 
Market, Supply and Support of Civilian & select Defence Radars for Indian & Global markets with technology 
inputs from Thales and utiliz ing existing production facilities of BEL. Two major developmental projects (1. Multi 
Tracking Pharos Radar & 2.Passive Radar) were initiated at BTSL with design and development support from 
Thales/BEL. The company in the last few years has bagged order fo r maintenance of radars installed in India. 
The Company is additionally undertaking to manufacture sub -assemblies for the offset requirements of the Thales 
France in the coming years. For this, negotiations are in an advanced stage and orders are expected by end of 
February/early March 2019. BTSL will not only have strong order book, but also will be profitable in the coming 
years. 
4.  D/o Heavy Industry: D/o Heavy Industry has informed that Boards of CPSEs exercise power in 
accordance with Companies Act and DPE guidelines issued from time to time. 
 
5. Ministry of Coal: M/o Railways has informed that Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL) is also venturing into 
exploitation of Coal Mines Methane (CMM) from Jharia CMM/CBM Block in Jharia Coalfield (under Coal Mining 
Leasehold of BCCL) with assistance of CMPDIL and this will go a long way in opening up the untapped sources 
of energy and thereby generating sources of revenue for the company. M/o Railways has also informed that 
Western Coalfields Ltd. (WCL) has taken a m ajor step towards diversification and creating business verticals for 
boosting the top line through “sand from over burden project”. Pilot plant is operational in Bhanegaon Mines of 
Nagpur Area. The plant provided sand at a very low cost to Nagpur Improvem ent Trust (NIT) for use in low cost 
housing projects under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (PMAY). WCL has also provided OB and sand to 
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) for construction of Mumbai -Nagpur Super Expressway. WCL is well 
set to launch i ts sand product commercially during the year 2018 -19 at a much cheaper rate at the same time 
earning substantial revenue and profit for the company.  
 6. Ministry of Power: Both Partratu Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (PVUNL) and Kanti Bijli Utpadan Nigam 
Ltd. (KBUNL), subsidiaries of NTPC, are in power generation business only. They have not diversified in other 
domains. 
 

77 
 
7.  Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals:  Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals  has stated 
that based on a proposal received from Bra hmaputra Cracker and Polymers Ltd. (BCPL), which proposes setting 
up of a Butene 1 and HPG plant at the project cost of Rs.386.75 crores to be financed with debt and equity/ 
internal accrual in the ratio of 90:10, the Government has undertaken the process of examination. The proposal 
aims to add value to functions of BCPL. 
8. Ministry of Steel: Ministry of steel on the observation of the Committee has furnished information in 
respect of the following loss making CPSEs under its control: 
8.1 Steel Authority of India Ltd.: Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) a „Maharatna‟ Public Sector 
Undertaking is governed by Government Guidelines on various aspects of its functioning. All procedures, 
Rules and Regulations have been codified in line with Government Policies and Regulations. 
8.2 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL): Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL)  is setting up a Forged Wheel Plant 
(FWP) with a capacity of 100,000 wheels per annum at an estimated cost of approx. Rs. 1,683 Crs. at 
Lalganj, Uttar Pradesh . An Off -take agreement has been signed with Indian Railways for off take of 80,000 
wheels per annum on cost plus pricing model. The input material for the FWP will be supplied from the main 
plant at Visakhapatnam. It is an import substitution  initiative and part of efforts taken by RINL towards 
“Make in India”. Any proposal on Diversification is initially put up to the related BSC viz., Raw Material 
Security & Joint Venture and Acquisitions and with the Committee‟s recommendations, such proposals are 
put up to the Board. The decision making on such diversification of business issues is done with due 
caution so that the primary purpose of the company to remain in its core business is fully taken care of.  
8.3 MECON Ltd.: Based on the recomm endations of the study, carried out long back by a Management 
Consultant Agency, MECON decided to diversify into Energy (Power and Oil & Gas) and Infrastructure 
sectors.Diversification has been in the priority areas of Government, i.e. Oil and Gas (like Urja Ganga project, 
CGD projects in 40 cities, POL Terminals, etc.), Power (like 24x7 Power for All, DDUGJY, etc.) and 
Infrastructure (like in Defence Infrastructure- Project Seabird Ph. I & II, CODs & RODs, Desalination Plant, Note 
Press & Mints). 
8.4 The Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited (BSLC): BSLC is a captive supplier of Dolomite to SAIL. It is 
exploring market for Limestone to cater cement manufacturers  subject to extension of lease beyond  
31.03.2020.   
9. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in respect of 
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) has informed as under on the observation of the Committee:  
 
(i) The Management of NFDC has always kept the factors like SWOT (Strength, Weakness, Opportunity and 
Threats) while deciding diversification into new products/avenues and programs. The Corporation also acquired 
expertise in the field of Production, Marketing etc. to minimize the downside risk.  NFDC has co -produced two 
Indo-Germans, two Indo -French and one Indo -New Zealand films with support from the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. International Co-production brings many advantages like access to bigger  and new markets,  ability 
to pool financial resources, access to the partner government's incentives and subsidies, Increase in the quality of 
production,  access to specialized skills or equipment, Opportunity to learn from the partner and network,  Access 
to a desired location , access to less expensive inputs  etc.  
 

78 
 
Department of Fertilizers: Department of Fertilizers has stated that CPSEs Boards are empowered to take 
decisions as per the categorization of CPSEs by DPE viz. Maharatna, Navratna, Minirat na etc. and guidelines 
issued by DPE from time to time in this regard. 
*** 

79 
 
ANNEXURE-VIII 
 
POINT No.15: DELAY IN PAYMENT OF DUES/VRS PACKAGES 
 
1. D/o Pharmaceuticals: D/o Pharmaceuticals has intimated that the Cabinet had earlier decided on 
28.12.2016 to meet the liabilities (including employees‟ liabilities) of CPSEs (Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd., Bengal 
Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Ltd.,Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd . and Rajastan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd) from proceeds of sale of their surplus land to government agencies. As the land could not be sold, the 
liabilities remained unmet. The Department has again approached Cabinet for modification of the earlier decis ion. 
The Department has sent a Cabinet note to Cabinet Secretariat on 5.2.2019 seeking upfront budgetary support as 
loan for meeting the outstanding liabilities of CPSEs under closure(IDPL &RDPL) and waiver of Central Govt. loan 
(principal & interest). In case of CPSEs under strategic disinvestment (HAL), budgetary support has been sought 
for settlement of employees‟ dues, VRS, One Time Settlement with Banks and waiver of Central Govt. loan 
(principal & interest).   
 
2. D/o Commerce: D/o Commerce has intimated that there are no dues pending.  
 
3. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change: Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
has informed that there are 765 employees in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation 
Development Corpora tion Limited . CCEA in its meeting held on 16th August, 2017 decided to close down the 
Corporation by offering VRS/VSS to all its employees and auction of movable and immovable assets. Payment of 
VRS/VSS is complete. The payment of leave encasement has also  been completed. 673 cases of Gratuity claims 
have been released and the rest are under process. The payment of TE is complete.  
 
4. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare: Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that i n HLL 
Lifecare Ltd, there is no pending dues of employees. In HLL Biotech Ltd there are no pending dues of employees. 
 
5. M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas: 
 
a. Indian Oil CREDA Biofuels Limited (ICBL) & CREDA HPCL Biofuels Limited (CHBL):   As there 
was no manpower in these companies at the time of its closure, no dues are pending in respect of 
employees of them. 
 
b. Prize Petroleum Company Limited (PPCL): Except one employee who is directly employed by 
PPCL, other employees are on secondment from the parent company. All employees are being paid 
their full salaries and applicable benefits on time.  
 
c. HPCL Biofuels Limited (HBL):  HPCL Biofuels Limited (HBL) has been making employee payments 
in time on regular basis. Settlement of employees leavin g the organization has always been done on 
time since incorporation of the company. HBL is also regular in statutory compliances of employee 
related benefits such as provident fund, bonus. 
 

80 
 
6. Ministry of Railways: Ministry of Railways has informed on the observation of the Committee in respect 
of their loss making CPSEs in 2016-17 as under: 
 
6.1 M/s Braithwaite & Co. Ltd.(BCL):  Revision of scale of pay w.e.f. 1.1.2007 was already implemented on 
time and further pay revision of BCL staff is under process wh ich is due from 2017 only and expected to be 
implemented by May‟19. 
 
6.2 Burn Standard Company Limited (BSCL): CCEA approved for closure of BSCL on 04/04/2018. There 
are 453 employees as on 01.09.2018. The Company approached the Hon‟ble Supreme Court for r elief against 
the NCLAT orders to withhold the disbursement of payments. Hon‟ble Supreme Court allowed the disbursement 
vide its order dated 07/09/2018. Accordingly, 396 employees submitted voluntary retirement (VR) options had 
been paid VR benefits. 57 em ployees who did not submitted voluntary retirement options were retrenched and 
retrenchment benefits were paid to them. 
 
6.3 M/s. Sidcul Concor Infra Company Limited (SCICL):  In SCICL, there is no regular employee, hence 
there is no case of VRS. Company i s making regular and full payments towards salary and other related 
reimbursements of all contractual staff and making timely reimbursement against salary of employees on 
deputation from Holding Company, CONCOR.   
 
6.4 M/s. Fresh & Healthy Enterprises Limited (FHEL):To make the facility viable, some of the employees 
who were on the rolls of FHEL have been absorbed in CONCOR after their resignation and of their full and final 
settlement is in process. 
 
6.5 RITES Infrastructure Services Ltd (RISL):  RITES Infrastructure Services Ltd (RISL) is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of RITES Ltd. The Board of Directors of RITES Ltd (the holding company) in its meeting held in 
January, 2016 decided to wind -up RISL, after handing over MFCs to Zonal Railways. There is no emp loyee on 
the roll of the company. 
 
7. Ministry of Tourism: Ministry of Tourism has informed that the recommendations contained in 
the CoPU Report in respect of the following CPSUs is not applicable, as the corporations have been 
disinvested or in advance stage of disinvestment: 
 
(i)     Assam Ashok Hotel Corporation Limited.  
(ii)    Donyi Polo Ashok Hotel Corporation Limited. 
(iii)    Ranchi Ashok Bihar Hotel Corporation Limited.  
(iv)    Utkal Ashok Hotel Corporation Limited  
 
8. D/o Heavy Industry: D/o Hea vy Industry has informed on the observation of the Committee that the 
payment of  VRS/VSS and other dues of employees of HMT Chinar Watches Ltd, HMT Ltd. (Tractor Division), 
HMT Bearings Ltd, Instrumentation Limited, Kota, Tunghabadra Steel Plant Limited a nd Hindustan Cables 

81 
 
Limited, has been completed. In case of HMT Watches Limited, the payment of the dues of some of the 
employees is pending due to a court case. The dues of employees of Ranibagh unit will be settled based on the 
court verdict. 
 
9. M/o Civil Aviation: M/o Civil Aviation has informed that based on Justice Dharamadhikari Committee 
(JDC) recommendations, the Revised Basic Pay (RBP) has been implemented for all the categories of the 
employees from different dates and full salary and allo wances are being paid from the dates on which respective 
agreements were signed with each category of employees. However, a provision Rs 1331.91 crore have been 
made in the books of accounts of Air India as on FY 2017 -18 for the payment of the 25% of the a llowances 
withheld for all employees of Air India towards the implementation of the JDC recommendations. Accordingly, the 
said amount shall be paid once the individual employee wise arrears sheets are drawn up and also based upon 
the financial/liquidity position of the company. 
 
10. D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals:  D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals  has informed the status of 
pending dues of the employees of Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) and Hindustan Fluorocarbons 
Limited (HFL) as on 12.03.2019, period of pendency and the action taken/required to settle the same which is 
given below:  
S. 
No. 
Pending dues of 
employees (existing & 
retired) 
Amount 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
Pending Since 
when 
Action Taken/required to settle the 
same 
A.  HOCL 
(i) Retired employees 3.82 For varying 
periods earliest 
being 1997 
Provision for paying the dues has been 
made by the company. However, payment 
is pending since the dues pertain to sub 
judice matters and to retired employees 
whose contact details are not available 
with the company. 
(ii) VRS opted employees 
of Rasayani unit. 
3.94 Feb. 2018 Some VRS opted employees have been 
temporarily retained for implementing 
restructuring plan of the company. Their 
dues will be paid once they are relieved. 
(iii) VRS opted employees  
of Kochi unit 
1.85 Dec. 2018 Dues will be paid once funds are received 
from land sale of Rasayani unit. 
 Total 9.61   
B. HFL 
(i) Salary and allowances 2.08 20% salary since 
April, 2018 and 
HFL has stated that its financial 
performance can improve if its non -

82 
 
salary for Feb. 
2019 
feedstock production quota of CFM -22 is 
increased to 1500 MTPA as against the 
existing quota of 1100 MTPA allotted by 
the M/o Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change (MoEFCC). The Department has 
requested MoEFCC to enhanc e the CFM -
22 quota for calendar year 2019 to 1500 
MT which can facilitate settlement of the 
employee dues through improved financial 
performance. 
(ii) Wage revision arrears 15.54 Oct. 2012 
(iii) Statutory Dues 20.02 For varying 
periods from April, 
2012 to Feb. 2019 
 Total 37.64   
 
11.  Ministry of Coal: Ministry of Coal has intimated that the wage cost  on manpower in Bharat Coking Coal 
Ltd andWestern Coalfields Ltd. have been already settled. 
 
12. Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region:   Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
has apprised with regard to their 2 loss making CPSEs viz. North Eastern Handicrafts & Handlooms Development 
Corporation Ltd.(NEHHDC) and  North Eastern Regional Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited ( NERAMAC) 
that there are no pending/ outstanding VRS dues.  
 
13. Ministry of Power:  There is no delay in payment of dues/ VRS with respect to Partratu Vidyut Utpadan 
Nigam Ltd. and Kanti Bijli Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (KBUNL). With respect of POWERGRID NM Transmission Ltd., 
POWERGRID Unchahar Transmission Ltd. and POWERGRID Vizag Transmission Ltd., it is stated that all 
employees dues are paid timely by POWERGRID. 
 
14. Ministry of Steel: Ministry of steel on the observation of the Committee has furnished the status in 
respect of the following loss making CPSEs under its control: 
14.1 Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. (RINL):  RINL is not a sick company. RINL is paying salaries to its employees 
timely. Continuous efforts are being made to improve its performance and the company is expected to turn 
around at the earliest. 
14.2 MECON Ltd.:MECON has been  paying the salary and other dues to its regular employees. 
14.3 The Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited (BSLC): All out efforts have been put for arrangement of 
funds for payment of pending salary. The company has been arranging funds for wages and statutory p ayments 
from the funds generated from sales revenue. 
15. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting:Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has informed that 
no payment is pending for VRS packages. 
 

83 
 
16. Department of Fertilizers: Department of Fertilizers has informed that the Pending  dues/VRS packages 
to the employees in respect of Fertilisers And Chemicals Travancore Ltd, Madras Fertilizers Ltd. and Projects and 
Development India Limited are Nil. 
***  

84 
 
ANNEXURE-IX 
17 (i) : SURPLUS LAND AND ASSET SALE OF LOSS-MAKING PSUS THROUGH NBCC 
 
1. Department of Pharmaceuticals : As regards the land of HAL, IDPL, RDPL and BCPL mentioned in the 
observation, D/o Pharmaceuticals has informed that Cabinet in its meeting dated 28.12.2016 had decided for 
closure of IDPL and  RDPL after meeting all the liabilities through sale of surplus land to Govt. agencies. Despite 
sincere efforts, the sale of surplus land of PSUs did not materialize, mainly as the bids were invited from the 
Government agencies alone. As such, the funds co uld not be generated for meeting all the liabilities of PSUs for 
effecting closure. It is now proposed to explore the possibility of the sale of surplus land as per revised DPE‟s 
guidelines dated 14.06.2018. 
 
1. Ministry of Railways: M/o Railways in respect of M/s Braithwaite & Co. Ltd. (BCL) has informed that no 
surplus land is available which can be offered for sale through NBCC. In respect of Burn Standard Company Ltd., 
it has been apprised that MoU with LMA for disposal of land co uld not be signed due to restriction imposed by 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
 
3. Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals:  The sale of land assets of Rasayani unit  of Hindustan 
Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) is being carried out in accordance with the CCEA approved restructuring plan 
of HOCL. (Rasayani unit of HOCL has been closed down under the restructuring plan). The sale of surplus land of 
Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL) at its plant s ite at Rudraram, Dist. Sangareddy, Telangana, is being 
processed as per decision taken in the meeting held in the PMO on 04.02.2019. As such, in the context of 
above mentioned land sale of HOCL & HFL, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals  has not explored any 
option regarding future requirement of land & assets of HOCL & HFL by such loss -making PSUs because both of 
these are approved 'in principle' for disinvestment. 
 
4. Ministry of Coal:   Ministry of Coal has informed that the coal mines are mostly in r emote areas and in 
respect of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and Western Coalfields Ltd., it has stated that they have no sparable land, 
which exists in their command area. 
 
5. Department of Heavy Industry: D/o Heavy Industry has stated that they have been regularly monitoring 
this aspect, with a view to expedite progress. The status is as under: 
 
(i). Consequent upon approval of Cabinet/CCEA for closure of certain CPSEs under DHI, NBCC was 
nominated as Land Management Agency (LMA), vide letter dated 31.01.2 017, for the following 5 CPSEs- 
i. Hindustan Cables Ltd.,  
ii. Instrumentation Ltd.,  
iii. HMT Bearing Ltd.,  
iv. HMT Watches Ltd. and  
v. Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd. 
 

85 
 
(ii). LMA issued first Request for Quotation (RFQ) on 17.05.2017. In response 8 bids were received from different 
Govt. organizations in respect of 7 Immovable assets out of total 22 assets of 5 CPSEs. After negotiations, the 
following Four Land Parcels (Two in parts) were finally recommended by LMA to be disposed off. These were 
referred back to DHI for further approval of competent Authority. 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of  CPSE  Details of property Area Organization  Area 
recommended 
for disposal 
1 HMT Bearings 
Limited 
Land at Moula Ali 
Hyderabad 
29.33 acre ISRO 29.33 acre 
2 Hindustan Cables 
Limited 
Land at Mallapur Village 
Hyderabad 
227 acre 27.5 
Gunta 
BPCL 92 acres 
3 Hindustan Cables 
Limited 
Land at Cherlapally 
Village Hyderabad 
96     acre  
35 Gunta 
BPCL 23 acre 
4 Tungabhadra Steel 
Products Limited 
Land at Hospet Karnataka 82.37 acre Karnataka 
Housing Board 
82.37 cre 
 
(iii). RFQ was again invited by LMA on 20.11.2017 for disposal of remaining properties of CPSEs. Bids were 
received from different Govt. organizations in respect of 8 Immovable assets. After negotiations five properties 
were finally recommended by LMA to be disposed off.  
 
(iv).  Present Status of the 9 properties mentioned above, as given by the LMA, is as under:  
 
S. 
N
o. 
Name of 
CPSE 
Details of asset Details of allotment Present Status 
Type & location Area Name of 
organiza-
tion 
allotted 
area 
Offered 
price in  
Rs. crore 
1 HMT 
Bearings 
Ltd. 
Land at Moula 
Ali Hyderbad 
29.33 acre ISRO 29.33 
acre 
104.10 Land sold to ISRO.    
2 TSPL Land at Hospet 
Karnataka 
82.37 acre Karnataka 
Housing 
Board 
82.37 
acre 
54.36 Land sold to 
Government of 
Government of 
Karnataka.  
3 HCL Land at 96 acre 35 BPCL 23 acre 47.46 Recommendation 

86 
 
Cherlapally 
Hyderabad 
gunta received from LMA 
was not considered 
due to a pending court 
case. 4 HCL Land at Mallapur 
Hyderabad 
227 acre 
22.5 gunta 
BPCL 92 acre 189.83 
5 HCL Land at 
Naredrapur 
Kolkata 
2 acre Intelligence 
Bureau 
2 acre 30.25 LMA recommended 
sale to IB. 
Inter-Ministerial 
reference sent to MHA 
on 15.11.2018.  
Reply received from 
MHA on 15.04.2019 
that  the price quoted 
by IB or the reserve 
price, whichever is 
less, be considered. 
However, guidelines 
require that sale be 
made at the higher of 
the two prices. 
6 HCL Guest house at 
Garihat Road 
Kolkata 
3613 Sft Intelligence 
Bureau 
3613 Sft 2.65 
7 HCL Guest house at 
Rashbehary 
Avnue Kolkata 
2558 Sft Intelligence 
Bureau 
2558 sft 2.13 
8 Instrume-
ntation 
Limited 
Land at Malviya 
Nagar Jaipur 
1.04 acre Intelligence 
Bureau 
1.04 acre 24.79 Recommendation 
received from LMA has 
been referred to parent 
department (MHA) on 
11.01.2019. Reply 
received from MHA on 
15.04.2019 that IB has 
submitted a bid for this 
plot of land for Rs. 
24.79 crores. This is 
being examined. 
9 Instrume
ntation 
Limited 
Land at Malviya 
Nagar Jaipur 
1.37 acre M/o Ayush 
(National 
Institute of 
Ayurveda) 
1.37 acre 19.00 M/o AYUSH, on 
11.04.19, requested for 
some more time, to 
make budgetary 
provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 
(v).  LMA has proposed re-tendering (third time) of the following properties, which have not been disposed off 
till date: 
 
S.  
No. 
Name of CPSE Details of property Area Status of  
Disposal  
1 Hindustan Cables 
Limited 
Land at Rupnarainpur WB 947.23 acre No bid received in two rounds of 
tendering. As per Para 3.3 and 
4.3.2(b) (ix) of O.M. No. 
DPE/5(1)/2014-Fin (Part -1) dated 
14.6.2018, wherever the 
administrative ministry faces any 
difficulty in disposal of land, it shall 
consult NITI Aayog. Accordingly, the 
matter of disposal of these 
properties has been referred to NITI 
Aayog for advice. 
2 4 Flats at Golf link Apartment, 
Chaditala Lane, Kolkata, WB 
3 Flats - 850 sqft 
1 Flat – 1020 
sqft.  
 
3 5 Flats at Juhi Colony, Allahabad 1076 Sqft each 
4 2 Flats at Agnipath Colony 
Allahabad 
1266 Sqft. each 
5 1 Residence at Asian Games 
Village New Delhi 
1963 Sft. Not considered due to a pending 
court case. Owing to difficulties in 
disposal, matter referred to NITI 
Aayog for advice, in terms of Para 
3.3 and 4.3.2(b) (ix) of O.M. No. 
DPE/5(1)/2014-Fin (Part -1) dated 
14.6.2018 
6 Balance Land at Cherlapally 
Village, Hyderabad  
73 acre 35 
Gunta  
7 Balance Land at Malapur 
Village, Hyderabad  
135 acre 22.5 
Gunta  
8 
 
Instrumentation 
Limited 
1 Office cum residence at 
Vadodara 
1200 Sft No bid received in two rounds of 
tendering. As per Para 3.3 and 
4.3.2(b) (ix) of O.M. No. 
DPE/5(1)/2014-Fin (Part -1) dated 
14.6.2018, wherever the 
administrative ministry faces any 
difficulty in disposal of land, it shall 
consult NITI Aayog. Accordingly, the 
matter of disposal of these 
properties has been referred to NITI 
Aayog for advice. 
9 3 Flats at Juhu Tara Road, 
Santacruz, Mumbai 
540 Sqft. each 
10 2 Flats at Beach Resort, Juhu 
Koliwada, Mumbai 
540 Sqft each 
11 3 Flats at Monalisa Socity,  
Bandra, Mumbai 
1 flat 551 Sqft                      
2 Flats 534 Sqft 
12 4 Commercial Flats at Remi 
Bizcourt, Andheri, Mumbai 
331,408,478 
and 741 sqft. 
 
13 Office space at SCOPE 7710 Sft. 

88 
 
 Complex New Delhi 
14 HMT Watches 
Limited 
1 Flat at Monalisa Society,  
Bandra, Mumbai 
753 Sft On dismissal of W.P. No. 3292/2016 
by the Hon‟ble High Court of 
Uttarakhand on 18.03.2019, DHI has 
initiated process of disposal of land. 
 
15 Balance Land at Ranibagh, 
Nainital  45.62 acre  
 
(vi). Thereafter, LMA has proceeded to dispose off the above mentioned land assets as per instructions 
contained in para 10 of the said guidelines dated 7.9.2016 and later, as per revised DPE guidelines dated 
14.6.2018. In terms of guidelines on closure, contained O.M. No. DPE/5(1)/2014-Fin (Part) dated 7.9.2016, land was 
to be sold to Central Government departments, Central Government bod ies / CPSEs, State Government 
departments, State Government bodies/ PSEs. 
 
(vii).  The progress of closure is monitored continuously in DHI. Further, DHI also takes up periodic review 
meetings to monitor overall progress where LMA is also invited. 
 
6. Department of Defence Production: Department of Defence Production has informed that BEL -
THALES Systems Ltd. is operated on leased land taken from BEL and it does not hold any land.  
 
7. Department of Fertilizers:  Department of Fertilizers has informed that the  PDIL is under the process of 
100% outright strategic disinvestment. The other two CPSEs namely Fertilisers And Chemicals Travancore Ltd 
(FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Ltd. (MFL) are loss making but not under closure. FACT had identified approx. 651 
acres of surplus land. Out of which 170 acres has been sold to Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL). Sale of 
approx. 481 acres of land to Govt. of Kerala is under consideration. MFL had identified 70 acres of surplus land 
sale. Chennai Petroleum Corporation L imited (CPCL) which is a subsidiary of India Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL), a 
PSU under M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas has shown interest in buying the land from MFL. The matter of sale of 
approx. 70 acres of land from MFL to CPCL is under consideration. 
***  

89 
 
ANNEXURE-X 
POINT N0.18: CASH RECEIVED THROUGH MONETIZATION OF ASSETS OF LOSS MAKING CPSEs  
 
1. D/o Commerce: D/o Commerce has informed that STC has taken loan from Exim Bank. As per agreement, 
STC required prior written consent of Exim Bank for sale of asse ts. STCL Ltd has 15.7 acres of freehold land 
which has been attached by Consortium of Banks headed by SBI under SARFAESI Act, 2002.  
 
2. M/o Railways: M/o Railways has informed in respect of Burn Standard Company Ltd., which was 
approved for closure on 4.4. 2018, that the Company has a total of 975.71 acres land including 422.84 acres of 
freehold land and 552.87 acres of leasehold land. MoU with LMA for disposal of land could not be signed due to 
restriction imposed by National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. 
 
3. D/o Pharmaceuticals: D/o Pharmaceuticals has intimated that no money has yet been realized through 
monetization of Pharma CPSUs. Surplus, if any, after meeting the liabilities of CPSUs would be deposited in the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
4. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change: Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
has informed that CCEA on 16th August, 2017 decided to close down the Corporation. The Ministry has conveyed its 
decision for disposal of all immovable assets held by the Corporation.   
 
 In consultation with A&N Administration, decision has been taken to return the immovable assets of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest  and Plantation Development Corporation  Ltd. ( ANIFPDCL) standing on 
Reserve Forests/Tribal Reserve/ License/Lease, at the book value to the A&N Forest Department and the other 
lands (Non -forest lands) in A&N Islands to A&N Administration on payment of book value. Accordin gly, all 
reserved forest land held under lease has been returned to Forest Department of Andaman and Nicobar 
Administration.  The matter is being taken up with Forest Department to deposit book value at the earliest for 
facilitating the closure process of the corporation.In this regard, MoEFCC has further stated that as per the 
information received from A&N Administration, A&N Administration has deposited the book value to LMA. Further 
under own use clause, one property at Salt Lake, Kolkata has been ordere d for transfer to PL Division of 
MoEF&CC for use by Hon. NGT.  
 
5. D/o Heavy Industry: D/o Heavy Industry has informed that this Department follows DPE guidelines on 
closure of CPSEs and consequent disposal of land and assets of such CPSEs. Accordingly in cas e of HMT and 
IL, M/s NBCC has been appointed as LMA to dispose of immovable assets of these two CPSEs. The process is 
still ongoing and sale money is yet to the received. 
 
6. Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals: Department of Chemicals and Petrochemica ls has 
informed that as per the restructuring plan of HOCL approved by the Govt. of India on 17.05.2017, financial 
implication of Rs.1008.67 crore (cash) of the restructuring plan is to be met partly from sale of 442 acres of 

90 
 
HOCL land at Rasayani to Bhara t Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) and the balance through bridge loan from 
the Govt. The restructuring plan provides for BPCL land sale proceeds to be used to settle the various liabilities 
of the company, including payment of outstanding salary and stat utory dues of employees, giving VRS/VSS to 
the Rasayani unit employees, payments to BPCL/ other suppliers, etc. There is no provision in the restructuring 
plan for depositing the land sale proceeds in a separate account. Details of the land sale proceeds a nd their 
utilization, as on 12.03.2019, are as follows:  
 
A) Land sale/lease transfer proceeds 
Particulars Approx. 
area (in 
Acre) 
Gross 
Amount 
(Rs in 
Crore) 
Remarks 
(i) Land sale to BPCL:    
a) Rasayani land - 
05.02.2018 
251.00 351.40 Net amount received  after deducting TDS and BPCL 
recovery of raw material dues was Rs.314.89 crore. 
b) Rasayani land - 
05.03.2019 
38.69 54.16 Net amount received after deducting TDS and BPCL 
recovery of raw material dues was Rs.8.77 crore. 
(ii) Lease transfer of land 
to NALCO - 08.02.2019 
0.25 13.10 Net amount received after deducting TDS of Rs.0.13 
crore was Rs.12.97 crore. 
Total 289.94 418.66  
 
B. Utilization of land sale proceeds  
Particulars Amount (Rs. in crore) 
(i) Payment of employees‟ dues (Including for giving  
VRS / VSS) 
209.25 
(ii) Payment to BPCL for raw material dues 77.85 
(iii) TDS deducted, Banks payment, contractors/ 
suppliers, power & water dues, etc. 
131.56 
Total 418.66  
 
 
*** 

91 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2020-2021)   
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 7th November 2021 from 1210 Hrs. to  
1310 Hrs. in Committee Room No. „3‟, Ground Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension, (PHAE), New 
Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA 
 2. 
 3. 
Shri Arjunlal Meena 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
 4. 
 5. 
Prof. Saugata Roy 
Shri Arjunlal Meena 
6. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
7. 
8. 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
10. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
11. 
 
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 

92 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LIMITED (NTPC)  
 
                    ****                                                  ****                                                  ****  
                  ****                                                     ****                                                  ****    
2. At the outset, t he Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
about the agenda for the sitting.  As a first agenda item, the Chairperson proposed for con sideration and adoption 
of the draft reports on the following subjects:- 
 (i)     Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
 (ii)    Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) 
 (iii)    Food Corporation of India (FCI) 
 (iv)    Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
 (v)     NBCC (India) Limited 
 
 (vi)    Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendatio ns contained in the Twenty -
second Report (16th LS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Financing of Renewable Energy Projects 
by Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited (based on Performance Audit Report No.12 of 2015)”. 
 
(vii)    Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fourth 
Report (16th LS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on “Review of Loss Making CPSUs”.  
   
3.  The Commi ttee then considered the aforesaid draft reports and adopted it without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairperson to finalize the report on the basis of 
factual verification by the concerned Ministry/Department and cons ider for presenting the reports to Hon‟ble 
Speaker since Parliament is not in session. 
 
(The representatives of NTPC were then called in) 
 
4. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
5. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
6. ****                                                      ****                                                ****  
7. ****                                                      ****                                                **** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately). 

93 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY -FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON REVIEW OF LOSS MAKING CPSUs  
 
I. Total number of recommendations: 
 
19 
II. Observations/Recommendations that have 
been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 1,2,5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 15, 17 
and 19 
Percentage to total: 
 
12 
 
63.16% 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s replies: 
Percentage to total: 
 
Nil 
Nil 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government had not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Para Nos. 10 and 16 
Percentage to total: 
 
2 
 
10.53% 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which Government have furnished interim 
replies: 
Para Nos. 3, 4, 6, 9 and 18 
Percentage to total: 
 
5 
 
26.32% 
 
 
 