i 
 
17 
    
 
 
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
[BASED ON AUDIT PARA 5.2 OF C&AG REPORT NO.18 OF 2020] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL 
SERVICES) 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2022-23) 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 

ii 
                                                 SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
                   (2022-23) 
 
 
          (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY LIMITED (IIFCL) 
[BASED ON AUDIT PARA 5.2 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 18 OF 2020] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
[AUDIT BASED PARA 5.2 OF REPORT NO.18 OF 2020 REGARDING AVOIDABLE LOSS DUE TO 
EXTENSION OF LOAN IN TERMINATED PROJECTS RELATING TO IIFCL] 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01 August, 2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01 August, 2022  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2022/ Shravana, 1944(Saka) 

iii 
CPU No. 1038 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2022 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(.....Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New 
Delhi-110 002. 

iv 
 
 C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S  
   
  Page No. 
 Composition of the Committee (2022-23) (v) 
 Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (vi) 
 Introduction (vii) 
 REPORT  
 PART  -  I  
   
A BACKGROUND 3 
B AUDIT PARAGRAPH 7 
(I) Avoidable loss due to extension of loan in terminated projects 7 
(II) Audit Observations 7 
C ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 10 
(I) Disbursement of loan to Raipur Waste Management Private Limited 
(RWMPL) done after termination of concession agreement 
10 
((II) Disbursement of loan to BhilaiDurg Waste management (BDWPL) done after 
termination of concession agreement 
12 
(III) Safeguards available to IIFCL in the Take Out finance scheme 16 
(IV) Sufficiency of stipulated Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) 17 
(V) No Objection Certificate not obtained and other loopholes in the agreement 19 
(VI) Action taken against the erring officials 23 
(VII) Improvement measures taken by IIFCL 25 
   
 PART  -  II  
   
 OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 27 
   
   
 APPENDIX   
   
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08.12.2021 31 
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 16.03.2022 33 
III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 05.04.2022 36 
IV Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 28.07.2022 39 

v 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2022-23) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3.    Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.    Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.    Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.    Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
7.    Smt. PoonambenHematbhaiMaadam 
8.    Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9.    Shri Janardan Mishra 
10.  Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
11.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas ChandrabhanjiTadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
18.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
19.  Dr. Anil Jain  
20.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
21.  Dr. Amar Patnaik  
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Director  
3. Shri G.C. Prasad - Additional Director 
4. Shri Dhurv - Executive Officer 
 

vi 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2021-22) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar      -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.   Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3.   Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4.   Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.   Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6.   Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7.   Shri Arjunlal Meena  
8.   Shri Janardan Mishra 
9.  Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
10.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11.  Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
12.  Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13.  Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
14.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh  
15.  Shri Ramdas ChandrabhanjiTadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
16.  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
17. Shri Anil Desai 
18. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
19. Shri Om Prakash Mathur  
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
22.  Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar appointed as Chairperson, COPU w.e.f. 13 August, 
2021 vice Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi appointed as Minister on 07 July, 2021. 

vii 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2022 -23) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventeenth Report on ‘Avoidable Loss due to e xtension of loan in terminated 
projects relating to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited(IIFCL)  (Based on 
C&AG Audit Para No. 5.2 of Report No.18 of 2020).  
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2021 -22) selected the above said 
subject for detailed examination.  
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2021 -22) were initially briefed about 
the subject by the representatives of the C&AG on 8 thDecember, 2021. The 
Committee then took evidence of the representatives of India Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited and Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on 16th 
March, 2022 and 5th April, 2022 respectively. 
  
4. The Committee (2022 -23) considered and adopted the draf t Report at their 
sitting held on 28th July, 2022. 
 
5. The Committe e wish to express their thanks to the representatives of India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited  and Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services)for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite 
information in connection with examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
 
7. For facility of reference and convenienc e, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                            SANTOSH KUMAR GANGWAR 
28 July, 2022                                 Chairperson 
06 Sravana , 1944(S)                              Committee on Public Undertakings 
 

1 
 
 
   R E P O R T 
PART- I 
 
A.    BACKGROUND 
 
 The Union Finance Minister, while presenting the Union Budget for 2005 -06 
acknowledged the need and significance of building adequate infrastru cture in the 
country and made the following announcement: 
“The importance of infrastructure for rapid development cannot be 
overstated. The most glaring deficit in India is the infrastructure deficit. 
Investment in infrastructure will continue to be funded  through the Budget. 
However, there are many infrastructure projects that are financially viable 
but, in the current situation, face difficulties in raising resources. I propose 
that such projects may be funded through a financial Special Purpose 
Vehicle. The SPV will lend funds, especially debt of longer -term maturity, 
directly to the eligible projects to supplement other loans from banks and 
financial institutions. Government will communicate the borrowing limit to 
the SPV at the beginning of each fiscal year”. 
 
2. The Government of India, accordingly approved a Scheme for Financing 
Viable Infrastructure Projects through a Special Purpose Vehicle called the India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd, broadly referred to as SIFTI.  India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd (IIFCL) was established in January 2006 as a 
wholly owned Government of India Company and commenced its operations from 
April 2006. 
 
3. The Union Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2009 -10, while highlighting 
the role of IIFCL and the need  for evolving a ‘Take Out’ financing scheme to boost 
infrastructure projects, announced as under: 
“To stimulate public investment in infrastructure, we had set up the India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) as a special purpose 
vehicle for pro viding long term financial assistance to infrastructure 
projects. We will ensure that IIFCL is given greater flexibility to 
aggressively fulfil its mandate. Take Out financing is an accepted 
international practice of releasing long -term funds for financing  
infrastructure projects. It can be used to effectively address Asset -Liability 
mismatch of commercial banks arising out of financing infrastructure 
projects and also to free up capital for financing new projects. IIFCL would, 
in consultation with banks, e volve a Take Out financing scheme, which 
could facilitate incremental lending to the infrastructure sector”. 

2 
4. IIFCL in a presentation made before the Committee on Public Undertakings 
explained the genesis, features and the benefits of its ‘Take Out’ Fina nce 
Scheme as under: 
 Genesis 
 
⚫ Take Out Finance Scheme has been approved by the Government of India. 
⚫ IIFCL pioneered the Take Out Finance in India. 
⚫ IIFCL, in consultation with banks and other key stakeholders, evolved a Take 
Out financing scheme, to facili tate incremental lending to the infrastructure 
sector. 
⚫ The scheme was launched on 16 April 2010 and operates under the aegis of  
 SIFTI. 
⚫ The scheme has undergone changes from time to time as approved by the  
Government of India. 
 
 Features 
 
⚫ Lends only to completed projects. 
⚫ Transaction is between existing banks and IIFCL. 
⚫ No disbursement is made to the Borrower of the project. 
⚫ Two external credit ratings with investment grade. 
⚫ Satisfactory track record – One year of revenue generation with Debt Service  
 Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1.0 before actual Take Out. 
⚫ No Objection Certificate and letter confir ming the asset is standard from 
existing banks. 
⚫ IIFCL has no direct linkage with Concession Authority. 
 
 Benefits 
 
 (I) Banks: 
 
➢ Derisks the banking sector 
➢ Capital Release: Improve banks’ liquidity for funding more projects 
➢ Improves Capital Adequacy for further investments 
➢ Addresses asset-liability mismatch concerns of banks 
➢ Ensures availability of longer tenor debt finance for infrastructure projects 
 
 (ii) Infrastructure Developer/ Promoter: 
 
➢ Enhanced viability in terms of elongated tenor 
➢ Lower interest rates as completion risk is over 
 
 
 (iii) System: 
 
➢ Market development for infrastructure sectors including ‘Sunrise Sectors’ 
➢ Helps reduce government’s outflow for generating new projects 
➢ Attracts further investments in infrastructure projects 
 

3 
5. Elaborating further on the importance of Take Out Finance Scheme, the 
Managing Director, IIFCL appearing before the Committee on Public 
Undertakings submitted as under :- 
 
“As far as IIFCL is concerned, we have pioneered the Take Out finance 
scheme for India’s financial market.  This was pursuant to the Hon’ble 
Finance Minister’s announcement in the Budget and it was approved by 
the Government of India.  Its main obje ctive was to ensure long -term 
lending and lower the risk in the banking sector because, at the particular 
point in time when the Take Out finance was launched in April 2010, the 
concept of public -private partnership was emerging.  Banking sector was 
the main lending source for infrastructure projects and they needed to less 
risk because infrastructure projects needed long -term money, whereas the 
majority of the liability profile of the banks up to 80 percent was for a short -
term period.  But we need loans f or a period of 15 to 20 years.  Take Out 
finance scheme was responsible to ensure that. The impact of the Take 
Out finance scheme has had, we have sanctioned Rs. 27,376 crore in 115 
projects involving a project outlay of Rs. 1.93 lakh crore and we have 
disbursed Rs. 16,413 crore in 58 projects.” 
 
 
6.  IIFCL is registered as a Non -Banking Finance Company-Non-Deposit taking- 
Infrastructure Financing Company (NBFC -ND-IFC) with the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) since September 2013 and follows the applicable prud ential norms of the RBI. 
The Government of India has infused Rs. 500 Crore in May 2019 and another Rs. 
5,300 Crore equity in IIFCL through Recapitalisation Bonds in March 2020. The 
authorized capital of the Company is Rs. 10,000 Crore and the paid up capit al of the 
Company is Rs. 9,999.92 Crore (as on 30th November 2020). 
 
 
7. When asked about the amount of loan disbursed so far by IIFCL under Take 
Out Finance Scheme (TFS) and the number of projects financed so far and the 
number of those that turned out as  NPA, the Company in a written note informed 
that the total amount disbursed so far under TFS was Rs. 16,413 Crore to 58 
projects out of which only in 8 cases the loans disbursed amounting to total of Rs. 
1411.64 Crore turned NPA.  This im plies that about 13.8% of the projects in which 
amount was disbursed by IIFCL, 8.6% of the amount disbursed turned NPA. 

4 
8. C&AG examined the financing under Take Out Finance Scheme by IIFCL in 
case of Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL) and Bhilai Durg 
Waste M anagement Private Limited (BDWMPL). In their Report No. 18 of 2020, 
CAG had pointed out several deficiencies on the part of IIFCL in execution of the 
‘Take Out’ financing Scheme. The Committee on Public Undertakings during its 
term 2021-22 selected Audit Para no. 5.2 of this C&AG Report relating to avoidable 
loss due to extension of loan in terminated projects pertaining to India Infrastructure 
Finance Company (IIFCL) for examination and report to Parliament. The Committee 
during examination of the subject heard the views of officers of the C&AG, the 
representatives of IIFCL and the Department of Financial Services (Ministry of 
Finance) before finalizing its Report.  The detailed observations of the Committee 
on the Audit Para have been given in succeeding paragraphs of this Report. 
 
 
 

5 
 
B.     AUDIT PARAGRAPH 
 
(I)  Avoidable loss due to extension of loan in terminated projects. 
 
9.  As per para 5.2 of the C&AG Report, IIFCL sanctioned and disbursed two 
loans under Take Out Finance Scheme without ensuring comp liance of critical 
requirement of obtaining ‘No Objection Certificate’ from Concessionaire Authorities, 
and without ensuring required debt servicing capacity of the borrowers from their 
audited annual accounts. 
10. Further, in one case, the project had alr eady been terminated before 
execution of the Take Out financing documents between IIFCL and the original 
lender banks, while in the other case, the notice of termination of project happened 
before disbursement of loan by IIFCL.  Resultantly, the loans of R s.26.20 crore 
became irrecoverable. 
 
 
(II)  Audit Observations 
 
11 As per Credit Policy, 2012 of IIFCL for Take Out fin ance, ‘No Objection 
Certificate(NOC)’ from the Concessionaire Authority, lenders and the consortium of 
lenders was required to be obtaine d before scheduled date of occurrence of Take 
Out. However, NOC from the Concessionaire Authority was not obtained 
 
12. IIFCL was also required to consider only those proposals, which had Debt 
Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1:00. However, suffic iency of th e 
stipulated DSCR was also not ensured by IIFCL at the time of sanction of loans. 
 
13 In the case of RSWPL (Raipur Waste Management Private Limited), notice 
for termination of concession agreement was served (24 December 2013) before the 
date of  sanction of the loan by IIFCL (22 September 2014), and in the case of 
BDWPL (Bhilai Durg Waste Management Private Limited), signing of financing 
documents by IIFCL took place (27 November 2014), i.e., after termination of the 
concession agreement (24 November 2014). Moreover, the disbursement of funds in 
both the cases was done after termination of its concession agreements, which 
indicates injudicious disbursements of loans to the SPVs. 

6 
14. IIFCL in November 2019 had responded to CAG stating that NOCs dat ed 28 
October 2014, 29 October 2014 and 26 November 2014 were obtained from all the 
lenders before effecting the Take Out. It was further replied that the loan was 
disbursed, based on the DSCR for the period July 2013 to June 2014, certified by a 
Chartered Accountant. 
 
15. C&AG however found the reply of IIFCL not in consonance with the facts as 
stated below: 
 
⚫ NOC, as required to be obtained from the Concessionaire Authority as per the 
 Credit Policy of the Company, was not obtained. 
 
⚫ The legitimacy of thre e of the four NOCs obtained (dated 28 October 2014 
and 29 October 2014) could not be established as t hese were not dated and 
contain reference to a future date {i.e., signing date of ‘Amended and Restated 
Facility Agreement’ was 27 November 2014}. 
 
⚫ Regarding DSCR, it was seen from the annual acc ounts of the borrowers for 
the year 2013-14 that DSCR was only 0.13 for RSWP L and 0.48 for BDWPL i.e. 
less than the stipulated ratio of 1. 
 
⚫ Further, the fact remained that the disbursement of funds in both t he cases 
were done after termination of its concession agreements. 
 
16. Thus, as per C&AG, due to non -adherence of the provisions of its own Credit 
Policy, IIFCL extended loan in the projects which had already been terminated and 
resultantly suffered a loss of Rs. 26.20 crore (Rs.13.59 crore plus Rs. 12.61 crore 
written off). C&AG recommended that responsibility may be fixed for the lapses 
pointed out by Audit. 
 
17. The sequence of events in sanction and disbursement of loan to RWMPL and 
BDWPL as per the inputs given by C&AG and IIFCL is given below: 
 
 
CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS 
Date RWMPL BDWPL 
Jan -2013 Availed loan facility from initial set of lenders Availed loan facility from initial set of lenders 
24/12/13 Notice of Termination of Concession 
Agreement served 
Notice of Termination of Concession 
Agreement served 
27/08/14 Project duly awarded IND BBB Credit rating 
by India Rating and Research 
27/08/14 
22/09/14 Date of sanction of loan --- 
17/10/14 Pre-disbursement site inspection done by 
IIFCL 
Pre-disbursement site inspection done by IIFCL 
21/10/14 Rating given by Brickwork Rating India Pvt. Rating given by Brickwork Rating India Pvt. Ltd. 

7 
Ltd. 
28/10/14 NOC issued. Letters received from 
consortium lenders confirming that the loan 
is 'Standard' asset in their book. 
NOC issued. Letters received from consortium 
lenders confirming that the loan is 'Standard' 
asset. 
29/10/14 
30/10/14 DSCR calculation of 1:16 for RWPL and 
BDWPL from July 13 to June 14 given by 
Gnanoba & Bhat, CA 
---------- 
24/11/14 --------- Termination of Concession Agreement 
26/11/14 NOC NOC issued. Letters received from 
consortium lenders confirming that the loan 
is 'Standard' asset in their book. 
NOC issued. Letters received from consortium 
lenders confirming that the loan is 'Standard' 
asset in their book. 
27/11/14 RWMPL submitted that there was no 
litigation pending against them which shall 
have adverse affect in their project. 
Signing of financing documents i.e. after 
termination of the Concession Agreement on 
24.11.14 
28/11/14 Lenders Legal  Councel (LLC) B7B Legal 
Syndicate opined that the documents are in 
accordance with law 
----------- 
03/12/14 Disbursed loan by way of Take Out Disbursed loan by way of Take Out 
13/08/15 ----------- BDWPL informed that termination notice of 
24.11.14 was informed on 13.08.15 
24/08/15 Catholic Syrian Bank in the JLM informed 
that no written communication was received 
at from Municipal Corporation and it was 
decided to furnish the copies to the lenders 
 
 
 
 

8 
C.     ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDITOBSERVATIONS 
 
(I) Dis bursement of Loan to Raipur Waste Management Private Limited 
(RWMPL) done after termiantion of Concession Agreement 
 
   18. As per Audit, in case of Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL), 
although notice for termination of concession agreement wa s served before the date 
of sanction of loan, yet, IIFCL had disbursed the loan. When asked about the 
reasons for sanctioning and disbursing of loan after termination of the project with 
respect to RWMPL, IIFCL submitted as below: 
 
"The said project availe d loan facility of Rs30.36 Crore from initial set of 
consortium of lenders in January2013. After duly completing more than 01 
year of successful commercial operation of the said project, in December 
2014, IIFCL under its ‘Take Out Finance’ scheme, as manda ted by the 
Government of India, disbursed the loan by way of Take Out finance on 
03.12.2014 thereby taking over the loans of Dhanlaxmi Bank and Catholic 
Syrian Bank totaling to Rs13.59 Crore. The disbursements were thus done 
directly to the Banks only. No amount was disbursed to the promoter of the 
said project. 
 
The initial lenders of the project including lenders to whom IIFCL disbursed the 
said loan were Dhanlaxmi Bank (DB) and Catholic Syrian Bank (CSB). 
 
As per clause No. 6.1 (g) under Article 6 of the  concession agreements of the 
project the respective Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) 
were under obligation to intimate the Lenders regarding any termination or 
event of default that was initiated by the Concessioning Authorities or any 
breach on part of the concessionaire in the said projects. 
The details of issue of termination notices and termination of to the said 
project, were not provided to IIFCL or to the Lead Lender   during the appraisal 
stage nor during the disbursement stage by the Concessioning Authority which 
is in contravention of the clause 6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. Pre -
disbursement site inspection by IIFCL was done on 17.10.2014. 
 

9 
The Lenders Legal Counsel (LLC) B & B Legal Syndicate, as appointed by 
the consortium of lenders, vide its opinion dated 28.11.2014 for the project 
stated that they have examined the loan/ security documents (including the 
Concession Agreement from the Authorities) and certified that the 
documents are in accordance with the law, there -by ruling out any 
termination or event of default was initiated by the Concessioning 
Authorities or was continuing in the said projects. In case of Raipur Waste 
Management Pvt Ltd, in the JLM held on 24.08.2015 (08 Months had 
lapsed after disbursement by IIFC L on 03.12.2014), Catholic Syrian Bank 
(Lenders Agent) informed that no written communication with respect to 
termination has been received from Municipal Corporation and it was 
decided to request the promoter to furnish the copies to the lenders. 
 
Information pertaining to notices/termination was also not available in 
public domain. Also, none of the lenders had any knowledge about the 
notice/ termination notice issued at the time of IIFCL sanction or 
disbursement. Also, the company had submitted letter da ted 27.11.2014 
confirming that there was no litigation pending against the company which 
shall have adverse effect on the project. 
 
Letters and No Objection certificates dated 26.11.2014, 28.10.2014 and 
29.10.2014 received from all the existing consortium lenders confirming 
that the loan is ‘Standard’ asset in their books were taken on record before 
disbursement of the loan, indicate that none of the existing lenders had 
received any termination/notice from the authority. Otherwise, the said 
existing banks are required to classify the account as Written -off/NPA 
instead of ‘Standard’ in their books. 
 
Two external ratings from RBI approved external rating agencies namely 
India Ratings and Research and Brickwork assigned ‘BBB -‘confirming 
stable investment grade  outlook indicating no existing defaults in the 
project or knowledge of issuance of termination by the authority in the 
project were obtained in the project. The Project was duly awarded IND 
‘BBB-‘credit rating as on 27.08.2014 by India Rating and Research  i.e. one 

10 
month prior to the sanction. Second rating was obtained from Brickwork 
Ratings India Pvt. Ltd. on 21.10.2014 which assigned BWR BBB- ratings to 
the project, was obtained before disbursement of the loan. 
 
The Statutory Auditor Certificate duly cer tifying DSCR of 1.16 in case of 
Raipur Waste Management Pvt Ltd for the period of 01year from July 2013 
to June 2014 had been obtained while processing for the disbursements in 
both the accounts. 
 
IIFCL had therefore followed the necessary Due Diligence pr ocess and 
required procedure during appraisal and disbursement of the loan, all well 
in compliance with its Credit Policy. 
 
Further, on 24 August 2015, lenders including IIFCL were informed in the 
Consortium meeting held on that date and received details o f termination 
of the agreement dated 25 th November 2014. It may be noted as the 
disbursement took place on 03 rd December 2014 which is only 05 working 
days from date of termination letter and the said notices and termination 
letter are not addressed/sent t o IIFCL or any other existing lenders 
(including the outgoing lenders) which is in contravention of the 
clause6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. Thus, there was no information 
available to IIFCL for taking any action in the matter at that time. 
 
On receip t of details of termination of the project concession in August 
2015, IIFCL immediately advised the Municipal Corporation to permit for 
substitution as per the Concession Agreement. However, Municipal 
Corporations has not accorded the approval, in violatio n of the executed 
provisions of the Concession Agreement. The project has turned non -
viable due to the lackadaisical attitude of not honouring the obligations 
under the Concession Agreement by the Municipal Corporations/ 
Authority.” 

11 
(II)  Disbursement of Loan to Bhilai Durg Waste management Private 
Limited (BWMPL) done after termiantion of Concession Agreement 
 
19 When asked about the reasons for sanctioning and disbursing of loan after 
termination of the project with respect to BDWPL, IIFCL submitted as below: 
 
“The said project availed loan facility of Rs. 27.69 Crore from initial set of 
consortium of lenders in January 2013. After duly completing more than 
01year of successful commercial operation of the said project, in 
December 2014, IIFCL under its ‘Take Out Finance’ scheme, as mandated 
by the Government of India, disbursed the loans of by way of Take Out 
Finance on 03.12.2014 thereby taking over the loans of Dhanlaxmi Bank 
and South Indian Bank (SIB) totaling to Rs. 12.61crore. The disbursements 
were thus done directly to the Banks only. No amount was disbursed to the 
promoter of the said project. The initial lenders of the project including 
lenders to whom IIFCL disbursed the said loan were DhanlaxmiBank (DB) 
and South Indian Bank (SIB). 
 
The Bhilai a greement was terminated vide on 4 th April 2015 and No 
termination letter has been received for the concession agreement of Durg, 
it may be noted as the disbursement took place on 03 rd December 2014 
the said project was NOT Terminated and also the referred notices are not 
addressed/sent to any lenders nor IIFCL, there was no information 
available to IIFCL until August 2015 for taking any action in the matter. 
 
….  (Already covered)   
 
The details of issue of termination notices to the said project, were not 
provided to IIFCL or to the Lead Lender during the appraisal stage nor 
during the disbursement stage by the Concessioning Authority which is in 
contravention of the clause 6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. Pre -
disbursement site inspection by IIFCL was done on 17.10.2014. 
 
The Lenders Legal Counsel (LLC) B & B Legal Syndicate, as appointed by 
the consortium of lenders, vide its opinion dated 28.11.2014 for the project 
stated that they have examined the loan/ security documents (including the 
Concession Agr eement from the Authorities) and certified that the 
documents are in accordance with the law, there -by ruling out any 
termination or event of default was initiated by the Concessioning 
Authorities or was continuing in the said projects. 
 
In case of Bhilai -Durg Waste Management Pvt Ltd, the promoter, in the 
consortium of lenders meeting held on 13.08.2015 (08 Months had lapsed 
after disbursement by IIFCL on 03.12.2014), informed that termination 
notice has been received from Bhilai Municipal Corporation and no notice 
has been received in case of Durg Municipal Corporation. South Indian 

12 
Bank (Lenders Agent) and IIFCL did not receive any communication from 
the Municipal Corporation in this regard and requested the promoter to 
furnish the copies to the lenders. 
 
Information pertaining to notices/termination was also not available in 
public domain. Also, none of the lenders had any knowledge about the 
notice/ termination notice issued at the time of IIFCL sanction or 
disbursement. Also, the company had submitted l etter dated 27.11.2014 
confirming that there was no litigation pending against the company which 
shall have adverse effect on the project. 
 
Letters and No Objection certificates dated 26.11.2014, 28.10.2014 and 
29.10.2014 received from all the existing con sortium lenders confirming 
that the loan is ‘Standard’ asset in their books were taken on record before 
disbursement of the loan, indicate that none of the existing lenders had 
received any termination/notice from the authority, otherwise the said 
existing banks would have classified the account as Written -off/NPA 
instead of ‘standard’ in their books. 
 
Two external ratings from RBI approved external rating agencies namely 
India Ratings and Research and Brick work assigned ‘BBB -‘confirming 
stable investment grade outlook indicating no existing defaults in the 
project or knowledge of issuance of termination by the authority in the 
project were obtained in the project. The Project was duly awarded IND 
‘BBB-‘credit rating as on 27.08.2014 by India Rating and Res earch i.e. one 
month prior to the sanction. Second rating was obtained from Brickwork 
Ratings India Pvt. Ltd. on 21.10.2014 which assigned BWR BBB- ratings to 
the project, was obtained before disbursement of the loan. 
The Statutory Auditor Certificate duly  certifying DSCR of 1.20 in case of 
Bhilai - Durg Waste Management Pvt Ltd for the period of 01 year from 
July 2013 to June 2014 had been obtained while processing for the 
disbursements in the account. 
 
IIFCL had therefore followed the necessary Due Dilige nce process and 
required procedure during appraisal and disbursement of the loan, all well 
in compliance with its Credit Policy. 
 
Further, on  13 August 2015 lenders including IIFCL were informed in the 
consortium meeting  held on that date and received det ails of termination 
of the agreement date 04 th April 2015 of only Bhilai agreement and No 
termination letter has been  received for the concession agreement of 
Durg, it may be noted as the disbursement took place on 03 rd December 
2014 and the said project was NOT Terminated and also the referred 
notices are not addressed/sent to IIFCL or any other existing lenders 
(including the outgoing lenders) which is in contravention of the clause 
6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. Thus, there was no information 
available to IIFCL for taking any action in the matter at that time. 
 

13 
On receipt of details of notice of termination in the project concession in 
August 2015, IIFCL immediately advised the Municipal Corporation to 
permit for substitution as per the Concession A greement. However, 
Municipal Corporations has not accorded the approval, in violation of the 
executed provisions of the Concession Agreement. The project has turned 
non-viable due to the lackadaisical attitude of not honouring the obligations 
under the Con cession Agreement by the Municipal 
Corporations/Authority.” 
 
20. Audit in response to the reply of IIFCL clarified as under: 
“The reply is not tenable because as per Credit Policy 2012 of IIFCL for 
Take Out finance, No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the Concessionaire 
Authority, Lenders and the consortium of lenders was required to be 
obtained before scheduled date of occurrence of Take Out. However, NOC 
from the Concessionaire Authority was not obtained. 
 
Moreover, no documents have been produced before the audit to 
substantiate that matter was ever taken up with the Concessionaire 
Authority for obtaining of NOC. 
 
In the Bhilai Durg Waste Management Case, the borrower had issued 
preliminary notice of termination of Concession Agreement to BMC (i.e. the 
Concessioning Authority), on 21.10.2014, which, due to no remedial action 
taken by BMC, was followed by Notice of termination of the Concession 
Agreement on 24.11.2014 under Article 9.2 (c) of the Concession 
Agreement. Therefore, the fact of the matter is th at the requisite NOC was 
not obtained by IIFCL before making disbursement especially in view of 
the fact that the event of default had already occurred and termination 
notice had also been issued and actual termination was a foregone 
outcome after lapse of stipulated time of 90 days. 
 
Besides this, IIFCL itself admitted that they were not in receipt of any 
information till August 2015 about issue of termination notice and 
subsequent termination of the project for taking any action in the matter. 
This tantamount to acceptance that there was failure of internal control.’ 
 
Further, reply of IIFCL that ‘The Lenders legal Counsel (LLC) B&B Legal 
Syndicate, as appointed by the consortium of lenders vide its opinion dated 
28.11.2014 for the project stating that the y have examined the loan/ 
security documents (including the Concession Agreement from the 
Authorities and certified that the documents are in accordance with the law 
thereby ruling out any termination or event of default initiated by the 
Concessioning Auth orities or was under process for the said projects’ is 
not relevant as LLC has examined the loan/ security documents (including 

14 
the Concession Agreement from the Authorities) which nowhere 
confirmed/ ruled about the termination or event of default. 
 
Further reply of IIFCL that ‘the Company had submitted letter dated 
27.11.2014 confirming that there was no litigation pending against the 
Company which shall have adverse effect on the project’ is also not 
relevant as the same does not confirm status of the pro ject or information 
regarding termination of project.” 
 
21. IIFCL’s clarification on the aforesaid observations was similar to the case of 
RWMPL. 
 
(III)   Safeguards available to IIFCL in the Take Out Finance Scheme 
 
22. Regarding the safeguards available to IIFCL in the Take Out finance scheme, 
the Company in a written note submitted as under: 
 
“The Take Out Finance Scheme (TFS) duly approved by the Government 
of India is designed in a manner to safeguard IIFCL in the following ways: 
 
• Under the TFS, IIFCL lends only to completed projects which are 
revenue earning (BOT Toll or Annuity). 
• The fund based transaction takes place only between existing 
banks and IIFCL. No disbursement is made by IIFCL to borrower/ 
promoter’s  account or project Escrow Account. 
• To ensure viability of the projects being funded IIFCL considers: 
 
a) Two external credit ratings with investment grade, 
a) Satisfactory track record established by ensuring DSCR of at least 
1, 
b) NOCs are obtained from existing banks 
c) Certificates from existing banks confirming the asset is standard. 
 
The only drawback of the TFS is that no direct contractual linkage of 
lenders with Concession Authority. This is throughout the lending industry, 
where the lenders having 70% stake in any infrastructure project under 
PPP model, have no direct linkage with the Concession Authorities. 
 
To plug this gap in infrastructure funding, IIFCL has been professing the 
need to have a Tri -partite Concession Agreement and a Model Concession 
Agreement in across the sectors to safeguard le nders’ interest and to 
address the issues as highlighted by C&AG in the instant cases and to give 
impetus to financing of Sunrise sectors in Social Infrastructure.” 

15 
23. When asked about the time period when the Company came to know that the 
loans to RWMPL and BDWMPL have turned into NPA, Representatives of 
Department of Financial Services stated during the course of oral evidence that 
"सर, मैं आप क ी अनुमति से तनवेद न क रना चाह ूंगा कक  सीएूंड एजी ऑडड ट ने इसक े  
अूंद र जो मुख्यि: दो ऋण  – रायप ुर वेस्ट मैनेजमेंट प्राइवेट लिलमटेड और लििाई 
द ुगग वेस्ट मैनेजमेंट प्राइवेट लि लमटेड  क ो आईएफसीएि  द्वारा13.71 करोड़ रुपये 
और 12.74 करोड़ रुपये क्रमश: लसिूंबर, 2014 में सैंक्शन ककए और ददसूंबर, 2014 
में उनको डडस्बसग ककया। यह िोन टेकआउट िोन क े  द्वारा था , मििब पहिे यह 
ऑिरेडी धनिक्ष्मी बैंक, क ै थॉलिक सीररयन बैंक , साउथ इूंडडयन बैंक क े  द्वारा 
फाइनेंस कक या हुआ था। यह ि ोन बाद  में एनप ीए हो गया। इसक े  बारे में ि ेखा 
परीक्षा क े  ऑडडट में उिर कर आया हैं”। 
 
(IV)  Sufficency of stipulated Debt Service Coverage Ratio(DSCR) 
 
24. When asked by the Committee whe ther the sufficiency of stipulated Debt 
Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR)  at RWMPL and BDWMPL  was ensured, IIFCL in 
their written reply to the Committee as below: 
“The applicable Take Out Finance scheme norms stipulate that at 
time of occurrence of actual Take Out the debt service ratio (DSCR) 
of the project should be at least 1.00. Accordingly, the debt service 
ratio (DSCR) for the period from July 2013 to June 2014 have been 
duly verified and found to be more than 1.00 in compliance with 
SIFTI’s Take-out financing norms. CA certificate from the Statutory 
Auditor of the company confirming debt service ratio (DSCR)of 
more than 1.00 for one year in the case has been obtained at time 
of disbursement in compliance of the applicable Take Out Finance 
Guidelines. 
 
The disbursement in the project was done only to the existing 
consortium of Banks in Dec 2014 after receipt of CA certificate from 
the Statutory Auditors of the company certifying debt service ratio 
(DSCR) as 1.16 for Raipur Waste Management Pvt Ltd 
(RWMPL)for the period of one year of operation from June 2013 to 
June 2014. The same is in compliance with the stipulations of the  
applicable Take Out Finance scheme and Credit Policy of IIFCL. 
 
Further, it may be noted that the CA certificate from the Statutory 
Auditor of the company certifies that the financial particulars like 
PAT, interest, depreciation, revenue, direct and indirect expenses, 

16 
etc. based on which the debt service ratio (DSCR)has been 
calculated.”  
 
25. On the same issue, a representative of the  Department of Financial Services 
appearing before the Committee on Public Undertakings submitted as under: 
“डीएससीआर की गणना और कफगसग ददए गएहैं , वे वर्ग 2013-14 क े  हैं 
जबकक पालिसी क े  द्वारा पपछिा एकवर्ग है , जब ये िोन लसिम्बर में 
सैंक्शन हुए, िो उन्हें जुिाई 2013 से ि ेक र ज न 2014 को देखा जोकक 
सबसे नवीनिम अवधध  थी। मैं समझिा ह ूं कक  यह उधचि था और यदद  
इस पीररयड की गणना हम करिे हैं िो उसमें डीएससीआर एक से ऊपर 
था। रायप ुर क े  लि ए यह 1.6 था और लििाई क े  लिए 1.20 था। कम्पनी 
का जो कायग और फाइनेंसेस थे , वह ठीक था। इन दोनों स्विूंत्र कम्पतनयों 
क े  लिए रेदटूंग िी कराई गई थी। एक इूंडडया रेदटूंग और ब्रिक वक ग  
क म्प नी थी। इनक े  अनुसार ि ी इनक ी पवत्तीय स्स्थति ठीक  थी और इन्हें 
बीबीबी(दिप्पिबी) रेदटूंग द ी गई थी। यह प ुरानी रेदटूंग नहीूं थी, बस्कक 
इन्होंने ब्रबि क ु ि  नवीनिम रेदटूंग क राई थी”। 
 
 
26. C&AG on the aforesaid issue in their vetting remarks clarified as 
under: 
“copy of the then applicable SIFTI Take Out Financing Scheme norms, 
stipulating that Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of the project should 
be at least 1.00 at the time of occ urrence of actual Take Out was not 
furnished. Further, the period of DSCR to be considered was not 
mentioned in the credit policy of IIFCL 2012 in respect of Take Out 
Finance Scheme.  However, IIFCL should have to consider the available 
Balance Sheet figures for arriving the DSCR. As the DSCR in 2013 -14 for 
both the projects were less than 1:00, the reply of IIFCL for considering the 
DSCR for the period June 2013 to June 2014 is not tenable.” 
 
 
27. On the aforesaid issue, C&AG again during the course of evi dence before the 
Committee further deposed as under: 
 
“I have just a small clarification regarding the July 2013 to June 2014 
score.  Normally, the quarterly scores are unaudited figures. So, the 

17 
figure of April 2013 to March 2014 is an audited figure whic h comes 
along with the balance -sheet. So, these are unaudited figures. If we see 
the difference, from .24 to 1 plus, in just one quarter, the first point which 
comes to the mind of an auditor is that it is an unaudited figure.  Just to 
support this fear of it being an unaudited figure, within the next one year, 
the Company is known as ‘gone bad’ and it is closed. So, to that extent, I 
think when you think of a way forward in the future and when you want to 
include it, our suggestion from the C&AG side would  be that you please 
take the audited figures and not the unaudited figures.” 
 
(V)  No Objection Certificate (NOC) not obtained and other loopholes in the 
Agreement 
 
28. As per Audit observation, IIFCL was required to consider only those 
proposals, which ha d Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1.00. 
However, sufficiency of the stipulated DSCR was also not ensured by IIFCL at the 
time of sanction as DSCR for the year 2013 -14 was 0.13 and 0.48 for RWMPL and 
BDWPL respectively. When asked about the r easons behind not obtaining NoC, 
IIFCL in a written note informed the Committee as under: 
 
"As per IIFCL’s Credit Policy 2012, NOC from the Lender(s), the 
Concessioning Authority (if applicable) and the consortium, is to be 
provided before scheduled date o f occurrence of Take Out. There is No 
clause/provision/requirement in the said Concession Agree ment stipulating 
that NOC is to be obtained from the respective Concessioning Authorities 
by any lender(s) or borrower prior to extending Take Out facility by lenders. 
Therefore, even if IIFCL had applied for an NOC, there were no provisions 
under the Concession Agreement for the Authority to issue such NOC. 
Accordingly, as NOC from the Concessioning Authority was Not 
Applicable/Not required as per the provisions of the said Concession 
Agreement, IIFCL was NOT required to obtain any NOC from the 
Concessioning Authority for extending the Take Out finance. As per clause 
No. 5.2 of the Concession Agreement, pertaining to Financing 
Arrangement, itis the concessionaire’ s (borrower’s) obligation to make 
financing arrangements to meet the cost of the ISWMP (project) at his 
cost, expenses and Risk. Accordingly, the concessionaire had the right to 
replace/Take Out lenders in accordance with the requirements of the 
project. F urther, IIFCL was NOT required to obtain any NOC from the 
Concessioning Authority for extending the Take Out finance.” 
 

18 
29. In response to the aforesaid reply of IIFCL, Audit further clarified as 
under:- 
“The reply is not tenable because, as per Credit Po licy 2012 of IIFCL for 
Take Out finance, No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the Concessionaire 
Authority, lenders and the consortium of lenders was required to be 
obtained before scheduled date of occurrence of Take Out. However, NOC 
from the Concessionaire Authority was not obtained. 
 
Moreover, no documents have been produced before audit to substantiate 
that matter was ever taken up with the Concessionaire Authority for 
obtaining NOC. 
 
Further, the Concessioning Agreement (CA) was entered between ‘Raipur  
Waste Management Private Limited and Raipur Municipal Corporation’.  
Thus, there was no contractual obligation/ safeguard available to IIFCL as 
far as CA was concerned.” 
 
30. IIFCL justifying its action on the comments of the Audit further submitted as 
under:- 
“IIFCL’s applicable Credit Policy 2012 states that ‘The No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) from the lender(s), the Concessioning Authority (if 
applicable) and the Consortium, is to be provided to IIFCL for extending 
the Take Out finance under the Scheme.   This NOC is to be arranged by 
the Borrower Company / Lender(s) before Scheduled Date of Occurrence 
of Take Out’ 
 
As IIFCL had disbursed the Take Out amount only to the existing banks of 
the consortium of lenders, as per the applicable credit policy, the NOC was 
required to be arranged and obtained only from the lenders before 
scheduled date of occurrence of Take Out.  The applicability was to the 
extent of lenders providing the NOC since the Take Out was directly 
between IIFCL and the lending banks. 
 
Accordingly, in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL’s Credit Policy 
2012, IIFCL had duly obtained No Objection Certificates (NOCs) from the 
consortium of lenders i.e Dhanlaxmi Bank and Catholic Syrian Bank before 
effecting Take Out in the instant case as p er the requirements. Further, all 
the lenders have confirmed the asset classification as ‘Standard’ before 
the disbursement of loan in both the loan accounts as per the norms. 
 
Also in the instant case, NOC from Authority was not applicable as there 
was no  clause/ provision / requirement in the Concession Agreement 
stipulating requirement of taking NOC from the Concessioning Authorities 
by any lender(s) or borrower prior to extending Take Out facility by lenders. 
 
Even if IIFCL had applied for the NOC, ther e was no provision under the 
Concession Agreement for the Authority to issue such NOC.  The Authority 
had no locus-standi to issue NOC to IIFCL. 

19 
Further, the extant lending banks also had no direct linkage with the 
Concession Authority under any agreement.   IIFCL being a third party did 
not have any direct linkage with the Concession Authority.  Therefore, 
IIFCL did not have any contractual right to approach the authority for 
requesting or obtaining such an NOC from the authority. Hence, IIFCL 
could not approach the Authority for any such NOC. 
 
Accordingly, as NOC from the Concessioning Authority was Not 
Applicable/ Not required as per the provisions of the said Agreement, 
IIFCL was no required to obtain any NOC from the Concessioning 
Authority for extending the Take Out finance. 
 
As per clause no. 5.2 of the Concession Agreement, pertaining to 
Financing Arrangement, it is the concessionaire’s (borrower’s) obligation to 
make financing arrangements to meet the cost of the ISWMP (project) at 
his cost, expenses and Risk.  Accordingly, the concessionaire had the right 
to replace/ Take Out lenders in accordance with the requirements of the 
project. 
 
In this context, IIFCL was a third party (with intention to Take Out part of 
loan of the existing banks and not directly transact with the concessionaire) 
and not required to obtain any NOC from the Concessioning Authority for 
extending the finance. 
 
It is pertinent to note that there has not been practice where lenders (in 
India) seek any NOC from Concession Authority f or any change in 
financing in terms of Take Out Finance, Refinance, or down selling in 
respect of Infrastructure projects. 
 
Accordingly, in view of the above, the prevalent industry practice and with 
the learning gained over the years, this provision/ clau se for obtaining 
NOC from Authority has since been revised and done away with in IIFCL’s 
Credit Polity (Credit Policy dated 09 December, 2021).” 
 
31. In written reply to a query whether IIFCL is of the opinion that a concession 
agreement with no clause sti pulating the need for NOC from the Concessioning 
authority to any lender or borrower prior to extending Take Out Finance facility, IIFCL 
in a written reply clarified as under: 
 
“Presently in India, the Concession agreements are bi -partite in nature 
between the Concessioning Public Authority and the Concessionairre only. 
Currently, lenders are not party to the concession agreements in the PPP 
arrangements in the country. 
 
It is submitted that IIFCL has been persuading the concerned authorities to 
stipulate T ripartite Agreements between the Concessioning Authority, 
Concessionaire and the lenders to ensure better coordination among all 

20 
the stakeholders, and share information with all the concerned. This will 
protect the interests of all the stakeholders includi ng the lenders and 
enable lenders to take informed decisions before disbursements. This will 
therefore be in the best interest of the system”. 
 
32. C&AG was however of the view that “Had NOCs been obtained from the 
Concessioning Authorities, IIFCL would ha ve become aware of notice of termination 
and may not have disbursed the loan.' 
 
33. Referring to the loopholes in the extant Concession Agreement and the need for   
Model Concession agreement, IIFCL clarified as under: 
 
“Solid Waste Management being a Sunrise Sector, State Governments still 
have to evolve Model Concession Agreement under PPP arrangement 
while awarding new projects. 
 
When IIFCL sanctioned loan to these 2 projects in 2014, the Concession 
Agreement was in nascent stages and thus did not quite safeguarded the 
lenders’ interest and lacked the termination related provisions. 
 
To plug these gaps, IIFCL has been professing the need to have a Tri -
partite Concession Agreement and Model Concession Agreements across 
all the sectors including sunrise sectors like Solid Waste Management. 
 
IIFCL has been pursuing to take up concerns of lenders regarding the Tri -
partite Concession Agreement with NHAI and has been advocating for 
similar Tri -partite Agreement in other sunrise sectors as well. In this 
process, IIFCL has taken up the matter with Department of Financial 
Services, Government of India. IIFCL could raise the concerns with 
concerned ministries, which we have done in past, now it is with the 
concerned authorities, ministries and the project authorities  to consider the 
concerns/issues being faced by lenders and to adopt necessary 
modifications/ evolutions to plug the gap in system”. 
 
34. Regarding the corrective measures taken by the Department of Financial 
Services (DFS) to ensure that there are no furt her such instances of this nature in 
future, the Secretary, DFS during course of evidence before the Committee held on 
Public Undertakings deposed as under: 
 
“सर, आगे इस प्रकार का टेकआउट फाइनेंस न हो , उसक े  लिए अब 
आईआईएफसीएि ने 3 दटयर का एक ररस्क असेसमेंट फ्र े मवक ग  िैयार ककया है। 
च ूंकक  प्रोजेक्ट में फाइनेंलशयि  ररस्क  हेिु उन्होंने रैप्सफाइनेंलशयि  क े  लि ए क्रे डड ट 

21 
रेदटूंग करवािी थी, िेककन इस प्रकार से क्या यह टलमगनेट  हो सकिा है ? क्या 
स्स्थति है? इन सब चीजों को देखने क े  लिए या इस प्रकार की अन्य पररस्स्थतियों 
क े  लिए , स्जनक े  क ारण क हीूं क ाूंिैक्ट टलमगनेट हो जाए या रेवेन्य  क म हो जाए, इस 
हेिु इस प्रक ार क ा ररस्क  असेसमेंट फ्रे मवक ग उन्होंने िैयार कक या है। आगे क े  जो 
िी िोन्स वे दे रहे हैं, उनको वे ररस्क असेसमेंट फ्र े मवक ग  से क्िीयरेंस लमिने क े  
बाद  ही सैंक्शन क र रहे हैं। यही इस क े  बारे में सूंक्षेप  में मुझे क हना था”। 
 
35. When asked by the Committee regarding the need for a tripartite agreement, 
the representatives of DFS appearin g before the Committee on Public Undertakings 
stated that: 
 
“पवशेर् कर जो िाइपटागइट एग्रीमेंट की बाि आईआईएफसीएि ने की है और 
माननीय सदस्य ने िी की है। टलमगनेशन क े  बाद जो पेमेंट है , यदद वह क ूं सेशनेयर 
अथॉररटी स्वयूं, िारि सरकार या राज्य सरकार या उसका कोई इूंस्टीट्य शन है िो 
उसक े  प ेमेंट क े  लि ए क ोई एक  िरीक ा होना चादहए। मैं आप से यह तनवेद न क रूँगा 
कक सलमति इसक े  बारे में लसफाररश करें”।  
 
(VI)  Action Taken against the erring officials 
 
36.  In written response to a query on the action taken against erring officials in 
the case of RWMPL, IIFCL furnished the following written information: 
“….IIFCL had followed all the Due Diligence process and required 
procedure during appraisal and disbursement of the said case and has 
adhered to and complied with all the provisions of its own Credit Policy and 
SIFTI, mandate by the Government of India for IIFCL. IIFCL had been 
constantly following-up for recovery of dues from the borrower. In respect 
of RWMPL, IIFCL filed individual recovery suit in the Debt Recovery 
Tribunal (DRT), Bengaluru. IIFCL has written off the outstanding amount of 
loan of Rs.13.71 Crore.  
 
In case of RWMPL IIFCLs decision also has legal tenacity as the Debt 
Recovery Tribunal (DRT), Bengaluru has awarded its order in favor of 
IIFCL and has ordered that Raipur Waste Management Pvt. Ltd. (SPV) 
and its promoter Kivar Holdings Pvt. Ltd. resp. shall be liable to pay entire 
amount of Rs.17,98,51,762.10 (Rs.17.985 Crore) at an interest rate of 
9.50% p.a. and penal interest of 2% from the date of application till final  
realization of entire outstanding loan of IIFCL amounting to Rs. 13.71 
Crore. 
 

22 
….. (already covered in p.8 of the draft)  
….. (already covered in para 9)  
 
As per the applicable staff accountability policy of IIFCL duly approved by 
the Board of Directors of IIFCL, the staff accountability exercise has been 
conducted and completed in the said project by two separate committees 
of Fact Finding and Comprehensive Review committee. The two separate 
committees have examined the case in detail and have NOT found any 
lapses on part of any official of IIFCL. 
 
The reports of the two committees have been considered by the competent 
authority, Managing Director in this case, and concurred with the 
recommendations of the two committees and has approved closing of the 
fact finding exercise with no lapses found on part of any official of IIFCL. 
The status of closure of the staff accountability exercises with No lapses 
on part of any official of IIFCL in the case has also been informed to the 
Board of Directors of IIFCL.” 
 
37. When asked by the Committee about the action taken against erring 
officials in case of BDWMPL, IIFCL furnished the following written information: 
 
“…. covered in page no. 20). 
 
….(covered in page 10)  
…..(covered in p 10)  
 
IIFCL has been constantly fo llowing-up for recovery of dues from the 
borrower. In respect of Bhilai -Durg project, IIFCL has issued recall notice/ 
invoked guarantee and joint recovery suit filed in Debt Recovery Tribunal 
(DRT), New Delhi. The proceedings are underway. IIFCL has writte n off 
the outstanding amount of loan of Rs12.61 Crore. 
 
IIFCLs decision also has legal tenacity as Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) 
hearing is ongoing in case of Bhilai Durg Waste Management Pvt. Ltd. and 
the Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) order is expected to b e adjudicated in 
favor of IIFCL. The order will make Bhilai Durg Waste Management Pvt. 
Ltd. and the promoters liable to pay the entire OA amount of Rs17.18 
Crore at an interest rate of 9.50% p.a. and penal interest of 2% from the 
date of application till f inal realization of entire outstanding loan of IIFCL 
amounting to Rs12.61 Crore. (The award of DRT order in this case is 
expected to be in favor of IIFCL in line with DRT order that has been 
awarded in case of Raipur Waste Management Pvt Ltd). 
 
….. (already covered)  
…..” 
 
 
 

23 
38. C&AG on the aforesaid issue expressed its concerns as under: 
 
“The fact remains that IIFCL, did not obtain the NOC from the 
Concessioning Authority (Raipur Municipal Corporation and Bhilai & Durg 
Municipal Corporation) which was in violation of its own credit policy. 
 
Further, IIFCL has not furnished documents relating to (I) Report of Fact 
Finding and Comprehensive Review Committee, (ii) Approval of 
Competent Authority and Managing Director for closing the fact finding 
exercise with  no lapses found on part of any officials of IIFCL, (iii) 
Intimation to Board of Director for closure of staff accountability exercise 
and no lapses found on part of any officials of IIFCL and (iv) course of 
action taken by IIFCL to recover the dues from t he date of issue of 
Recovery Certificate by Debt Recovery Tribunal, Bangalore (DRT -2) i.e. 
October 2020 to till date. Hence, audit is unable to verify the same.” 
 
 
(VII)   Improvement measures taken by IIFCL 
 
39. When asked about the measures undertaken by  IIFCL for improvements in 
the Take Out Financing Scheme for non -recurrence of such instances and the way 
forward, the Company in a power point presentation highlighted the measures as 
under: 
 
“Internal Due diligence and Credit Appraisal Department 
 
⚫ Internal capacities and specializations 
⚫ Enhanced monitoring mechanisms 
⚫ Regular due diligence and monitoring 
 
Strengthened Risk Management Function 
 
⚫ Independent Chief Risk Officer (CRO) 
⚫ Dedicated Risk Management Depart ment: Enhanced capacities to 
  address credit, market and operational risks 
⚫ 360-degree assessment of market environment before sanction 
 
Reinforced Legal Department 
 
⚫ Independent experts and reputed legal firms empanelled by IIFCL 
 
Adequate & continuous Capacity Building 
 
⚫ All officers imparted with technical training in operational areas 
 
Specialized Recovery and NPA Management 
 

24 
⚫ External experts: Independent High Level Advisory Committee 
chaired retired Hon’ble Judge of Madras High Court and Executive 
Directors of Banks/ Fis 
⚫ Officers with specialized skills in recovery and NPA Management 
 
Digital Initiatives 
 
⚫ Real-time Online Project Monitoring System, first of its kind in India 
⚫ Digitization of services for enhanced tracking and monitoring 
 
WAY FORWARD 
 
Tri-partite Agreement with Concession Authority 
 
⚫ To address the highlighted issues 
⚫ To safeguard lenders interest 
⚫ To give impetus to financing of Sunrise sectors in Social  
  Infrastructure 
 
Develop a Model Concession Agreement across sectors 
 
⚫ To standardize the procedures as per industry practice 
⚫ To ensur e banks get an equal opportunity to be heard on the 
  matter of termination, arbitration, etc.” 

25 
PART- II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
A. OVERVIEW 
 To stimulate public investment in infrastructure sector, the Government 
of India set up the India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) as a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in January 2006 for providing long term 
financial assistance to infrastructure projects. IIFCL in consultation with banks 
and other key stakeholders pioneered and e volved a 'Take Out' financing 
scheme.  The scheme was launched on 16 April 2010 and it operates under the 
aegis of 'SIFTI'.  The main objective of the Take Out finance scheme is to 
ensure long-term lending and lower the risk in the banking sector because, at 
that particular point of time, when the Take Out finance scheme was launched, 
the concept of public -private partnership was emerging. Banking sector was 
the main lending source for infrastructure projects and they needed to lessen 
the risk because infrastructure projects needed long term money, whereas the 
majority of the liability profile of the banks upto 80 percent was for a short -
term lending.   
 2. The present Audit Para no. 5.2 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020, examined by 
the Committee, relates to extending loans under 'Take Out Finance Scheme' to 
two concessionaires viz. Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL) 
and Bhilai Durg Waste Management Private Limited (BDWPL) in September 
2014 by IIFCL. In both the cases the notices of termination were  issued by the 
Concessioning Authority before sanctioning of loan/ signing of the 
documents. C&AG observed that   loans to these two concessionaires under 
the Take Out Finance Scheme were disbursed without ensuring compliance of 
critical requirement of obt aining 'No Objection Certificate' from the 
Concessionaire Authorities and without ensuring the stipulated Debt Service 
Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of the borrowers as per their audited annual accounts. 
These loan accounts consequently turned NPAs.  The two inter nal Committees 
set up by IIFCL on staff accountability have not found any lapses on any of the 
officials of IIFCL. The reports of the two Committees, C&AG pointed out, were 
not made available to them for further analysis leading to doubts about the 

26 
credibility of such reports.  The Committee, before finalizing their observations 
in their report heard the views of the officers from C&AG that conducted the 
Audit, and also the views of the representatives of IIFCL and Department of 
Financial Services, Ministry  of Finance. The evidence of the stakeholders, the 
information and clarifications submitted by them, and after internal 
deliberations led the Committee to arrive at the conclusions and make 
suggestions as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
B. OBTAINING OF NO OBJECTION CERTIFICATE (NOC) BEFORE 
EXTENDING TAKE OUT FINANCE; NEED FOR TRIPARTITE AGREEMENT; AND 
THE MODEL CONCESSION AGREEMENT. 
 
  3. The Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit Policy 2012, the 
Company, for affecting Take Out finance, 'Th e No Objection Certificate (NOC) 
from the lender(s), the Concessionaire Authority (CA) (if applicable) and the 
Consortium, is to be provided to IIFCL for extending the Take Out finance 
under the Scheme. This NOC is to be arranged by the Borrower Company/ 
Lender(s) before Scheduled Date of Occurrence of Take Out”. Though the 
company has obtained NOC from the existing lenders and the consortium, yet 
it could not do so from the CAs (in this case Raipur and Bhilai - Durg Municipal 
Corporations) as -   
(i) there was no clause /provision/ requirement in the Concession 
Agreement stipulating requirement for taking NOC from the CAs by any 
lender or borrower prior to extending Take Out facility by the lenders ,  
(ii) even if IIFCL had applied for NOC, the CA had no ‘locus stand i’ to issue 
 NOC to IIFCL. IIFCL being a third party, had no direct linkage with the 
 CAs under any agreement. Even extant lending banks also had no direct 
 linkage with the CA under any agreement. 
(iii) there has not been industry practice where lenders in India seek any 
 NOC  from Concession Authority for any change in financing in terms of 
 Take Out Finance, Refinance, or down selling in respect of Infrastructure 
 Projects the Company could not obtain CA’s NOC. 

27 
4.  The IIFCL had disbursed the Take Out amount only to the existing banks of 
the consortium of lenders, as per the applicable credit policy, the NOC was 
required to be arranged and obtained from the lenders before scheduled date 
of occurrence of Take Out. The applicability was to the extent of lenders 
providing the NOC since the Take Out was directly between IIFCL and the 
lending banks. 
Accordingly, in compliance with the provisions of IIFCL’s Credit Policy 2012, 
IIFCL had obtained No Objection Certificates (NOCs) from the consortium of 
lenders i.e. Dha nlaxmi Bank and Catholic Syrian Bank in case of RWMPL and 
Dhanlaxmi Bank and South Indian Bank in case of BDWMPL before effecting 
Take Out in the instant case as per the requirements. Further, all the lenders 
have confirmed the asset classification as “Standard” before the disbursement 
of loan in both the accounts, as per the norms.  
The Committee find this a serious shortcoming in the concession agreement 
and also find it rather surprising for IIFCL not realizing the need to include a 
clause for obtaining NOC from the respective Concessioning Authorities 
before affecting the Take Out although IIFCL's own Credit Policy 2012 has a 
provision for it. It should have realized this gap in the concession agreements 
and sought to plug the same before effecting Take Out to protect its own 
financial interest. Instead, it relied more on the presumption that NOC would 
be refused by the Concessioning Authorities as it was not covered under any 
clause in the Agreement. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that IIFCL should  make necessary 
amendments in its Credit policy to include clauses in concession agreements 
for making 'obtaining of NOC from Concessioning Authorities, lender(s) as 
well as the consortium of lenders' a pre -requisite before extending any Take 
Out finance t o the borrowers in the Credit Policy/ Take Out scheme.  The 
Committee also strongly recommend that need for a modified Take Out 
Finance scheme with suitable conditions pertaining to Tripartite Agreement be 
incorporated in the Credit Policy.  IIFCL should e nsure that the proposed Take 
Out finance projects having existing Tripartite Agreement should have 
provision for inclusion of IIFCL as new or additional lender in all other 

28 
lendings viz. direct lending, credit enhancement, etc.   In cases involving 
Concessioning Authorities, IIFCL should finance only those projects where a 
Tripartite agreement will be entered.  
5.   In view of the  important role played by Take Out Financing in development 
of Infrastructure sector and to protect the interest of the  lenders  and Take Out 
financiers , a model concession agreement may be  drafted/ prepared where in 
a  provision for Tri -partite Agreement, as  is  the norm globally,    involving  
Concessioning Authorities, Concessionaire and the lenders / Take Out 
financiers  be inserted  to enable  furnishing of  NOC to the lenders and Take 
Out financiers by the Concessioning Authorities.    
 
C.  CLARITY ON STIPULATED DEBT SERVICE COVERAGE RATIO (DSCR) 
 
 6. Audit had observed that as per IIFCL's Credit Policy 2012 the Company is 
empowered to   consider the proposals of those projects only which have Debt 
Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1.00. There was, however no clarity 
on the period of DSCR - a financial year or immediate 12 months period prior 
to effecting the Take Ou t. IIFCL has informed that   a Statutory Auditor 
Certificate duly certifying DSCR of 1.16 and 1.20 in case of RWMPL and 
BDWPL respectively for the period of one year from July 2013 to June 2014 
was obtained while processing the disbursements in the account . The 
Committee tend to agree with the views and suggestions of C&AG that 
quarterly figures are generally unaudited ones which may not have 
authenticity, acceptability and may not give as much confidence as that of 
audited figures to the lenders and accord ingly recommend that in future, IIFCL 
should rely on audited figures and should also consider the available balance 
sheet figures for considering DSCR in the projects.  
 
D. PRUDENT APPROACH BEFORE DISBURSAL OF FUNDS AND ACTION 
ON ERRING OFFICIALS 
 
7. The C ommittee when asked about sanction of loan to RWMPL and BDWPL 
without obtaining of NOC from the Concessioning Authority, IIFCL had stated 
that there was no provision or requirement in the concession agreement 

29 
stipulating that NOC is to be obtained from res pective Concessioning 
Authorities by any lender(s). In another issue regarding sanction and 
disbursement of loan after termination of the project of RWMPL and BDWPL, 
IIFCL informed the Committee that until August 2015 there was no information 
available to IIFCL about the termination of the projects of RWMPL and BDWPL.  
This was despite the fact that as per clause no. 6.1 (g) under Article 6 of the 
concession agreements of the project, the respective Concessioning 
Authorities (Municipal Corporations) were un der obligation to intimate the 
lenders regarding any termination or event of default that was initiated by the 
Concessioning Authorities or any breach on part of the concessionaire in the 
said projects. The details of issue of termination notices and termination of the 
said project, were not provided to the Lead Lender and hence not provided to 
the IIFCL during the appraisal stage nor during the disbursement state (before 
the date of Take Out) by the Concessioning Authority which is in 
contravention of the clause 6.1(g) of the Concession Agreement. Requirement 
of NOC not being part of Concession Agreement and Take Out Finance 
Scheme approved by the Government of India, IIFCL had disbursed the Take 
Out amount to the existing banks of the consortium of lenders , the NOC was 
required to be arranged and obtained only from the lenders before scheduled 
date of occurrence of Take Out. Accordingly, in compliance with the 
provisions of IIFCL’s Credit Policy 2012, it has obtained No Objection 
Certificates (NOCs) from the consortium of lenders of both the projects before 
effecting Take Out in the instant case as per the requirements. 
The Committee noted that IIFCL is well in agreement that the 
Concession Authority should inform the existing set of lenders in the projects 
regarding Termination Notices, which is in contravention to clause 6.1(g) of 
the Concession Agreement. This is the reason, IIFCL has been professing the 
need to have a Tri -partite Concession Agreement and a Model Concession 
Agreement for all infrastructure  sectors to safeguard lenders’ interest (having 
majority financial stake in Infrastructure projects), for building the confidence 
of lenders and to address the issues as highlighted by C&AG in the instant 
cases and to give impetus to financing the Sunrise sectors including such 
Social Infrastructure sectors. 
The Committee feel that IIFCL should have been more careful and 

30 
vigilant in drafting financial agreements to address the issue of termination of 
projects by the Concessionairre Authorities.  
 
8.  Further, the pre -disbursement site inspection in both the cases was 
done by IIFCL on 17 October 2014, which was after the notice of termination of 
concession agreement (which IIFCL stated was unaware) was served and the 
loan sanctioned.  The Committee further ob serve that the report of two 
Committees that conducted the staff accountability & fact finding exercise and 
concluded that there was no lapse on any of the officials of IIFCL was not 
made available to C&AG for further analysis giving the impression that th e fact 
finding exercise was more like a cover -up exercise as the reports were 
considered by IIFCL's own Managing Director and the fact finding closed at his 
instance. The Committee without casting any aspersions on the conduct of the 
officials involved or without questioning the wisdom of the Board, feel that the 
IIFCL should have taken prudent approach by taking legal action against the 
Concessioning Authorities (Municipal Corporations) for violation of 6.1 (g) of 
the concession agreement to come out clean on their part. 
 
E. IMPROVEMENT  MEASURES 
 
9.  The Committee are happy to note the improvement measures taken by 
IIFCL in the Take Out Take Out Financing Scheme viz. (I) internal due diligence 
and credit appraisal department, (ii) strengthening of its Risk  Management 
Function, (iii) empanelment of independent experts and reputed legal firms, 
(iv) imparting of adequate & continuous technical training and capacity 
building in operational areas, (v) digitization of services and real -time online 
project monitoring system, etc.  The Committee hope that these measures will 
go a long way in improving and strengthening the functioning of IIFCL. 
   
 
 
  New Delhi ;                                                                        SANTOSH GANGWAR 
  28 July, 2022                        Chairperson 
  06 Sravana , 1944(S)                         Committee on Public Undertakings 

31 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2021-2022) 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FOURTEENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tues day, the 08 th December, 2021 from 1555 hrs. to  
1620 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri  Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.C.Tiwari                     -        Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda        -                 Director 
3. Shri G.C.Prasad                   -         Additional Director 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6.  
7.  
8.               
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Madam 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. 
10. 
Shri K.C.Ramamurthy 
Shri M.Shanmugam 

32 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
1. Shri  Raj Ganesh 
Viswanathan 
  - Dy. C&AG (Commercial, 
Coordination & Local Bodies and 
Chairman, Audit Board) 
2. Dr. Kavita Prasad   - Director General (Commercial)-I 
3. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh   - Principal Director (Parliamentary 
Committee) 
 
4. 
 
Ms. Vidhu Sood 
   
- 
 
Principal Director of Audit (I&CA) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Representatives of O/o C&AG made a Power Point 
presentation and briefed the Committee on 'Audit Para No. 5.2 of Report  No.18 of 
2020 regarding Avoidable Loss due to extension of loan in terminated projects 
relating to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL)' in detail. The issues 
touched upon, inter-alia, involved non -obtaining of NOC, insufficiency of Debt 
Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) and disbursement of loans even after termination of 
the projects with regard to Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RSWPL) and 
Bhilai Drug Waste Management Private Limited (BDWMPL).  
3.   Thereafter, Chairperson and Member s sought clarifications from the 
representatives of the O/o C&AG on various aspects of IIFCL seeking reasons 
behind such glaring lapses, involvement of possible corruption motives, need to fix 
responsibility, accountability and liability, fabricated balanc e sheets, non -ensuing of 
project viability before lending, involvement of sub -contractors with the intent of 
siphoning-off finance by borrowers, etc. 
4. The representatives of the C&AG clarified on some issues on which 
information was readily available wit h them. The Committee decided to hear the 
views of IIFCL and Department of Financial Services (DFS) on the Audit Para No. 
5.1 and 5.2 of Report No. 18 of 2020 for further examination of the subject in next 
sittings of the Committee. 
 The witness then withdrew. 
         /---------------------/ 

33 
APPENDIX II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2021-2022) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTHSITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 thMarch, 2022 from 1530 hrs. to  
1625 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, G round Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi                -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda      -                   Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad                -                           Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal          -        Deputy Secretary  
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
4. Shri Janardan Mishra 
5. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri Anil Desai 
9. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
10. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 

34 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
1. Dr. Kavita Prasad - Director General (Commercial)-I 
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia - Director General (Commercial)-II 
3. Shri Deepak Kapoor - Director General (Infrastructure) 
4. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh - Director General (Parliamentary 
Committees) 
5. Shri Mrinal Chawla                        - Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIA INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE COMPANY 
LIMITED 
 
1. Shri P.R. Jaishankar - Managing Director 
2. Sh. Gaurav Kumar - General Manager 
3. Shri Samik Das Gupta - General Manager 
 
2. The Cha irperson welcomed the Members and the officers of C&AG at the 
sitting convened to take evidence of the representatives of India Infrastructure 
Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) in connection with examination of Para No. 
5.2 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2020 rega rding ‘Avoidable loss due to 
extension of loan in terminated projects’ relating to IIFCL. The representatives of 
O/o CAG then made a brief presentation on the important issues pertain ing to the 
subject. Audit pointed out to the two cases of loan extended u nder ‘Takeout Finance 
Scheme’ by IIFCL to Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL) and 
Bhilai Drug Waste Management Private Limited (BDWPL)  without obtaining No 
Objection Certificate from the Consessioning Authorities .  These loans eventually 
turned into NPAs and an amount of Rs. 26.20 crore for these cases had to be written 
off. 
(The representatives of IIFCL were then called in.) 
 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of IIFCL and drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality 
of evidence before the Parliamentary Committees . Hon’ble Chairperson emphasized 
on important aspects of IIFCL and sought to be apprised on two project loans to 
BDWMPL and RWMPL sanctioned and disbursed under ‘Takeout Finance 
Scheme’after the termination of the projects without ensuring compliance of critical 
requirement of obtaining ‘No Objection Certificate’ from Concessioning Authorities  

35 
turning them into NPAs. 
4. Thereafter, the r epresentatives of the IIFCL made a  presentation to the 
Committee on the subject  therein highlighting theCompany’s genesis and business 
profile; Company’s impact and major achievements in financing infrastructure sector; 
Takeout Finance Scheme genesis, features, benefits and its impact on i ndustry.  
IIFCL made submission on the observations by the Audit on both the projects 
BDWMPL and RWMPL and recovery actions on them along with measures taken by 
IIFCL for improvements and way forward. 
5. The Members then raised various issues pertaining to  Audit findings in the 
functioning of IIFCL vis-à-vis details of lending inmajor projects; financial loss to the 
exchequer and action taken to recover and responsibility for the same; details of 
Arbitration Award and issue relating to bank guarantee; futur e roadmap of the 
Company keeping in mind change to Hybrid Annuity Model in infrastructure sector to 
capitalise future growth.   Thereafter Hon’ble Chairperson sought update on statues 
of dues from both the borrowers against recovery proceedings in Debt Rec overy 
Tribunal. 
6. The representatives of the IIFCL clarified issues on which information was 
readily available with them. In respect of some points for which information was not 
readily available, the Chairperson desired that written replies may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
 
 (The Committee then adjourned.) 
 
 
/---------------------/ 

36 
APPENDIX III 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2021-2022) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesda y, the 05 th April, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to  
1555 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -                       Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda     -            Director 
3. Shri G.C. Prasad              -                   Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal        -              Deputy Secretary  
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Shri Janardan Mishra 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
9. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. 
11. 
 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Anil Desai 
12. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
13. 
14. 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
Shri M. Shanmugam 

37 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
(Commercial, Coordination & 
Local Bodies and Chairman, Audit 
Board) 
2. Dr. Kavita Prasad - Director General (Commercial)-I 
2. Ms. Ritika Bhatia - Director General (Commercial)-II 
3. Shri Deepak Kapoor - Director General (Infrastructure) 
4. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh - Director General (Parliamentary 
Committees) 
5. Shri S. Ahlladini Panda     -  Principal Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES, 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Malhotra - Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Agrawal -  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Lalit Kumar Chandel - Economic Advisor 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the officers of 
C&AG at the sitting convened to take evidence of the representatives of Department 
of Financial Services  in connection with examination of Para No. 5.2 of C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2020  regarding ‘Avoidable loss due to extension of loan in 
terminated projects’ relating to IIFCL . The representatives of O/o CAG then made 
a brief presentation on the important issue s pertaining to the subject. Audit pointed 
out the two cases of loan extended under ‘Takeout Finance Scheme’ by IIFCL to 
Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RWMPL) and Bhilai Drug Waste 
Management Private Limited (BDWMPL) without obtaining No Objectio n Certificate 
from the Consessioning Authorities.  These loans eventually turned into NPAs and 
an amount of Rs. 26.20 crore for these cases had to be written off. 
 
(The representatives of DFS were then called in.) 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representa tives of DFS and drew their 
attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality 
of evidence before the Parliamentary Committees. Hon’ble Chairperson emphasized 
on important aspects of IIFCL and sought to be apprised on  two project loans to 

38 
BDWMPL and RWMPL sanctioned and disbursed under ‘Takeout Finance Scheme’ 
after the termination of the projects without ensuring compliance of critical 
requirement of obtaining ‘No Objection Certificate’ from Concessioning Authorities 
turning them into NPAs. Chairperson also sought clarifications on various safeguards 
provided by the Ministry to the IIFCL before finalizing schemes such as ‘Takeout 
Finance Scheme’. 
4. Thereafter, the r epresentatives of the DFS gave clarification on vario us 
aspects about the two projects i.e. BDWMPL and RWMPL. The representatives of 
the Department clarified that before disbursement of loans to both the companies, 
requirement of Debt Service Coverage ratio was ascertained and further pointed out 
that the loans to BDWMPL and RWMPL were disbursed before the termination of the 
projects, etc. 
5. The Members then raised various issues such as loopholes in concession 
agreement, need for tripartite concession agreements, provision of site visit before 
disbursal of every loan, mechanism to check the progress of the projects, status of 
provision of tripartite agreements etc. 
6. The representatives of the DFS clarified issues on which information was 
readily available with them. In respect of some points for which info rmation was not 
readily available, the Chairperson desired that written replies may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
 
/---------------------/ 

39 
APPENDIX IV 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2022-2023) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28 th July, 2022 from 1500 Hrs. to  
1600 Hrs. in Committee Room No. 3, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
       1.     Shri V K Tripathi           -              Joint Secretary                       
   2.  Shri Santosh Kumar     -   Director 
   3. Shri G.C. Prasad           -                 Additional Director 
  4. Smt. Mriganka Achal     - Deputy Secretary 
Lok Sabha 
     2. 
     3. 
     4. 
     5. 
     6. 
Shri  Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
Sh. Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
 
Shri Syed Nassir Hussain 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Prakash Javadekar 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 

40 
2. At the outset, t he Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and apprised them about the agenda for the sitting.  The Committee then 
considered and adopted the draft report on “C&AG Audit Para No. 5.2 of Report No. 
18 of 2020 regarding avoidable loss due to extension of loan in terminated projects 
relating to India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL)” without any 
changes/modifications. The Committee thereafter authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize the report on the basis of factual verification by  the concerned 
Ministry/Department and consider for presenting the report during the current 
session of the Parliament. 
 
The witnesses of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL)  
were then called in. 
 
4.       xxxxxxx                         xxxxxxxx                                               xxxxxxx 
 
5.    xxxxxxx                            xxxxxxx                                          xxxxxxx  
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 
 
  
 