33 
 
 
BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED (BSNL) 
 
SETTING UP OF 25, 000 WI-FI HOTSPOTS IN BSNL 
RURAL TELEPHONE EXCHANGES  
 
[BASED ON C&AG PARA NO. 4.2 OF REPORT NO.                    
16 OF 2023] 
 
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
(MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-26) 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
 
 
II 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED (BSNL) 
 
SETTING UP OF 25, 000 WI-FI HOTSPOTS IN BSNL RURAL 
TELEPHONE EXCHANGES 
 
[BASED ON C&AG PARA NO. 4.2 OF REPORT NO.  16 OF 
2023] 
 
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
(MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on Para No. 4.2 of C&AG Report No. 16 of 2023 of 
C&AG relating to Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL)] 
 
 
 
      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 August, 2026  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Shravana, 1948(Saka) 


 
 
 
III 
 
CPU No. 1089 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha ( Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 
001. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
IV 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2026-27)…………… 
  
V 
  INTRODUCTION…………………………. 
  
VII 
CHAPTER I      REPORT…………………….  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………………. 
  
21 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government 
Replies………………. 
  
47 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration………. 
  
48 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim 
replies…………………………….  
51 
 ANNEXURE  
I Independent Review of “Setting up of 25,000 Wi-Fi Hotspots in 
BSNL Rural Telephone Exchanges” 
52 
II Impact Assessment Report of 25,000 Wi-Fi Hotspots   98 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 3.8.2026 108 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth 
Report (18thLS) of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2025-26) on ‘Para No. 4.2 of Report No. 16 of 2023 on setting 
up of 25,000 Wi -Fi Hotspots in BSNL Rural Telephone 
Exchanges’.……………………………………………… 
110 
  

 
 
 
V 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2026-27) 
Shri Baijayant Panda - Chairperson 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
7. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
9. Shri Rajeev Rai 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Prof. Sougata Ray 
13. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
19. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Vacant* 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 

 
 
 
VI 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Pawan Kumar - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
*Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Debashish Samantaray from the membership 
of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 May,2026 vide Rajya Sabha Builletin Part-II No. 66428 
 
  

 
 
 
VII 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (202 6-27) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-third 
Report on  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Setting up of 25,000 Wi -Fi Hotspots in BSNL Rural Telephone Exchanges’ 
[Based on Para No. 4.2 of C&AG Report No. 16 of 2023]. 
2.  The Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2025. 
The Action taken Replies to all the 13 recommendations contained in the Report were 
received from the Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communicatio ns           
on 25 March, 2026. 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held                      
on 3 August, 2026. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
4.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Committee 
(18th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
New Delhi:   
03 August, 2026  
12 Shravana, 1948(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA  
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

 
 
 
1 
 
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings regarding ‘Setting up of 25,000 Wi -Fi Hotspots in 
BSNL Rural Telephone Exchanges based on C&AG Para  No. 4.2 of Report no. 16 of 
2023’, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2025. It contained 
13observations/recommendations. 
2.  Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
12 observations/recommendations of the Committee. The Committee will now deal with 
the Action Taken by the Government on some of the Observations/Recommendations in 
the succeeding paragraphs.  The introductory paragraphs (  Sr. No. 1 ) was general 
observations, on which the Ministry did not offer specific comments. 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
Sl.Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13. 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 12) 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Nil 
  (Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii)   
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration.    
Sl.No.4  
(Chapter IV) 
(Total: 01) 
 
  (iv)   
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                      
Nil  
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total: 00) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire  the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) to furnish final Action Taken Notes/replies in respect of 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2 
 
SELECTION OF 25,000 WI-FI HOTSPOTS WITHOUT DUE DILIGENCE 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report, had recommended as under:- 
  "The Committee observe that BSNL missed to conduct a proper feasibility 
study before selecting 25,000 rural telephone exchanges as Wi -Fi Hotspot 
locations. Many of these exchanges had already been identified as unviable due 
to low subscriber numbers. Audit findings showed that some locations were later 
shut down or relocated, leading to unproductive expenditure. BSNL had issued 
internal directives to close rural exchanges with fewer than 20 Direct Exchange 
Lines (DELs), yet it proceeded with the installation  of Wi-Fi Hotspots in many of 
these locations. Thus, lack of due prudence led to inefficiencies and financial 
losses.  
 
  BSNL’s justification citing technological changes and declining landline use 
as reasons for project shortcomings reflects reactive planning rather than proactive 
due diligence. While commissioning 97% of hotspots sounds substantial, failure to 
assess viabi lity of rural exchanges beforehand indicates a lack of strategic 
foresight and risk assessment. The DoT’s response further downplays the project's 
inefficiencies by focusing on deployment numbers and usage data, while 
sidestepping accountability for approving a technically outdated and commercially 
unviable proposal. The commitment to transparency and improved monitoring is a 
positive step, but it also implicitly acknowledges systemic lapses in planning and 
oversight. Thus, both BSNL and DoT responses ref lect a pattern of post -hoc 
rationalization rather than a transparent admission of flawed planning and 
oversight.  
 
  Taking into consideration the above, the Committee are of the view that 
BSNL underperformed in assessing feasibility and technology relevance, while 
DoT missed in its regulatory and funding oversight. Though remedial actions have 
been taken, they come only  after unproductive expenditures and substantial 
inefficiencies were exposed by audit scrutiny. The case, thus, underscores the 
need for future telecom projects to be guided by rigorous viability studies, flexible 
technology planning and accountable gove rnance mechanisms. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that since, BSNL’s reliance on outdated 2G/3G technology 
and lack of foresight has time and again highlighted the need for technology 
foresightedness in project planning, hence, future rural connectivi ty projects be 
conceptualised with robust pre -project due diligence including thorough techno -
economic feasibility assessments to ensure infrastructure viability and alignment 
with current and emerging technologies such as 4G and 5G. BSNL must establish 
accountability mechanisms to address lapses in execution, with regular 

 
 
 
3 
 
performance audits and clearly defined responsibilities. Additionally, the 
Committee urge DoT to ask BSNL for institutionalisation of dynamic, real -time 
monitoring systems —such as PMIS (Project Monitoring & Information System) – 
a centralized digital platform to track the progress of telecom infrastructure projects 
in real -time, a prevalent practice in telecom sector, SLAs (Service Level 
Agreements) - Contractual agreements between service providers (like BSNL) and 
funding or regulatory bodies (such as DoT or DBN (Digital Bharat Nidhi) that define 
the expected quality, uptime, performance standards and penalties for non -
compliance and third-party evaluations—to ensure overall transparency and timely 
course correction. To enhance sustainability, projects sho uld include adaptive 
frameworks that allow mid-execution adjustments and incorporate viable revenue 
models to shift user perception away from expecting free services. Emphasis have 
to be also placed on leveraging shared infrastructure like BharatNet and promoting 
last-mile solutions such as FTTH and PM-WANI to improve reach and efficiency in 
rural telecommunications delivery.” 
 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
"BSNL on the directions from DoT and in line with the Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
initiative of the Government of India, invited Expression of Interest (Eol) on 1st 
January 2021 thereby providing an opportunity to the indigenous manufacturers to 
technically prove their pro duct by participation in the proof of concept. Further, 
BSNL placed a purchase order of one lakh eNodeBs (Base Trans receiver 
Stations) and associated core equipment’s on pan India basis including Delhi and 
Mumbai License Service area (LSA) of MTNL on turn key basis under Phase IX.2 
of the Project. Out of one lakh eNodeBs, total 97,797 eNodeBs have been installed 
and 95,892 eNodeBs are on air as on 15.2.2026. BSNL has also planned 
additional 26,298 eNodeBs to increase the coverage and capacity of the mobile 
network under add -on order against which advance purchase orders have been 
issued on 20.5.2025 to M/s TCS and M/s ITI. 
For project implementation, BSNL has implemented a digital dashboard for 
milestone tracking and for effective coordination which is also accessible to all 
authorities, including the funding agency. 
In respect of Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) funded projects: 
(a) Mobile projects: A dedicated digital platform has been developed by 
BSNL for comprehensive project monitoring of ongoing mobile 
projects. Additionally, DBN has also developed an AI-based evaluation 
tool to enable near real-time monitoring of progress of mobile projects. 
 

 
 
 
4 
 
(b) Amended BharatNet Program (ABP): For implementation and 
monitoring, a project monitoring tool which has been developed by 
BSNL for monitoring of the project milestone and deliverables. Further, 
DBN has developed a Claim Settlement and Management System 
(CSMS) for monitoring milestone-based payments. 
(c) BharatNet Unified Network Management System has been integrated 
with BSNL Operations Support Systems and Business Support 
Systems for near real -time monitoring of FibreTo The Home (FTTH) 
connections. 
(d) Further, to ensure accountability, the 4G Saturation Agreement 
executed between DBN and BSNL includes provisions relating to 
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and Quality of Service (QoS) 
standards as prescribed by TRAI. The framework also provides for 
performance evaluation, including through third -party audits, and 
incorporates penalty provisions linked to network uptime. 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the comprehensive reply provid ed by the 
Government while noting the proactive steps taken by Bharat Sanchar Nigam 
Limited to strengthen its technology adoption and project implementation 
framework. The large -scale rollout of indigenous 4G infrastructure, including 
installation and commissioning of a substantial number of Evolved Node Bs across 
the C ountry, is a significant step towards modernising telecom services and 
enhancing digital connectivity. The Committee further commend the  efforts made 
under the Digital Bharat Nidhi framework, particularly the development of digital 
dashboards, AI-based monitoring tools and integrated project monitoring systems 
for real -time tracking of project progress and deliverables. The Committee also 
appreciate the incorporation of structured mechanisms such as Service Level 
Agreements (SLAs), Quality of Service (QoS) standards prescribed by Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India, third -party audits and penalty provisions linked to 
performance, which re flect a clear intent towards enhancing transparency, 
accountability and efficiency in execution of telecom projects. The integration of 
monitoring platforms like PMIS and the Claim Settlement and Management System 
(CSMS) further demonstrates a shift toward s data -driven governance and 
improved financial oversight. The Committee are of the view that these forward -
looking measures, particularly the focus on indigenous technology, real -time 

 
 
 
5 
 
monitoring and structured accountability frameworks, are in line with the spirit of 
the Committee’s recommendations. The Committee are confident that these 
initiatives will significantly improve project planning, execution and service 
delivery in future rural connectivity projects. The Committee would, however, like 
to emphasise that the effectiveness of these measures would depend upon their 
sustained and verifiable implementation, and therefore desire that clear 
performance benchmarks, measurable outcome indicators and defined timelines 
for execution be put in place and periodically reviewed. The Committee further 
expect that responsibility for implementation of these mechanisms be clearly 
delineated at all levels, and that any deviation from prescribed st andards be duly 
recorded and promptly acted upon. The Committee would, however, like to be kept 
informed about the sustained implementation of these measures and their tangible 
impact on ensuring better feasibility assessment, efficient utilisation of reso urces 
and improved outcomes in upcoming telecom infrastructure initiatives, including 
through periodic status reports indicating progress against targets, challenges 
encountered and corrective measures undertaken thereof. 
 
LOSS OF OPEX SUBSIDY AMOUNTING TO ₹1.15 CRORE  
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 4) 
8. The Committee, in their Report, had expressed concern over the loss of OPEX 
subsidy due to delays and failures in commissioning Wi -Fi Hotspots and urged 
institutionalise internal accountability procedures to review financial setbacks and assign 
responsibility: 
  "The Committee note that BSNL incurred a loss of ₹1.15 crore in 
Operational Expenditure (OPEX) subsidy due to delays and failures in 
commissioning Wi -Fi Hotspots under the USOF supported project. The Audit 
reported that out of the 24,333 hotspots that BSNL finally chose to commission, 
700 were commissioned after the eligible subsidy period and 8 were never 
commissioned. Despite BSNL's decision to repurpose 1,500 pre acquired hotspots 
from its Mobile Data Offload (MDO) Project in June 2017, only 27 were 
commissioned within the stipulated one month target - just 1.8% of the intended 
number. This performance shortfall directly led to the subsidy loss of ₹108.36 lakh 
for the delayed sites and ₹6.88 lakh for the uncommissioned ones. Thus, BSNL 
suffered a loss of ₹1.15 crore in Operational Expenditure (OPEX) subsidy due to 

 
 
 
6 
 
delayed or non -commissioning of Wi -Fi Hotspots under the rural connectivity 
initiative. The Committee find this financial setback especially concerning given the 
critical need for fiscal prudence in Public Sector Undertakings and the high 
strategic value of rural connectivity. 
 
  BSNL, in its submissions, attributed the subsidy loss to delays in equipment 
supply and site readiness, compounded by challenges like poor power supply, 
inadequate manpower post-VRS and the operational difficulties brought on by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. It f urther cited low revenue realization from Wi -Fi services 
and changing consumer preferences toward mobile data as reasons for project 
underperformance. BSNL claimed that it has introduced remedial measures such 
as revised Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and engagement with local partners 
on a revenue-sharing model for future deployments. However, the Committee note 
that BSNL did not conduct any formal inquiry to fix accountability for the avoidable 
subsidy loss. DoT, on its part, highlighted that relevant penalty provisions exist 
within the agreement and that oversight was exercised through Project Monitoring 
Units and third -party verifications. Yet, there was no evidence of these 
mechanisms being effectively activated to avert financial losses, nor was the re 
clarity on how the findings influenced future policy enforcement. 
 
  The Committee are of the view that the OPEX subsidy loss amounting to 
₹1.15 crore represents not merely a financial lapse, but a failure in both planning 
and accountability on the part of BSNL and regulatory oversight by DoT. The loss 
of subsidy is particu larly disconcerting given that these funds were essential for 
supporting non -remunerative rural operations and enhancing last -mile 
connectivity. Despite the availability of pre -procured equipment and predefined 
timelines, the inability to deploy even a fra ction of the committed infrastructure 
within deadline reflects systemic inefficiencies. This situation reflects a critical 
operational gap with financial consequences. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that BSNL institutionalise internal accountability procedures to review 
financial setbacks and assign responsibility. For future projects, subsidy 
disbursement must be linked to milestone -based performance metrics for fund 
release certified by independent monitoring agencies. In addition to this, DoT must 
ensure rigorous pre-approval appraisal of technical and financial projections and 
contingency plans as part of every project design. Additionally, DoT and BSNL 
should jointly conduct a financial impact study of the Wi -Fi Hotspot project and 
submit a status report before the Committee within six months. Further, DoT 
should expedite the integration of digital oversight tools such as Project 
Management Information System (PMIS), Geographic Information System (GIS) 
mapping and Remote Fiber Monitoring System (RFM S) across all ongoing and 
upcoming rural connectivity schemes to ensure real time monitoring and course 

 
 
 
7 
 
correction. 
 
9.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
"Suitable instructions as per the recommendations of the committee has 
been provided to BSNL field units. Further, the monitoring mechanism 
implemented for current projects has enabled periodical review (financial and 
physical progress), which is carried ou t regularly. With regard to the suggestion 
that fund disbursement be linked to milestone -based performance metrics and 
fund release is duly certified by independent monitoring agencies, it is submitted 
that for release of payments under the Amended BharatNet Program, Independent 
Engineer has been engaged for verification of milestones & performance metrices 
before payment. With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding ensuring of 
rigorous pre -approval appraisal of technical and financial projections a nd 
contingency plans as part of every project design, it is submitted that the financial 
projections for the Amended BharatNetProgramme was duly appraised by the 
Expenditure Finance committee (EFC). In respect of technology implications, the 
proposal has been considered by Empowered Technology Group (ETG) and the 
ETG has recommended the proposal for Cabinet Approval.In compliance of 
paragraphs 2.4.8 and 2.5.2 of the agreement dated 9.6.2017 for 25,000 Wi-Fi hot 
spot project signed between erstwhile Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) 
and BSNL, impact assessment study has been done and the summary of findings 
is at Annexure II.  
In respect of DBN-funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) For mobile projects, a dedicated digital platform has been developed by 
BSNL for comprehensive project monitoring. Additionally, DBN has developed an 
AI-based evaluation tool to enable near real -time monitoring of physical progress 
of the project. 
(b) Prevalent IT technologies and tools as used by industry like Geographic 
Information System (GIS) mapping, monitoring of network by Central Network 
Operating Centre (C-NoC) and use of Remote Fibre Management System (RFMS) 
for monitoring of fibre are bei ng used for implementation of Amended BharatNet 
Program.  
10.      The Committee are content to note the steps taken by the Ministry towards 
strengthening monitoring mechanisms, adoption of milestone -based fund 
disbursement with independent verification, and improved appraisal processes, 
along with the deployment of digi tal tools for enhanced project oversight. The 
Committee also take note of the impact assessment study based on varied 

 
 
 
8 
 
technical parameters and its social impact on users, among others. However, the 
Committee observe that their specific recommendation regarding instituting an 
internal accountability mechanism within BSNL for reviewing financial setbacks 
and assigning responsibility appears not to be fully reflected in the response. While 
the measures taken for improving oversight in ongoing and future projects are 
noted, the response remains limited in addressing the need for a structured 
internal review of the lapses that led to the loss of OPEX subsidy amounting to 
₹1.15 crore in the Wi -Fi Hotspot project. The Committee are of the view that the 
absence of such a mechanism may need further emphasis in understanding the 
overall effectiveness of the corrective measures report ed. The Committee would, 
however, emphasise that a time -bound and clearly structured internal 
accountability framework be instituted within BSNL, with defined roles and 
responsibilities at each level, along with measurable indicators for tracking 
financial and operational lapses. The Committee further expect that findings of 
such internal reviews be formally documented, periodically evaluated, and acted 
upon through appropriate corrective and disciplinary measures to ensure 
deterrence and institutional lear ning. In view of all the above, the Committee 
reiterate that BSNL may put in place a suitable internal mechanism to 
systematically review financial shortfalls and clearly define responsibility within 
the project implementation framework, so as to strengthen overall governance and 
guard against recurrence of such instances. The Committee also desire that 
periodic status reports on action taken, including progress  made, deficiencies 
identified and remedial steps undertaken, be submitted for review. 
REVENUE GENERATION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF THE SCHEME  
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 7) 
11. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended as under: 
  "The Committee note with concern that BSNL missed to achieve the 
envisaged revenue target of ₹75 crore for the year 2018 -19, earning only ₹3.09 
lakh during the entire period from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22, with no revenue targets 
fixed thereafter. Despite a clear agreement clause mandating paid usage post a 
six month trial period, BSNL continued to provide free Wi -Fi services until 
December 2022 without prior approval from DoT. This non compliance severely 

 
 
 
9 
 
undermined the financial sustainability of the scheme. The Committee also 
observe that while the infrastructure was utilized by rural users, evident from 
significant data consumption during the free period, it missed to convert this usage 
into paid subscriptions. 
 
  BSNL, in their submission to the Committee, has attributed the poor 
revenue generation to factors such as the rise of affordable and high -speed 4G 
services, closure of rural exchanges and the widespread public perception that Wi-
Fi is a free service. Also, the usage drastically dropped outside the free period 
despite BSNL’ s attempts to introduce prepaid plans and partner with digital 
payment platforms. The Committee observe that DoT, while acknowledging the 
issue, did not effectively intervene or enforce agreement compliance, which further 
contributed to the lack of account ability. Now, both BSNL and DoT have shifted 
focus towards integrating Wi -Fi services with BharatNet and FTTH connections 
under programs like the 4G Saturation Scheme and Amended BharatNet Program 
(ABP). However, continued reliance on Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) support and 
absence of a market aligned monetization strategy raises questions on the long -
term viability of such standalone Wi-Fi hotspot projects. 
 
  The Committee are of the view that failure to adhere to agreement terms, 
lack of proactive market analysis and delayed corrective action led to revenue 
shortfall, rendering the scheme unsustainable. To ensure financial viability and 
optimal utilization of public funds, the Committee recommend that BSNL must 
strictly enforce paid usage models after any trial period and avoid prolonged free 
usage without DoT approval. Also, future Wi -Fi or similar digital connectivity 
projects must include comprehensive market research, enforceable sustainability 
clauses and a hybrid revenue model incorpo rating advertisement support, 
integration with government services and bundling with FTTH and mobile plans. 
Further, DoT must strengthen its oversight and monitoring mechanisms to enforce 
compliance and evaluate project outcomes periodically. The terms of future 
agreements should be revised to reflect changing market dynamics and encourage 
financially viable partnerships, especially leveraging the BharatNet infrastructure 
for service delivery and monetization.” 
 
12.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
"BSNL is giving FibreTo The Home (FTTH) connections through BharatNet 
under postpaid billing model. DBN is not only giving Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) 
subsidy for provision of connections but also giving incentive for retention of 
customers.The model adopte d in Amended BharatNet Program has been based 
on the successful completion of pilot project of Five lakh rural FTTH connections 

 
 
 
10 
 
through BharatNet network.  Bharat Net Udyami (BNU) is being roped in by BSNL 
for providing FTTH connections using BharatNet. Further, BSNL, is responsible for 
carrying out branding, publicity and awareness campaign regarding 
implementation of Amended BharatNet Program. 
Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) has developed the following oversight and monitoring 
mechanisms for its following projects: 
(a) For 4G mobile projects, Project monitoring tool is used for monitoring and 
verification by Third Party Agency (TPAs) have been introduced. Further, AI-based 
evaluation tool to enable near real-time monitoring of physical progress of mobile 
towers has been implemented by DBN.  
(b) For implementation of ABP a dedicated digital project monitoring tool has 
been developed by BSNL for comprehensive project monitoring. Further, prevalent 
IT technologies used by industry like GIS mapping, monitoring by central NOC and 
Remote Fibre Mana gement System (RFMS) are being used for ABP 
implementation. 
(c) In ABP Independent Engineers have been provisioned who shall verify 
project milestone before capex payment and verify Service Level agreement (SLA) 
for O&M payment. 
(d) Controller of Communication Accounts (CCAs) has been designated as 
Designated Monitoring Agency (DMA) as DoT field units to monitor the 
implementation of this DBN project. The penalties for non -compliance of network 
uptime and rollout schedules are to be verified by CCAs in BSNL bills by way of 
cross verification with Network Management System (NMS) reports. Independent 
Engineer (IE) for proper monitoring and Service Level Agreements (SLA) based 
payments have been provisioned in future projects like ABP. 
Utilisation agreement under Amended BharatNet Program has been signed by 
BSNL with DBN and it has provision for mid-term review thorough it the conditions 
of the agreement if required can be modified as per revised requirements."  
13. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by Bharat Sanchar Nigam 
Limited under the guidance of the Department of Telecommunications in moving 
towards a more sustainable and structured model for rural connectivity. The 
Committee note positively that FibreT o The Home (FTTH) services are being 
provided under a postpaid billing model through BharatNet, along with incentives 
for customer retention, which reflects a shift towards revenue -based service 
delivery. Further, the adoption of the BharatNet Udyami model  for last -mile 

 
 
 
11 
 
connectivity and the emphasis on branding, awareness and village -level outreach 
indicate a more integrated approach to improve  service up take. The Committee 
also appreciate  the strengthening of monitoring and oversight mechanisms 
through digital project monitoring tools, AI -based evaluation systems, GIS 
mapping, Remote Fibre Management Systems (RFMS), and involvement of 
Independent Engineers and third -party agencies, which t ogether enhance 
transparency and accountability. The provision for mid-term review of agreements 
under the Amended BharatNet Program is also a positive step, enabling flexibility 
to adapt evolving requirements. The Committee further note that these initiatives 
reflect a gradual shift towards improving financial sustainability and service 
delivery in rural telecom projects. The Committee are of the view that continued 
emphasis on strengthening revenue models, ensuring effective implementation of 
paid service frameworks, and leveraging integrated infrastructure would further 
enhance the long-term viability of such initiatives. The Committee would, however, 
like to point out that the effectiveness of these measures must be ensured through 
sustained and verifiable implementation, as well as time bound revenue targets. 
The Committee would also like the Ministry to strengthen adherence to paid service 
frameworks alongwith clearly fixed compliance agreement conditions at 
appropriate levels, and that deviations, including any unauthorised continuation of 
free services, be duly recorded and acted upo n. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that these measures be consistently implemented and further built upon so as to 
ensure optimal utilisation of infrastructure, improved user adoption and 
sustainable growth of rural connectivity services. The Committee also desire that 
periodic status reports indicating progress in revenue realisation, user conversion 
rates, challenges faced and corrective measures undertaken be submitted for 
review. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
12 
 
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH IMPACT ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 8) 
 
14. The Committee in their report had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that as per Clauses 2.4.8 and 2.5.2 of the Agreement, 
BSNL was required to appoint an independent agency and conduct an impact 
assessment within 6–12 months of signing the agreement. However, BSNL failed 
to comply with this requirement.  Instead of timely evaluations, BSNL issued 
instructions to circles for in -house assessments in October 2019 and January 
2020, which were delayed due to tendering issues, delays in site finalization and 
the COVID-19 lockdown. Eventually, impact assessments were conducted in only 
806 exchanges and submitted to USOF by November 2022, well beyond the 
stipulated timeline. The C&AG observed that BSNL’s failure to complete the 
evaluation on time hindered assessment of service quality, infrastructure 
adequacy and commercial viability, contributing to continued underperformance 
and inefficient use of public funds.  
In their submission, BSNL attributed the delay in evaluation to procedural 
delays in issuing work orders, closure of unviable rural exchanges and the 
outbreak of COVID -19. While it claimed that assessments were eventually 
conducted with support from educat ional institutions, it admitted that no 
independent agency was appointed as mandated. Further, BSNL has proposed 
including a relaxation clause in future agreements for delays due to uncontrollable 
circumstances. Furthermore, the Company stated that public perception of Wi-Fi 
as a free service made monetization unfeasible and currently there is no plan to 
upgrade Wi -Fi technology. DoT, on its part, acknowledged the issue and 
highlighted that future projects such as the Amended BharatNet Program shall now 
include monitoring tools like PMIS, Third Party Audits (TPAs) and the appointment 
of Independent Engineers. However, the Committee find that neither BSNL nor 
DoT took proactive steps to ensure accountability for the missed timelines and 
there was little effor t to leverage the assessment findings to guide revenue 
strategies or policy refinements. 
The Committee are of the firm view that the lack of a timely and independent 
impact assessment undermined the project’s ability to gauge its effectiveness, 
adapt to market conditions and justify public expenditure. BSNL’s internal 
assessments, conducted well after the due period, lacked objectivity and missed 
to guide course corrections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in all 
future projects, independent third -party impact assessments must be mandated 
within 6–12 months of implementation, with appo intment of agencies done at the 
project’s inception. Assessment findings must be publicly disclosed and integrated 
into policy decisions. The Committee also recommend linking disbursement of 

 
 
 
13 
 
public funds to measurable impact metrics. BSNL should collaborate with 
academic and research institutions to carry out socio -economic evaluations and 
identify sustainable technology solutions. The DoT must also enforce strict 
compliance with evaluation re quirements and take corrective actions for 
deviations. Further, a policy framework for periodic evaluation and mid -course 
correction should be institutionalised across all USOF-funded programs”. 
15. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
For Amended BharatNet Program (ABP), Independent Engineers are monitoring 
project milestones and also monitor SLA for Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of 
ABP network. For 4G mobile projects, verification by Third Party Audit (TPAs) have 
also been introduced 
For Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) projects, funds are disbursed as per terms and 
conditions of the signed agreement. ABP payments are linked with deliverables 
based on project milestones and O&M payments are linked with Service Level 
Agreement. These are being monitored online through Project monitoring tool and 
claims are settled through Claim Settlement Management System portal.  
For DBN funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) For mobile projects provision of TPA is there, besides AI tool has been 
developed for monitoring of physical progress of the project. 
(b) For Amended BharatNet Program Independent Engineers shall do 
monitoring of program using online Project Monitoring tool and reports of Network 
operating Centre. 
.  
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding collaboration with academic 
and research institutions to carry out socio -economic evaluations and identify 
sustainable technology solutions, it is submitted that this suggestion has been duly 
communicated to BSNL for taking further necessary action to ensure the same.  
For Amended BharatNet Program (ABP), Steering committee under Chairmanship 
of Administrator DBN and Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary Telecom has been constituted for monitoring the implementation of 
Program and resolution of the implementation issues. 
Besides, there is provision in the Agreement signed with State/UTs for monitoring 
implementation of ABP in the State, wherein, monitoring of the program shall also 
be done by State Broadband Committee and by District level Telecom Committee. 
BharatNet Utilization agreement for Amended BharatNet Program has been 
signed by BSNL with DBN, wherein, it has provision for mid -term review, 
modifications of the conditions of the agreement if required. 

 
 
 
14 
 
 
16. The Committee acknowledge the steps taken by BSNL and DoT towards 
strengthening the monitoring and implementation mechanisms in respect of 
USOF/DBN-funded projects, including the deployment of Independent Engineers 
for the Amended BharatNetProgramme, introduction of Third -Party Audits in 
mobile projects, and establishment of multi -tier monitoring commit tees at the 
Central, State and District levels. The linkage of payments with project milestones 
and Service Level Agreements, along with the use of online monitoring and claim 
settlement systems, is also a positive development towards ensuring 
accountability and timely execution. The Committee further appreciate that 
provision for mid-term review and course correction has also been incorporated in 
the programme framework and that the suggestion regarding collaboration with 
academic and research institutions  has been duly communicated to BSNL. The 
Committee further expect that findings of such assessments be formally 
documented, systematically analysed and utilised for evidence -based policy 
formulation and project redesign, with accountability clearly fixed for any delay or 
deviation from prescribed norms. Further, the Committee observe that the critical 
aspect regarding the assessment findings that must be publicly disclosed and 
integrated into policy decisions has not been adequately addressed. The 
Committee are of the view that continued progress in this direction would help 
promote greater transparency and support evidence-based policymaking in future 
programmes. 
ADDRESSING CHALLENGES IN RURAL CONNECTIVITY AND LONG-TERM 
OPERATIONS 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 10) 
17. The Committee in their Fourteenth Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that BSNL and DoT face significant challenges in 
providing telecom services, particularly Wi-Fi and broadband, in rural and remote 
areas. These challenges include lack of physical infrastructure such as power 
supply, road access and back haul connectivity, as well as Right of Way (RoW) 
issues and low Return on Investment (RoI). Despite these difficulties, BSNL has 

 
 
 
15 
 
connected over 50,000 villages with FTTH services through local partners and has 
proposed forming dedicated teams for Wi -Fi hotspot projects. USOF provides 
limited OPEX support and BSNL has introduced revised tariff plans to improve 
service viability in ru ral areas. The Committee does appreciate these efforts but 
recognized the need for a more systemic and sustainable approach. 
  BSNL’s submissions acknowledge the structural difficulties of deploying 
and maintaining networks in rural regions and rely heavily on local partnerships 
and OPEX support for operations. However, the Committee observe that these 
approaches, while helpful, lack scalability without corresponding investments in 
durable technology and R&D. Further, the DoT has initiated funding through the 
Telecom Technology Development Fund (TTDF) and is deploying mobile and 
BharatNet projects with SLA based incentives. Still , the lack of a comprehensive 
policy for long term sustainability and inadequate private sector participation 
remain critical gaps. Although FTTH connectivity is progressing, the Committee 
find the current model insufficient in addressing the compounded is sue of low 
demand, high cost and maintenance challenges. 
  While applauding the gains achieved by BSNL, the Committee note that a 
recent newspaper headline highlighted that BSNL had gained and private telecoms 
had lost one crore subscribers in the previous month. The Committee further 
observed that with this positive development and the commendable efforts of 
BSNL, it appears that things are now moving in a promising direction for the  
Company’s future. Going ahead with this spirit, the Committee recommend that 
BSNL and DoT develop a structured rural telecom strategy anchored in durable 
infrastructure, power independence (e.g., solar backups) and scalable partnership 
models. BSNL should leverage its local entrepreneur model more aggressively and 
expand use of mesh networks and other low -maintenance technologies. A 
centralized rural connectivity monitoring framework should be established, 
integrating data from PMIS, local partner performa nce and user feedback. The 
Committee further recommend that the Department of Telecommunications 
allocate a dedicated corpus under TTDF to fund development of rugged, low -cost 
equipment suited to remote areas. It must also instutionalise coordination 
mechanisms with State Governments to expedite RoW clearances and utility 
access. Periodic review of rural connectivity projects, with emphasis on reliability, 
usage patterns and financial health, must be conducted jointly by BSNL and DoT.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
With regard to the suggestion that BSNL to develop a strategy for durable 
infrastructure, power independence (e.g., solar backups) and scalable partnership 

 
 
 
16 
 
models, to leverage its local entrepreneur model, and expand use of mesh network 
and other low-maintenance technologies, the following is submitted: 
(a) Mobile project has provision of at least two power sources, i.e., grid power 
connectivity, battery and stand by power source (Diesel Generator/Solar) have 
been prescribed. 
(b) In Amended BharatNet Program (ABP) provision exists that Project 
Implementing Agency (PIA) has to provide smart rack at Block and GPs along with 
provision of separate electricity connection and provision of UPS for short term 
power failure. However, fo r GPs where there is no power or where there is more 
power outage, provision exist for installation of solar panel by the PIA. 
(c) The Amended BharatNet Program, for which BSNL is the program 
management agency, is being implemented in ring/mesh topology. 
(d) BSNL is leveraging local entrepreneur model for provision of fibre 
connectivity to homes. 
Project Management Information Systems tool for mobile project has been 
integrated through Application Programming Interface (API) with Network 
Operating Centre of execution agencies of DBN. This integration with Network 
Operating Centre of TSPs provides r eal-time information about physical progress 
and operation status.  
In respect of ABP, Project Monitoring tool have been developed by BSNL and is 
enabled through API with Central Network Operating Centre for project monitoring 
and operation and maintenance of BharatNet Network. 
In respect of committee recommendations to DoT the following is submitted: 
(a) The Telecom Technology Development Fund (TTDF) Scheme has been 
notified for domestic companies and institutions engaged in the design, 
development, and commercialization of telecommunication products and solutions. 
The scheme aims to enable affordable broadband and mobile services in rural and 
remote areas. It also provides funding support for development of rugged, low-cost 
equipment suited to such regions. 
(b) The Telecommunications (Right of Way) Rules, 2024 have been notified by 
DoT, and further on 1.1.2025, BharatNet has been notified as “Special Project” 
under these rules facilitating provision of deemed approval within seven days of 
application of submitted BharatNet cases.  
(c) Besides, provision of Call Before u Dig (CBuD) through an online platform 
has been developed by DoT, an initiative to encourage minimal or no damages to 
underground assets while carrying out any digging activity.  

 
 
 
17 
 
(d) DoT has developed an online portal for monitoring of RoW applications, 
monitoring the Application to further Track and Manage Telecom Right of Way 
permissions seamlessly and State (s) have been persuaded to have their own 
RoW portals for online resolut ion of RoW issues. Projects and schemes are 
reviewed regularly at various levels in DoT. 
For Amended BharatNet Program, Steering committee under Chairmanship of 
Administrator DBN and Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary Telecom has been constituted with concerned officers of BSNL and DBN 
/DoT as members, these committees shall regularly monitor the implementation of 
Program and to resolve the implementation issues. 
 
19. The Committee are happy to  note the initiatives taken by BSNL and DoT in 
addressing various aspects of rural connectivity, including provision of multiple 
power sources, incorporation of solar solutions, adoption of ring/mesh topology 
under the Amended Bharat  Net Programme and leveraging of local entrepreneur 
models by BSNL. The Committee further note the development of Project 
Monitoring tools, integration with Network Operating Centres for real -time 
monitoring, and steps taken under the Telecom Technology Develop ment Fund 
(TTDF) Scheme for promoting indigenous, low -cost solutions. The measures 
undertaken for expediting Right of Way clearances and strengthening coordination 
mechanisms are also n oted. Further, the Committee note that the constitution of 
Steering and Empowered Committees to monitor the implementation of rural 
connectivity projects under the Amended Bharat Net Programme with participation 
of BSNL and DoT. While this provides a framework for periodic review, the 
Committee observe that the reply may not fully touch upon aspects such as 
reliability, usage patterns and financial health. The Committee would, therefore, 
highlight the value of clearly outlining these key parameters, namely reliability of 
services, usage patterns and financial health, through appropriate measurable 
indicators and incorporating them in a structured manner into the monitoring 
framework, with periodic review against agreed benchmarks and timelines. T he 
Committee further expect that responsibility for monitoring these parameters be 
clearly assigned, and that any gaps identified be promptly addressed through 
targeted corrective measures to ensure effectiveness of rural connectivity 
initiatives. The Committee furthe r desire that these key parameters be duly 
incorporated in the monitoring mechanism to ensure comprehensive evaluation of 
the projects. 
 
 

 
 
 
18 
 
STRENGTHENING BORDER AREA CONNECTIVITY AND NATIONAL SECURITY 
CONCERNS 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 11) 
 
20. The Committee, in their Report, had expressed concern over the Strengthening 
Border Area Connectivity and National Security Concerns and recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that BSNL has deployed a wide network of mobile and 
fiber infrastructure in border areas of Punjab, with more than 2,000 BTS and 
56,650 Bharat Fiber connections. The mobile and broadband Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) in these areas are reportedly within TRAI benchmarks. However, 
concerns regarding security, spillage of foreign telecom signals and lack of 
seamless connectivity in strategic regions were raised during the course of 
evidence. DoT responded that surveys and coordination with security agencies are 
being conducted to monitor spillage along international borders and Line of Actual 
Control (LAC). BSNL also confirmed that it is engaging with MHA for security 
technology like portable jammers. 
While BSNL has confirmed satisfactory service performance in border 
districts and has cited multiple partnerships with state agencies for surveillance 
and connectivity projects, the Committee observe that national security 
requirements demand heightened vigilance and technological preparedness. The 
correspondence with MHA for deployment of security tools like jammers must be 
taken-up on priority. Also, DoT’s coordination with Law Enforcement Agencies and 
the Wireless Monitoring Organization (WMO) is appreci ated, but the Committee 
note that there is no long -term roadmap to secure border telecom zones or 
guidelines for emergency communication preparedness. 
The Committee recommend that DoT and BSNL jointly develop a Border 
Area Telecom Strategy (BATS) to ensure robust, secure and high -availability 
connectivity in strategic zones. This should include priority deployment of 
indigenous 4G/5G technology, redundan t backhaul connectivity and rapid 
response systems to address spillage and service disruption. Further, DoT must 
fast track coordination with MHA to facilitate timely deployment of portable 
jammers and anti-intrusion systems. Additionally, a real-time monitoring command 
centre should be established for high risk zones to integrate telecom operations 
with security protocols. BSNL must also expand partnerships with border area 
institutions and enhance FTTH and MPLS -VPN services to Government offices 
and public service points in these regions.” 
21. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
  “With regard to the Committee’s recommendation regarding a strategy for 

 
 
 
19 
 
desired connectivity in strategic zones, priority deployment of indigenous 4G/5G 
technology, redundant backhaul connectivity, the following is submitted:  
 
(a) Network For Spectrum (NFS), project envisages establishing optical fiber 
network for Defence Services in lieu of spectrum released by them. NFS 
is already being utilised operationally by Defense services.  Army network 
has been made operational in all six commands. Navy network including 
IP-MPLS has been commissioned and operational. Air Force Net has been 
commissioned and is also being used by Indian Air Force. 
(b) Under BharatNet, satellite connectivity at 1,409 Central Armed Police 
Force locations have been provided, including in strategic areas of the 
border States / Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh. 
(c) To ensure robust secure and high availability and connectivity in border 
areas DBN has funded the following three programs: 
 
(i) BOP-BIP project: 4G towers at 602 sites have been proposed and out 
of which 241 are on air. 
(ii) Border Area Development Project (BADP): 17,057 villages/habitations 
out of 17,611 BADP villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of 
remaining 554 villages/habitations, 442 villages/habitations are 
planned, while 64 habitations/villages are not planned due to nil 
populations / not traceable and 48 villages/habitations are under 
survey/planning. 
(iii) Vibrant Village Programme (VVP): 523 villages/habitations out of 662 
VVP villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of remaining 139 
villages, 99 are planned to provide coverage, 38 villages/habitations 
are not planned due to issues like nil population  or village/habitation 
not traceable, access issues, etc. and for two villages/habitations 
survey is pending. 
In all abovementioned sites, indigenous 4G technology has been deployed or 
planned to be deployed.  
 
  In regard to the Committee’s recommendation addressing spillage and 
service disruption and integration of telecom operations it is submitted that a 
project for setting up of a network of remote (unmanned) and manned monitoring 
stations at strategic locations along the international border to prevent cross border 
interference and control spillage signal is under implementation by DoT and the 
pilot project under this is targeted for commissioning by November 2026.  Further, 
as per extant international regul ations, spillage of radio signals and interference 
may be mitigated through bilateral coordination and special agreements with 

 
 
 
20 
 
neighbouring countries and if harmful interference cannot be resolved after 
bilateral efforts, the affected country may seek assistance from the 
Radiocommunication Bureau and the Radio Regulation Board of the International 
Telecommunication Union to resolve the issue. 
  As and when network becomes available in border and strategic areas, 
BSNL follows up with relevant Government departments, institutions and offices 
with a view to provide them telecom connectivity and to meet their telecom 
requirements”. 
 
22. The Committee appreciate the progress made under the V ibrant Village 
Programme, Border Area Development Project programs and the targeted 
deployment of indigenous technology. However, the Committee note that the 
proposed monitoring stations for signal spillage are still in the pilot stage. Given 
the national security implications, the Committee urge the DoT to fast -track this 
project and establish a permanent Command Centre for high -risk zones that 
integrates telecom operations with security protocols as originally recommended. 
The Committee would, however, emphasise that a clearly defined timeline for 
transition from pilot stage to full-scale operational deployment be established and 
adhered to, with periodic review of progress against specified milesto nes. The 
Committee further expect that roles and responsibilities for implementation and 
monitoring of such systems be explicitly delineated, and that any delays or 
deficiencies be promptly addressed through coordinated action among concerned 
agencies. The  Committee also desire that periodic status reports indicating 
progress, especially of the pilot project, challenges encountered and corrective 
measures undertaken informed to the Committee in due course. 
  

 
 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Overview 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 1) 
 
1. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) was established on 15th September 2000 
and began operations on 1st October 2000, providing telecom services across India 
except for Delhi and Mumbai.   It is a 100% Government-owned PSU with an authorized 
share capita l of ₹2,10,000 Crore and paid -up share capital Rs.1,08,117.51 Crore 
comprising of Rs.1,00,617.51 Crore Equity share capital and Rs. 7,500 Crore Preference 
shares capital as on 28.02.2025 having total income figure of Rs.15,603 crore during the 
FY2024-25 (u pto Dec, 2024).  Presently, BSNL has been offering wireline, mobile, 
broadband, FTTH, Wi-Fi and enterprise services, serving over 997.87 Lakh subscribers.  
Its mission focuses on customer satisfaction, technological advancements and affordable 
services, with an emphasis on rural connectivity.   BSNL partnered with the Universal 
Service Obligation Fund (USOF) to set up 25,000 rural Wi -Fi Hotspots.  The C&AG 
audited this aspect of BSNL’s performance from 2017-18 to 2021-22 and the Committee 
on Public Undertakings took-up examination of this Audit Para during 2024-25 term.   
The C&AG in their audit report observed and flagged important issues hereunder : -   (i) 
BSNL proposed setting up 25,000 Wi -Fi Hotspots in rural telephone exchanges without 
ensuring technological compatibility, as the network only supported 2G/3G while 4G was 
already operational;  (ii) BSNL missed to assess the viability of rural exchanges, leading 
to closures and relocations.  As a result, 13.77% of sites were either shut down or moved, 
making the expenditure on these Hotspots unproductive;  (iii) BSNL miss ed to  meet its 
June 2017 target of commissioning 1,500 Wi -Fi Hotspots within a month’s time i.e.  by 
July 2017, achieving only 27 out of 1500 Wi -Fi Hotspots (1.8%) by July 2017, despite 
having the required hardware; (iv) Due to delays and non -commissioning of sites, BSNL 
lost ₹1.15 crore in OPEX subsidies by December 2022; (v) Delay in commissioning 700 
Wi-Fi Hotspots across 10 telecom circles, with delays extending up to 790 days (26 
months) due to BSNL's one-year delay in awarding purchase orders.  As a result, USOF 
imposed liquidated damages of ₹81.84 lakh, of which ₹58.38 lakh was recovered from 
CAPEX subsidies that was payable to the circles; (vi) Failure to maintain the required 
99.99% uptime for rural Wi-Fi Hotspots, leading to a ₹60.71 crore penalty  for downtime.  
Despite spending ₹33.08 crore on AMC vendors, BSNL did not effectively monitor 
maintenance, resulting in widespread site failures at various circles —including 
no/insufficient power backup at Wi -Fi Hotspots, non -working/faulty Wi -Fi Hotspot s at 
sites, absence of conducting periodical testing as per clause 4.8 of the Agreement and 
non-generating of adequate revenue to meet the cost of AMCs, leading to failure of 

 
 
 
22 
 
maintenance of the Wi -Fi Hotspots;  (vii) Poor publicity, lack of appropriate bandwidth, 
power backup and faulty equipment contributed to declining and lack of user access and 
revenue.  The report concluded that BSNL's inefficiencies on account of non-institution of 
AMC and inadequate monitoring by BSNL compromised the scheme's success and 
financial viability; (viii) failure to generate significant revenue, earning only ₹3.09 lakh from 
2017-18 to 2021 -22 against a target of ₹75 crore for 2018 -19.  Despite s etting a tariff 
structure, BSNL continued offering free usage till December 2022 for all the 
commissioned Hotspots without seeking approval from DoT, violating the agreement and 
affecting revenue generation; and (ix) Failure to conduct a timely evaluation/ impact 
assessment of the Wi-Fi Hotspots as per the agreement that resulted in failure to access 
the quality of service, support infrastructure and sustainability of the scheme as factors 
responsible to determine the revenue potential and the optimum busine ss model for 
operation and maintenance.  Summing up, BSNL’s lack of oversight resulted in continued 
under performance of the scheme and also deprived access of rural population to network 
connectivity.   
The Committee, in its in-depth examination of the Audit Para, has not only scrutinised the 
issues directly at hand but has also delved into the broader challenges and other pertinent 
aspects that a Company like BSNL - a key Central Public Sector Undertakin g, playing a 
crucial role in extending telecom connectivity to even the most remote corners of the 
country - must address in order to perform effectively and remain relevant in the fast -
moving telecom sector, both globally and within India. The Committee is hopeful that the 
following recommendations will assist the Company and the Government in their efforts 
to bridge the digital divide in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.” 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
 
SELECTION OF 25,000 WI-FI HOTSPOTS WITHOUT DUE DILIGENCE 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 2) 
2. "The Committee observe that BSNL missed to conduct a proper feasibility study 
before selecting 25,000 rural telephone exchanges as Wi -Fi Hotspot locations. Many of 
these exchanges had already been identified as unviable due to low subscriber numbers. 
Audit findings showed that some locations were later shut down or relocated, leading to 
unproductive expenditure. BSNL had issued internal directives to close rural exchanges 
with fewer than 20 Direct Exchange Lines (DELs), yet it proceeded with the installation of 
Wi-Fi Hotspots in many of these locations. Thus, lack of due prudence led to inefficiencies 
and financial losses.  

 
 
 
23 
 
BSNL’s justification citing technological changes and declining landline use as reasons 
for project shortcomings reflects reactive planning rather than proactive due diligence. 
While commissioning 97% of hotspots sounds substantial, failure to assess viabi lity of 
rural exchanges beforehand indicates a lack of strategic foresight and risk assessment. 
The DoT’s response further downplays the project's inefficiencies by focusing on 
deployment numbers and usage data, while sidestepping accountability for approv ing a 
technically outdated and commercially unviable proposal. The commitment to 
transparency and improved monitoring is a positive step, but it also implicitly 
acknowledges systemic lapses in planning and oversight. Thus, both BSNL and DoT 
responses reflect a pattern of post-hoc rationalization rather than a transparent admission 
of flawed planning and oversight.  
Taking into consideration the above, the Committee are of the view that BSNL 
underperformed in assessing feasibility and technology relevance, while DoT missed in 
its regulatory and funding oversight. Though remedial actions have been taken, they 
come only after unproductive expenditures and substantial inefficiencies were exposed 
by audit scrutiny. The case, thus, underscores the need for future telecom projects to be 
guided by rigorous viability studies, flexible technology planning and accountable 
governance mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommend that since, BSNL’s 
reliance on outdated 2G/3G technology and lack of foresight has time and again 
highlighted the need for technology foresightedness in project planning, hence, future 
rural connectivity  projects be conceptualised with robust pre -project due diligence 
including thorough techno -economic feasibility assessments to ensure infrastructure 
viability and alignment with current and emerging technologies such as 4G and 5G. BSNL 
must establish acco untability mechanisms to address lapses in execution, with regular 
performance audits and clearly defined responsibilities. Additionally, the Committee urge 
DoT to ask BSNL for institutionalisation of dynamic, real-time monitoring systems —such 
as PMIS (Project Monitoring & Information System) – a centralized digital platform to track 
the progress of telecom infrastructure projects in real-time, a prevalent practice in telecom 
sector, SLAs (Service Level Agreements) - Contractual agreements between service 
providers (like BSNL) and funding or regulatory bodies (such as DoT or DBN (Digital 
Bharat Nidhi) that define the expected quality, uptime, performance standards and 
penalties for non-compliance and third-party evaluations—to ensure overall transparency 
and timely course correction. To enhance sustainability, projects should include adaptive 
frameworks that allow mid-execution adjustments and incorporate viable revenue models 
to shift user perception away from expecting free services. Emphasis have to be al so 
placed on leveraging shared infrastructure like BharatNet and promoting last -mile 
solutions such as FTTH and PM -WANI to improve reach and efficiency in rural 
telecommunications delivery.” 
 
 

 
 
 
24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"BSNL on the directions from DoT and in line with the Atma Nirbhar Bharat initiative of 
the Government of India, invited Expression of Interest (Eol) on 1st January 2021 thereby 
providing an opportunity to the indigenous manufacturers to technically prove their 
product by participation in the proof of concept. Fur ther, BSNL placed a purchase order 
of one lakh eNodeBs (Base Trans receiver Stations) and associated core equipment’s on 
pan India basis including Delhi and Mumbai License Service area (LSA) of MTNL on 
turnkey basis under Phase IX.2 of the Project. Out of one lakh eNodeBs, total 97,797 
eNodeBs have been installed and 95,892 eNodeBs are on air as on 15.2.2026. BSNL 
has also planned additional 26,298 eNodeBs to increase the coverage and capacity of 
the mobile network under add -on order against which advance p urchase orders have 
been issued on 20.5.2025 to M/s TCS and M/s ITI. 
For project implementation, BSNL has implemented a digital dashboard for milestone 
tracking and for effective coordination which is also accessible to all authorities, including 
the funding agency. 
In respect of Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) funded projects: 
(a) Mobile projects: A dedicated digital platform has been developed by 
BSNL for comprehensive project monitoring of ongoing mobile 
projects. Additionally, DBN has also developed an AI -based 
evaluation tool to enable near real -time monitoring of progress of 
mobile projects. 
 
(b) Amended BharatNet Program (ABP): For implementation and 
monitoring, a project monitoring tool which has been developed by 
BSNL for monitoring of the project milestone and deliverables. Further, 
DBN has developed a Claim Settlement and Management System 
(CSMS) for monitoring milestone-based payments. 
(c) BharatNet Unified Network Management System has been integrated 
with BSNL Operations Support Systems and Business Support 
Systems for near real -time monitoring of FibreTo The Home (FTTH) 
connections. 
(d) Further, to ensure accountability, the 4G Saturation Agreement 
executed between DBN and BSNL includes provisions relating to 
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and Quality of Service (QoS) 
standards as prescribed by TRAI. The framework also provides for 
performance evaluation, including through third -party audits, and 
incorporates penalty provisions linked to network uptime. 
 

 
 
 
25 
 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
DELAYED PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 3) 
 3. The Committee note that BSNL entered into an agreement with USOF on 
09.06.2017 with a stipulated completion period of six months for setting up 25,000 public 
Wi-Fi Hotspots in rural areas. However, BSNL failed to complete the project within the 
original ti meframe, resulting in multiple extensions —first, to November 2018, then, to 
December 2019 and finally, to December 2022. The Audit observed that these extensions 
were granted without levy of Liquidated Damages (LD), even though only hotspots 
commissioned by December 2019 were eligible for full OPEX subsidy. Moreover, BSNL, 
in an attempt to expedite rollout, had instructed all circles to commission 1,500 pre -
procured hotspots under the Mobile Data Offload (MDO) Project by July 2017, but 
managed to commission only 27. BSNL eventually short-closed 667 sites in 2022 due to 
unviability, with only 24,333 hotspots commissioned.  
BSNL, in its replies and oral evidence, attributed the delays to the GST transition, 
tendering delays, vendor performance issues and severe cash flow problems during 
2018-19. It stated that tender clarifications related to GST and PMA policy delayed the 
finalization of contracts and further operational hurdles emerged during site deployment, 
particularly in remote rural areas. Though BSNL has claimed to have learned lessons and 
improved its project management protocols, these measures seems to be largely a 
generalised reaction implemented after the project execution. Furthermore, while DoT 
stated that the rollout period was extended based on BSNL’s justifications and cited 
penalties imposed and physical verifications carried out by the O/o Controller of 
Communication Accounts (CCA), it missed to conduct a rigorous assessment of the 
justifications or enforce contractual penalties. Discrepancies in LD figures between DoT's 
and Audit’s accounts further highlight weaknesses in DoT’s oversight mechanisms. Thus, 
DoT’s reliance on routine verifications by CCAs and the absence of proactive 
enforcement further underline gaps in monitoring and accountability.  
The Committee is of the firm view that the delay in project implementation highlight 
serious lapses in BSNL’s planning, execution and management of the project. Despite 
having pre procured equipment, BSNL’s inability to mobilize resources and coordinate 
effectively reflects poor operational control. The Committee also note with concern the 
lack of rigor from DoT in assessing BSNL’s justifications for delay and the leniency in 
extending deadlines without enforcing LD provisions. Going forward, the Committee 
recommend that for all time -bound Government-funded telecom infrastructure projects, 
BSNL must develop a comprehensive Project Implementation Plan (PIP) with a digital 
dashboard for real -time milestone tracking. The Committee further recommend that for 

 
 
 
26 
 
all future time-bound infrastructure projects funded through public money, both BSNL and 
DoT must institute mandatory project risk registers, pre-defined escalation protocols and 
enforceable Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with vendors. DoT should ensure t hat 
extensions are granted only after rigorous evaluation and should mandatorily impose LDs 
for unjustified delays. Additionally, BSNL must institutionalize a real -time project 
monitoring dashboard, linked to measurable milestones, which is accessible to a ll 
oversight authorities, including the funding agency. A comprehensive post -project 
performance audit should also be conducted by DoT for this Wi -Fi Hotspot project to 
identify systemic weaknesses and apply the learnings to other ongoing projects and 
upcoming rural digital connectivity programs such as the 4G Saturation and BharatNet 
initiatives. 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL for project implementation has implemented a digital dashboard for milestone 
tracking for effective coordination which is accessible to all authorities, including the 
funding agency.  
In Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) funded mobile project, there are enabling provision in the 
agreement which is signed by DBN with project executing agency(ies). The provision 
includes Service Level Agreements (SLAs), project milestones and penalties. Besides 
pre-defined escalation protocol / matrix are also defined in the project and enforceable 
SLAs have been incorporated in the agreement. 
Extensions are granted only after proper evaluation and liquidated damages are imposed 
for unjustified delays.  
BSNL has developed online project monitoring tool for monitoring the implementation of 
Amended BharatNet Program (ABP). DBN has developed a claim settlement and 
management system for monitoring milestone -based payments . Further ABP has 
provision of Independent Engineers (IE) who shall carry out concurrent inspections and 
suggest corrective actions to Project Implementation Agency (PIA) during 
implementation.   
For 4G mobile projects, project monitoring tool is used and verification through Third Party 
Audits (TPA) have also been introduced. 
The work of post project performance of 25,000 Wi -Fi project has been assigned to an 
independent agency (M/s E&Y) and the report is submitted on 7.3.2026 (Annexure I). 
Future projects are being calibrated based on finding and learnings of this project.    
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 

 
 
 
27 
 
LEVY OF LIQUIDATED DAMAGES DUE TO DELAY IN COMMISSIONING OF WI-FI 
HOTSPOTS 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 5) 
4. The Committee note that BSNL incurred Liquidated Damages (LD) amounting to 
₹81.84 lakh due to delays of up to 790 days in commissioning 700 Wi-Fi Hotspots across 
10 telecom circles. These delays were attributed primarily to the BSNL Corporate Office’s 
delay of nearly one year in awarding purchase orders for equipment, despite the rollout 
period having been extended twice, until 31 December 2019 and targets reduced. Of the 
total LD levied, ₹58.38 lakh was recovered by deducting it from the CAPEX subsidy 
payable to BSNL circles, thereby weakening their operational capacity. The Committee 
observe that this procedural lapse resulted in missed opportunities for revenue generation 
and compounded BSNL’s already precarious financial position. The Audit further 
highlighted that lockdown restrictions came into effect only after the rollout deadline, 
nullifying that justification and noting a lack of foresight in planning for technology 
obsolescence.  
In their submission, BSNL attributed the delays to vendor bottlenecks, resource 
constraints, disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic and evolving market trends such 
as increased mobile data usage and 4G penetration. The CMD, BSNL, during oral 
evidence, acknowledged the significant delay and outlined remedial measures such as 
implementation of ERP and centralized online monitoring mechanisms. It was also stated 
that LD penalties were imposed on defaulting vendors and procedural changes were 
made to streamline future procurement. However, the Committee note with concern that 
no internal accountability review was conducted to identify lapses in decision -making or 
delays in issuing purchase orders. Further, DoT’s submission focused on the availability 
of monitoring clauses in agreements and noted that both it and BSNL had acted within 
the contract framework by imposing LDs. However, the Committee find DoT’s oversight 
inadequate, especially in terms of preemptively mitigating delays or reassessing project 
viability as market conditions evolved. The Committee also note that neither BSNL nor 
the Ministry adequately accounted for the obsolescence of 2G/3G based Wi-Fi in the face 
of widespread 4G expansion.  
The Committee are of the considered view that the imposition of ₹81.84 lakh in 
Liquidated Damages is symptomatic of systemic shortcomings in BSNL’s project 
execution and DoT’s regulatory oversight. The absence of internal evaluations, weak 
procurement governance and delayed vendor finalization all contributed to the missed 
rollout deadlines. While BSNL has now introduced ERP and improved Material 
Management (MM) systems, these remedial measures lack foresight and were initiated 
only in hindsight, rather tha n as part of a proactive planning strategy. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that BSNL must institutionalise a Centralized Digital Procurement 
and Monitoring System (CDPMS), integrated with Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
and Project Monitoring tools  like Project Management Information System (PMIS), to 

 
 
 
28 
 
ensure real-time tracking of procurement, site readiness and vendor compliance. Vendor 
contracts should include enforceable clauses with pre -defined penalties for delays. 
Further, DoT must ensure that future agreements incorporate clauses mandating market 
feasibility and technology sustainability assessments. Moreover, the Ministry should 
conduct an independent audit to evaluate BSNL’s internal processes related to this 
project and report to the Committee within six months with a roadmap for strengthening 
institutional accountability and project delivery timelines. 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL has developed its own inventory management system, Material Management 
module built in Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. Further for smooth vendor 
invoice tracking and prompt payment, BSNL has developed Vendor Invoice Processing 
Automation (VIPA) for vendor payments. 
BSNL is leveraging its local entrepreneur model aggressively, a centralized rural 
connectivity monitoring framework is also in place integrated with Project Monitoring 
Information System (PMIS). Local partner performance, usage patterns, user feedback 
etc. are monitored on regular basis for an efficient delivery and quality service to the end-
user. 
In respect of DBN funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) Amended BharatNet Programme, there are pre -defined penalties for delays in 
implementation by vendors. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) payments are 
linked to outcome based measurable Service Level Agreements (SLAs) including 
penalties for non- performance. 
(b) As per agreement with BSNL for 4G Saturation scheme, Liquidated Damages (LD) 
on BSNL shall be imposed for non-execution of the work in scheduled time-period. 
The quantum of LD will be in accordance with the LD provisions contained in the 
Contract Agreement signed by BSNL with the successful bidder, consistent with 
the bid document. BSNL shall ensure recovery of LD from vendor, in accordance 
with the contract agreement, and shall pass on the same to DBN or adjust in the 
final claim 
 
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion in regard to ensure in future agreements to 
incorporate clauses mandating market feasibility and technology sustainability 
assessments, it is submitted that BSNL has been asked to review existing agreement 
clauses relating to assessment of market feasibility and technology sustainability and to 
ensure that future agreements have appropriate clauses for such assessments on the 
lines suggested. 
Further, work to assess internal processes of BSNL for 25,000 Wi -Fi project has been 
assigned to an independent agency (M/s E&Y) who have submitted the report on 
7.3.2026 (Annexure I) 

 
 
 
29 
 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
POOR PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF WI-FI HOTSPOTS RESULTING IN 
DOWNTIME PENALTY 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 6) 
5. The Committee note that as per Clause 4.16 of the Agreement, BSNL was 
mandated to maintain a network uptime of 99.99% to ensure quality service in rural areas, 
failing which pro -rata OPEX subsidy deductions were to be imposed. The C&AG 
observed that BSNL paid a downtime penalty of ₹60.71 crore between 2017 –18 and 
2021–22 due to persistent underperformance and inadequate maintenance of Wi -Fi 
Hotspots. These penalties were deducted from the OPEX subsidy, accounting for 9.45% 
of the revised project cost of ₹642.58 crore. Despite spending ₹33.08 crore on AMC 
contracts during this period, BSNL missed to ensure effective vendor performance or 
sufficient fault rectification. The Committee also note  a marked decline in public 
engagement with the scheme, linked to insufficient awareness, lack of signage, 
inadequate power backup and faulty equipment, resulting in declining user access and 
revenue. 
In their submission, BSNL cited multiple constraints impacting its ability to maintain 
the mandated uptime, including poor electricity availability in remote areas, reduced 
manpower post-VRS and logistical hurdles during COVID -19 lockdowns. The Company 
admitted to AMC lapses and capped vendor penalties at 20%, while itself paying 
considerable downtime penalty. BSNL further explained that AMC contracts were 
discontinued post subsidy due to non-remunerative operations and that subsequent rural 
projects were i ssued as turnkey contracts with extended O&M periods. While BSNL 
claimed that the initiative helped boost FTTH adoption and digital literacy in rural areas, 
the Committee find its efforts to create awareness or recover penalties from vendors to 
be inadequa te. Further, DoT, in turn, highlighted its monitoring tools (PMIS, RoW 
platforms, CBuD) and inclusion of SLA-based payments in future agreements. However, 
the Audit in their vetting comments pointed to DoT’s inadequate response towards 
assisting BSNL in de veloping effective communication strategies. DoT's responses 
largely reiterated BSNL's claims without proactive measures to address structural gaps. 
The Committee are of the considered view that BSNL’s failure to maintain 
contracted uptime levels and the resultant penalty of  ₹60.71 crore reflects deep -rooted 
inefficiencies in project governance, AMC execution and public engagement strategies. 
The unlimited liability borne by BSNL vis -à-vis capped penalties for vendors further 
exacerbated its financial burden. While BSNL has in troduced improvements like ERP 
integration, site surveys and bundled turnkey contracts in newer projects, these seems 
as post hoc  rather than preemptive interventions to earlier failings. The Committee, 

 
 
 
30 
 
therefore, recommend that BSNL should institutionalise an SLA framework with parity in 
penalty structure for itself and its vendors, backed by strict enforcement and automated 
monitoring. AMC contracts must include clear performance deliverables and be overseen 
through centralized dashboards integrated with PMIS. At the same time, BSNL must 
deploy hybrid power solutions (including solar backups) for rural exchanges and adopt a 
uniform communication strategy leveraging local languages, community outreach and  
visual signage. In addition to the above measures, DoT must support BSNL by designing 
project-specific IEC (Information, Education and Communication) plans and ensuring 
performance-based funding in future initiatives. A joint audit by DoT and an independent 
third party must be undertaken to evaluate uptime shortfalls, vendor non-compliance and 
effectiveness of AMC monitoring, with findings reported to the Committee within six 
months. 
Reply of the Government 
In respect of agreement provisions under DBN funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) Amended BharatNet Program, there are pre -defined penalties for delays in 
implementation by vendors. Further, Operation and Maintenance (O&M) payments 
are linked to outcome based measurable Service Level Agreements (SLAs) 
including penalties for non- performance. 
(b) As per agreement with BSNL for 4G Saturation scheme, Liquidated Damages on 
BSNL will be imposed for non-execution of the work in scheduled time-period. The 
quantum of LD will be in accordance with the LD provisions contained in the 
Contract Agreement of BS NL with its successful bidder, consistent with the bid 
document. BSNL shall ensure recovery of LD from vendor, in accordance with the 
contract agreement, and shall pass on the same to DBN or adjust in the final claim. 
A centralised rural connectivity monitoring framework is also in place integrated with 
Project Monitoring Information System.  
In respect of implementation and monitoring of Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) funded projects 
the following is submitted: 
(a) Mobile projects:  A dedicated digital platform has been developed by BSNL for 
comprehensive project monitoring. Additionally, DBN has also developed an AI -
based evaluation tool to enable near real -time monitoring of progress of mobile 
projects. 
(b) Amended BharatNet Programme (ABP):  For implementation and monitoring, a 
project monitoring tool has been developed by BSNL for monitoring the project 
milestone and deliverables.  
 
In compliance to the committee recommendation on hybrid power solutions (including 
solar backups) for DBN funded projects the following is submitted: 

 
 
 
31 
 
(a) Mobile project has provision of at least two power sources, i.e., grid power 
connectivity, battery and stand by power source (Diesel Generator [DG]/Solar) 
have been prescribed. 
(b) Under ABP provisions, the Project Implementing Agency (PIA) has to provide 
smart rack at Block and GPs along with separate electricity connection and 
provision of Uninterrupted Power Supply (UPS). However, for GPs where there is 
no power or where there is more power outage, provision exist for installation of 
solar panel by the PIA. 
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding adoption of a uniform 
communication strategy leveraging local languages, community outreach and visual 
signage, it is submitted that this suggestion has been duly communicated to BSNL for 
taking further necessary action to ensure the same.  
Bharat Net Udyami(es) (BNUs) are being roped in by BSNL for providing Fibre To The 
Home (FTTH) connections using BharatNet. Further, BSNL, is responsible for carrying 
out branding, publicity and awareness campaign regarding BharatNet. Besides, BNU who 
is a Village level Entrepreneur shall provide FTTH connections in Gram Panchayats and 
Villages and from BSNL side is engaged for carrying out village level campaign.   
In respect of independent third party audit the following is submitted: 
(a) For mobile project joint audit to be conducted by DoT through appointment of 
Independent Auditors.  
(b) In ABP Independent Engineers have been provisioned who shall verify project 
milestone for capex payments and verify Service Level Agreements (SLAs) for 
operation & maintenance payment. Besides Independent Engineers (IE) shall also 
carry out concurrent insp ections and suggest corrective actions to Project 
Implementation Agency (PIA) during implementation.  
(c) In respect of 25,000 Wi-Fi project the work has been assigned to an independent 
agency (M/s E&Y) and they have submitted report on 7.3.2026 (Annexure I). 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
REVENUE GENERATION AND SUSTAINABILITY OF THE SCHEME 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 7) 
6. The Committee note with concern that BSNL missed to achieve the envisaged 
revenue target of ₹75 crore for the year 2018-19, earning only ₹3.09 lakh during the entire 
period from 2017-18 to 2021-22, with no revenue targets fixed thereafter. Despite a clear 
agreement clause mandating paid usage post a six month trial period, BSNL continued 
to provide free Wi-Fi services until December 2022 without prior approval from DoT. This 
non compliance severely undermined the financial sustainability of the scheme. The 

 
 
 
32 
 
Committee also observe that while the infrastructure was utilized by rural users, evident 
from significant data consumption during the free period, it missed to convert this usage 
into paid subscriptions. 
BSNL, in their submission to the Committee, has attributed the poor revenue 
generation to factors such as the rise of affordable and high -speed 4G services, closure 
of rural exchanges and the widespread public perception that Wi-Fi is a free service. Also, 
the usage drastically dropped outside the free period despite BSNL’s attempts to 
introduce prepaid plans and partner with digital payment platforms. The Committee 
observe that DoT, while acknowledging the issue, did not effectively intervene or enforce 
agreement compliance, which further contributed to the lack of accountability. Now, both 
BSNL and DoT have shifted focus towards integrating Wi-Fi services with BharatNet and 
FTTH connections under programs like the 4G Saturation Scheme and  Amended 
BharatNet Program (ABP). However, continued reliance on Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) 
support and absence of a market aligned monetization strategy raises questions on the 
long-term viability of such standalone Wi-Fi hotspot projects. 
The Committee are of the view that failure to adhere to agreement terms, lack of 
proactive market analysis and delayed corrective action led to revenue shortfall, rendering 
the scheme unsustainable. To ensure financial viability and optimal utilization of public 
funds, the Committee recommend that BSNL must strictly enforce paid usage models 
after any trial period and avoid prolonged free usage without DoT approval. Also, future 
Wi-Fi or similar digital connectivity projects must include comprehensive market research, 
enforceable sustainability clauses and a hybrid revenue model incorporating 
advertisement support, integration with government services and bundling with FTTH and 
mobile plans. Further, DoT must strengthen its oversight and monitoring mechanism s to 
enforce compliance and evaluate project outcomes periodically. The terms of future 
agreements should be revised to reflect changing market dynamics and encourage 
financially viable partnerships, especially leveraging the BharatNet infrastructure for 
service delivery and monetization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL is giving Fibre To The Home (FTTH) connections through BharatNet under 
postpaid billing model. DBN is not only giving Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) subsidy for 
provision of connections but also giving incentive for retention of customers. 
The model adopted in Amended BharatNet Program has been based on the successful 
completion of pilot project of Five lakh rural FTTH connections through BharatNet 
network.  Bharat Net Udyami (BNU) is being roped in by BSNL for providing FTTH 
connections using BharatNet. Further, BSNL, is responsible for carrying out branding, 
publicity and awareness campaign regarding implementation of Amended BharatNet 
Program. 

 
 
 
33 
 
Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) has developed the following oversight and monitoring 
mechanisms for its following projects: 
(a) For 4G mobile projects, Project monitoring tool is used for monitoring and 
verification by Third Party Agency (TPAs) have been introduced. Further, AI -
based evaluation tool to enable near real-time monitoring of physical progress of 
mobile towers has been implemented by DBN.  
(b) For implementation of ABP a dedicated digital project monitoring tool has been 
developed by BSNL for comprehensive project monitoring. Further, prevalent IT 
technologies used by industry like GIS mapping, monitoring by central NOC and 
Remote Fibre Manageme nt System (RFMS) are being used for ABP 
implementation. 
(c) In ABP Independent Engineers have been provisioned who shall verify project 
milestone before capex payment and verify Service Level agreement (SLA) for 
O&M payment. 
(d) Controller of Communication Accounts (CCAs) has been designated as 
Designated Monitoring Agency (DMA) as DoT field units to monitor the 
implementation of this DBN project. The penalties for non-compliance of network 
uptime and rollout schedules are to be v erified by CCAs in BSNL bills by way 
of cross verification with Network Management System (NMS) reports. 
Independent Engineer (IE) for proper monitoring and Service Level Agreements 
(SLA) based payments have been provisioned in future projects like ABP. 
Utilisation agreement under Amended BharatNet Program has been signed by BSNL with 
DBN and it has provision for mid-term review thorough it the conditions of the agreement 
if required can be modified as per revised requirements.  
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
 
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH IMPACT ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 8) 
7. The Committee note that as per Clauses 2.4.8 and 2.5.2 of the Agreement, BSNL 
was required to appoint an independent agency and conduct an impact assessment 
within 6–12 months of signing the agreement. However, BSNL failed to comply with this 
requirement. Instead of timely evaluations, BSNL issued instructions to circles for in -
house assessments in October 2019 and January 2020, which were delayed due to 
tendering issues, delays in site finalization and the COVID -19 lockdown. Eventually, 
impact assessments were conducted in only 806 exchanges and submitted to USOF by 
November 2022, well beyond the stipulated timeline. The C&AG observed that BSNL’s 

 
 
 
34 
 
failure to complete the evaluation on time hindered assessment of service quality, 
infrastructure adequacy and commercial viability, contributing to continued 
underperformance and inefficient use of public funds.  
In their submission, BSNL attributed the delay in evaluation to procedural delays 
in issuing work orders, closure of unviable rural exchanges and the outbreak of COVID -
19. While it claimed that assessments were eventually conducted with support from 
educational institutions, it admitted that no independent agency was appointed as 
mandated. Further, BSNL has proposed including a relaxation clause in future 
agreements for delays due to uncontrollable circumstances. Furthermore, the Company 
stated that public perception of Wi-Fi as a free service made monetization unfeasible and 
currently there is no plan to upgrade Wi -Fi technology. DoT, on its part, acknowledged 
the issue and highlighted that future projects such as the Amended BharatNet Program 
shall now include monitoring tools like PMIS, Third Party Audits (TPAs) and the 
appointment of Independent Engineers. However, the Committee find that neither BSNL 
nor DoT took proactive steps to ensure accountability for the missed timelines and there 
was little effort to leverage the assessment findings to guide revenue strategies or policy 
refinements. 
The Committee are of the firm view that the lack of a timely and independent impact 
assessment undermined the project’s ability to gauge its effectiveness, adapt to market 
conditions and justify public expenditure. BSNL’s internal assessments, conducted we ll 
after the due period, lacked objectivity and missed to guide course corrections. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that in all future projects, independent third -party 
impact assessments must be mandated within 6 –12 months of implementation, with 
appointment of agencies done at the project’s inception. Assessment findings must be 
publicly disclosed and integrated into policy decisions. The Committee also recommend 
linking disbursement of public funds to measurable impact metrics. BSNL should 
collaborate with academic and research institutions to carry out socio -economic 
evaluations and identify sustainable technology solutions. The DoT must also enforce 
strict compliance with evaluation requirements and take corrective actions for deviations. 
Further, a policy framework for periodic evaluation and mid-course correction should be 
institutionalised across all USOF-funded programs. 
Reply of the Government 
For Amended BharatNet Program (ABP), Independent Engineers are monitoring project 
milestones and also monitor SLA for Operations & Maintenance (O&M) of ABP network. 
For 4G mobile projects, verification by Third Party Audit (TPAs) have also been 
introduced 
For Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) projects, funds are disbursed as per terms and conditions 
of the signed agreement. ABP payments are linked with deliverables based on project 
milestones and O&M payments are linked with Service Level Agreement. These are being 

 
 
 
35 
 
monitored online through Project monitoring tool and claims are settled through Claim 
Settlement Management System portal.  
For DBN funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) For mobile projects provision of TPA is there, besides AI tool has been developed 
for monitoring of physical progress of the project. 
(b) For Amended BharatNet Program Independent Engineers shall do monitoring of 
program using online Project Monitoring tool and reports of Network operating 
Centre. 
.  
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding collaboration with academic and 
research institutions to carry out socio -economic evaluations and identify sustainable 
technology solutions, it is submitted that this suggestion has been duly communicated to 
BSNL for taking further necessary action to ensure the same.  
For Amended BharatNet Program (ABP), Steering committee under Chairmanship of 
Administrator DBN and Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary 
Telecom has been constituted for monitoring the implementation of Program and 
resolution of the implementation issues. 
Besides, there is provision in the Agreement signed with State/UTs for monitoring 
implementation of ABP in the State, wherein, monitoring of the program shall also be 
done by State Broadband Committee and by District level Telecom Committee. 
BharatNet Utilization agreement for Amended BharatNet Program has been signed by 
BSNL with DBN, wherein, it has provision for mid -term review, modifications of the 
conditions of the agreement if required. 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
 
UTILISATION OF USOF FUNDS BY BSNL 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 9) 
8. The Committee note that the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) (now 
renamed as “Digital Bharat Nidhi” (DBN)) had entered into agreement with BSNL at an 
estimated project cost of ₹942.34 crore for setting up 25,000 public Wi-Fi Hotspots in rural 
telephone exchanges, comprising ₹544.50 crore as Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) and 
₹397.84 crore as Operational Expenditure (OPEX) subsidy support over a period of three 
years. However, BSNL commissioned only 24,333 Hotspots, falling short of the original 
target. The rollout, initially scheduled to be completed within six months of signing the 
Agreement in June 2017, experienced significant delays. Only sites commissioned before 

 
 
 
36 
 
December 2019 were eligible for full OPEX subsidy in the first year. Audit observations 
revealed that 700 sites were commissioned after the eligible rollout period and eight sites 
were never commissioned, leading to a cumulative loss of ₹1.15 crore in OPEX subsidy. 
Additionally, USOF levied ₹81.84 lakh in Liquidated Damages (LD), of which ₹58.38 lakh 
was deducted directly from the CAPEX subsidy. BSNL also incurred ₹60.71 crore in 
downtime penalties, further reducing its subsidy entitlement. 
 In their submission, BSNL attributed the delays and inefficiencies to tendering 
complications, delay in vendor finalisation, GST implementation issues, closure of rural 
exchanges, vendor performance gaps and the unforeseen COVID 19 pandemic. BSNL 
also cit ed financial constraints, workforce reduction due to VRS and difficulties in 
maintaining remote rural sites. The Company claimed to have made up for delayed sites 
by commissioning 97.3% of the target and introducing local partnership models for 
operational sustainability. DoT, while endorsing BSNL’s replies, did not conduct any mid-
course correction to monitor fund utilisation or assess actual outcomes. The Department 
also missed to enforce strict compliance with agreement conditions such as performance-
linked disbursement, impact assessments and real -time monitoring. Despite being the 
funding agency, USOF did not link subsidy release to verified deliverables or initiate 
course corrections when performance indicators declined. 
 The Committee are of the firm view that although BSNL substantially utilised the 
USOF (now DBN) allocation in physical terms, the effectiveness, service outcomes and 
financial efficiency of the project were sub-optimal. The failure to adhere to timelines, low 
network uptime and poor revenue generation from installed Hotspots indicate that the 
project objectives of enhancing rural digital connectivity were not fully met. The 
Committee recommend that in future, BSNL must be made accountable through a 
performance-linked fund disbursement mechanism that includes independent third-party 
verification of deliverables and adherence to rollout and uptime milestones. DoT should 
develop and implement a pre-funding viability assessment framework, including demand 
mapping, sustainability analysis and technology relevance. Furthermore, BSNL must 
submit comprehensive utilisation certificates and outcome-based performance reports to 
DBN onto project completion/closure. The Committee also recommend that future funding 
to BSNL through DBN must be contingent upon demonstrable compliance with service 
obligations, timely project execution and transparent utilisation of public funds. 
Reply of the Government 
Under Amended BharatNet Program (ABP), capital expenditure payments are linked with 
project milestones and are being verified by Independent Engineer (IE) and Operations 
& Maintenance (O&M) payments are based on achievement of Service Level Agreements 
(SLA) upon verification by the IEs.  
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding DoT to develop and implement a 
pre-funding viability assessment framework, including demand mapping, sustainability 
analysis and technology relevance, in this regard it is submitted that the model adopted  

 
 
 
37 
 
in ABP for utilization has been based on the successful completion of the pilot project of 
Five lakh rural FTTH connections under BharatNet network which included assessment 
of demand generation, viability and sustainability for ABP utilization. In respect  of 
technology implications of the ABP, the proposal has been considered by the Empowered 
Technology Group (ETG) and the ETG has recommended the proposal for Cabinet 
Approval. 
In line with the committee recommendation, BSNL has submitted utilization certificate and 
reports for all DBN projects as per terms and conditions as stipulated in agreement(s). 
For Wi-Fi Hot-Spot project, documents related to project completion/closure ha ve been 
submitted by BSNL to Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN). 
For DBN projects, funds are disbursed as per terms and conditions of the agreement. 
Further, for both ABP and 4G saturation projects, payments are linked with project 
milestone and deliverables and SLA for O&M, payment through SLA have been defined 
and are  being monitored online using Project Monitoring tool and verification by 
Independent Engineer and further validation through reports from Network Operating 
Centre (NOC) and payment is being made through online Claim Settlement Management 
System (CSMS) of Digital Bharat Nidhi. 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
 
(B) CHALLENGES AND OTHER RELEVANT ISSUES 
ADDRESSING CHALLENGES IN RURAL CONNECTIVITY AND LONG-TERM 
OPERATIONS 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 10) 
9. The Committee note that BSNL and DoT face significant challenges in providing 
telecom services, particularly Wi -Fi and broadband, in rural and remote areas. These 
challenges include lack of physical infrastructure such as power supply, road access and 
backhaul connectivity, as well as Right of Way (RoW) issues and low Return on 
Investment (RoI). Despite these difficulties,  BSNL has connected over 50,000 villages 
with FTTH services through local partners and has proposed forming dedicated teams for 
Wi-Fi hotspot projects. USOF provides limited OPEX support and BSNL has introduced 
revised tariff plans to improve service viabi lity in rural areas. The Committee does 
appreciate these efforts but recognized the need for a more systemic and sustainable 
approach. 
 BSNL’s submissions acknowledge the structural difficulties of deploying and 
maintaining networks in rural regions and rely heavily on local partnerships and OPEX 

 
 
 
38 
 
support for operations. However, the Committee observe that these approaches, while 
helpful, lack scalability without corresponding investments in durable technology and 
R&D. Further, the DoT has initiated funding through the Telecom Technology 
Development Fund (TTDF) and is deploying mobile and BharatNet projects with SLA 
based incentives. Still, the lack of a comprehensive policy for long term sustainability and 
inadequate private sector participation remain critical gaps. Although FTTH connectivity 
is pr ogressing, the Committee find the current model insufficient in addressing the 
compounded issue of low demand, high cost and maintenance challenges. 
 While applauding the gains achieved by BSNL, the Committee note that a recent 
newspaper headline highlighted that BSNL had gained and private telecoms had lost one 
crore subscribers in the previous month. The Committee further observed that with this 
positive development and the commendable efforts of BSNL, it appears that things are 
now moving in a promising direction for the Company’s future. Going ahead with this 
spirit, the Committee recommend that BSNL and DoT develop a structured rural telecom 
strategy anchored in durable infrastructure, power independence (e.g., solar backups) 
and scalable partnership models. BSNL should leverage its local entrepreneur model 
more aggressively and expand use of mesh networks and other low -maintenance 
technologies. A c entralized rural connectivity monitoring framework should be 
established, integrating data from PMIS, local partner performance and user feedback. 
The Committee further recommend that the Department of Telecommunications allocate 
a dedicated corpus under T TDF to fund development of rugged, low -cost equipment 
suited to remote areas. It must also instutionalise coordination mechanisms with State 
Governments to expedite RoW clearances and utility access. Periodic review of rural 
connectivity projects, with emp hasis on reliability, usage patterns and financial health, 
must be conducted jointly by BSNL and DoT. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to the suggestion that BSNL to develop a strategy for durable infrastructure, 
power independence (e.g., solar backups) and scalable partnership models, to leverage 
its local entrepreneur model, and expand use of mesh network and other low -
maintenance technologies, the following is submitted: 
(a) Mobile project has provision of at least two power sources, i.e., grid power 
connectivity, battery and stand by power source (Diesel Generator/Solar) have 
been prescribed. 
(b) In Amended BharatNet Program (ABP) provision exists that Project Implementing 
Agency (PIA) has to provide smart rack at Block and GPs along with provision of 
separate electricity connection and provision of UPS for short term power failure. 
However, for GPs where there is no power or where there is more power outage, 
provision exist for installation of solar panel by the PIA. 
(c) The Amended BharatNet Program, for which BSNL is the program management 
agency, is being implemented in ring/mesh topology. 

 
 
 
39 
 
(d) BSNL is leveraging local entrepreneur model for provision of fibre connectivity to 
homes. 
Project Management Information Systems tool for mobile project has been integrated 
through Application Programming Interface (API) with Network Operating Centre of 
execution agencies of DBN. This integration with Network Operating Centre of TSPs 
provides real-time information about physical progress and operation status.  
In respect of ABP, Project Monitoring tool have been developed by BSNL and is enabled 
through API with Central Network Operating Centre for project monitoring and operation 
and maintenance of BharatNet Network. 
In respect of committee recommendations to DoT the following is submitted: 
(a) The Telecom Technology Development Fund (TTDF) Scheme has been notified 
for domestic companies and institutions engaged in the design, development, and 
commercialization of telecommunication products and solutions. The scheme aims 
to enable affordable broadband and mobile services in rural and remote areas. It 
also provides funding support for development of rugged, low -cost equipment 
suited to such regions. 
(b) The Telecommunications (Right of Way) Rules, 2024 have been notified by DoT, 
and further on 1.1.2025, BharatNet has been notified as “Special Project” under 
these rules facilitating provision of deemed approval within seven days of 
application of submitted BharatNet cases.  
(c) Besides, provision of Call Before u Dig (CBuD) through an online platform has 
been developed by DoT, an initiative to encourage minimal or no damages to 
underground assets while carrying out any digging activity.  
(d) DoT has developed an online portal for monitoring of RoW applications, monitoring 
the Application to further Track and Manage Telecom Right of Way permissions 
seamlessly and State (s) have been persuaded to have their own RoW portals for 
online resolution of RoW issues. Projects and schemes are reviewed regularly at 
various levels in DoT. 
For Amended BharatNet Program, Steering committee under Chairmanship of 
Administrator DBN and Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary 
Telecom has been constituted with concerned officers of BSNL and DBN /DoT as 
members, these committees sha ll regularly monitor the implementation of Program and 
to resolve the implementation issues.  
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
 

 
 
 
40 
 
STRENGTHENING BORDER AREA CONNECTIVITY AND NATIONAL SECURITY 
CONCERNS 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 11) 
10.  The Committee note that BSNL has deployed a wide network of mobile and fiber 
infrastructure in border areas of Punjab, with more than 2,000 BTS and 56,650 Bharat 
Fiber connections. The mobile and broadband Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in 
these areas are r eportedly within TRAI benchmarks. However, concerns regarding 
security, spillage of foreign telecom signals and lack of seamless connectivity in strategic 
regions were raised during the course of evidence. DoT responded that surveys and 
coordination with s ecurity agencies are being conducted to monitor spillage along 
international borders and Line of Actual Control (LAC). BSNL also confirmed that it is 
engaging with MHA for security technology like portable jammers. 
While BSNL has confirmed satisfactory service performance in border districts and 
has cited multiple partnerships with state agencies for surveillance and connectivity 
projects, the Committee observe that national security requirements demand heightened 
vigilance and technological preparedness. The correspondence with MHA for deployment 
of security tools like jammers must be taken-up on priority. Also, DoT’s coordination with 
Law Enforcement Agencies and the Wireless Monitoring Organization (WMO) is 
appreciated, but the Committee note that there is no long-term roadmap to secure border 
telecom zones or guidelines for emergency communication preparedness. 
The Committee recommend that DoT and BSNL jointly develop a Border Area 
Telecom Strategy (BATS) to ensure robust, secure and high -availability connectivity in 
strategic zones. This should include priority deployment of indigenous 4G/5G technology, 
redundant backhaul connectivity and rapid response systems to address spillage and 
service disruption. Further, DoT must fast track coordination with MHA to facilitate timely 
deployment of portable jammers and anti -intrusion systems. Additionally, a real -time 
monitoring command centre should be established for high risk zones to integrate telecom 
operations with security protocols. BSNL must also expand partnerships with border area 
institutions and enhance FTTH and MPLS -VPN services to Government offices and 
public service points in these regions. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation regarding a strategy for desired 
connectivity in strategic zones, priority deployment of indigenous 4G/5G technology, 
redundant backhaul connectivity, the following is submitted:  
(a) Network For Spectrum (NFS), project envisages establishing optical fiber network 
for Defence Services in lieu of spectrum released by them. NFS is already being 
utilised operationally by Defense services.  Army network has been made 
operational in all six commands. Navy network including IP -MPLS has been 

 
 
 
41 
 
commissioned and operational. Air Force Net has been commissioned and is also 
being used by Indian Air Force. 
(b) Under BharatNet, satellite connectivity at 1,409 Central Armed Police Force 
locations have been provided, including in strategic areas of the border States / 
Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim and 
Arunachal Pradesh.   
(c) To ensure robust secure and high availability and connectivity in border areas DBN 
has funded the following three programs: 
(i) BOP-BIP project: 4G towers at 602 sites have been proposed and out of 
which 241 are on air.  
(ii) Border Area Development Project (BADP):  17,057 villages/habitations out 
of 17,611 BADP villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of remaining 554 
villages/habitations, 442 villages/habitations are planned, while 64 
habitations/villages are not planned due to nil populations / not traceable 
and 48 villages/habitations are under survey/planning. 
(iii) Vibrant Village Programme (VVP): 523 villages/habitations out of 662 VVP 
villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of remaining 139 villages, 99 are 
planned to provide coverage, 38 villages/habitations are not planned due to 
issues like nil population or village/habitation not traceable, access issues, 
etc. and for two villages/habitations survey is pending.   
In all abovementioned sites, indigenous 4G technology has been deployed or 
planned to be deployed.  
In regard to the Committee’s recommendation addressing spillage and service disruption 
and integration of telecom operations it is submitted that a project for setting up of a 
network of remote (unmanned) and manned monitoring stations at strategic locatio ns 
along the international border to prevent cross border interference and control spillage 
signal is under implementation by DoT and the pilot project under this is targeted for 
commissioning by November 2026.  Further, as per extant international regulat ions, 
spillage of radio signals and interference may be mitigated through bilateral coordination 
and special agreements with neighbouring countries and if harmful interference cannot 
be resolved after bilateral efforts, the affected country may seek assist ance from the 
Radiocommunication Bureau and the Radio Regulation Board of the International 
Telecommunication Union to resolve the issue. 
As and when network becomes available in border and strategic areas, BSNL follows up 
with relevant Government departments, institutions and offices with a view to provide 
them telecom connectivity and to meet their telecom requirements.  
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 

 
 
 
42 
 
IMPROVING BSNL’S SERVICE DELIVERY TO GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND 
CUSTOMERS 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 12) 
11. The Committee note with concern the observations made during the course of 
evidence regarding BSNL’s indifferent attitude in offering telecom services to Government 
offices and departments, particularly in Chandigarh and surrounding regions. Despite the 
demand for services, BSNL appeared unr esponsive in some instances. Hon’ble 
Chairperson and Members of the Committee pointed out specific cases where BSNL did 
not act proactively, even when services were being sought by Government departments. 
Although BSNL later stated that services are being provided wherever requested and 
efforts are being made to engage with departments, the Committee find that these actions 
are not being followed in letter and spirit by BSNL’s Regional Offices. 
 BSNL highlighted a number of ongoing Government projects in Punjab, including 
MPLS-VPN connectivity for Punjab Police, Bharat Fiber connections to over 19,000 
schools and M2M SIM deployment for smart meters under PSPCL. These 
projects demonstrate BSNL’s technical capability and service reach. However, the 
Committee find the response lacking in addressing the larger issue of institutional 
engagement and customer responsiveness. BSNL’s claim of prompt service delivery 
contrasts with testimonies from stakeholders pointing to reluctance and delayed action. 
Moreover, no structured outreach plan or client relationship management strategy 
appears to be in place for government or enterprise segments. 
The Committee strongly recommend that BSNL instutionalise a proactive and 
accountable engagement mechanism with all Government departments, public 
institutions and enterprise customers. This should include appointment of dedicated nodal 
officers for each major state and central Government department, with defined response 
timelines and service -level commitments. BSNL should establish a digital CRM 
(Customer Relationship Management) dashboard to monitor requests, follow -ups and 
their resolution in real-time. Also, BSNL may also introduce an online dashboard system 
on its website to ensure that new requests made by entities such as Government offices 
across the Country, Companies and Customers are transparently available in the public 
interest along with real-time updates to the seekers. Further, periodic satisfaction surveys 
and formal feedback mechanisms should be conducted to assess service delivery to 
institutional clients. Further, DoT must monitor BSNL’s engagement metrics with 
Government departments and take corrective action where  required. The Committee is 
of the view that BSNL’s institutional business, if properly cultivated, can serve as a stable 
and strategic revenue stream while reinforcing its public utility. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BSNL has segmented its enterprise customers into the following three categories: 

 
 
 
43 
 
(a) Platinum: For Central Government / nationalized banks and private institutions 
having billing of more than ₹500 crore. National Account Manager is appointed as 
nodal officer for customers under Platinum category. 
(b) Gold: For State Government and Regional Rural Banks and private institutions 
having billing between ₹50 to ₹500 crore. Key Account Manager from regional circle 
is appointed as nodal officer for customers in this category. 
(c) Silver: For other enterprise customers having billing below ₹50 crore, Key Account 
Manager from regional/ local Business Area is appointed as nodal officer. 
For provisioning of the Fibre To The Home (FTTH) service, Broad Band Managers have 
been designated to look after the FTTH services of the valued customers in particular 
region or area. 
With regard to the Committee’s suggestion regarding conducting periodic satisfaction 
surveys and formal feedback mechanisms to assess service delivery to institutional 
clients, monitoring of engagement metrics with Government departments, it is submitted 
that this suggestion has been duly communicated to BSNL for taking further necessary 
action and to ensure the same.  
BSNL through use of various technologies and systems like Multi -Protocol Label 
Switching (MPLS), Virtual Private Networks (VPN), Machine to Machine (M2M) 
communication and SIM deployment has enhanced its institutional business project 
implementation plan. Further, using digital dashboard for milestone tracking is in place 
for effective coordination and same is accessible to all stakeholders including funding 
agencies. 
An Inter -Ministerial Committee comprising of members from concerned user 
Ministries/Departments has been formed by DoT to encourage broadband in rural areas 
using BharatNet network. 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
ENHANCING BUDGETARY SUPPORT AND STRATEGIC POSITIONING OF BSNL 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 13) 
12. The Committee note that BSNL has projected a capital expenditure requirement 
of ₹45,507 crore for FY26 to FY28, covering additional 4G rollouts, network upgrades and 
other strategic investments. Of this, ₹30,035 crore has been sought as budgetary support. 
The Committee appreciate the Government’s recognition of BSNL as a strategic national 
asset and its commitment to deploying indigenous 4G/5G technology under the 
Atmanirbhar Bharat initiative. The Committee also note that the Government had already 
sanctioned ₹22,000 crore for deploying 1 lakh 4G sites and recognized the need to further 

 
 
 
44 
 
expand coverage and network depth through additional towers and infrastructure 
enhancement. 
 While BSNL’s role as a strategic public sector telecom provider is undisputed, the 
Committee observe that continued viability hinges on timely budgetary support and 
strategic policy alignment. Further, DoT’s testimony highlighted the challenge of 
competing with private players who possess a significantly larger infrastructure footprint. 
While BSNL’s focus remains on rural and  under-served areas, the need to address 
bandwidth constraints, backhaul limitations and technology obsolescence is urgent. The 
Committee also note BSNL’s steps to adopt domestic 4G technology in partnership with 
C-DoT, Tejas and TCS, which is a positive move towards indigenization and cost control. 
 The Committee recommend that the Government may take a call on timely 
approval and release of BSNL’s budgetary support of ₹30,035 crore to allow smooth 
implementation of its modernization plan. A three -year financial roadmap, aligned with 
telecom penetration targets in rural, border and aspirational districts, must be approved 
with measurable milestones. The Committee also urge the Government to prioritize BSNL 
in national digital infrastructure plans, such as universal broadband and digital inclusion 
schemes, ensuring it remains competitively relevant. BSNL should instutionalise a Project 
Finance Monitoring Unit to track capital deployment and publish quarterly updates to 
promote transparency. Finally, the Committee recommend that BSNL intensify 
engagement with state and central departments to expand institutional business, which 
can offer stable revenue streams and strategic utility. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India has extended substantial financial support to BSNL through a 
series of revival packages amounting to more than ₹3 lakh crore aimed at strengthening 
the company’s financial viability, improving service delivery and enabling it to pla y a 
strategic role in India’s telecommunications sector. These packages involve significant 
public funding and are accompanied by performance expectations relating to operational 
efficiency, financial sustainability and improve governance. 
₹76,679 crore of capital expenditure requirement have been forecasted to ensure BSNL 
carries forward the impact of ₹2 lakh crore cash support invested so far by Government. 
The breakup of capital expenditure of ₹76,679 crore is as follows: 
(a) BSNL funded – ₹13,215 crore (17%); 
(b) Land monetisation support ₹10,000 crore (13%); and 
(c) Government funding ₹53,464 crore (70%). 
This capital expenditure requirement is to be leveraged for following key strategic 
priorities: 
(a) Expanding BSNL 4G coverage with more than 2 lakh 4G sites across India; 
(b) Media rehabilitation of estimated 1.5 lakh RKMs; 
(c) Digital and IT system upgrades; and 

 
 
 
45 
 
(d) Strategic 5G coverage, 10,000 5G sites. 
The above capital expenditure plan is in discussion stage between Department of telecom 
and Ministry of Finance. 
The Government remains committed to the sustained revival and modernisation of BSNL 
through phased financial and operational support. Substantial capital infusion has already 
been extended under the revival packages approved by the Union Cabinet in 2019, 2022 
and 2023, which are presently under implementation. BSNL’s 4G rollout and network 
expansion are progressing in line with these approvals. 
With regard to the suggestion for a roadmap for rural, border and aspirational districts for 
universal broadband and digital inclusion, it is submitted that DBN is funding the following 
projects: 
(a) Amended BharatNet Programme is being implemented to provide Broadband 
connectivity to all Gram Panchayats (GPs) in ring topology and to connect non-GP 
villages on demand basis and also to provide 1.5 crore Fibre To The Home (FTTH) 
connections through BharatNet.   
(b) Mobile projects: 
(i) 4G saturation project: 24,204 towers are sanctioned to provide 4G mobile 
connectivity to identified uncovered villages across the country. As on 
28.2.2026, 14,301 towers are on-air, providing coverage to 21,328 villages. 
(ii) 4G mobile connectivity in Aspirational Districts: Under various DBN-funded 
mobile projects executed by BSNL, 5,259 mobile towers have been made 
on-air, providing 4G mobile coverage to 6,876 villages in Aspirational 
Districts across the country. 
(iii) BOP-BIP project:  4G towers at 602 sites have been proposed. As on 
28.2.2026, 251 towers are on air providing coverage to 337 locations.  
(iv) Border Area Development Project (BADP):  17,079 villages/habitations out 
of 17,611 BADP villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of remaining 532 
villages/habitations, 414 villages/habitations are planned under DBN funded 
mobile projects while 64 habitations/villages are not planned due to nil 
populations / not traceable and 54 villages/habitations are under 
survey/planning. 
(v) Vibrant Village Programme (VVP): 521 villages/habitations out of 662 VVP 
villages/habitations are 4G covered. Out of remaining 141 villages, 98 are 
planned to provide coverage, 40 villages/habitations are not planned due to 
issues like nil population / access issues, etc. and on three 
villages/habitations survey is pending.   
With regard to the suggestion for institutionalising project finance monitoring of capital 
deployment, it is submitted that BSNL has been asked to ensure the same as part of its 

 
 
 
46 
 
plans to create a project monitoring unit to monitor various performance management 
metrics. 
BSNL has engaged with State Governments (Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Karnataka, 
West Bengal and Uttarakhand), select departments of the Central Government such as 
the Department of School Education and Literacy and the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare, and NABARD for provision of FTTH connections and Wi -Fi facilities in 
rural institutions. This has resulted more than 1.6 lakh Government institutions in rural 
areas having working FTTH connections. 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 

 
 
 
47 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 

 
 
 
48 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
LOSS OF OPEX SUBSIDY AMOUNTING TO ₹1.15 CRORE  
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 4) 
1. "The Committee note that BSNL incurred a loss of ₹1.15 crore in Operational 
Expenditure (OPEX) subsidy due to delays and failures in commissioning Wi-Fi Hotspots 
under the USOF supported project. The Audit reported that out of the 24,333 hotspots 
that BSNL finally chose to commission, 700 were commissioned after the eligible subsidy 
period and 8 were never commissioned. Despite BSNL's decision to repurpose 1,500 pre 
acquired hotspots from its Mobile Data Offload (MDO) Project in June 2017, only 27 were 
commissioned within the stipulated one month target - just 1.8% of the intended number. 
This performance shortfall directly led to the subsidy loss of ₹108.36 lakh for the delayed 
sites and ₹6.88 lakh for the uncommissioned ones. Thus, BSNL suffered a loss of ₹1.15 
crore in Operational Expenditure (OPEX) subsidy due to delayed or non -commissioning 
of Wi-Fi Hotspots under the rural connectivity initiative. The Committee find this financial 
setback especially concerning given the critical need for fiscal prudence in Public Sector 
Undertakings and the high strategic value of rural connectivity. 
BSNL, in its submissions, attributed the subsidy loss to delays in equipment supply and 
site readiness, compounded by challenges like poor power supply, inadequate manpower 
post-VRS and the operational difficulties brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. It further 
cited low revenue realization from Wi -Fi services and changing consumer preferences 
toward mobile data as reasons for project underperformance. BSNL claimed that it has 
introduced remedial measures such as revised Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and  
engagement with local partners on a revenue -sharing model for future deployments. 
However, the Committee note that BSNL did not conduct any formal inquiry to fix 
accountability for the avoidable subsidy loss. DoT, on its part, highlighted that relevant 
penalty provisions exist within the agreement and that oversight was exercised through 
Project Monitoring Units and third-party verifications. Yet, there was no evidence of these 
mechanisms being effectively activated to avert financial losses, nor was there clarity on 
how the findings influenced future policy enforcement. 
The Committee are of the view that the OPEX subsidy loss amounting to ₹1.15 crore 
represents not merely a financial lapse, but a failure in both planning and accountability 
on the part of BSNL and regulatory oversight by DoT. The loss of subsidy is particu larly 
disconcerting given that these funds were essential for supporting non-remunerative rural 

 
 
 
49 
 
operations and enhancing last -mile connectivity. Despite the availability of pre -procured 
equipment and predefined timelines, the inability to deploy even a fraction of the 
committed infrastructure within deadline reflects systemic inefficiencies. This sit uation 
reflects a critical operational gap with financial consequences. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that BSNL institutionalise internal accountability procedures to review 
financial setbacks and assign responsibility. For future projects, subsidy d isbursement 
must be linked to milestone -based performance metrics for fund release certified by 
independent monitoring agencies. In addition to this, DoT must ensure rigorous pre -
approval appraisal of technical and financial projections and contingency plans as part of 
every project design. Additionally, DoT and BSNL should jointly conduct a financial impact 
study of the Wi-Fi Hotspot project and submit a status report before the Committee within 
six months. Further, DoT should expedite the integration of digital oversight tools such as 
Project Management Information System (PMIS), Geographic Information System (GIS) 
mapping and Remote Fiber Monitoring System (RFMS) across all ongoing and upcoming 
rural connectivity schemes to ensure real time monitoring and course correction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Suitable instructions as per the recommendations of the committee has been 
provided to BSNL field units. Further, the monitoring mechanism implemented for current 
projects has enabled periodical review (financial and physical progress), which is carried 
out regularly. With regard to the suggestion that fund disbursement be linked to milestone-
based performance metrics and fund release is duly certified by independent monitoring 
agencies, it is submitted that for release of payments under the Amended BharatN et 
Program, Independent Engineer has been engaged for verification of milestones & 
performance metrices before payment. With regard to the Committee’s suggestion 
regarding ensuring of rigorous pre -approval appraisal of technical and financial 
projections and contingency plans as part of every project design, it is submitted that the 
financial projections for the Amended BharatNetProgramme was duly appraised by the 
Expenditure Finance committee (EFC). In respect of technology implications, the 
proposal has b een considered by Empowered Technology Group (ETG) and the ETG 
has recommended the proposal for Cabinet Approval.In compliance of paragraphs 2.4.8 
and 2.5.2 of the agreement dated 6.9.2017 for 25,000 Wi -Fi hot spot project signed 
between erstwhile Universa l Service Obligation Fund (USOF) and BSNL, impact 
assessment study has been done and the summary of findings is at Annexure II.  
In respect of DBN-funded projects, the following is submitted: 
(a) For mobile projects, a dedicated digital platform has been developed by BSNL for 
comprehensive project monitoring. Additionally, DBN has developed an AI -based 
evaluation tool to enable near real-time monitoring of physical progress of the project. 

 
 
 
50 
 
(b) Prevalent IT technologies and tools as used by industry like Geographic 
Information System (GIS) mapping, monitoring of network by Central Network Operating 
Centre (C-NoC) and use of Remote Fibre Management System (RFMS) for monitoring of 
fibre are being used for implementation of Amended BharatNet Program.  
 
[Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications)] 
O.M No. DDG(SP)/DBN/COPU/BSNL 25000 Wi-Fi dated 25.03.2026 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
  

 
 
 
51 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi:   
03 August, 2026  
12 Shravana, 1948(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA  
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

 
 
 
52 
 
 
 
 
  


 
 
 
53 
 
 
  


 
 
 
54 
 
 
  


 
 
 
55 
 
 
  


 
 
 
56 
 
 
  


 
 
 
57 
 
 
  


 
 
 
58 
 
 
  


 
 
 
59 
 
 
  


 
 
 
60 
 
 
  


 
 
 
61 
 
 
  


 
 
 
62 
 
 
  


 
 
 
63 
 
 
  


 
 
 
64 
 
 
  


 
 
 
65 
 
 
  


 
 
 
66 
 
 
  


 
 
 
67 
 
 
  


 
 
 
68 
 
 
  


 
 
 
69 
 
 
  


 
 
 
70 
 
 
  


 
 
 
71 
 
 
  


 
 
 
72 
 
 
  


 
 
 
73 
 
 
  


 
 
 
74 
 
 
  


 
 
 
75 
 
 
  


 
 
 
76 
 
 
  


 
 
 
77 
 
 
  


 
 
 
78 
 
 
  


 
 
 
79 
 
 
  


 
 
 
80 
 
 
  


 
 
 
81 
 
 
  


 
 
 
82 
 
 
  


 
 
 
83 
 
 
  


 
 
 
84 
 
 
  


 
 
 
85 
 
 
  


 
 
 
86 
 
 
  


 
 
 
87 
 
 
  


 
 
 
88 
 
 
  


 
 
 
89 
 
 
  


 
 
 
90 
 
 
  


 
 
 
91 
 
 
  


 
 
 
92 
 
 
  


 
 
 
93 
 
 
  


 
 
 
94 
 
 
  


 
 
 
95 
 
 
  


 
 
 
96 
 
 
  


 
 
 
97 
 
 
  


 
 
 
98 
 
 
  


 
 
 
99 
 
 
  


 
 
 
100 
 
 
  


 
 
 
101 
 
 
  


 
 
 
102 
 
 
  


 
 
 
103 
 
 
  


 
 
 
104 
 
 
  


 
 
 
105 
 
 
  


 
 
 
106 
 
 
  


 
 
 
107 
 
 
 


 
 
 
108 
 
Appendix-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3rd August, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Rajeev Rai 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
11. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. John Brittas 
13. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
14 Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
2. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
 
 
109 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the six draft Reports. 
The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft reports, without any 
changes/modifications: - 
(i)    Comprehensive Examination of “NHPC Limited (NHPC)”;  
(ii)   Horizontal Examination of “Review of Performance of Insurance Sector 
CPSUs”;  
(iii)   Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
(BSNL) setting up of 25,000 Wi -Fi Hotspots in BSNL Rural Telephone 
Exchanges [Based on C&AG Audit Para No. 4.2 of Report No. 16 of 2023]”;  
(iv)   Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Rural Electrification 
Corporation Limited (REC Ltd)’’;  
(v)  Action Taken Report based on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL)”; and  
(vi)  Action Taken Report based on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Review of 
Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs”. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the Reports to Parliament soon.   
 
(The Committee took another agenda for the day) 
/-------/ 
 
 
  

 
 
 
110 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (18thLS) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) on ‘Para No. 4.2 of Report No. 
16 of 2023 on setting up of 25,000 Wi-Fi Hotspots in BSNL Rural Telephone 
Exchanges’. 
 
I Total number of recommendations 13 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
[videRecommendationsatSl.Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11, 12 and 13] 
Total - 12 
 
 
 
 
Percentage-92.30% 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies.- 
Nil 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage–00.00% 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration. -
Sl. No. 4  
Total -01  
 
 
 
Percentage–07.69% 
V Observations/Recommendations to which 
the Government has furnished interim replies. 
Nil 
 
 
Total - 00 
 
Percentage–00.00% 
 
 
 
 
 