27 
 
REVIEWING TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN 
NOTES (ATNs) ON C&AG PARAS/REPORTS 
(COMMERCIAL) BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2025-26) 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
 
ii 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
REVIEWING TIMELY SUBMISSION OF 
ACTION TAKEN NOTES (ATNs) 
ON C&AG PARAS/REPORTS (COMMERCIAL) 
BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE)  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Reviewing Timely Submission of Action Taken 
Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports (Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
 
iii 
 
CPU No. 1083 
 
 
Price: Rs….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New 
Delhi- 110001. 
 
  

 
 
 
iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) 
  
v 
  INTRODUCTION 
  
vi 
CHAPTER I      REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
  
8 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
  
18 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
  
19 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies  
20 
 ANNEXURES  
I OM dated 31-07-2025 Minutes of Meeting 04-07-2025  21 
II Dept of Expenditure O.M. dated 28.08.2025  28 
III Dept of Public Enterprises OM Dated 29-10-2025  40 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of the sitting held on 05.12.2025 44 
II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Eleventh Report of 
Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha)  on Reviewing Timely 
Submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) BY THE Ministries/Departments 
46 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
15. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Mriganka Achal - Director  
3. Ms. Smita Khade - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty-Seventh Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Reviewing Timely 
Submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments’. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
27 March, 2025. The Action  taken Replies to all the 07 recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Finance, Department 
of Public Enterprises on 30 October, 2025. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their 
sitting held on 05th December, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee           
(18th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025                          Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S)      Committee on Public Undertakings 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 
CHAPTER   I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha)  of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2024 -25) on "Reviewing 
Timely Submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments" relating to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Public Enterprises) was presented to Parliament on 27 March, 2025. 
It contained Seven observations/recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the Seven (07) observations/recommendations contained in the Report. Since the 
Government has accepted all seven recommendations, the action taken notes have 
been categorized as follows:: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7                                   (Total 07)                               
        
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies         
(Chapter III)  
            
- NIL -                                                                   (Total 00)
                                                                                   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration 
                       
(Chapter IV) 
  
- NIL -                                                                    (Total 00)
             
  
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished 
interim replies and final replies are still awaited                  
(Chapter V) 
                                                   
  - NIL -                                                                    (Total 00)
    

 
 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee’s Eleventh Report on " Reviewing Timely Submission of Action 
Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports (Commercial) by the 
Ministries/Departments" and the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
comprehensive acceptance of all seven recommendations by the Government 
symbolise a watershed moment  in strengthening parliamentary oversight and 
governance of Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs). This decisive and 
streamlined response, marked by the DPE’s issuance of the Office Memorandum 
dated 29-10-2025 issuing directions to the Ministries/Departments to take immediate 
steps within 30 days, has set a powerful governance precedent  for effective 
Parliamentary-Executive collaboration and ushers in an era of real-time accountability 
and unprecedented transparency. 
 
4. Albeit having cent percent acceptance, b elow are the 
observation/recommendation-wise submission highlighting the actions taken by the 
DPE to streamline the outcome and Committee’s further views on them in entirety.  
The Committee desire that the Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of 
Finance) to furnish Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of further 
Observations/Recommendations (Paras @ Sl.Nos. 6 and 7) contained in Chapter 
I of the Report. 
 
Obs/Rec 
No. 
Gist of the Observation/ 
Recommendation Gist of Action Taken Reply (DPE) 
1 
Overview 
Need for urgent reforms, 
including a digital monitoring 
system – Audit Para Monitoring 
System (APMS) for real -time 
tracking of ATNs, strict deadlines 
for non -compliant Ministries/ 
Departments of the concerned 
CPSUs, inter -ministerial 
coordination and periodic 
reporting to the Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS). 
The Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) has accepted all the 
overarching recommendations and 
has called for a systemic overhaul 
through a Digital Mandate ( Audit 
Para Monitoring System - APMS), 
Inter-ministerial Coordination  and 
annual reporting to track ATNs. The 
DPE's full acceptance paves the way 
for a detailed, streamlined procedure 
outlined in succeeding 
recommendations. 

 
 
 
3 
 
2 
Delayed Submission of ATNs 
Ministries/Departments to 
invariably submit ATNs within six 
months, with non -compliance 
requiring an explanation within 
30 days to DPE and DoE for 
placing before the Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS). Additionally, 
Financial Advisors (FAs) should 
submit quarterly reports and 
Secretaries of the 
Ministries/Departments acting as 
Chief Accounting Authority 
(CAA) should be held 
accountable for recurring non -
compliance and delayed ATN 
submission. 
The DPE has accepted the 
recommendation, following up 
through a review meeting in July 2025 
(with representatives of O/o C&AG 
present) to mandate remedial actions 
(Internal Monitoring Committees 
(IMCs) and Departmental Audit 
Committees (DACs)) by Ministries. 
The APMS pilot portal has been 
prepared by the O/o Controller 
General of Accounts, Dept. of 
Expenditure in consultation with DPE 
and User Acceptance Testing (UAT) 
completed.  The Portal shall go -live 
by January 2026. Further, the DPE 
has officially communicated all 
accepted recommendations and 
timelines to concerned Ministries vide 
OM dated 29-10-2025, committing to 
annual progress reporting to CoPU. 
3 
Lack of a Centralized 
Monitoring System 
Immediate action on 
implementation and 
operationalization of an Audit 
Para Monitoring System (APMS) 
involving all stakeholders by the 
Controller General of Accounts 
(CGA) within six months. This 
system should include real -time 
tracking, automated alerts, digital 
ATN submissio ns and a 
discontinuation of hard copy 
communication between 
stakeholders. 
The DPE has accepted the 
recommendation, noting that the 
Department of Expenditure 
provided inputs for the Action Taken 
Replies. The dashboard for Audit 
Para Monitoring System (APMS) 
pilot portal is ready  (UAT 
completed) and shall go -live by 
January 2026  with enhanced 
functionalities like real -time tracking 
and automated alerts. The DPE has 
formally communicated the portal's 
functionalities and outlined expected 
roles to all concerned Ministries/ 
Departments/ O/o C&AG vide OM 
dated 29-10-2025.  In the OM, D PE 
has directed them  to take immediate 
steps ensuring setting up of the 

 
 
 
4 
 
required mechanism within 30 days 
of issuance of the OM. 
4 
High Pendency in Specific 
Ministries 
 
Accountability of Financial 
Advisors (FAs) of high-pendency 
Ministries with stricter scrutiny for 
Ministries with over 20 pending 
ATNs, escalation of unresolved 
cases to the Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) and Cabinet 
Secretariat, classification of 
pending cases, establishment of 
a legal advisory panel for cases 
involving legal dispute and 
seeking explanation from non -
compliant Ministries on APMS 
Portal. 
The DPE has accepted the 
recommendation, noting the APMS 
pilot portal shall go-live by January 
2026. This digital platform will feature 
full functionalities, including age wise 
pendency, classification of paras as 
DPE Guidelines, AMRCD, 
Court/Arbitration, Systemic and Other 
categories. The DPE will use the 
portal data to monitor high 
pendency Ministries/Departments  
and vide OM dated 29-10-2025, has 
informed them about the need to 
establish legal advisory panels  for 
ATNs delayed due to legal 
proceedings in consultation with 
Dept. of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law. 
5 
Number of Journeys and 
Turnaround Time 
Regular inter -departmental 
meetings to streamline the 
process limiting the review 
process to two rounds and 
ensuring a maximum of 30 days 
for vetting. Further, the 
Committee have desired for 
Internal Monitoring Committees, 
Departmental Audit Committees 
and structured workflows should 
be established to expedite ATNs 
submission within six months 
timeline. 
The DPE has accepted the 
recommendation and held a meeting 
on 04-07-2025 (with C&AG present) 
to sensitize high-pendency Ministries 
about remedial actions, including 
establishing Internal Monitoring 
Committees (IMCs)  and 
Departmental Audit Committees 
(DACs) for reviewing/expediting the 
processing/finalisation of ATNs, 
regular follow -ups/joint meetings 
between the Ministry's Audit Wing 
and the C&AG Office. The DPE 
subsequently formalized these 
requirements, along with adherence 
to timelines, vide OM dated 29 -10-
2025. 

 
 
 
5 
 
6 
Need for a Stronger 
Enforcement Mechanism 
Linking ATN compliance to the 
Performance Appraisal (PA) of 
Financial Advisors of the 
Ministry/Department, including 
ATN data in CPSU Annual 
Reports and a two -tier 
accountability structure 
(Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) & Department 
of Expenditure (DoE) followed by 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS)). 
Further, persistent non -
compliance should require 
concerned Secretaries to appear 
before CoPU and their Annual 
Performance Reviews should 
reflect ATN compliance as a 
metric. 
The DPE accepted the 
recommendation. Crucially, the DPE 
vide OM dated 29 -10-2025 has 
informed the concerned 
Ministries/Departments about their 
specific role in ensuring ATN 
compliance. 
  
7 
Conclusion 
Emphasised that delayed ATNs 
hinder transparency, financial 
discipline and governance in 
CPSUs, therefore, have strongly 
recommended the immediate 
adoption of a centralized digital 
monitoring system (APMS -
CoPU) and strict enforcement 
measures to ensure 
accountability in CPSUs 
The DPE has  accepted the 
recommendation and confirmed that 
APMS pilot portal has been made 
ready (UAT completed) to go-live by 
January 2026  with all necessary 
functionalities to ensure timeliness 
of ATNs and lower pendency , 
thereby directly addressing the 
Committee's call for a centralized 
digital monitoring system and strict 
compliance measures. 
5. The Committee place on record its sincere appreciation for the prompt 
and comprehensive action taken by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), 
Ministry of Finance, in accepting all recommendations. This marks a significant 
milestone, as the Committee's focused intervention has acted as the catalyst for 
institutional transformation paving way for establishing a systemic, digital and 
administratively enforced framework to address the critical, long -standing 

 
 
 
6 
 
deficit in timely compliance of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the C&AG Audit 
Paras/Reports. 
6. While accepting the replies, the Committee underscores that the true 
success lies in the robust, time-bound and uncompromising implementation of 
the accepted recommendations. The Committee, therefore, desire the following 
noteworthy mandates to ensure the intended objective is fully achieved: 
i. Real-Time Digital Mandate (Recommendation Nos. 1 to 5): The assured 
go-live date of January 2026  for the Audit Para Monitoring System 
(APMS) must be treated as sacrosanct. The Committee expect the DPE 
to allocate all required resources to ensure a successful system debut. 
Following the official launch, the Committee shall continue its active 
oversight on the Software (APMS -CoPU) and desire DPE to furnish 
compliance report  within three months on system's full technical 
functionality confirming widespread pan -user adoption across all 
CPSUs and concerned Ministries. 
 
ii. Top-Down Administrative Mandate (Recommendation No. 6 – Part I 
and 7):  As recommended by the Committee, the commitment to 
include data on settled and pending ATNs in CPSUs Annual Reports 
and ATN compliance as a metric in the Performance Review of the 
Financial Advisor and Secretary  is the most impactful governance 
reform in the direction of streamlining the process of ATNs . The 
Committee desire that the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and 
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) should ensure that this 
parameter is formally notified and enforced , cementing the link 
between governance efficiency and top-level accountability.  For this, 
DPE may impress upon the DoPT to include prompt disposal and zero 
pendency of ATNs on C&AG Paras/Reports pertaining to the CPSUs in 
the Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APAR) appraisal of the 
Financial Advisors, acting as Nodal Officer and Annual Performance 
Review of the concerned Secretaries. 
 

 
 
 
7 
 
iii. Consequence-Driven Enforcement Mandate (Recommendation Nos 6 
– Part II): The Committee hope that as recommended in the Original 
Report, the DPE to ensure mandatory graded enforcement 
mechanism, requiring the involvement of the DPE/DoE at first level and 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) at second level, before non-compliant 
Ministries/Departments are finally brought before CoPU. This two-tier 
mechanism must remain a live and operational tool for expeditious 
settlement of C&AG Reports/Paras . Thereafter, the Com mittee will 
take-up the matter and may call upon the Secretaries of non-compliant 
Ministries/Departments alongwith the Heads of the established two -
tier graded enforcement mechanism to address the  pendency in 
respect of final settlement of the C&AG Reports/Paras and fulfill the 
spirit of Recommendation No. 6 (i.e. Graded Escalation and 
Instutionalising Accountibility of FAs & Secretaries). 
 
7. The Committee hope that the full implementation of these accepted 
recommendations will decisively improve the parliamentary oversight, 
fundamentally enhancing the transparency in functioning and financial 
prudence of CPSUs.   The Committee are of the view that the Department of 
Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance to consider the Eleventh Report as ‘The 
Charter of Accountability’, a rulebook that systematically upholds three primary 
standards: the Digital Mandate  (eliminating the archaic, paper -based 
submission process), the Administrative Mandate (linking top-level (Financial 
Advisor/Secretary) efficiency directly to their APAR/Annual Performance 
Review respectively) and the Enforcement Mandate  (providing graded 
escalation from the DPE/DoE to the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) and finally, 
appearance before the CoPU).  To conclude, the Committee hope that the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee will be enforced in letter and 
spirit and  serve as landmark achievement in strengthening parliamenta ry 
oversight, driving fundamental reforms in settling C&AG Reports/Paras across 
all CPSUs and establishing new standards of  full accountability and efficiency 
in its deliverance. 
******** 

 
 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (SI. No.1) 
  
1. The Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU) under Rule 312A of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is entrusted to examine the 
functioning of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and scrutinize reports of the 
Comptroller and Auditor Ge neral (C&AG) regarding their performance. The C&AG, 
under Sections 19 of C&AG’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 
audits Government Companies and Corporations in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 143(6) of the Companies Act, 2 013 and the Audit reports thereon are 
subsequently presented to Parliament. 
The administrative Ministries/Departments of the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) are required to submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on audit 
observations within six months of the presentation of C&AG Reports (Commercial) in 
Parliament in accordance with Section 19 -A of C&AG’s (DPC) Act, 1971. However, 
widespread delays and non -compliance by Ministries/Departments have rendered 
audit scrutiny ineffective, leading to unresolved governance and accountability issues 
in CPSUs.  Failure to comply also results in a backlog of unsettled audit paras, 
delaying parliamentary oversight and remedial actions thereon. 
As per the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020, Secretaries of concerned 
Ministries/Departments are responsible for timely submission of ATNs, duly vetted by 
the Audit before the settled Audit Para/Report is finally sent to the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (CoPU). Despite clear regulations, the Committee have repeatedly 
observed non-submission or delayed submission of ATNs, with some cases spanning 
multiple years. An analysis of details of pendency of Audit Reports/Paras revealed that 
from the 967 R eports/Paras involving 141 CPSUs across 28 Ministries, 
313Reports/Paras remained pending with 76 Reports/Paras awaiting first ATNs and 
237 Reports/Paras requiring revised ATNs. Ministries such as Petroleum & Natural 
Gas, Finance (Dept. of Financial Services), Steel, Defence, Civil Aviation, Power and 
Road Transport & Highways have the highest number of pending audit paras, 
reflecting a significant compliance gap. 
The Committee observed that a major challenge contributing to this issue is the 
lack of a centralized monitoring system for tracking ATN submissions related to 
CPSUs. Unlike the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), which benefits from the Audit 
Para Monitoring System (APMS), simila r platform for CoPU is yet to be made 

 
 
 
9 
 
functional for monitoring CPSUs related Audit Paras, resulting in inefficient manual 
tracking and difficulty in record-keeping.  
Further, past recommendations (including those in 49th Report of 7th Lok Sabha, 
2nd Report of 12th Lok Sabha and 1 st Report of 13th Lok Sabha) had emphasized the 
need for Monitoring Cells (MCs) in Ministries and a Centralised Monitoring Cell (CMC) 
in the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to oversee timely compliance with ATN 
submission. However, these measures did not seem to have  yielded the desired 
improvements and as stated by C&AG and DPE officials, several Ministries have failed 
to establish robust internal tracking systems for compliance. 
The delayed or non-submission of ATNs is a major hurdle in ensuring effective 
parliamentary oversight, transparency and financial discipline in CPSUs.  Given the 
magnitude of the issue and to address this systemic issue at its root ca use, the 
Committee strongly felt a dire need for urgent reforms, including the development of 
an APMS -like digital platform under the Controller General of Accounts (CGA), 
Department of Expenditure, for real-time tracking of ATNs. Further, prompt action and 
setting of strict deadlines have to be enforced for non-compliant CPSUs and reviewing 
them through their administrative Ministry/Department. Also regular inter -ministerial 
coordination meetings should be convened between C&AG &CPSUs Administrative 
Ministries/Departments; Depa rtment of Public Enterprises; and Department of 
Expenditure to monitor progress.  Since Government holds majority share in these 
CPSUs, to enhance governance, ensure strict enforcement mechanism and 
accountability across all Ministries and CPSUs, the Commi ttee desire d that a 
structured system of reporting delayed submissions may be brought forth periodically, 
on annual basis by the Department of Public Enterprises and Department of 
Expenditure (DoE) before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) headed by Cabinet 
Secretary so that the seriousness of the matter can be impressed upon the concerned 
Secretaries. Details of streamlining the procedure for submission of ATNs and working 
towards achievement of zero pendency has been illustrated in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
2. This Paragraph of Recommendation/observations contain overview of the 
subject matter involving development of digital platform for real-time tracking of ATNs. 
Regular Inter-ministerial coordination meeting and  structured system of reporting of 
delayed submissions on annual basis. Each of the above recommendation has been 
accepted by DPE and details of streamlining procedure have been stated in the replies 
to succeeding specific recommendation(s). 
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (i) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

 
 
 
10 
 
DELAYED SUBMISSION OF ATNS BEYOND THE STIPULATED  
SIX-MONTHS PERIOD  
Recommendation (SI. No.2) 
 
3. The Committee noted that despite clear guidelines under Regulations on Audit 
and Accounts, 2020, several Ministries and Departments have failed to submit ATNs 
within the stipulated six months from the date of the presentation of the Audit Report 
to Parliament. As per data pr ovided by C&AG as of December 31, 2022, reveal that 
out of 313 pending Audit Paras, 76 first ATNs were awaited, while 237 revised ATNs 
were yet to be submitted. The delay in ATN submission results in prolonged audit 
scrutiny and ineffective corrective acti on, ultimately undermining financial 
accountability. 
The information furnished by C&AG has highlighted that many Ministries do not 
submit ATNs unless the concerned Audit Paras are selected for examination by the 
CoPU. This results in large -scale pendency and failure to implement corrective 
actions.  The DPE while acknowledging the issue has stated that despite regular 
reminders, several Ministries/Departments have either submitted incomplete 
information or have not responded at all.  To this, Controller General of Accounts 
(CGA) has suggested that an automate d tracking system for ATNs (Audit Para 
Monitoring System - APMS) may be implemented to ensure real -time monitoring of 
submission timelines. 
 The Committee while deali ng with the issue in detail found  that mandatory 
compliance with ATNs submission deadlines is need of the hour and every 
administrative Ministry/Department of the CPSUs should have been adhered to 
promptly long back.  (i) Henceforth, with no exception, complete action on furnishing 
of ATN s, with number of journeys not exceeding two between the concerned 
Ministry/Department followed by vetting comments of Audit, must be adhered to within 
six months of the presentation of the Audit R eport to Parliament; (ii)  Any 
Ministry/Department failing to comply should be required to submit an explanation 
within 30 days after the six -month deadline to the DPE and DoE for placing it before 
the Committee of Secretaries (CoS).  In this regard, DPE may prepare the list of non-
compliant Ministries/Department annually (as on 31st December) for placing before 
CoS.  While placing the compliance data before CoS, DPE may classify the 
Ministries/Departments under three categories viz., Low pendency, Medium pendency 
and High pendency depending on the pendency percentage of ATNs as more than 0-
25 %, 25 -50 % and more than 50% respectively.  The final compliance on progress 
made after placing the data before CoS may be sent by DPE to the Committee 
Secretariat for perusal of the Committee along with the annual information sought with 
regard to various CPSUs for being considered by the Committee at their first sitting 
held for Selection of Subjects for examination; and (iii)  The Financial Advisors (FAs) 
of concerned Ministry/Department, made as Nodal Officer for collation of all data must 
submit quarterly reports on ATN status to DPE; and (iv) In addition to this, the 

 
 
 
11 
 
accountability of Secretary of the Ministry/Department, who also acts as Chief 
Accounting Authority (CAA), should be upheld in case of recurring non -compliance 
with ATN submission timelines, as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU. The Department of Public 
Enterprises has rigorously followed -up the matter with the Concerned 
Ministries/Departments through email/OM etc. DPE has given the updated status on 
21-02-2025, which is also a part of the Eleventh Report of 2024-25 of COPU which is 
reproduced below: 
 
 
 
DPE has further conducted meeting on 04 -07-2025 with Ministries/Departments 
having large number of Audit Paras (i.e. more than 5 audit paras), The O/o C&AG was 
also represented in the meeting.  Ministries/Departments were sensitised 
about various recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report including remedial 
actions to be taken by them like establishment of Internal  Monitoring Committees 
(IMCs), Departmental Audit Committee (DAC) for reviewing/expediting the 
processing/finalisation of ATNs, regular follow -ups/joint meetings between the 
Ministry's Audit Wing and the C&AG Office. The minutes of meeting is enclosed 
herewith as Annexure -I. After the meeting, improved coordination between O/o C&AG 
and Ministries/Departments has been observed. 
 
The Office of Controller General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure have 
prepared the pilot Portal in consultation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It is likely 
that the portal shall be live by January 2026.  DPE vide Office Memorandum 
F.No.DPE-S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 29 -10-2025 to concerned 
Ministries/Departments incorporating all the above recommendations including 


 
 
 
12 
 
adherence to timelines. DPE shall also submit the progress report on final compliance 
to CoPU Secretariat on annual basis as recommended. 
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (i) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
LACK OF A CENTRALIZED MONITORING SYSTEM FOR ATN SUBMISSION 
Recommendation (SI. No.3) 
 
5. The Committee found  that the existing process for ATN submission is largely 
manual, leading to delays, inefficiencies and difficulty in tracking pending ATNs. The 
absence of a centralized monitoring system has resulted in a lack of real-time data on 
ATN submission across Min istries/Departments. The DPE and the Committee 
Secretariat manually tracks the status of pending ATNs, leading to difficulties in tracing 
records and updating the status of settlement. 
The C&AG during deliberation on various occasions have expressed concerns 
over the absence of a dedicated digital system to track ATNs, leading to ineffective 
follow-ups. The DPE has also affirmatively agreed with the need for an integrated 
digital monitor ing system and suggested that ATN compliance be monitored in 
coordination with CGA under DoE and finally to CoPU.  The CGA supporting the 
proposal has shown their preparedness to immediately make provisions for 
operationalization of the Audit Para Monitori ng System (APMS), on the directions of 
the Committee, which would allow Ministries/Departments, C&AG, DPE, DoE and 
CoPU to track ATN submission status in real time. 
 To give effect to this, the Committee desire d (i)  Immediate action on 
implementation and operationalization of the APMS Portal by CGA within next six 
months, in consultation with the stakeholders viz., CPSUs through their concerned 
Ministry/Department, C&AG and DPE to make audit system for CPSUs mor e 
efficacious.  The CGA should develop a customized APMS Portal involving the 
stakeholders and maintain the same under the Department of Expenditure.  The portal 
should invariably include real -time tracking, au tomated alerts and a dashboard to 
display ATN submission status across all Ministries/Department.  The portal should 
also generate automatic reminders for pending ATNs to the concerned Ministries and 
their Secretaries, in case of breach of any submission t imeline; and (ii) The Portal 
should invariably have mandatory digital submission of ATNs by the 
Ministries/Departments and vetting remarks by C&AG through the APMS to eliminate 
inefficiencies in manual record-keeping.  Hard copy submissions should immediat ely 
be discontinued and a digital acknowledgment receipt may be generated for tracking 
purposes. 

 
 
 
13 
 
Reply of the Government 
6. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU.   Department of Expenditure 
has also furnished the inputs for framing ATR vide OM dated 28.08.2025 (copy 
enclosed). The Office of Controller General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure 
have prepared the pilot Portal in consult ation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It 
is likely that the portal shall be live by January 2026 with additional functionalities like 
real-time tracking, automated alerts and a dashboard.   DPE has issued Office 
Memorandum vide F.No.DPE-S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 29 -10-2025 to 
concerned Ministries/Departments/O/o C&AG informing their expected roles and 
various functionalities of the portal. 
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (i) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
HIGH PENDENCY IN SPECIFIC MINISTRIES WITH LARGE NUMBER OF  
AUDIT PARAS  
Recommendation (SI. No.4) 
 
7. The Committee note d that certain key Ministries, including Ministries such as 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Finance (Dept. of Financial Services), Steel, Defence, Civil 
Aviation, Power and Road Transport & Highways, have disproportionately high 
numbers of pending ATNs. Ministries fail to submit ATNs even after multiple reminders, 
delaying corrective actions and undermining financial discipline.  Further, as submitted 
by DPE before the Committee, two kinds of paras, one is related to the operation of 
CPSUs and the second related to financial irregularities or violations of DPE guidelines 
are the majority where timely settlement of ATNs could not be achieved. 
The Committee note d that those Ministries that have a history of non -compliance in 
ATN submission, urge stricter monitoring mechanisms.  The DPE has stated that while 
reminders were issued, Ministries often cite resource constraints or pending legal 
proceedings as reasons for delays.  To arrive at amicable resolution of the matter, the 
Committee find that it would be a wise step to have accountability of the Financial 
Advisors (FAs) of high -pendency Ministries under the ambit and supervision of the 
DPE and DoE. 
To meet the intended objective, the Committee found that time has come where 
(i) Priority on monitoring of high -pendency Ministries should be taken -up by DPE 
where Ministries with over 20 pending ATNs should be placed under stricter scrutiny 
and their Financial Advisors (FAs) should present a compliance ac tion plan, detailing 
steps taken to clear the backlog; (ii) Escalation mechanism for long-pending ATNs be 
made functional if ATNs remain pending beyond one year and the matter should be 

 
 
 
14 
 
escalated to the Cabinet Secretariat through CoS; (iii)  The cases involving unsettled 
Audit Paras may be classified under the sub -heads - DPE Guidelines, AMRCD, 
Court/Arbitration, Systemic and Other categories; (iv) For such cases where 
Ministries/Departments have cited ongoing legal proceedings as a reason for delayed 
ATNs, the Committee recommend the establishment of a legal advisory panel in 
consultation with Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law to review such cases 
and recommend appropriate leg al reforms, if necessary; and (v) Further, non -
compliant Ministries should be required to submit a written explanation on the APMS 
Portal for being viewed by the Secretaries of DPE and DoE with final responsibility to 
CoPU. 
 
Reply of the Government 
8. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU. The Office of Controller 
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure have prepared the pilot Portal in 
consultation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It is likely that the portal shall be live 
by January 2026 with all functionalities like age wise pendency, classification of paras 
as DPE Guidelines, AMRCD, Court/Arbitration, Systemic and Other categories. DPE 
shall monitor the high pendency Ministries/Department as per information available 
with the portal. Fur ther, DPE vide F.No.DPE -S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 
29-10-2025 has inter-alia informed concerned Ministries/Department about the need 
of establishment of a legal advisory panel in cases where legal proceedings have been 
cited as reason for delayed  ATN in consultation with Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law.  
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (i) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
NUMBER OF JOURNEYS AND TURNAROUND TIME FOR  
FINALIZATION OF ATNs 
Recommendation (SI. No.5) 
 
9. The Committee noted inconsistent time taken and coordination issues between 
the Ministries/Departments and C&AG in furnishing the ATNs and vetting remarks 
respectively.  There are hardly any cases where the timeline of six months has been 
adhered to for sending the final ATNs to CoPU for settlement/dropping of Audit para in 
view of no further comments by the Audit. Many Ministries/Departments delay final 
ATN submission due to long turnaround times in the vetting process. In several 
instances, ATNs were returned by CAG with comments, but Ministries failed to provide 
revised ATNs in a timely manner.  The C&AG time and again have also brought to the 

 
 
 
15 
 
notice of Committee that some Ministries take excessive time to resubmit revised 
ATNs after receiving initial audit observations.  It has been found that the overall 
process sometimes takes years with several rounds of journey between the 
Ministry/Department and C&AG before reaching settlement on the matter.   
The Committee are of the view that regular inter -departmental meetings should be 
held to streamline the vetting process.  To streamlining the vetting process, the Ministry 
and C&AG each should set a maximum timeline of 30 days for reviewing and providing 
ATNs and vetting comments on them. 
To give effect to this, (i ) the Ministries/Departments may establish Internal 
Monitoring Committees to oversee the timely preparation and submission of ATNs. 
These Committees can meet at regular intervals, chaired by senior officials such as 
the Additional Secretary or Financial Advisor;  (ii) The Ministry/Department should also 
have Departmental Audit Committee (DAC), chaired by the Secretary of the 
Ministry/Department that may hold review meetings to expedite the processing and 
finalization of ATNs before submission to C&AG for vetting; and (iii) Finally, structured 
workflow and timeline for the ATN submission process alongwith regular follow -ups 
and joint meetings between the Ministry's Audit Wing and the C&AG Office may also 
take place to facilitate vetting and resolve queries at  an early stage.  Such meetings 
should help to reduce delays due to repeated revisions of ATNs. 
The measures suggested above and reducing number of journeys to two 
between the Ministries/Departments should be able to meet the intended purpose of 
completion of action on ATNs submission within six months timeline. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
10. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU. The Office of Controller 
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure have prepared the pilot Portal in 
consultation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It is likely that the portal shall be live 
by January 2026.  
DPE has conducted meeting on 04-07-2025 with Ministries/Departments having large 
number of Audit Paras (i.e. more than 5 audit paras), The O/o C&AG was also 
represented in the meeting.  Ministries/Department were sensitised about  various 
recommendation contained in the Eleventh Report including remedial actions to be 
taken by them like establishment of Internal Monitoring Committees (IMCs), 
Departmental Audit Committee (DAC) for reviewing/expediting the 
processing/finalisation of ATNs, regular follow -ups/joint meetings between the 
Ministry's Audit Wing and the C&AG Office. The minutes of meeting is enclosed 
herewith as Annexure - I. 
DPE vide Office Memorandum F.No.DPE-S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 29-
10-2025 informed concerned Ministries/Departments about the need of various 
committees like Departmental Audit Committee (DAC), Internal Monitoring 

 
 
 
16 
 
Committees, Joint meetings between the Ministry's Audit Wing and the C&AG Office 
as well as adherence to timelines. 
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (i) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
NEED FOR A STRONGER ENFORCEMENT MECHANISM  
Recommendation (SI. No.6) 
 
11. The Committee observed that existing mechanisms lack strict penalties for non-
compliance with ATN submission deadlines. Ministries/Departments often delay ATNs 
without facing any consequences, leading to continued inefficiency.  The C&AG, also 
in agreement that Ministries failing to submit ATNs should be subject to stricter 
Parliamentary scrutiny, the Committee were of the view that (i) ATN compliance may 
be included as part of Performance Appraisal (PA) system of the Financial Advisors of 
the Ministry/Department, being the Nodal Officer nominated by DPE in this regard.  
Further, each CPSU while bringing their Annual Report should include information on 
data pertaining to settled and pending ATNs that should help bring enhanced 
transparency and compliance in public domain; (ii) The Committee further desired for 
layers of answerability at first level, to DPE and DoE and second level of CoS should 
act as deterrence for the non-compliant Ministries/Departments before being brought 
finally to CoPU.  Failure at first and second level, the Secretaries of flagged non -
compliant Ministries should be required to appear before CoPU for an explanation.  
Further, Annual Performance Reviews of Secretaries should include ATN compliance 
as a metric. 
 
Reply of the Government 
12. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU. The Office of Controller 
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure have prepared the pilot Portal in 
consultation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It is likely that the portal shall be live 
by January 2026.  
DPE vide F.No.DPE -S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 29 -10-2025 informed 
concerned Ministries/Department about the role of Ministries/Departments in ensuring 
ATN compliance. 
  Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (ii) and (iii) of Chapter 1 of the Report) 

 
 
 
17 
 
CONCLUSION  
Recommendation (SI. No.7) 
 
13. The issue of delayed and non -submission of ATNs is a critical gap in the 
parliamentary oversight of CPSUs. Without timely submission, key audit observations 
remain unresolved, affecting the transparency, financial discipline, and governance of 
CPSUs. The Committee strongly recommend ed immediate implementation of a 
centralized digital monitoring system [APMS(CoPU)] and strict compliance measures 
to ensure effective oversight and accountability in Central Public Sector Undertakings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
14. DPE accepts the recommendation of the COPU. The Office of Controller 
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure have prepared the pilot Portal in 
consultation with DPE. UAT has been completed. It is likely that the portal shall be live 
by January 2026 with all functionalities necessary for ensuring timeliness of ATNs and 
lower pendency. 
   
Ministry of Finance, Department of Public Enterprises 
[OM NO S-04/0002/2025-Survey Division dated 30-10-2025 (Comp. No.: 14345)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 6 (ii) and 7 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
  
------- 
  

 
 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL  - 
  

 
 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL  - 
 
  

 
 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT HAS FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND FINAL REPLIES ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL   - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
21 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 


 
 
 
22 
 


 
 
 
23 
 


 
 
 
24 
 
 


 
 
 
25 
 
 


 
 
 
26 
 


 
 
 
27 
 
 


 
 
 
28 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 


 
 
 
29 
 


 
 
 
30 
 


 
 
 
31 
 


 
 
 
32 
 


 
 
 
33 
 


 
 
 
34 
 


 
 
 
35 
 


 
 
 
36 
 


 
 
 
37 
 


 
 
 
38 
 


 
 
 
39 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
40 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 


 
 
 
41 
 
 


 
 
 
42 
 


 
 
 
43 
 
 
 


 
 
 
44 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 2025 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘ 2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft 
Reports. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft report s, 
without any changes/modifications: - 

 
 
 
45 
 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited  (SFCL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs 
(Horizontal Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to flaring 
of High -pressure gas’ relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) 
Limited. (Audit Based Examination); 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Procurement of 
hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)”  
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Undue enrichment 
through recovery of turnover tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report 
No. 14 of 2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Design and 
Development (D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)”  [Based on 
Chapter-II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “ Reviewing timely 
submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the current 
session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 

 
 
 
46 
 
APPENDIX- II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH 
REPORT (18th LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) ON “REVIEWING TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES 
(ATNs) ON C&AG PARAS/REPORTS (COMMERCIAL) BY THE 
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS” 
 
 
I Total number of recommendations:               07 
 
II Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 
 
 
       Total- 07 
Percentage- 100 
 
III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies: 
-    NIL    - 
 
 
     Total- 00 
Percentage- NA 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and need reiteration: 
-    NIL   - 
 
 
 
        Total- 00 
Percentage- NA 
 
V Observations/Recommendations to which the 
Government has furnished interim replies: 
-   NIL   - 
 
 
        Total- 00 
Percentage- NA 
 
 