 
 
 
 
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED  
(HAL) 
 
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT (D&D) IN HINDUSTAN 
AERONAUTICS LIMITED (HAL) 
 
[BASED ON CHAPTER II OF C&AG REPORT NO. 18 OF 2023] 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION 
(MINISTRY OF DEFENCE) 
 
          COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
                                       (2025-26) 
 
 
 TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                        
       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                          NEW DELHI 
26 

 
ii 
 
TWENTY- SIXTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS                                                                                           
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED  
(HAL) 
 
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT (D&D) IN HINDUSTAN 
AERONAUTICS LIMITED (HAL) 
 
[BASED ON CHAPTER II OF C&AG REPORT NO. 18 OF 2023] 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION 
(MINISTRY OF DEFENCE) 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Chapter -II of C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2023 relating to Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
 
                                  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                                         NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947(Saka) 

 
iii 
 
CPU No.1082  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs...... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok 
Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 
 
 

 
iv 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) ………………………………... 
  
v 
  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………… 
  
vi 
CHAPTER I      REPORT…………………………………………………………………………….  01 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………. 
  
 
07 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government Replies………………. 
  
 
16 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration……….  
  
 
17 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies…………………………….  
 
18 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. 
 
Minutes of the sitting held on 05.12.2025 
                                       
21 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 10 th Report of Committee on  
Public Undertakings (18 th Loksabha) [Based on Audit Para 6.1 Of C&AG Report 
No.14 of 2021 relating to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL)]                                                                                         
                                               
23 
 
 
 
  

 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
 
Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.  Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.  Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
15.  Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Dr. John Brittas 
17.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18.  Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2.  Ms.  Mriganka Achal - Director  
3.  Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary  
4.  Shri Pranay Pathak - Secretariat Assistant 

 
vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Twenty-Sixth Report on their 
behalf, present this Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘ Design and 
Development (D&D) In Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) ’ [Based on 
Chapter-II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]. 
 
2. The Tenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
27 March, 202 5. The Action  taken Replies to all the 09 recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Defence on 21 
April, 2025. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their 
sitting held on 05th December, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the 
Committee (18th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 

 
1  
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings related to Chapter II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023 regarding ‘Design and 
Development (D&D)’ in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’ , which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 18.02.2025. It contained 09 observations/recommendations. 
2.  Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect the 08 of the 09 
observations/recommendations of the Committee . The introductory paragraphs (Sr. Nos. 1 and 2 ) 
were general observations, on which the Ministry did not offer specific comments. 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9. 
   (Chapter II) 
     (Total: 07) 
 
(ii) 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Sl. No. Nil 
  (Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration.    
Sl. No. Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total: 00) 
 
  (iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                      
Sl. Nos. 3 and 6. 
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total: 02) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire  the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Production ) to 
furnish final Action Taken Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report.  The Committee further desire that the final replies in 
respect of  Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which only interim 
replies have been given by Government, should be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 

 
2  
 
 
 
 
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH PRE-PROJECT PROCESSES AND R&D POLICY 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Tenth Report, had highlighted systemic weaknesses in HAL's project 
planning and recommended strict adherence to its R&D Policy: 
" The Committee observed that HAL has not adhered to its own R&D Policy and 
Manual in several critical pre -project processes. A review of 32 projects revealed that 
18 projects (56.25%) lacked Project Feasibility Reports (PFRs), 29 projects (90.6%) 
did not have Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), and 21 projects (65.6%) failed to 
conduct Technology Gap Analysis (TGA). These lapses indicate systemic 
weaknesses in planning and risk assessment, leading to delays, cost overruns, and 
inefficient resource utilization. Furthermore, the Committee note that technical review 
meetings were conducted irregularly, with only 14 out of the mandated 42 Committee 
of Institutions Network (COIN) meetings were held, reflecting a 66.7% shortfall in 
oversight. This lack of structured project governance has led to several high -value 
projects suffering delays and financial impairments, including the Gas Turbine Engine 
project, Project 2 (Trainer Aircraft), and the Indigenous Helicopter Development 
Program. HAL has justified that Draft Cabinet Notes were used as a substitute for 
DPRs in customer -funded projects, and that feasibility studies were proportionate to 
project size. However, the Committee find that these practices compromise the 
integrity of project planning and increase the likelihood of project failures. 
 
The Committee recommend that HAL enforce strict adherence to the R&D Policy by 
making the preparation of PFRs, DPRs, and TGAs mandatory for every project, 
regardless of funding source or scale. Additionally, if HAL or the Ministry determines 
that these manuals are outdated, they should be thoroughly revised to incorporate 
new developments, technical advancements, and internationally approved standards. 
The Ministry of Defence should establish a review mechanism to ensure that all pre -
project processes are followed, and corrective measures should be taken in cases of 
non-compliance.” 
 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" The Design and Development (D&D) projects undertaken by HAL broadly fall into 
two categories viz. Customer that is Govt. funded projects and HAL funded projects. 
The Government funded projects are approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security 
(CCS) based on the requirements of the Defence forces. The HAL funded projects are 
undertaken to build indigenous capability in strategic Defence equipment/components 
through internal resources. 
 
About 85% of the projects undertaken by M/s.HAL are approved by Customer/ 
Government and sanctioned by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The CCS note 
is prepared on the basis of forces requirement & feasibility assessments etc and 
contains justification, Inter-Ministerial consultations, factors like pre-feasibility etc. 
 

 
3  
Remaining about 15% projects taken up for Technology development at HAL with 
Internal funding, the detailed process of DPR / PFR / TGA are followed. For small 
projects, all the aspects which are required for scrutiny are covered in the project 
proposal itself, not as steps or document. 
 
Therefore, though all projects go through adequate pre -project process which bring 
out the requisite and relevant aspects, however, as recommended by the Committee, 
guidelines have been issued by the HAL to its R&D centers to adhere to the laid down 
procedures for project approval & implementation, in R&D Manual 2022. Moreover, a 
consultant is being appointed to review HAL’s R&D procedures & benchmarks it with 
best practices in Global Aerospace and Defense companies, and  to revise R&D 
Manual of HAL. 
 
HAL has also undertaken a transformation in its R&D approach by modernizing all its 
R&D centers, adopting digital workflows with recent roll out of Software tool to monitor 
the R&D projects as well as work flow. MoD has advised HAL to scrupulously follow all 
steps including pre-project processes as per their R&D Manual, particularly in view of 
deficiencies brought out by C&AG report No. 18 of 2023 regarding ‘Design and 
Development (D&D)’ in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL).” 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the comprehensive reply provided by the Ministry 
and note the proactive steps taken by HAL to strengthen its pre -project 
processes. The issuance of new guidelines to R&D centers to ensure adherence 
to the R&D Manual 2022 is a welcome measure. The Committee further 
commend the forward -looking decision to appoint a consultant to review and 
benchmark HAL’s R&D procedures against global best practices. This initiative 
to revise the R&D Manual reflects a strong commitment to incorporating 
technical advancements and international standards, which aligns perfectly with 
the Committee's original recommendation. The Committee are confident that 
these measures will address the systemic weaknesses previously identified and 
lead to more efficient project planning and resource utilization in the future. The 
Committee would appreciate being kept informed about the key outcomes from 
the consultant's review and the subsequent finalization of the revised R&D 
Manual. 
 
                   Delays in Project 1 (Gas Turbine Engine) Development     
(Recommendation No. 3) 
8. The Committee, in their Report, had expressed concern over the significant delays in the Gas 
Turbine Engine project and urged HAL to secure critical infrastructure: 

 
4  
" The Committee note that the Gas Turbine Engine project, initially sanctioned for 
₹441.41 crore, has been significantly delayed, causing an impaired expense of 
₹159.23 crore. The project was divided into two stages: Stage I (Project Definition and 
Design) was originally scheduled for completion in September 2014 but was delayed 
to December 2015, and Stage II (Prototype Development, Testing, and Certification) 
has been ongoing since 2018 with no completion in sight. One of the primary reasons 
for the delay is the failure to secure critical components on time, due to procurement 
bottlenecks and delayed approvals for test -bed construction. Additionally, land 
clearance approvals were delayed due to bureaucratic inefficiencies, adding more 
than three years to the project timeline. The Committee also note that HAL did not 
anticipate the need for 3D technology and advanced material integration, leading to 
multiple redesign efforts and further pushing back project deadlines. The lack of 
indigenous expertise in medium thrust -class engine development forced HAL to rely 
on external consultants, increasing costs and extending the timeline. In this project the 
Committee note that the project, was handled in very casual approach wherein not 
even thorough research was done as HAL was not sure where to buy the critical 
component on time and it was delayed. 
 
The Committee recommend conducting thorough research on the project and urges 
HAL to establish long-term strategic partnerships with both domestic and international 
vendors. This will ensure the timely availability of critical components and minimize 
procurement-related delays. Additionally, the Ministry of Defence should allocate 
dedicated funding for the early -stage development of test -bed infrastructure, ensuring 
that essential testing facilities are in place before project execution begins. The 
Committee would suggest that to accelerate technological readiness, HAL should 
invest in advanced material research and indigenous 3D technology capabilities to 
reduce dependency on foreign suppliers.” 
 
9.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" HAL took up R&D of two engines pro -actively to become self -reliant in the engine 
technology and is developing Gas Turbine Engine which is very complex and highly 
iterative process where the progress is made stage wise incorporating lessons from 
earlier stage of design, testing. The engines taken up for R&D are 25 kilo newton 
engine able to power fixed wing aircraft of the class of Intermediate jet trainer and 
another class of Turbo shaft engine which will be powering Helicopters. The  critical 
components for such engine are being designed and developed for the first time in the 
country and there has been delay from the estimated time in redesigning them. It is 
pertinent to bring out that very few countries in the world have matured gas turbine 
engine manufacturing technology and they do not transfer the complete technology. 
HAL is actively working towards establishing long -term strategic partnerships with 
global aerospace and defence companies to overcome the technology gap. HAL has 
long time relationship with Engine manufacturing companies like Rolls Royce & Safran 
for manufacturing of Aero Engines designed and developed by them. Further, HAL 
has formed a JV company named as SAFHAL with Safran Helicopter Engines, France 
to jointly develop engine for IMRH / DBMRH Project. However, even in these cases, 
none of foreign companies/ countries are ready to transfer 100% ToT.The core 
competence of HAL is in Research and Development of aircraft, helicopters, engines 
and accessories. The material research which is a critical factor for engine 
development is being taken up by DMRL (DRDO) and MIDHANI & private sector. HAL 
is working with these organizations for advanced materials required for aero -engine 

 
5  
development. HAL has placed orders on MIDHANI for Rs 757.82 Crs towards 
indigenization of raw material. As  suggested, a gap analysis of ground facilities for 
testing of airborne systems is being carried out by the Ministry."  
10. The Committee appreciate HAL's efforts in establishing strategic 
partnerships and collaborating with domestic entities like DRDO and MIDHANI 
for material research. However, the reply is interim in nature, as the core issue 
of developing dedicated test -bed infrastructure remains unresolved. The 
Ministry has only stated that a "gap analysis...is being carried out". The 
original audit highlighted that delayed approvals for test -bed construction 
were a primary cause for project delays. This gap analysis is a critical first 
step, but it is not the solution itself. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry expedite this analysis and furnish a definitive action plan, with clear 
timelines and funding arrangements, for the establishment of the required 
testing infrastructure. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the 
progress in this regard. 
  
DELAYS IN EASA CERTIFICATION FOR HELICOPTER 1 AND EXPORT CHALLENGES   
             (Recommendation No. 6) 
11. The Committee, in their Report, had highlighted the decade-long delay in securing EASA 
certification and recommended concrete steps to address this: 
" The Committee observed that HAL’s attempt to secure certification for Helicopter 1 
from the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) was delayed by over a decade, 
leading to ₹108.24 crore in impaired costs and significantly affecting its export 
potential. Initially, HAL anticipated that its extensive military certification experience 
would facilitate the EASA approval process. The lack of prior engagement with 
international civil aviation regulators resulted in prolonged testing and documentation 
delays. Consequently, HAL was unable to market and export Helicopter 1 in a timely 
manner. The Committee further note that the extended certification timeline not only 
impacted HAL’s financial standing but also reduced its credibility in the international 
aviation industry. 
 
Given the stringent regulatory landscape of civil aviation, the Committee strongly 
emphasize the need for HAL to integrate international certification requirements from 
the earliest stages of aircraft design. The Committee recommend that HAL establish a 
dedicated Civil Certification Task Force to ensure efficient coordination of all 
compliance-related activities and facilitate faster regulatory approvals. Additionally, the 
Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to strengthen bilateral agreements with key 
international certification bodies, including EASA, to fast -track approval processes for 

 
6  
future aircraft and helicopter projects.” 
 
12.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" The majority of HAL’s projects are for Indian Defence Services. The products which 
has a potential to be marketed as civil products would be taken up for Civil and 
International certification. The current R&D manual encompasses the requirements of 
both military and Civil certification (DGCA). Based on the requirement of the project 
undertaken, HAL will integrate international certification requirements at the design 
stage. At HAL, Civil Certification group already exists with the name of Airworthiness 
Group (AWG) and they are co -ordinating with DGCA and EASA.MoD will examine the 
feasibility of strengthening bilateral agreements with key international certification 
bodies, including EASA, to fast -track approval processes for future aircraft and 
helicopter projects through Ministry of Civil Aviation and DGCA."  
13. The Committee note that a Civil Certification group already exists within HAL. 
While the Ministry’s response to the Committee’s key recommendation 
strengthening bilateral agreements to expedite international approvals is noted, 
the assurance to “examine the feasibility” of such agreements appears to reflect 
a cautious approach to a matter of considerable importance. Given that delays in 
securing international certifications have resulted in impaired costs exceeding 
₹108 crore and missed export opportunities, the Committee believes that a more 
proactive stance is warranted. The Committee respectfully reiterates its 
recommendation and encourages the Ministry of Defence, in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to move beyond preliminary assessments and 
initiate concrete measures toward establishing bilateral agreements with key 
international certification authorities, including EASA. These agreements are 
essential to streamline approval processes for upcoming aircraft and helicopter 
projects. The Committee requests that specific steps taken in this direction be 
shared in the next Action Taken Notes, along with a clear timeline to ensure 
transparency and accountability in addressing this critical issue. 
  

 
7  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE    
GOVERNMENT 
                                                                  OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (No. 1) 
 
1.  The present Audit Para 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023, examined by the 
Committee on Public Undertakings, pertains to "Design and Development (D&D) in 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)." The Committee reviewed the audit findings 
concerning HAL’s compliance with R&D policies, project delays, cost overruns, and 
procedural shortcomings in key development programs. HAL, a Maharatna company under 
the Ministry of Defence, plays a critical role in aerospace and defense manufacturing with 
21 production centers and 9 R&D facilities across India. The audit highlights systemic 
lapses in HAL’s adherence to mandated pre -project processes, including the absence of 
Project Feasibility Reports (PFRs) in 18 out of 32 projects and Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) in 29 out of 32 projects. Additionally, Technology Gap Analyses (TGA) were 
missing in 21 projects, affecting HAL’s ability to identify technical shortfalls and mitigate 
risks. The report also raises concerns about delays in flagship projects such as the Gas 
Turbine Engine, Aircraft 2 Avionics Upgrade, and Indigenous Helicopter Development, 
attributing them to inefficient planning, procurement challenges, and shifting project 
requirements. Among the major financial concerns, the audit notes ₹100.68 crore in 
impaired costs related to System 1 redesign, ₹159.23 crore in cost overruns for the Gas 
Turbine Engine project, and ₹75.85 crore in excess expenditure on Project 2 due to initial 
engine selection issues. Additionally, HAL’s failure to obtain European Union Aviation on 
Safety Agency (EASA) certification on time delayed the export potential of Helicopter 1, 
resulting in an impairment of ₹108.24 crore. In response, HAL acknowledged 
documentation and procedural gaps but justified its approach, citing flexibility in project 
approvals and the use of Draft Cabinet Notes for customer -funded projects as substitutes 
for DPRs. HAL also attributed delays to evolving defense requirements, complex integration 
challenges, and the need for indigenous technology development. The company has since 
revised its R&D manual (2022) to introduce sector -specific processes and issued 
compliance directives to all R&D Centers to strengthen project documentation. Before 
finalizing their observations and recommendations, the Committee carefully considered the 

 
8  
input from C&AG, HAL, and the Ministry of Defence. The Committee evaluated the 
evidence, project justifications, and remedial measures taken by HAL. Following thorough 
internal deliberation, the Committee reached the conclusions and formulated the 
recommendations outlined in the subsequent paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
 
                                                                        “No Comments” 
Non-Compliance with Pre-Project Processes and R&D Policy 
Recommendation (No. 2) 
 
2. The Committee observed that HAL has not adhered to its own R&D Policy and Manual in several 
critical pre-project processes. A review of 32 projects revealed that 18 projects (56.25%) lacked 
Project Feasibility Reports (PFRs), 29 projects (90.6%) did not have Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs), and 21 projects (65.6%) failed to conduct Technology Gap Analysis (TGA). These lapses 
indicate systemic weaknesses in planning and risk assessment, leading to delays, cost overruns, 
and inefficient resource utilization. Furthermore, the Committee note that technical review 
meetings were conducted irregularly, with only 14 out of the mandated 42 Committee of 
Institutions Network (COIN) meetings were held, reflecting a 66.7% shortfall in oversight. This lack 
of structured project governance has led to several high -value projects suffering delays and 
financial impairments, including the Gas Turbine Engine project, Project 2 (Trainer Aircraft), and 
the Indigenous Helicopter Development Program. HAL has justified that Draft Cabinet Notes were 
used as a substitute for DPRs in customer -funded projects, and that feasibility studies were 
proportionate to project size. However, the Committee find that these practices compromise the 
integrity of project planning and increase the likelihood of project failures. 
The Committee recommend that HAL enforce strict adherence to the R&D Policy by making the 
preparation of PFRs, DPRs, and TGAs mandatory for every project, regardless of funding source 
or scale. Additionally, if HAL or the Ministry determines that these manuals are outdated, they 
should be thoroughly revised to incorporate new developments, technical advancements, and 
internationally approved standards. The Ministry of Defence should establish a review mechanism 
to ensure that all pre -project processes are followed, and corrective measures should be taken in 
cases of non-compliance. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 “The Design and Development (D&D) projects undertaken by HAL broadly fall into two 
categories viz. Customer that is Govt. funded projects and HAL funded projects. The 
Government funded projects are approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) based 
on the requirements of the Defence forces. The HAL funded projects are undertaken to build 
indigenous capability in strategic Defence equipment/components through internal resources. 
About 85% of the projects undertaken by M/s.HAL are approved by Customer / Government 
and sanctioned by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The CCS note is prepared on the 

 
9  
basis of forces requirement & feasibility assessments etc and contains justification, Inter -
Ministerial consultations, factors like pre-feasibility etc. 
Remaining about 15% projects taken up for Technology development at HAL with Internal 
funding, the detailed process of DPR / PFR / TGA are followed. For small projects, all the 
aspects which are required for scrutiny are covered in the project proposal itself, not as steps or 
document.                                                              
Therefore, though all projects go through adequate pre -project process which bring out the 
requisite and relevant aspects, however, as recommended by the Committee, guidelines have 
been issued by the HAL to its R&D centers to adhere to the laid down procedures for project 
approval & implementation, in R&D Manual 2022. Moreover, a consultant is being appointed to 
review HAL’s R&D procedures & benchmarks it with best practices in Global Aerospace and 
Defense companies, and to revise R&D Manual of HAL.  HAL has also undertaken a 
transformation in its R&D approach by modernizing all its R&D centers, adopting digital 
workflows with recent roll out of Software tool to monitor the R&D projects as well as work flow.                    
Mod has advised HAL to scrupulously follow all steps including pre -project processes as per 
their R&D Manual, particularly in view of deficiencies brought out by C&AG report No. 18 of 
2023 regarding ‘Design and Development (D&D)’ in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL).” 
 
                                                 [Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
(O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Incorrect Engine Selection in Project 2 & Aircraft Stall/Spin Issues 
Recommendation (No. 4) 
3. The Committee observe that Project 2 (Trainer Aircraft Development), initiated in 
1999 with an initial budget of ₹180 crore, has faced significant setbacks due to 
incorrect engine selection. HAL initially selected Engine 1, which was found to be 
underpowered and unsuitable for operational requirements. In 2005, HAL switched to 
Engine 2, a higher -thrust alternative, but this change required extensive modifications 
to the aircraft’s structure. These modifications led to additional delays and cost 
overruns, pushing the total project expenditure to ₹710.08 crore, with a cost overrun of 
₹75.85 crore. The Committee also note that the aircraft faced serious stall and spin 
issues, which were not directly linked to engine thrust but rather to aerodynamic 
configuration and aircraft inertia. To resolve these issues, HAL engaged external 
consultants and implemented modifications to the vertical tail and rudder parameters, 

 
10  
which further extended the project timeline. As of 2024, the aircraft has still not been 
certified, and its operational viability remains uncertain. 
The Committee would like to suggest that HAL should conduct comprehensive market 
research and feasibility studies before selecting engines for indigenous aircraft 
programs, ensuring alignment with long -term operational and technical requirements. 
HAL should also invest in an advanced aerodynamic testing framework during the 
early stages of aircraft design to pre -emptively identify stall and spin issues and avoid 
costly modifications at later stages. 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The engine is selected based on the market survey of engines which are suitable for 
the aircraft. The critical design reviews are done to find suitability of the engine. At 
the start of this program, off the shelf engine with required power rating for the 
development of the aircraft was not available, hence, the nearest proven engine of 
lesser power rating available at that time, was selected to realise the programme and 
start the flight testing to prove the technologies of the aircraft  Subsequently, as per 
established commercial procedure, a composite committee with members from 
MOD, IAF and HAL was initiated for selection of adequate power rating engine 
required for the program. The aerodynamic issues are part of any R&D of highly 
complex Aircraft design. The same was overcome through consultation with global 
firm and all issues have been addressed. The aircraft was successfully modified post 
consultancy from International Firm and successfully flown in recently held Aero -
India. Customer demonstrations were held during Aero -India and the aircraft 
received encouraging response. 
HAL has a well -defined process for comprehensive feasibility studies in all future 
projects. A detailed chapter wise circular has been issued to all R&D Centres 
outlining the necessary steps for market research, feasibility analysis and long-term 
operational requirement before selecting critical components such as engines. 
HAL acknowledges the importance of robust aerodynamic testing in aircraft 
development and as recommended by the Committee, it is planning to invest in an 
advanced aerodynamic testing framework. This will include enhanced computational 
fluid dynamics (CFD) capabilities, dedicated stall and spin analysis methodologies, 
and improvements in wind tunnel testing to identify aerodynamic challenges at an 
early stage and minimize design iterations. High Power Computing Lab for 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) studies has been established in HAL.  Nasik in 
Dec 2024 being utilized by all R&D Centre.” 
                                                 [Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
(O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 

 
11  
 
 
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT AND COST RECOVERY MEASURES FOR SYSTEM 1 REDESIGN 
Recommendation (No. 5) 
 
4. The Committee note that HAL incurred ₹100.68 crore in redesign costs for System 
1 in Helicopter 1, but delays in certification prevented cost recovery through existing 
contracts. As a result, HAL had to write off ₹21.31 crore as an impaired expense, 
impacting financial sustainability. The project was initially designed to enhance 
component reliability, but multiple setbacks —including design flaws, late validation tests, 
and unexpected prototype development issues—pushed the timeline significantly beyond 
expectations. The Committee note that HAL’s approach to amortizing redesign costs 
against future orders is highly dependent on securing new contracts, which poses 
financial risks if future demand does not materialize. 
The Committee would like to recommend that HAL should establish a financial risk 
assessment framework before initiating large -scale redesign projects to ensure cost 
recovery strategies are built into project planning. Also, the Ministry of Defence should 
integrate amortization mechanisms into procurement contracts to reduce financial 
exposure and ensure that redesign costs are recovered through structured payments. 
Additionally, HAL should strengthen its financial modelling process by securing advance 
commitments from potential buyers before undertaking high-cost redesign investments. 
        Reply of the Government 
 
“HAL takes up re -design projects depending on the requirement of product 
improvements, component and system improvements. These projects are taken up pro -
actively based on the working of the product in real environment and feedback received 
from customers. 
R&D involves uncertain outcomes. Many projects do not result in commercially viable 
products. Therefore, full cost recovery project wise is not always possible. Even 
successful R&D may not give returns if the market is not ready or if regulatory 
approval/certification is delayed. By its very nature, R&D is a strategic/public good 
investment rather than a profit -guaranteed expenditure. But it is well understood and 
imbibed by HAL that overall investment in R&D shall result into overall profitable 
operations/outcomes & HAL follows that model. HAL follows financial modeling through 
cost amortization approach, where expenditures incurred on design and development 
efforts are systematically recovered through future orders. HAL has a well -defined Risk 
Management Policy framework, which is already in place to assess technical and 
financial risks. This is reviewed periodically by a Risk Management committee, a 
subcommittee of the Board. 

 
12  
Further, in the upcoming consultancy work being taken up for benchmarking of HAL 
R&D policy & procedures with Global aerospace companies, the assessment of risk 
management methodology followed by global companies is included in the scope of 
work. Lessons learnt with such bench marking would be included in the new R&D 
Manual. The  Defence Acquisition Procedure (DAP) 2020 already provides for 
amortization of R&D cost.” 
[Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
(O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 
 
PROJECT 3 (UAV DEVELOPMENT) AND MARKET RESEARCH DEFICIENCIES 
Recommendation (No.7) 
5. The Committee observed that HAL undertook Project 3 (Rotary UAV 
Development) without conducting a detailed market survey or demand assessment, 
leading to financial losses and lack of defense contracts. The project, initially 
sanctioned at ₹23.18 crore, aimed to develop a technology demonstrator for future 
surveillance platforms. However, HAL failed to align the project with actual defense 
requirements, leading to a product that did not meet operational standards. The 
UAV had a payload capacity of only 2.5 kg, an endurance of one hour, and a range 
of just 8–10 km, making it unsuitable for defense applications. Due to this mismatch, 
HAL failed to secure any defense orders, resulting in an impairment of ₹9.54 crore. 
Additionally, the Committee note that no comprehensive “Lessons Learned Report” 
was prepared, which prevented HAL from utilizing the project experience to improve 
future UAV programs. 
The Committee recommend that HAL should establish a dedicated Market 
Research and Demand Forecasting Division to assess potential buyer interest 
before investing in technology demonstrators,  ensuring that projects are 
commercially and operationally viable. HAL should align all future pilot projects with 
existing defense procurement roadmaps to maximize contract potential and avoid 
resource misallocation. Additionally, HAL should ensure that Letters of Intent (LoIs) 
from potential buyers are secured before initiating large - scale UAV development 
projects to guarantee a clear market pathway for new products. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommends that as suggested by C&AG HAL should conduct 
mandatory post-project evaluations, including a “Lessons Learned Report”, to refine 
project planning and risk assessment for future UAV programs. 
Reply of the Government  
“HAL takes up futuristic projects on its assessment of the technology needs of the 
defence aerospace sector of the country. Some of these projects are taken up pro -
actively to evaluate the technology. HAL’s strategic planning department regularly 

 
13  
studies Technology Perspective Capability Requirements (TPCR) and other similar 
documents to strategize and plan the roadmap. 
Market survey may not always be possible for the projects taken up only for 
technology development because the concepts are new and yet to be proven and 
there is no market, at that time, available for such concepts. Though for other D&D 
projects, market assessment is carried out. It may not always be feasible to obtain 
Letters of Intent (LoIs) particularly for projects which are taken up by HAL for 
technology development. 
In some cases, if project is not successful, the cost may not be recoverable though 
efforts are made to utilize the expenditure incurred by incorporating learning in other 
projects. 
 HAL prepares Performance measure documents, lesson learnt report and project 
closure report for completed projects. Project related documents, flight trial reports 
and defect investigation reports effectively capture lessons learnt. It is clarified that, 
for the project 3 (UAV), closure report was prepared by HAL covering the lessons 
learnt co-ordinated by IIT Kanpur.  However, the new R&D Manual which would be 
prepared after a benchmarking exercise by the consultant, would cover lessons 
learnt in a more structured manner.” 
[Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
                                                              (O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 
 
INDIGENOUS DEVELOPMENT OF AIRCRAFT 1 AND ADDITIONAL MODIFICATIONS 
Recommendation (No.8) 
6. The Committee observe that HAL’s attempt to upgrade Aircraft 2 
(Avionics Modernization Program) faced significant delays and financial overruns 
due to evolving user requirements and unplanned modifications. Initially 
sanctioned for ₹84.61 crore in 2015, the upgrade aimed to reduce dependency 
on foreign manufacturers by integrating indigenous Line Replaceable Units 
(LRUs) and advanced avionics. However, the project was still ongoing as of July 
2022, exceeding the original timeline by over four years. HAL was forced to seek 
additional ₹69.37 crore in funding in 2018, raising the total cost to ₹153.98 crore, 
without securing firm commitments from the Indian Air Force (IAF) for future 
orders. The Committee also note that HAL failed to obtain formal permission from 
the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) before proceeding with 
modifications, which could pose legal and contractual risks. Additionally, the IAF 
introduced new requirements mid -way, such as the integration of a Counter 
Measure Dispensing System (CMDS), which further delayed certification and 
testing. 

 
14  
The Committee would suggest HAL to establish a structured pre -design 
consultation mechanism with the IAF and other stakeholders to finalize system 
requirements before initiating avionics upgrades to ensure that mid -course 
modifications do not disrupt project timelines and financial planning. Additionally, 
the Ministry of Defence should develop a long -term roadmap for avionics 
modernization, ensuring that R&D initiatives are synchronized with future defense 
requirements to prevent redundancy and cost escalation. HAL should also 
implement a contractual risk mitigation strategy, securing OEM approvals in 
advance to prevent potential licensing disputes and ensure smooth project 
execution.          
Reply of the Government 
“In this project, HAL tried to anticipate the needs of the user and initiated the design with 
self-funding to ensure that the company is continuously innovating to meet the future 
needs of the customer. There is a certain amount of risk involved to this, however, it is 
required to stay competitive. In view of this, though efforts are made to finalize system 
requirements with stakeholders, it may not be possible always. 
As per existing R&D Manual, HAL studies preliminary staff Qualitative requirements 
(PSQR) during pre -design stage and engages with customers before finalising the 
requirements.Periodic joint project management reviews are being held with customers 
to align the customer requirements in the design. HAL is committed to contractual risk 
mitigation and will ensure that risk analysis is conducted as part of project planning. HAL 
will also proactively secure necessary OEM approvals in advance to prevent licensing 
disputes and ensure smooth project execution. Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff 
(HQ IDS) under MoD prepares a 10-year Integrated Capability Development Plan (ICDP) 
in consultation with the SHQ, comprising of two five -year plans. Along with ICDP , a 10 
year Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) is also prepared to give 
signal to the defence industry for its need of equipment & technologies in next 8 -10 
years.” 
     [Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
                                                                 (O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 
21.04.2025) 
 
CONCLUSION 
Recommendation (No.9) 
7.  The Committee recognize HAL’s pivotal role in advancing India's 
defense and aerospace capabilities, contributing significantly to indigenous 
aircraft, helicopter, and engine development. However, the findings in C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2023 highlight critical shortcomings in HAL’s project planning, 
execution, and financial oversight. Issues such as non -compliance with pre -
project documentation, procurement delays, cost overruns, and inadequate 

 
15  
market research have led to prolonged project timelines, impaired costs, and 
missed strategic opportunities. While HAL has made commendable progress 
in strengthening India’s self -reliance in aerospace technologies, systemic 
inefficiencies continue to hinder its ability to meet operational demands 
effectively. The Committee firmly believe that rigorous adherence to pre -
project processes, enhanced risk assessment mechanisms, and structured 
stakeholder engagement are essential for HAL to achieve global 
competitiveness in defense manufacturing. Strengthening financial oversight, 
establishing robust market research frameworks, and ensuring timely 
compliance with international certification standards will be crucial in 
positioning HAL as a leading aerospace powerhouse on the global stage. The 
Committee also emphasize the urgent need for HAL to transition from a 
reactive to a proactive R&D strategy, ensuring that technological 
advancements align seamlessly with national defense objectives and market 
requirements. In light of these observations, the Committee urge HAL and the 
Ministry of Defence to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, 
ensuring that future projects are executed with greater efficiency, financial 
prudence, and strategic foresight. The success of India’s defense 
modernization and indigenization efforts will depend not just on technological 
advancements but on the ability to integrate innovation with effective project 
management, accountability, and long -term vision. HAL’s progress in these 
areas will not only strengthen national security but also cement India’s position 
as a global leader in defense and aerospace manufacturing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         “Noted please. MoD & HAL would implement recommendation with due regards and sincerity.” 
 
[Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
                                                                 (O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 
21.04.2025) 
 
 

 
16  
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
 
 
  

 
17  
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
-     Nil      -  

 
18  
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT 
HAS FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
 
 
DELAYS IN PROJECT 1 (GAS TURBINE ENGINE) DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation (No. 3)  
 
1. The Committee note that the Gas Turbine Engine project, initially 
sanctioned for ₹441.41 crore, has been significantly delayed, causing an 
impaired expense of ₹159.23 crore. The project was divided into two stages: 
Stage I (Project Definition and Design) was originally scheduled for completion 
in September 2014 but was delayed to December 2015, and Stage II (Prototype 
Development, Testing, and Certification) has been ongoing since 2018 with no 
completion in sight. One of the primary reasons for the delay is the failure to 
secure critical components on time, due to procurement bottlenecks and delayed 
approvals for test -bed construction. Additionally, land clearance approvals were 
delayed due to bureaucratic inefficiencies, adding more than three years to the 
project timeline. The Committee also note that HAL did not anticipate the need 
for 3D technology and advanced material integration, leading to multiple 
redesign efforts and further pushing back project deadlines. The lack of 
indigenous expertise in medium thrust -class engine development forced HAL to 
rely on external consultants, increasing costs and extending the timeline. In this 
project the Committee note that the project, was handled in very casual 
approach wherein not even thorough research was done as HAL was not sure 
where to buy the critical component on time and it was delayed. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend conducting thorough research on the project and urges 
HAL to establish long -term strategic partnerships with both domestic and 
international vendors. This will ensure the timely availability of critical 
components and minimize procurement -related delays. Additionally, the Ministry 
of Defence should allocate dedicated funding for the early -stage development of 
test-bed infrastructure, ensuring that essential testing facilities are in place 
before project execution begins. The Committee would suggest that to 
accelerate technological readiness, HAL should invest in advanced material 
research and indigenous 3D technology capabilities to reduce dependency on 
foreign suppliers. 
Reply of the Government 
“HAL took up R&D of two engines pro -actively to become self -reliant in the engine 
technology and is developing Gas Turbine Engine which is very complex and highly iterative 
process where the progress is made stage wise incorporating lessons from earlier stage of 
design, testing. The engines taken up for R&D are 25 kilo newton engine able to power fixed 

 
19  
wing aircraft of the class of Intermediate jet trainer and another class of Turbo shaft engine 
which will be powering Helicopters. The critical components for such engine are being 
designed and developed for the first time in the country and there has been delay from the 
estimated time in redesigning them. It is pertinent to bring out that very few countries in the 
world have matured gas turbine engine manufacturing technology and they do not transfer 
the complete technology. HAL is actively working towards establishing long -term strategic 
partnerships with global aerospace and defence companies to overcome the technology 
gap. HAL has long time relationship with Engine manufacturing companies like Rolls Royce 
& Safran for manufacturing of Aero Engines designed and developed by them. Further, HAL 
has formed a JV company named as SAFHAL with Safran Helicopter Engines, France to 
jointly develop engine for IMRH / DBMRH Project. However, even in these cases, none of 
foreign companies/ countries are ready to transfer 100% ToT. The core competence of HAL 
is in Research and Development of aircraft, helicopters, engines and accessories. The 
material research which is a critical factor for engine development is being taken up by 
DMRL (DRDO) and MIDHANI & private sector. HAL is working with these organizations for 
advanced materials required for aero -engine development. HAL has placed orders on 
MIDHANI for Rs 757.82 Crs towards indigenization of raw material. As suggested, a gap 
analysis of ground facilities for testing of airborne systems is being carried out by the 
Ministry.” 
                                                [Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
                       (O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
DELAYS IN EASA CERTIFICATION FOR HELICOPTER 1 AND EXPORT 
CHALLENGES 
Recommendation (No. 6)  
 
2. The Committee observed that HAL’s attempt to secure certification for 
Helicopter 1 from the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) was delayed by over 
a decade, leading to ₹108.24 crore in impaired costs and significantly affecting its 
export potential. Initially, HAL anticipated that its extensive military certification 
experience would facilitate the EASA approval process. The lack of prior 
engagement with international civil aviation regulators resulted in prolonged testing 
and documentation delays. Cons equently, HAL was unable to market and export 
Helicopter 1 in a timely manner. The Committee further note that the extended 
certification timeline not only impacted HAL’s financial standing but also reduced its 
credibility in the international aviation industry. Given the stringent regulatory 
landscape of civil aviation, the Committee strongly emphasize the need for HAL to 
integrate international certification requirements from the earliest stages of aircraft 
design. The Committee recommend that HAL establish a dedicated Civil Certification 
Task Force to ensure efficient coordination of all compliance -related activities and 
facilitate faster regulatory approvals. Additionally, the Committee urge the Ministry of 
Defence to strengthen bilateral agreements with key international certification 

 
20  
bodies, including EASA, to fast -track approval processes for future aircraft and 
helicopter projects. 
Reply of the Government 
“The majority of HAL’s projects are for Indian Defence Services. The products which has a 
potential to be marketed as civil products would be taken up for Civil and International 
certification. The current R&D manual encompasses the requirements of both military and 
Civil certification (DGCA). Based on the requirement of the project undertaken, HAL will 
integrate international certification requirements at the design stage. At HAL, Civil 
Certification group already exists with the name of Airworthiness Group (AWG) and they are 
co-ordinating with DGCA and EASA. MoD will examine the feasibility of strengthening 
bilateral agreements with key international certification bodies, including EASA, to fast -track 
approval processes for future aircraft and helicopter projects through Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and DGCA.” 
                 [Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production]   
                        (O.M No. 48040/08/2023-D(HAL-III)-Vol II dated 21.04.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 

 
21  
APPENDIX- I 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 2025 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘ 2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft 
Reports. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft report s, 
without any changes/modifications: - 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited  (SFCL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  

 
22  
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs 
(Horizontal Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to 
flaring of High -pressure gas’ relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation 
(ONGC) Limited. (Audit Based Examination); 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Procurement of 
hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)”  
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Undue enrichment 
through recovery of turnover tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report 
No. 14 of 2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Design and 
Development (D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)”  [Based on 
Chapter-II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “ Reviewing timely 
submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the current 
session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 
  

 
23  
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (18th LS) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) on Chapter II of C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2023 regarding ‘Design and Development (D&D)’ in 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’. 
 
I Total number of recommendations 09 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 
and 9] 
Total - 07 
 
 
 
 
Percentage-77.78 % 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies.- Nil 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration. -
Nil 
Total -    00  
 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
V Observations/Recommendations to which 
the Government has furnished interim replies. 
Sl. Nos. 3 and 6. 
  
 
Total - 02 
 
 Percentage–22.22% 
 
 