 
  
4 
    
 
 
 
NMDC LIMITED 
[BASED ON C&AG REPORT NO.5 OF 2019 RELATING TO OPERATIONAL 
PERFORMANCE OF NMDC Ltd.] 
 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
  
 
FOURTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
NMDC LIMITED  
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) based 
on C&AG Report No.5 Of 2019 relating to operational performance of NMDC Ltd.] 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on    18 December, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    18 December, 2024  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946(Saka) 


 
  
CPU No. __1057 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 
 
 
  

i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)             ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
  25 
CHAPTER III    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do   not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
  40 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
  41 
CHAPTER V      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies  
  50 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) held  
on 24th October, 2024….. …………………………….. …………..…………………………..………60 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations  
            contained in the Eighteenth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings  
            (17th Lok Sabha) on NMDC Limited…………………………………………………………………… 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       

ii 
 
 
 
 COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.    Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.   Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal      -         Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha        -         Director  
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal            -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Smita Khade                -           Executive Officer 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the E ighteenth 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17 th Lok Sabha) based on C&AG Report No. 
5 of 2019 relating to Operational Performance of NMDC Ltd. related to NMDC Limited. 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17 th Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20 December, 2022. The 
Action taken Replies to all the 13 recommendations contained in the Report were received from 
the Ministry of Steel on 06 December, 2023. 
 
3. The Committee  considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on                              
24 October, 2024.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee (17 th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  New Delhi;                 Baijayant Panda     
  11 December, 2024        Chairperson 
  20 Agrahayana, 1946(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  
  

1 
 
 
R E P O R T 
 
CHAPTER   I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (2022-23) on “NMDC Limited" [Based on C&AG Report 
No. 5 of 2019 relating to Operational Performance of NMDC Ltd.] which was presented to 
Parliament on 20 December, 2022. It contained thirteen observations/recommendations.  
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the thirteen 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10                                                            (Total 08)  
      
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies                              (Chapter III)  
            
NIL                                                                          (Total 00)                                                                       
            
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration              
                                         (Chapter IV) 
  
Sl. Nos. 8, 11, 12 and 13                                                                       (Total 04)   
           
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished interim replies 
and final replies are still awaited                                      (Chapter V) 
                                                   
 Sl. No. 2                                                                         (Total 01)  
    
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Steel to furnish Action Taken Notes/ Replies 
in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report. The 
Committee desire that the final replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter V for which only interim replies have been given by Government, 
should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
{Fixing of Unrealistic target in Strategic Management Plant(SMP) -Vision 2025} 
 
5. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report, had observed and recommended as follows:- 
" The Committee observe that NMDC had a Corporate Plan upto the year 2009 -10. 
Thereafter, no Corporate Plan was formulated till the year 2015 -16. Instead, production 
and other targets were fixed annually. In a review meeting held on 27 October 2014, the 
Administrative Ministry had suggested for preparation of a vision document 'NMDC 2025' 
as the Company had intended to produce 75 million tons per annum (MTPA) by 2018-19 
and 100 MTPA by 2021 -22. Subsequently, in January 2015, a Consultant, namely, M/s 
Accenture was appointed for a fee of Rs. 0.57 Crore by NMDC to evaluate the intended 
production in the vision document . The Consultant, in May 2015, after assessing the 
existing customers in the domestic market, potential volume of exports and captive 
consumption, suggested that the intended objective of achievement of production of 75 
MTPA and 100 MTPA would be difficult. Yet, NMDC in October 2015, ignored the advice 
of the consultant and fixed over-ambitious target of 75 MTPA by 2018-19 and 100 MTPA 
by 2021-22 in its Strategic Management Plan (SMP) Vision 2025. However, sensing the 
subdued market condition, fall in inter national iron ore prices, NMDC revisited its SMP - 
Vision 2025 in September 2016 and lowered the target of iron ore production to 50 MTPA 
for 2018-19 and 67 MTPA for 2021-22. The Committee find that even this lowered target 
was on the higher side and NMDC failed to achieve the target of iron ore production during 
the financial years 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 which remained at 32.36, 31.49 and 
34.15 MTPA respectively. The Ministry of Steel reviewed the situation and further lowered 
the target of iron ore p roduction to 47 MTPA for financial 2021 -22. The Committee note 
that even at this stage, the reduced target of 47 MTPA could not be achieved by NMDC 

3 
 
and the Company could only produce 42.19 MTPA of iron ore during 2021 -22. The 
Committee do not understand wh y NMDC ignored the suggestions of the consultant to 
whom it paid a fee of Rs. 0.57 crore which may be construed as wasteful, now appears 
to be thoughtless expenditure of public money. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
targets fixed by NMDC at different stages were over ambitious and irrational taking in 
view the unfavorable market condition, fall in international iron ore prices, unfinished 
projects related to doubling of various railway lines, inability in finding new potential 
customers, termination of long term agreements with some countries, delay in execution 
of various packages & enhancement facilities, etc. On an overall review of the position, 
the Committee note that against the initial target of 100 MTPA fixed by NMDC to be 
achieved by 2021 -22, t he Company could ultimately achieve only 42.19 MTPA of 
production. The Committee suggest that NMDC should seriously consider the 
professional advice given by consultants on time and undertake proper realistic 
assessment while fixing of various targets in future.” 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The Strategic Management Plan “Vision 2025” was prepared in 2015 considering various 
assumptions and was based on various conditions stipulated therein. The revised SMP 
stipulates an ambitious plan of producing 67 MTPA of iron ore by 2025 and 100 MTPA 
by 2030 by NMDC. The Vision document stressed a total of six strategies which included 
Business Strategy, Operations Strategy, Human Resources Strategy, IT Strategy, R&D 
Strategy, Sustainability Strategy.  
NMDC has gradually transformed itself according to the stipulations made in the Vision 
document and the same can be seen by the continuous improvement in the production 
capacities. Evacuation was  and continues to remain one of the important factors affecting 
the capacities. Due to the locational disadvantage, there are many constraints in 
increasing evacuation capacities. The doubling of KK line is one such aspect. By doubling 
of the line, the rail evacuation capacity will increa se to 40MTPA from the existing 28 
MTPA. This project is being executed by railways and NMDC is funding it. The same is 
expected to be completed by 2025 and will support in achieving the envisaged targets. 
The commissioning of Slurry pipeline will also add to the evacuation capacity which in 
turn will add to the production capacities. 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
 
During the last two financial years, NMDC has continuously crossed the 40 MTPA 
production and is poised to achieve 50 MT of production during FY 2023 -24. During the 
first quarter of FY 2023-24, NMDC achieved its highest-ever production. 
 
  Q1 OF 2022-23 Q1 OF 2023-24 
IN MILLION 
TONNES 
PRODUCTION SALES PRODUCTION SALES 
8.92 7.80 10.70 11.15* 
 
Achievements of SMP Targets – 
  
While the production decisions are based on demand and supply dynamics of the iron 
ore market and feasibility of evacuation, the NMDC has worked hard to repare itself for a 
higher volume of prouction. If market and other conditions are favourable, the comp any 
would be able to meet its revised goals on the basis of said developments. These are 
detailed below:- 
 
  Strategies and Key 
Enablers  
Achievements 
1 Business Strategy: From “single commodity, geography” to “multiple commodities 
and globally diversified” 
  Expansion to New Products, 
New Geographies 
 Two Coal Blocks in Jharkhand and one Gold 
Block in Andhra Pradesh have been allocated 
and action is on hand for start of production 
activities. 
 NMDC is a part of ICVL which acquired 
Operational Coal Mine in Mozambique. 
 NMDC Exiting the Steel business by 
demerging NMDC Steel Limited to 
concentrate on Core activity of Mining 
 
______________________________________________________________________________
*updated to 10.98 MT (for Q1 of 2023-24) as per extract of 557th meeting of the Board of 
Directors of NMDC Ltd. held on 11.08.2023.                           
[MoS O.M. No. S-28011/17/2021-NMDC dated 18th November, 2024] 

5 
 
                                                                                                         
 
2 Operations Strategy: Capacity augmentation of existing mines to optimise capital 
spent along with development of new mines as JVs. Parallelly , investment in 
evacuation infrastructure. Develop and deploy strategies to enter new markets.  
  Iron ore Production Capacity 
to be enhanced from Existing 
Operating Mines & starting 
of New Mines 
 Capacity augmentation of existing mines is an 
ongoing process and is achieved by enhancing 
the capacities of the plants and mines.  
 Moving close to the customers: Developed 
intermediary stockpile at strategic locations - 
First intermediate stockpile at Kumarmarenga 
near Jagdalpur is operational.  
  Evacuation Infrastructure  Implementation of Rapid Wagon Loading 
System (RWLS) at Kirandul Complex 
 Doubling of KK railway line is in its final 
stage 
 Construction of railway line between Rowghat 
and Jagdalpur –  Activities going on 
 Construction of slurry pipeline in Bailadila 
region – First Phase from Bailadila to 
Nagarnar is in advanced stage 
  Capital Projects Strategy  For managing the ongoing/ under 
construction Projects, a new vertical of 
HOP-Works has been created at Project 
level and HO 
 Dedicated Project Management Cell (PMC) is 
created to monitor the ongoing Projects 
 Procurement and Works Manuals have been 
prepared with latest guidelines and practices  
 Tender and Contract management 
processes have been made more 
effective by 
 Use of IT and project management 
Softwares 
 online tendering process & Pre bid 
discussions 

6 
 
 Regular review meetings with top 
management and creation of Digital 
Record Depository 
 Providing early completion Bonus to 
the contractors 
  Enhanced Customer 
Orientation: Customer 
Relationship Management 
 Aligning Product mix with the requirements 
of customers, e.g. 10- 20 mm sized ore for the 
Sponge Iron customers – already producing 
 Development of a dedicated Customer 
Portal 
3 Human Resources Strategy: From having core competencies in iron ore mining to 
honing competencies in mining, metals, metallurgy and other businesses.  
  Strengthen Performance 
Management System (PMS):  
 The Performance Management System has 
been revised and Integrated with ERP 
  Leadership Development and 
Succession Planning to drive 
the expansion plan 
 Leadership Development Programmes are 
being organized with the help of professional 
institutes 
 NMDC has identified competency-led 
Leadership Capability Development as a basis 
for Succession Planning, through which it is 
looking at development of its senior 
executives to occupy key positions based on 
their performance and potential.  In working 
towards the same, NMDC has decided to carry 
out Assessment Centre (AC) as a 
development-focused intervention. 
  Employee Training & 
Development: 
 The executives are being provided 
professional development training in reputed 
institutes like IIM, ISB etc 
    Corporate HRD Department is committed towards 
the development of its employees by imparting 
different types of Training and customized 
Learning interventions which are meticulously 
designed separately like Behavioral Interventions, 
Technical Interventions,  Psycho-Analytical 
Interventions etc and more precisely Customized 
Learning Interventions, Focused Learning 
Initiatives, Structured Initiatives (Small Group 
Activities) etc. some of them are given below: 
  
o Assessment Development centre for 
succession planning 

7 
 
o High Potential Executives (HIPO) 
programme 
o Knowledge Management System in 
line with Learning Management 
System to create a learning eco-system 
o General Management Programmes 
o Advance Management Programmes 
o Supervisory Development 
Programmes 
o Behavioral Based Safety Training 
Programmes 
o Learning Intervention on 
communication and Presentation Skills 
o Learning Intervention on Finance for 
Non-Finance Executives 
o Learning Intervention on Mentoring & 
Coaching 
o Assessment Centre Workshop 
o Performance Appraisal System 
through trained Internal Resource 
Persons 
o Employees satisfaction and 
Organization culture survey 
  New Initiatives  IKIGAI – A Happy Workforce 
 Strengthening of Quality Circles 
4 IT Strategy:  Enhance productivity through automation and digitization of 
operations. 
  Develop an IT / digital 
blueprint for “NMDC of 
Future” considering 
emerging IT and digital 
concepts and Best Practices 
including:  
 As a first step towards Digital Journey, 
NMDC has implemented Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) on SAP S/4 HANA platform 
which covers entire value chain of mining, 
starting from Exploration to mine 
development & Production to mine closure 
with a complete visibility from Pit to Port. 
 ERP Modules such as Production Planning, 
Plant Maintenance, Quality Management, 
Sales & Distribution, Materials Management, 
Human Capital Management, Environment 

8 
 
Health & Safety, and Finance & Costing etc. 
have been successfully implemented. 
 Subsequently NMDC has launched 
Management Dashboards for providing 
information and insights on Production, Sales, 
Material Management, Quality Management, 
HCM, EHS, CSR, etc. in real time 
  
  Implementation of ERP 
(Project Kalpataru) 
 Implementation of SAP S/4 HANA – First 
Indian PSU to achieve this 
 NMDC has also started initiatives for the 
Phase II and Phase III of its digital roadmap 
 The Phase II solutions includes IT / OT 
Integration in the following aspects 
 Automated Data Capturing from OCSL Plant 
to ERP 
 Integration of Field and Plant Operations with 
ERP 
 Fleet Management System 
 Back Office Automation 
 Linear Asset Management 
 The Phase III solutions includes Intelligent 
Mines in the following aspects 
 Advanced Analytics 
 Artificial Intelligence 
 Condition based Maintenance 
 Integrated Command & Control Center  
  
  Mine Transport & 
Surveillance System (MTSS) 
 Implementation of MTSS (Mine Transport 
Surveillance System) – already implemented 
& operational at Donimalai Complex and in 
process for Bailadila region 
 Implementation of FMS (Fleet Management 
System) in NMDC mines is in final stage 
 Action on hand for implementation of 
Automatic Sampling and analysis System 

9 
 
  
5 R&D Strategy: Develop and deploy technologies for beneficiation of lean ores to 
extend life of mine and move towards zero waste mining Confidential 
  Value addition to iron ore   Pellet Plant at Donimalai has been 
commissioned to utilize the low grade ore 
 Beneficiation plant (as part of the Slurry 
Pipeline System) is under construction at 
Bailadila 
  Evacuation of iron ore from 
mines  
 Study for transportation through slurry 
pipeline  
  Tailing disposal   Beneficiation of tailing and sale of slimes 
 Improving screening efficiency of secondary 
screens in screening plants of Kirandul 
Complex 
 Modification in transfer chutes to reduce 
jamming at Kirandul Complex  
 Installation of Online moisture analysers in 
Kirandul, Bacheli and Donimalai complex 
 Utilization of ultra-fine iron ore (-75micron) 
in iron ore sintering process 
 Utilization of sub-grade iron resources and 
lean grade iron resources (BHJ/BHQ) 
 Focus on Dry Beneficiation 
 Development of research equipment under 
Aatma Nirbhar Bharat  
 Developments of Indigenous vendor base for 
sourcing wear resistance liners under Aatma 
Nirbhar Bharat  
 Developments of process for reduction 
roasting of goethitic iron ore using microwave 
assisted heating furnace:  
 NMDC Innovation & Incubation Centre 
(NICE) 
  Collaborative approach  R&D Centre NMDC Ltd and RDCIS -SAIL 
has signed MOU in the year Jan 2019 to 
support each other in meeting individual 
organization goal. MOU is in force till 
January 2024 (Five years ) 

10 
 
     IMMT Bhubaneswar - Modeling & 
Optimization of High Concentration Iron ore 
concentrate slurry Pipelines for Indian Iron 
Ore Processing Industries 
 IMMT Bhubaneswar– Evaluation of Nano 
iron powder for high end application like 
batteries and sensors 
 CSIRO Australia 
 IIT Bhubaneswar– Optimization of silos, bins 
and hoppers designs through modeling, 
primarily intended for iron ore storage  
 CSIR-CIMFR-Dhanbad– Development of 
vision enhancement system for foggy weather 
 IMMT Bhubaneswar - Dry Beneficiation 
tests of coal and iron ore with Air 
classification equipment named “VSK 
Separator”.  
 IMMT Bhubaneswar –  Feasibility Studies 
for Preparation of Fused Magnesia from 
Kimberlite Tailings  
6 Sustainability Strategy: Adopt environmentally safe and scientific mining practices 
and integrate sustainability in all our processes. 
  Design and deploy “License 
to Operate” office (LTO)  
 Operational 
  Design and deploy Enterprise 
Risk Management capability  
 Operational 
 
 
  
7. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid reply of the Government are as 
follows:- 
“As stated by the Ministry, the achievement of targets envisaged in the Strategic 
Management Plan “Vision 2025” is dependent on the timely completion of ev acuation 
facilities commensurate with the production facilities. As doubling of Kirandul 
Kothavalasa Railway Line and commissioning of Slurry Pipeline are still under 
execution, Audit is not in a position to comment as to whether the revised targets could 
be achieved by NMDC by 2025 and subsequent targets by 2030. Hence, Audit has no 
comments to offer for the present.” 

11 
 
8. The Committee noted that NMDC did not formulate Corporate Plan from 2010-11 to 
2015-16 and instead fixed production and other targets annually.  At the behest of 
Administrative Ministry (October, 2014), a vision document ‘NMDC 2025’ was prepared by 
NMDC th at intended to produce 75 MTPA by 2018 -19 and 100 MTPA by 2021 -22.  
Thereafter, a Consultant was appointed (January, 2015) to evaluate the intended 
production in the vision document, who opined (May, 2015) that the intended objective 
set by NMDC for produc tion targets would be impractical to achieve.  Yet, ignoring the 
Consultant’s advice NMDC persisted in setting them, leading to significant 
underperformance.  The Company first lowered its target for production of iron ore to 50 
MTPA for the year 2018 -19 and 67 MTPA for the year 2021 -22 and afterwards the target 
was further lowered by the Ministry of Steel to 47 MTPA for 2021 -22.  The Committee, in 
its Original Report highlighting NMDC's failure to achieve its overambitious production 
targets set in its SMP Vision 2025 opined that against the initial target of 100 MTPA fixed 
by NMDC, the Company could ultimately achieve 42.19 MTPA of production in 2021 -22.  
The Committee expressing their concern had recommended that NMDC should give 
serious consideration to the professional advice provided by the Consultant and ensure 
a realistic assessment when setting future targets.  The Ministry in their submission while 
acknowledging the Company's performance regarding missed production target, has 
submitted that post SM P 'Vision 2025', NMDC has gradually aligned itself as per the 
stipulations. The ongoing efforts to improve production capacities, particularly through 
projects like doubling the Kirandul Kothavalasa (KK) Railway Line and commissioning a 
Slurry Pipeline should add to achieve production capacities of NMDC.  However, Ministry 
in their reply is silent about the reasons for not adhering to professional advice as given 
by the Consultant hired for the purpose.  Since the success of revised targets now 
depends on t he successful completion of the projects and considering the ongoing 
challenges and uncertainties surrounding the completion of crucial infrastructure 
projects affecting production capacities, the Committee recommend that NMDC should 
prioritize realistic goal-setting based on thorough assessment of market conditions and 
infrastructure capabilities. They could emphasize the importance of heeding professional 
advice and maintaining flexibility in strategic planning to adapt to evolving 
circumstances. Addition ally, the Ministry may keep a close eye on monitoring of the 
progress of infrastructure projects to ensure timely completion and also aligning the 
production targets accordingly. 

12 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
{Delay in obtaining of Environmental Clearance for Screening Plant-II of Kumaraswamy 
Iron Ore Project (KIOP)} 
 
9. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that in order to identify additional reserves in Donimalai Iron Ore 
Project (DIOP), NM DC decided for construction of a second Screening Plant (SP -II) at 
Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project (KIOP). The Company applied for Environmental 
Clearance (EC) for the Screening Plant II in March 2014. However, the EC was received 
after more than 03 years of application made by the Company. The inordinate delay was 
attributable on the part of State Pollution Control Board (PCB) in conducting Gram Sabha 
coupled with failure on the part of NMDC in taking prompt action for applying for revised 
Terms of Reference (ToR) and delay in submitting the required information to the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests & Climatic Change (MoEF&CC). Similarly the Forest Clearance 
(FC) for the SP-II (Stage-I) which NMDC applied in December 2014, could not be received 
even after 7 years. The FC was held up due to delay in submission of Differential Global 
Positioning System (DGPS) map to Forest Department and resubmission of application 
for revision of ToR. During the course of evidence, the Ministry of Steel admitted the delay 
and submitted that these were priority items for them and work is now being monitored 
on real time basis. The Committee are, however, perturbed with the lackadaisical 
approach on the part of the management of the Company that failed in timely submission 
of do cuments to the concerned authorities and pursue various clearances. The 
Committee feel that had some concrete monitoring mechanism been in place to keep 
track of the progress of work in various stages, the delay of so many years could have 
been avoided. Th e Committee, therefore, recommend that all -out efforts be made to 
obtain all the necessary statutory clearances to complete the Screening Plant II without 
any further delay to enable identification of additional reserves in Donimalai Iron Ore 
Project (DIOP) and enhancement of its capacity.”  
 
 

13 
 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“Stage-2 Forest clearance order was obtained on 10th July, 2023. The compliance of the 
condition set out therein has also been furnished on 24th July, 2023 to the Government 
of Karnataka for issue of Final Forest clearance orders. 
  
Environmental clearance: The proposal was recommended by Expert Appraisal 
Committee, MOEFCC during the meeting held on 8th June, 2017 subject to obtaining 
Stage-1 Forest clearance. As per MOEFCC requirements, the updated EIA/EMP report 
with fresh baseline data collected from March to May, 2023 has been submitted to 
MOEFCC on 15th July, 2023 for obtaining Environmental clearance. EAC is scheduled 
to consider the same on 2nd August, 2023.” 
 
11. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid reply of the Government 
are as follows:- 
“The Environmental Clearance shall be followed by obtaining of Consent for 
Establishment from the concerned State Pollution Control Board before initiating work 
at site for the proposed Screening Plant – II at Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project. This 
shall further be followed by Consent for Operations before the commencement of 
operations of Screening Plant after the same is commissioned. He nce, as such, since 
NMDC is yet to obtain the Environmental Clearance, Audit has no comments to offer for 
the present.” 
 
12. The Committee in their Original Report highlighted the significant delay in 
obtaining Clearances viz., Environmental Clearance (EC) and Forest Clearance (FC) for 
the construction of Screening Plant II (SP II) at the Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project (KIOP). 
The Administrative Ministry had admitted to the delay and submitted that the same had 
been taken up on priority and work was being monitored by them on real time basis.  The 
Committee, while expressing concern on the issue,  felt the need for having a concrete 
monitoring mechanism to keep track of the progress of work in various stages and 
recommended that a ll-out efforts may be made to obtain all the necessary statutory 
clearances to complete the Screening Plant II without any further delay to enable 
identification of additional reserves in Donimalai Iron Ore Project (DIOP) and 

14 
 
enhancement of its capacity.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply has submitted that 
they have furnished compliance on the condition set out to Government of Karnataka in 
July, 2023 for issue of Final FC.  Further, the updated EIA/EMP report with fresh baseline 
data has been subm itted to MOEFCC in July, 2023 for obtaining EC which was due for 
consideration by Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) in August, 2023.  Since the Final 
Forest Clearance and Environmental Clearance is yet to be obtained and in view of C&AG 
observation, the Committee recommend NMDC to expedite the process of obtaining these 
clearances, particularly the Environmental Clearance, as it is crucial for initiating work at 
the site. The Committee further stress on the importance of closely monitoring the 
progress of cl earance procedures and ensuring timely submission of required 
documents to regulatory authorities. The Committee once again reiterate and implore that 
both the Ministry and NMDC should invariably have a robust monitoring mechanism in 
place to monitor the p rogress and take immediate action on real time basis so as to 
prevent such inordinate delays in the future.  This could facilitate timely completion of 
projects. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
{Setting up of Integrated Steel Plant at Nagarnar, Chhattisgarh} 
 
13. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that in line with the National Steel Policy 2005, the Government in 
March 2008 decided that NMDC may set up a Steel Plant on its own in view that the 
Company had adequate cash reserves and easy access to the primary raw material i.e. 
iron ore. The Board of NMDC in July 2008 appointed MECON Limited as a Consultant for 
preparation of Techno Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) for the project which was 
submitted by MECON in December 2008. After carrying out due diligence, the Board of 
NMDC in January 2010 accorded approval for setting up the Nagarnar Integrated Steel 
Plant (NISP) in Chhattisgarh with an estimated cost of Rs. 15,525 crore. NISP was 
scheduled to be completed and commissioned by March 2014. The Committee, however 
are perturbed to note that the project was delayed as the work for the project was awarded 
on the basis of a tentative TEFR instead of a Detailed Project Report (DPR) which is more 
elaborate and a ccurate. The decision to depend on TEFR lead to revision of technical 

15 
 
specifications, modification of tenders, time overruns and upward revision of estimated 
cost of the project from Rs. 15,525 crore to Rs. 22,196 crore. NMDC contended that 
preparation of DPRs has lost its relevance as its preparation is time consuming which 
further leads to increase in project time schedule and increase in cost of project, and also 
that many private players and steel companies in the past have executed their expansion 
projects/ new projects based on TEFR. The Committee, however, are not in agreement 
with the view of NMDC as even after proceeding with TEFR, the NISP project has been 
delayed for more than 8 years and the project is still incomplete. The Committee believe 
that TEFR lead to change in technical specifications in works and contracts particularly in 
03 major works namely (i) Raw Material Handling System, (ii) By -Product Plant, and (iii) 
Line & Dolomite Calcined Plant leading to termination and re -awarding contracts to new 
contractors. Further, the cost of the NISP project escalated from 15, 525 crore to Rs. 
22,196 crore and even after regular monitoring at Company and Ministry level, the NISP 
project is scheduled to be completed by March 2024 after an estimated delay of 9 years. 
The Committee are of the opinion that NMDC willingly erred in deciding not to prepare 
DPR in such a huge ambitious project although it was new in the field of establishment of 
steel plants and instead heavily depended on tentative TEFR that r esulted in additional 
burden of Rs. 6671 crore on the public exchequer and time overrun of 9 years. The 
Committee are also apprehensive of cost overrun and time overruns in the project that 
has lead the Government to decide on the disinvestment/ demerger of NISP which is also 
simultaneously under process. The Committee only hope that with the constant 
monitoring by the Ministry of Steel, the project would be completed as per the revised 
schedule without any further cost and time overrun.” 
 
14. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“NMDC decision to proceed the project with TEFR submitted by M/s MECON, was taken 
after due diligence of TEFR by Price Waterhouse Coopers. Feasibility reports covering 
techno-economic portions for various SAIL plants (BSP, RSP, DSP) were also prepared 
by their Consultant MECON. As such the procedure of approval of projects based on 
TEFR is in practice and the same was followed in NMDC. NMDC was not having requisite 
experience in construction and commiss ioning of steel plant, hence MECON was 
appointed as PMC/EPCM consultant for construction and commissioning of NISP Steel 
plant. For such type of large project, there is always a possibility and requirement of 

16 
 
change in technical specifications in works whi ch cannot be predicted at the start of the 
project.  
  
Major reasons for Delay are:  
1. Contract award could not be done in sequential manner due to poor response from 
bidders in tenders floated  
2. Improper assessment/estimate of quantities/jobs by contractors before quoting for 
tenders.  
3. Abnormal increase in labour price.  
4. Inordinate delay in completing the engineering.  
5. Delay in getting forest clearance for doing intake well in river Sabari at Tiriya.  
6. Change of name  of  Package Contractors in Steel Melting Shop, Turbo blower and 
Sinter plant and Oxygen plant which have changed the name of their company due 
to mergers and acquisition and it resulted in delays of the project. This affected the 
supplies by the contractors.  
7. Delays due to financial crunch of Contractors. The financial health of major 
contractors like M/s. Shapoorji, M/s. SEW, M/s. SEPC, M/s. NCC, M/s. TPL, M/s BEC, 
M/s Primetals etc. have been deteriorated due to external reasons beyond control. 
This has resulted in inadequate resource deployment.  
8. Difficulty in availability of skilled manpower locally due to remote  geographical 
location and lack of an ecosystem of steel making nearby.   
9. Commercial issues raised by various contractors like M/s Primetals , M/s BEC, M/s 
SPCPL, M/s Danieli, M/s Linde etc. which resulted in slow down of supplies and 
execution of work at site.  
10. Mismatch in shell manufacturing by the contractor with respect to approved design in 
Blast Furnace Package resulted in a considerable delay because of time taken in 
finalizing the  modification of shell.  
11. Inter consortium disputes in multiple packages has resulted in delay in supply and 
execution of work.  
12. Non sequential supply of structure and equipment’s by contractors.  
13. Poor performan ce of contractors in RMHS, BPP & LDCP etc resulted in delay in 
commissioning of plant in an integrated manner.  
14. Covid-19 has also severely impacted the progress and commissioning plant as work 
was entirely stopped during this period and after effects of co vid which resulted in 
delay in deputation of foreign experts and supply of imported items.  
15. Refurbishment of equipment due to idling/delay etc.  
  
The reasons which are mentioned above clearly indicate that the progress of plant was 
hampered due to reasons  beyond the control of NMDC which has also resulted in cost 
overrun. Even through the management has taken concrete step with support of MECON 
for planning, monitoring and execution so as to ensure that works are completed in 
earliest possible duration, many unforeseen issues cropped up during execution of NISP 
project, and all efforts were made by management to resolve the issues, which has 
brought plant upto the present level of progress.  
  

17 
 
The present progress of plant where in physical works are broadl y completed and 
commissioning activities are in full swing. Raw Material Handling system is functioning in 
line with the requirements of overall plant. Coal, Coke, Sinter route are operational, rest 
other routes are also ready and will be operated as per c ommissioning sequence of 
packages. By -Product Plant is operational since 27th Oct’22 and is under process of 
stabilization. Lime Dolomite Calcination Plant (LDCP) balance work has been awarded in 
Jan’23 to new contractor M/s Offshore and consortium and work is in progress. However, 
completion of LDCP is not a prerequisite for the commissioning of overall steel plant as 
the requirement of Lime & Dolo will be met through the purchased calcined lime and 
Calcined Dolo from the market, and necessary arrangements  has been done for storing 
and handling of calcined lime and Dolo.  
  
Brief status of commissioning activities are as follows:  
 Coke Oven Battery -1 and By -Product Plant commenced Operations from 27th Oct 
‘22  
 Coke Oven Battery-2 commenced Operations from 24th April ’23  
 Sinter Plant and Oxygen Plant (ASU-2) commenced operation on 19.04.2023.  
 Steam Turbo Generators (STG) -1 & 2 is synchronised and started power generation. 
All 3 boilers are ready and 2 are operational. Turbo Blowers (3 No’s) hot trial for cold 
blast generation taken & hooking up with blast furnace completed.  
 Blast Furnace all 3 stoves heating under progress.  
 All auxiliary units/services department like MRS, PPDS, PBS, Water Depts. CAS, DG 
Station, Central Stores are operational.   
 Trial production with purchased plate started in Hot Strip mill and first coil rolled on 
30.06.2023  
  
Prerequisite activities for Hot Metal from Blast Furnace and Liquid Steel production from 
Steel Melting Shop are in progress and will be ready by end of July’23.” 
 
15.  The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid reply of the Government 
are as follows:- 
“The Integrated Steel Plant has  been operational since August 2023 and is currently in 
stabilization stage. Hence, Audit has no further remarks to offer.” 
16. The Committee in their Original Report had thoroughly reviewed NMDC’s decision 
to proceed with the Nagarnar  Integrated Steel Plant (NISP) project based on a tentative 
Techno Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) prepared by the Consultant, MECON Limited.  
The Company, a naïve in the field of setting-up of Steel Plant, going ahead with the trend 
adopted by reputed Steel companies to reply on TEFR in-place of Detailed Project Report 

18 
 
(DPR) ultimately lead NMDC to significant delays (from March 2014 to estimated 
completion by March 2024), cost overruns (additional burden of Rs.6671 crore), and 
technical specification changes. The Committee had expressed concern over the lack of 
preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR) and emphasized the need for better project 
management to avoid such issues in the future. The Ministry in their reply has submitted 
that TEFR submitted by M/s MECON was taken after due diligence of the same by Price 
Waterhouse Coopers.  NMDC’s decision to go ahead with TEFR was based on standard 
procedures, however unforeseen challenges marred timely execution of project.  The 
Ministry further outline d various reasons for the project delays and cost overruns, 
including contractor issues, supply chain disruptions, and the impact of COVID -19. The 
Ministry also provided an update on the current status of the project, stating that physical 
works are largel y completed, and commissioning activities are underway as also 
highlighting the operational status of different components of the plant and progress 
towards full commissioning.  The C&AG now confirmed that the Integrated Steel Plant 
has been operational since August 2023 and is in the stabilization stage. Given the current 
operational status of the plant, the Committee recommend NMDC to focus on stabilizing 
operations, optimizing production processes, and ensuring efficient maintenance 
practices to maximize  the plant's performance. The Committee are hopeful on the 
implementing lessons learned from the project's challenges to improve future project 
planning and execution within NMDC. Further, the Committee reemphasize the 
importance of continued monitoring and evaluation to address any lingering issues and 
ensure the long-term success of the Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
{Sponge Iron Unit at Paloncha, Telangana} 
17. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report, had recommended as follows:- 
" The Committee note that NMDC at the instance of Ministry of Steel, in July 2010, 
acquired a loss -making Sponge Iron India Limited (SIIL) at Paloncha , Telangana. The 
sponge iron production turned unviable due to higher cost of production and the losses 
of SIIL accumulated to Rs. 194.77 crore in 2017 which further grew to Rs. 273.69 crore 
as on 31 March 2021. The Committee are disappointed to note that the turnaround plans 
of the sick Sponge Iron Unit, initially with the construction of a Super Critical Thermal 

19 
 
Power Plant and then with a Cold Rolled Coil Unit have been shelved for different reasons 
by NMDC. As a measure of turnaround plan, the Company h ad intended to utilize the 
available land of 428 acres for setting up of Thermal and Solar Power Plants. The 
Committee are unhappy to note that although the Government had tried to sell the SIIL 
Unit by issuing expression of interest, there was no response. The Committee also find it 
surprising on the Government insisting to acquire a sick & loss-making Sponge Iron Unit 
in July 2010 and would like to know the reasons therefor. The Committee are not aware 
of the turnaround plan of the Company to set up a Sol ar Power Plant to bring the 
Company out of losses. Since the loss of the Company are accumulating year after year 
and that there are no prospective buyers of the Unit, the Committee recommend that a 
concrete turnaround plan be drawn and implemented to brin g SIIL Unit of Paloncha out 
of losses.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 “ 
 NMDC is having free land bank of around 350 Acres (290 acres of free land bank and 
60 acres of non-operational plant) at Paloncha.  
 NMDC has prepared a detailed report for setting up of a 4.5 MW ground -mounted, 
grid-connected Solar Power Plant at SIU, Paloncha. 
 The proposal is under finalization and has an implementation timeline of 12 months. 
 A part of the land area (as shown below) is being currently utilized for the Solar Power 
Plant. For the remaining land area, NMDC is looking for other business opportunities 
including expansion of the Solar Power Plant.” 
 
19. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid reply of the Government 
are as follows:- 
“The progress made in setting up of Solar Power Plant will have to watched. Hence, 
Audit has no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
20. While expressing their concern  over NMDC's acquisition of the loss -making 
Sponge Iron India Limited (SIIL) at Paloncha, Telangana, in July 2010, at the insistence of 
Ministry of Steel which only resulted in accumulating losses for the Company. The 
Committee highlighted the failure of turnaround plans, including proposals for a Super 
Critical Thermal Power Plant and a Cold Rolled Coil Unit. Despite attempts to sell the unit, 

20 
 
there were no prospective buyers. The Committee in addition to being inquisitive to know 
the reasons f or insistence to acquire sick and loss making SIIL Unit had urged for 
development of a concrete turnaround plan to bring SIIL out of losses.  The Ministry's 
response outlined NMDC's plan to set up a 4.5 MW ground -mounted, grid -connected 
Solar Power Plant at SIU, Paloncha, utilizing available land. Further, the ongoing efforts 
to finalize the proposal, with a 12 -month implementation timeline and use of remaining 
land area by NMDC for other business opportunities should help the Company as way 
forward.  The C ommittee further expressing their concern on non -submission by the 
Ministry for reasons of acquiring a sick and loss -making Sponge Iron Unit, therefore, 
reiterate to know the reasons for the same.   Given the current status, the Committee 
further recommend closely monitoring the implementation of the Solar Power Plant 
project at Paloncha. The Committee further emphasise the importance of ensuring that 
the project progresses according to the proposed timeline and that any potential hurdles 
are addressed promptly. In addition to the above, the Committee desire that NMDC should 
explore appointment and seeking professional advice on evaluation and cost benefit 
analysis for utilising the investment opportunities on other businesses for the remaining 
land effectively, potentially including further expansion of renewable energy projects or 
alternative industrial ventures. Furthermore, the Committee stress the need for NMDC to 
continue seeking sustainable solutions to mitigate losses and optimize the utilization of 
resources at the Paloncha site. 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13) 
{Investment by NMDC in non-profitable Joint Ventures} 
 
21. The Committee in their Eighteenth Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that with the objective of sourcing Metallurgical Coking Coal and 
Thermal Coal supplies from overseas, a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) namely 
International Coal Ventures Limited (ICVL) was formed in May 2009. In July 2014, ICVL 
decided to acquire the ownership of coal mine and coal assets located in Mozambique. 
NMDC had invested Rs. 376.36 crore in ICVL. However, NMDC further remitted an equity 
contribution of over Rs. 2.50 crore to ICVL's to meet expenditure budget and also to clear 
the ICVL's outstanding liabilities. The Committee note that the NMDC has so far invested 

21 
 
Rs. 590.51 crore in ICVL despite an adverse report of the consultant and the investment 
not yielded any returns so far. Similarly, NMDC in May 2011 acquired 50 percent shares 
in Legacy Iron Ore Limited (LIOL), Australia to secure management control on the mining 
tenements that would be acquired by LIOL. NMDC made a total investment of Rs. 168.53 
crore in LIOL despite the fact that the consultant appointed for conducting the evaluation 
study had opined that it was a negative Net Present Value (NPV) project and was a 
marginal asset in the short to medium term. Further, due to erosion of the share value of 
LIOL, the value of investment made by NMDC declined from Rs. 168.53 cro re to Rs. 
17.13 crore. The Committee are disheartened to note that in both the cases, the 
investments were made by NMDC despite a negative opinion tendered by the 
Consultants and would like to know the reasons therefor. The Committee are of the view 
that NMDC should have given due cognizance to the opinion tendered by the project 
consultants before making any investment overseas. From the experience gained, the 
Committee expect NMDC to be more careful in making strategic investments in Joint 
Ventures in future.” 
22. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“ ICVL – Total investment made by NMDC till date is Rs 378.9 crores and the present 
valuation of NMDC shareholding in ICVL is Rs 616.81 crores (31.03.2022). With the scale 
of operations being upgraded and new mines opened at Mozambique, the valuation of 
NMDC investment is likely to increase in future. These projects are long gestation ones. 
It is to inform that NMDC shareholding in  ICVL is 25.94 % whereas the shareholding of 
SAIL is 47.83%. The Coal produced at Mozambique is imported and being used by SAIL 
and RINL. 
 Legacy Iron Ore Limited – To progress Mt Bevan iron ore project, Legacy (60% stake) 
along with its partner Hawthorn R esources(40% stake) had signed a non -binding term 
sheet with M/s Hancock Magnetite Holdings Pty Ltd and as per the terms, M/s Hancock 
will acquire 51% stake in Mt Bevan iron ore project (only at project level and not at 
company level) in two phases for an investment of A$16mn (A$4.8mn to Legacy, 
A$3.2mn to Hawthorn and the rest A$8mn into the new JV). They will complete PFS 
studies on Mt Bevan within two years from the date of signing the JV agreement. Pursuant 
to this arrangement, Legacy will have 29.4% st ake in Mt Bevan JV(Joint Venture) 
whereas NMDC continues to hold 90.05% stake in Legacy Iron Ore Ltd. 

22 
 
M/s Hancock Prospecting Ltd which is 100% owner of M/s Hancock Magnetite Holdings 
Pty Ltd is already producing Mt~70Mtpa iron ore in Australia. This partn ership with a 
strong partnership with local experience provides a great opportunity to progress Mt 
Bevan and share the costs.  Hancock will also progress this project up to the PFS stage 
which removes most of the uncertainties in the project and then NMDC/Legacy can take 
a call on further participation in the project based on the outcome of the studies. This 
investment would help Legacy to increase its resource base and increase exploration 
activities. 
Further, in continuation to the above agreement (which was for iron ore only), Legacy has 
again signed a tripartite JV agreement with M/s Hancock for the Exploration of Other 
minerals (lithium and other minerals) against which M/s Hancock will invest a max of 
A$22mn towards the exploration of other minerals. 
With the JV agreement, the share values of Legacy have improved substantially 
increasing the value of NMDC investment in Legacy.  
Legacy is progressing its Mt Celia gold tenements and by this calendar year itself, 
production of Gold will be started..” 
 
23. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid reply of the Government 
are as follows:- 
“As these projects have long gestation periods, the benefit derived by NMDC from its 
investment in ICVL needs to be watched over a period of time. Hence, A udit has no 
remarks to offer for the present. As the studies relating to Mount Bevan Iron Ore Project 
are yet to be conducted and the proposed benefits from the Joint Venture are yet to 
accrue, Audit is not in a position to comment on the prudence of the i nvestment made in 
Legacy Iron Ore Limited. Hence, Audit has no comments to offer for the present.” 
24. The Committee had in its Original Report critically examined NMDC's investments 
in non-profitable joint ventures, particularly in International Coal Ventures Limited (ICVL) 
and Legacy Iron Ore Limited (LIOL), despite negative evaluations by the Consultants. The 
Committee desired to know the exact reasons for Company’s decision on deviating from 
the Consultants advice and urged NMDC to be more cautious in its overseas investments 
and pay heed to the Consultant opinions. The Ministry in their reply has stated that ICVL’s 

23 
 
present valuation of NMDC shareholding stands a t Rs.616.81 crore as against a total 
investment of Rs.378.9 crore.   The Ministry has further informed that in partnership with 
M/s Hancock Magnetite Holdings Pvt. Ltd. including investments towards exploration of 
other minerals, the share values of Legacy  have improved substantially thereby 
increasing the value of NMDC investment in LIOL.  The Committee are in agreement with 
the Audit’s observation that monitoring the benefits derived from NMDC's investment in 
ICVL over time due to long gestation periods a nd coming to reality of the forecasted 
benefits for LIOL until studies on the Mount Bevan Iron Ore Project are conducted.  Given 
the current status, the Committee recommend continued monitoring of the investments 
in ICVL and LIOL to assess their long -term benefits accurately. Keeping in mind the 
Company’s interest, the Committee stress on the importance of periodic evaluations to 
ensure that these investments align with NMDC's strategic goals and contribute 
positively to its financial performance. Additiona lly, the Committee are of the strong 
opinion that NMDC must have learned from past experiences and shall exercise greater 
caution and due diligence in future investments, particularly in joint ventures, to mitigate 
risks and maximize returns for shareholders. 
-------- 
25. Further, the Committee on perusal of majority of the replies furnished by the 
Ministry of Steel find that varied timelines have been fixed for completion/execution of 
intended objective by the Company.  Majority of these replies although b eing accepted 
by the Committee, albeit needs mention as they shall determine the heading for the 
course of progress by NMDC to achieve in near future.  The Committee’s recommendation 
on:- 
 (a) ‘Fixing of unrealistic target in revised ‘SMP Vision 2025’ (Recommendation No. 
2) wherein the Ministry are hopeful of NMDC to achieve 50 MTPA by March, 2024 
should subsequently help the Company in achieving the envisaged targets the 
targets set for 2030 i.e. 100 MTPA.  The Committee while wishing for targets to be 
met desire that the Ministry of Steel may keep a close eye on timely completion of 
evacuation facilities including doubling of KK Railway Line and commissioning of 
Slurry pipeline and timely intervene to make possible the targets achievable;  

24 
 
(b) ‘Delay in ex ecution of Packages for development of Deposit 11B mine’ 
(Recommendation No.3) wherein despite the constraints highlighted, full 
production from 11B mine is expected from 2024 -25. The Committee while 
accepting this revised timeline fixed in the Ministry’s reply, are hopeful that this 
would be achieved without any extension simultaneously working on making the 
11B facility fully operational and prompt completion of key activities;  
(c) Likewise, on ‘Delay in Execution of Packages for development and producti on 
through KIOP’ (Recommendation No. 4) the tendering part of the said project been 
initiated and likely completion of the Screening Plant – II at Donimalai expected in 
March 2026, the Committee are hopeful of no further reasons for delay in meeting 
the decided timeline of March 2026 and should not come in way of fully commission 
of production facilities at KIOP;  
(d)  As regards ‘Increasing Customer base to meet increased production’ 
(Recommendation No. 5), all out efforts including involving local help and support 
should be adopted by NMDC in eliminating citied hindrances for completion of the 
balance work of doubling 44 km Railway line stretch from Dantewada to Kirandul 
by January, 2025; and  
(e) On the issue of ‘Delay in Kirandul project due to denial of  permission for 
blasting’ (Recommendation No. 10), the Committee hope that the Ministry’s 
submission that the project’s scheduled fully completion by August 2024 has been 
statistically practical given only 38 per cent work being completed on Screening 
Plant-III project at Kirandul.   
After carefully examining each of the Ministry's submissions, the Committee 
expect that both the Ministry and the Company have learned from past experiences and 
will move forward with better preparedness in the future. The Committee also hopes that 
the administrative Ministry and NMDC will be able to achieve the set targets on time.   
********* 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
NMDC - OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 1. NMDC Limited is a Navaratna CPSU under the Ministry of Steel. It is the single largest 
producer of iron ore in India. It was incorporated in November 1958 with the main objective of 
exploring the mineral resources in the Country. The Company is consider ed to be one of the 
low-cost producers of iron ore in the world. It produces Iron ore through its highly mechanized 
open cast mines located at Kirandul (3 mines), Bacheli (2 mines) in Bailadila sector of 
Dantewada district in Chhattisgarh and through Donim alai (2 mines) in Bellari district of 
Karnataka. The production of the Company during 2021 -22 was 42.19 million tons per annum 
(MTPA). Apart from the production of iron ore, the Company has taken several business 
diversification initiatives such as setting  up of a Steel Plant and a captive power plant at 
Nagarnar, Chhattisgarh; acquisition of a Sponge Iron Unit at Paloncha, Telangana; 
establishment of a pellet plant at Donimalai, Karnataka, etc. The Company has also made 
investments in Joint Ventures with C entral / State Government Undertakings and private 
companies in India and abroad for establishment of Steel Plants and development of Coal and 
Iron ore mines. NMDC also operates the only mechanized diamond mine in India at Panna, 
Madhya Pradesh. The Perfor mance Audit Report No. 5 of 2019 of C&AG on ‘Operational 
performance of NMDC Limited’ deals with the production, evacuation and sale of iron ore, 
business diversification activities and investment in Joint Ventures by NMDC Limited during the 
period from 2012-13 to 2016-17. The findings of C&AG mostly relate to NMDC (i) not giving due 
weightage to the professional advice 
tendered by consultants in various projects resulting in avoidable delay, time and cost overruns 
in those projects, (ii) not carrying out d ue diligence beforehand resulting delay in execution of 
various work packages, (iii) non -addition of new marketing strategies and customers to match 
its production, (iv) avoidable delay in obtaining Environmental 
Clearance and Forest Clearance in various p rojects, (v) grave errors in documents going un -
noticed by NMDC resulting in delay of important projects, (vi) relying heavily on Techno 
Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) instead of Detailed project Report (DPR) while conceiving 

26 
 
of projects leading to cos t escalation and time overruns in commissioning of project, (vii) 
investments made in non -profitable Joint Ventures resulting in extra -financial burden on the 
Company, etc. The Committee on Public Undertakings examined the C&AG report and its 
observations are in consonance with the findings of the C&AG that are elaborated in succeeding 
paragraphs.  
 
Delay in execution of Packages for development of Deposit-11B mine 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
2. The Committee note that Deposit 11B mine of Bailadila  sector is located in Kirandual, 
Chhattisgarh. In July 2005, NMDC awarded Engineering, Contract Procurement Services & 
Project Management and Construction Management Services (EPCM) contract to MECON 
Limited to execute packages for development of Deposit 11B mine within 35 months i.e. by June 
2008 in order to meet production of 7 MPTA of iron ore from the mine.  The Committee find it 
shocking to note that the development of the mine remained incomplete even by March 2022 
resulting in Deposit 11B mine only pr oducing 2.20 MTPA during 2018 -19, 3.99 MTPA during 
2019-20 and 4.49 MTPA of iron ore during 2020-21 against the expected production target of 7 
MPTA to be achieved by June 2008. Further, the Screening Plant III that was a part of the 
package was yet to be constructed and commissioned without which the full production of 7 
MTPA could not be possible in Deposit 11B mine. NMDC attributed the delay to change in 
technology from soil nailing technique to grouted nailing technique in package III (Earth Works) 
and to the site conditions, change in design, approval of drawings, local disturbances, 
inadequate deployment of men and material by contractors, etc. Surprisingly, NMDC although 
stated to have levied liquidated Damage (LD) / penalty for the delay, did not fur nish any details 
of package-wise LD/ penalty imposed on the contractor/ consultant in some of the packages to 
the Audit party during examination. NMDC also did not furnish the action taken on its employees 
who were responsible for the delays to the Audit party. The Committee find that the incidents of 
grave lapse on the technical wing of the Company such as failing to foresee averse 
circumstances or carry out due diligence before handing over the packages to the contractors 
resulted in delay of more than 14  years adversely impacted the performance of the Company. 
The Committee feel that had proper due diligence been carried out and punitive action taken 
against the officers responsible for untimely submission of drawings, erring contractors/ 
consultants, the  delay of so many years and the adverse impact on the production of the 

27 
 
Company could have been avoided. The Committee hope that NMDC would make all out efforts 
to complete the work of Screening Plant III without any further delay and the targeted production 
of 7 MTPA from Deposit 11B mine would be achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Work for the Screening Plant at -III at Kirandul is in progress. Presently 38% work is completed 
and the work is scheduled to be completed by Aug-2024. Meanwhile, efforts are being made to 
operate the plant partwise before the above schedule. i.e., to complete the RWLS package by 
Sep-2023 so that loading can be made through RWLS (Rapid Wagon loading system). Further 
efforts are also being made to complete the Fine ore handling ar ea equipment by Feb-2024 so 
that storage and loading can be done from there. 
 The Delays in 11B package is mainly due to the following: - 
• Problems faced in executing the projects in remote areas with typical site conditions, 
• Poor mobilization of men and material, slow pace of work by package contractors 
• Frequent Naxal disturbances & bandhs,  
• Threatening of employees and damage of equipment by extremists. 
• Fire incident caused by insurgents (Photographs attached) 
• Non-availability of skilled and unskilled labourers and sub-contractors in remote area. 
• Impact of the extremist’s activities in the region  led to restricted working hours as the 
contractors are not in a position to work during the dark hours. 
• Contract labours leaving the site due to f ear psychosis (attacks on CISF Personnel by 
extremists) 
In view of the above constraints in which the project was implemented, there was no 
inaction on the part of NMDC. However, whenever there was a specific delay on the part 
of the Contractor/Consultant, action as per the contractual provision was taken. 
  
LD was imposed on contractors and the details were provided earlier. The updated status in this 
regard is as under:- 
Package/Contractor  Contract 
Price  
LD Imposed  
Crushing Plant Package - 
Pkg I  
  
M/s TRF Limited  
Rs.117.82 
Cr   
Rs.11.78 Cr  
  
 LD amount recovered.  

28 
 
 Amicable settlement done with the 
contractor and release of payment 
deferred by NMDC due to pending risk & 
cost issue of another contract.  
  
Downhill Conveyer System 
- Pkg II  
  
M/s Sandvik Asia Private 
Limited  
Rs.120.46 
Cr  
Rs.12.05 Cr.  
  
 LD amount recovered.   
 Amicable Settlement failed and package 
contractor invoked Arbitration.  
 Hon’ble Sole Arbitrator awarded in favor 
of contractor.  
 Later out of court settlement done with 
the contractor.  
  
5B- Service Centre 
Facilities  
   
M/s BCC Infracon Pvt Ltd  
Rs.17.65 
Cr  
Rs. 1.76 Cr  
  
 LD amount recovered.  
 Later Amicable settlement done with the 
contractor.  
  
EPCM Consultant   
  
M/s Mecon Ltd  
Rs. 9.95 
Cr   
Rs. 0.995 Cr  
  
 LD amount recovered.  
  
The status of Deposit 11B mine is as under:- 
 The works of all the packages were completed except erection of 01 Nos. Electric Overhead 
Travelling (EOT) Crane in Service centre  facilities. Same is expected to complete by October 
2023.  However, the non -completion of above work did not have any bearing on the operation 
of the 11B mine. Full production from Deposit 11B is expected from 2024-25. 
   [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
 
“The constraints mentioned by the Ministry were already considered by Audit and only the delays 
on the part of Contractor/ Consultant were pointed out in the R eport. However, as the Deposit 
11B facilities are yet to be fully operational and Ministry has mentioned revised timelines for 

29 
 
completion of key activities which are yet to be achieved, Audit has no comments to offer for the 
present.”. 
 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25(b) of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Delay in Execution of Packages for development and production through 
Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project (KIOP) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
3. The Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project (KIOP) is located in Bellari District of Karnataka and 
was envisaged to produce 7 MTPA of iron ore by 2018 -19. As per audit findings, the revised 
schedule for completion of KIOP was March 2012 but the project remained incomplete even till 
March 2018. The Committee observe that although some of the packages were commissioned, 
some crucial packages like approach road works were still incomplete and due to non-existence 
of Screening Plant II and th e Loading Plant with Railway Yard, NMDC had to resort to 
outsourcing of mining which was not a environment friendly step. The Company had produced 
3.82 MTPA through outsourcing and 3.18 MTPA through Departmental Production during 2020-
21 while the entire 7 MTPA or iron ore production should have been met through Departmental 
Production. The Committee are unhappy over the incorrect reply furnished to the C&AG and the 
Committee that no show cause notice was issued by the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) 
to the Company. The Ministry of Steel agreed that the transportation of iron ore through 
outsourcing contractors by tippers was not an environment friendly step and the Screening Plant 
II was still incomplete as statutory clearances had not been received du e to which KIOP could 
not take off as envisaged. The Committee recommend that extraordinary efforts be made by 
NMDC to obtain the statutory clearances so that Screening Plant II which has been delayed for 
more than 14 years can start and KIOP can begin Dep artmental production in -full instead of 
outsourcing of their activities. 
Reply of the Government 
The packages of KIOP have been completed and operational. Regarding the Screening Plant-II 
at Donimalai the clearances are in progress. Presently the clearance s are being monitored 
through PMG portals and reviewed at Ministry level. Stage-2 Forest clearance has been received 

30 
 
on 10.07.2023. Follow up action regarding tree enumeration, tree felling, handing over of land 
have been initiated. The Environment clearan ce proposal with updated EIA/EMP report has 
already been submitted which will be considered in the next EAC meeting to be held on 
02.08.2023. NMDC has also prepared the tender documents for two contract packages for 
Screening Plant-II, Donimalai and preten der meeting with prospective bidders has been held. 
After consideration of suggestions received, both the tender will be floated in the 1st week of 
August,2023. Likely schedule for completion of screening Plant-II at Donimalai is March -2026. 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
 
“Though the production facilities at Kumaraswamy  Iron Ore Project are commissioned, the 
commensurate evacuation facilities also should be completed. In case of Screening Plant-II, as 
the works are still at the stage of preparation of tender documents and commissioning is 
expected to be completed in March 2026, Audit has no comments to offer for the present.”. 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25(c) of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Delay of the work related to the doubling of Kirandul-Kothavalasa (KK) Railway Lines 
between Jagdalpur to Kirandul and between Jagdalpur to Ambagaon 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
4. The Committee note that in order to enhance the evacuation facility for meeting the 
envisaged higher production targets, NMDC undertook two projects viz. (i) doubling of 150.45 
km of the Jagdalpur to Kirandul section of the KK Railway line, and, (ii) doubling of 25 km Railway 
line section between Jagdalpur and Ambagaon. In the first project, NMDC entered into 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Ministry of Railways in December 2012 with an 
estimated cost of Rs. 826.57 crore in 2011-12 that was subsequently revised in December 2015 
to Rs. 1160.83 crore to execute and complete the doubling of the rail way line by August 2018. 
However, the doubling work could not be completed by the scheduled date and as a result the 
enhancement in evacuation facility could not be done. As per the information furnished during 

31 
 
December 2021 to the Committee, out of the 15 0 km of the Jagdalpur – Kirandul section, 
approximately 85 km doubling works was already commissioned and works in the remaining 65 
km was under progress. In the second project, doubling of railway line section of 25 km between 
Jagdalpur and Ambagaon was taken up by NMDC with the Ministry of Railways in August 2016. 
The project was intended to meet the requirement of handling the anticipated two fold increase 
in the volume of traffic on account of the upcoming Integrated Steel Plant at Nagarnar (NISP). 
As per the agreement, the project was to be completed by January 2019. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that only 50 percent physical progress has been made so 
far in this project. NMDC attributed the delay in completion of the projects to extremists problems 
in remote locations of work, issues in land diversions, delay in forest  clearances, etc. The 
Committee find that the delay in the first project has cost the public  exchequer an avoidable 
expenditure of Rs. 334.26 crore due to cost escalations in the  project. The Committee are, 
however, happy to note that apart from the regular monitoring done by the Ministry of Railways, 
the two projects are now also being monitored by the Prime Minister Office (PMO) every month 
through 'PRAGATI' portal. The Committee only hope that the doubling works of KK Railway line 
projects are completed without any further  delay and the evacuation facilities envisaged for 
achieving higher production by the Company are met. 
Reply of the Government 
The total doubling work from Jagdalpur to Kirandul (150.462 km) is divided into 03 sections. The 
details of work progress are as follows: 
Sections % of work 
Progress 
Status of Work 
Section-I: Jagdalpur - Silakjhori: 
45.50 km 
100% Commissioned on 17.06.2017 
Section-II: Gidam - Kirandul: 
52.228 km 
(Bacheli - Kirandul: 9.50 km revised 
target completion is Oct’23) 
(Dantewada- Kamlur: 12.36 km 
revised target completion is Nov’23) 
(Kamlur-Bhansi-Bacheli: 21.98 km 
revised target completion is Jan’25) 
  
51%  Tree cutting by Forest Dept. is in 
progress in Kamlur-Bhansi-Bacheli 
Sections. 
 Due to burning of excavator by 
extremists on 23.03.2023 between 
Kirandul- Bacheli, subsequent 
denial of work granting permission 
by Dist. Police Authorities citing 
security threat, all works stopped in 
Bacheli- Kirandul section for some 
time and now P-way linking works 

32 
 
started in Bacheli - Kirandul 
Section. 
 Earth work, Bridge works started in 
Bacheli- Bhansi section. 
 P-way material shifting to reaches 
in progress in Dantewada -Kamlur 
section 
Section-III: Silakjhori - Gidam: 
52.734 km 
100 % Commissioned on 13.09.2022 
Overall Progress 85% Out of 150 km, 106 km (from Jagdalpur 
to Dantewada) commissioned and 44 km 
(Dantewada to Kirandul) is balance. 
The work is done on deposit work basis by East Coast Railways. Details of contribution of NMDC 
towards the construction is as follows: 
 
Doubling of 25 km between Jagdalpur to Ambagaon was commissioned by Railways on 
19.03.2019. 
  [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
“Until the entire stretch of Kirandul – Kothavalasa Railway Line is complete, the evacuation 
capacity of NMDC will not be enhanced to match the production capacities of mines in 
Bailadila Sector. However, as the Railway Line is expected to be fully operatio nal only by 
January 2025, Audit has no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25(d) of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Maximum fund to be deposited by NMDC ₹ 1500 Cr. 
Amount Deposited by NMDC till date ₹ 1263 Cr. 
Expenditure incurred by Railways ₹ 1219.54 Cr. 
Balance fund available with Railways ₹ 43.46 Cr. 

33 
 
Increasing Customer base to meet increased production 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 6 and 7) 
5. The Committee observe that NMDC sells iron ore produced from its two sectors namely 
(i) Bailadila sector, and; (ii) Donimalai sector. In Bailadila sector, the Company sells it s iron ore 
to end-use plants primarily through Long Term Agreement (LTA) with the end -use plants in the 
sector. NMDC at present has LTAs with about 85 iron & steel plants which comprises Integrated 
Steel Plants, Secondary Steel Producers, pellets & Sponge manufacturers for the sale of iron 
ore from the Bailadila sector. NMDC in December 2021 informed that presently there was a 
registered demand of iron ore of about 40 to 50 MTPA from Bailadila sector and it is expected 
to achieve the target of 67 MTPA sale of iron ore by the year 2024-25. However, on analysis of 
data on the quantity of total iron ore allotted and the total quantity of iron ore lifted during a period 
of 03 years i.e. from 2018 -19 to 2020-21, the Committee find that the lifted quantity of iron  ore 
was always 10 to 11 MTPA less than the allotted quantity implying that there was no 
commensurate demand of iron ore from the customers. The Committee further note that the 
export of iron ore to Japan and South Korean Steel Mills has stopped as the LTA s with these 
countries were not renewed beyond the financial year 2020 -21. This has further adversely 
impacted the market of NMDC. NMDC contended that once the Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant 
(ISP) would start its operation, additional demand of 4 -5 MPTA would narrow the gap between 
the iron ore allotted and lifted. Yet, even after considering the expected demand of 4 -5 MPTA 
from the Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant and with the termination of LTAs with Japan & South 
Korea, the Committee feel that the gap be tween the allotted and lifted quantity of iron ore has 
further widened. Ironically, in such a scenario, the Company has not met the long standing 
demand of iron ore from the Chhattisgarh Sponge Iron Associations which could have narrowed 
the gap between the quantity allotted and the quantity lifted. The Committee feel that unless the 
existing customer base is expanded, new long term customers inducted and LTAs with foreign 
customers renewed, the target of 67 MTPA by 2024 -25 cannot be achieved. The Committee , 
therefore, desire that the demand of iron ore from Chhattisgarh based Sponge Iron producers 
be immediately met. Further, immediate expansion of customer base along with empanelment 
of new long term customers, renewing of LTAs with Japan, South Korea and other countries, 
need to be pursued vigorously if the target sale of 67 MPTA is to be achieved by 2024-25. 
6. In the Donimalai sector, there are no Long Term Agreements(LTA) and iron ore is sold through 
e-auction mode only, conducted by Monitoring Committee as per the directives of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court. The sale in this sector is dependent on the auction performance for the 

34 
 
corresponding period. NMDC has stated that they have been able to liquidate its production from 
the Donimalai complex over the years and with the existing customer base, the Company can 
sell its entire production from its Donimalai Complex. The Committee, howe ver note that even 
in this sector, the lifted quantity was always 3 to 5 MTPA less than the allotted quantity during 
2018-19 to 2020 -21 implying that demand of iron ore from the customers was not 
commensurate. The Committee understand that introduction of the auction rule has increased 
the risks of NMDC as its major customers like JSW Steel Limited and AM-NS India have acquired 
captive mines in mineral -rich States and have already started production from the newly 
acquired mines & planned to increase it fur ther in near future. The new tranches of auction are 
likely to add further capacity of iron ore to steel players as well as other merchant players in near 
future which is likely to adversely impact the market for NMDC over the long term. The 
Committee desire NMDC to take advantage of the increased demand for steel from developed 
economies in post pandemic period and the continuous rise in price of steel in international 
market which is expected to increase the demand of domestic iron ore. Further, NMDC need s 
to actively tackle private players, induct new customers and adopt robust marketing strategies if 
it has to remain and excel in the market. 
Reply of the Government 
1. It may be noted that, iron ore production and sales for the three financial years- FY 19 to 
FY 21 are at par with each other. 
 
 
 
 
2. Even in the recent years, NMDC has been producing over 40 MTPA iron ore for past two 
Financial Years, FY 22 and FY 23, The sales are also keeping the pace and are hovering 
in the range of 38-40 MTPA in the same period. Therefore, most of the production is being 
sold. 
3. NMDC has been adding customers every year and has empanelled 11 new customers in 
past two financial years. In an endeavour to improve the number of customers, NMDC is 
in the process of floating an EoI and inviting interested parties for empanelment as Long-
Term Customers.  
Particulars FY 18-19 FY 19-20 FY 20-21 
Production (in million ton) 32.36 31.5 34.15 
Sales (in million ton) 32.36 31.5 33.25 
  

35 
 
4. The allocation of iron ore is a quantity that is reserved for off-take by a long-term customer 
during a particular Financial Year. The allocation is done by NMDC to its Long -Term 
Customers annually based on the following parameters: 
a. Envisaged Production for the year and available stocks. 
b. Indicated demand of iron ore by long term customers. 
c. Past year’s off-take of the customers.  
5. As far as the observation regarding the gap in allocation and sales is concerned, in order 
to ensure maximum sales, the sales commitments by NMDC are usually pegged   higher 
than the env isaged production as due to the volatility and change in market dynamics, 
the procurement by customers is short of their projections.  
6. NMDC has always accorded priority to iron ore demand of Chhattisgarh based customers. 
75% of DRCLO production and 100% production of sized ore (10-20mm), which is a ready 
to use product for sponge iron industry, is reserved for Chhattisgarh  based customers. 
7. As Bailadila region has a logistical disadvantage compared to other mining belts like 
Odisha and Maharashtra that are relatively closer to the end users based in Raipur, 
Raigarh, Durg, Bhilai and Bilaspur, the logistic costs are relatively higher. 
8. NMDC appreciates that there should be an alternative market for iron ore apart from 
Domestic market and hence we are also expl oring options to commence export of iron 
ore. 
9. During the said period of FY 19 to FY 21, in Donimalai  sector, the entire quantity of iron 
ore is sold through e -auctions conducted by Monitoring Committee, hence no allocation 
was being done. The Monitoring Committee in Karnataka has been withdrawn since 
May’22 and NMDC would be entering into long term agreement with interested customers 
shortly. 
10. The increase in captive mines is to mitigate any disruption in the supplies of iron ore. 
However, Since the auction of Captive mines since 2020, NMDC’s sales have been 
increasing on account of availability of quality, consistency and reliability as a supplier of 
iron ore. All the major steel makers have expansion plans which would translate to 
incremental demand in the coming decade. 

36 
 
11. Market development and empanelment of customers   is an continual process which 
requires devising a robust and agile policy framework coupled with adequate evacuation 
facilities. The initiatives like doubling of KK line is likely to be completed in the current 
financial year, adding an incremental 12 MTPA evacuation capacity, The rapid wago n 
loading system at Kirandul Complex will improve the dispatch from Kirandul Complex and 
reduce the rake turnaround time. The 15 MTPA slurry pipeline that is likely to be 
commissioned by 2025 will reduce dependency on conventional modes of transport (rail 
and road) and is also expected to be economical in terms of cost of transportation. This 
would open new avenues for NMDC and help expand its customer base. 
 
   [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“As the increase in production capacities and commensurate evacuation facilities are proposed 
for completion in future, their impact on the customer base cannot be evaluated at this stage. As 
such, Audit has no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
 
 
Avoidable delay in obtaining of Consent for Establishment (CFE) for Screening Plant-III 
at Kirandul Complex 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
7. The Committee note that the Environmental Clearance (EC) for the Screening Plant - III 
at Kirandul Complex was received by NMDC in November 2013. However, in the EC, the land 
area mentioned was 65,936 hectares instead of 74,236 hectares as applied for by the Company. 
The Committee find it shocking that this anomaly was not noticed by NMDC before October 2016 
until it was pointed out by the Chhattisgarh Environment Conservation Board (CECB) to whom 
it applied for issue of Consent for Establishment (CEF). NMDC in December 2016 requested the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) for issue of a revised EC which 
was received in March 2017. Eventually, the CEF was granted by CECB in July 2017 resulted 
in an avoidable delay of 38 months. The Committee deplore the way such grave error on crucial 

37 
 
document went unnoticed by the NMDC Management for 3 years until it was pointed out by 
CECB. The Committee desire that a detailed administrative exercise be carried out to find out 
the causes for such grave lapse, fix responsibility and take punitive action on those found guilty. 
Simultaneously, a concrete fool -proof mechanism be developed to monitor timelines fixed for 
various work and detection of such errors at early stages so that unnecessary delays are 
avoided.  
Reply of the Government 
 The proposed Screening Plant -III and associated loading infrastructure facilities were 
proposed to be located adjacent to existing Deposit -14 NMZ Mining Lease. The existing 
Screening Plant-I and II are in Bailadila Deposit-14 NMZ lease area. 
 The area identified outside Deposit-14 NMZ ML area is 65.936 Ha which is revenue forest 
land requiring Forest clearance under FC Act, 1980.    
 In addition to above, the TEFR prepared for SP -III also identified an area of 8.30 Ha in 
Deposit-14 NMZ lease area (506.742 Ha lease area) which was forest land and already 
under possession of NMDC for which Forest clearance approval was accorded. 
 The EIA/EMP report prepared for obtaining Environmental clearance for augmentation of 
Screening Plant and associated facilities at Bailadila Deposit -14/11C, 11B Project, 
Kirandul of NMDC specifically mentioned the requirement of 65.936 Ha Forest land 
outside Deposit-14 NMZ lease area and 8.30 Ha land which was in NMDC’s possession 
under lease area. 
  The extract of PPT presented before public hearing on 5/10/2009 is enclosed wherein it 
was clearly mentioned about the total land requirement. (Copy enclosed). 
  The Final EIA/EMP report (upgraded after PUBLIC HEARING) submitted to MOEFCC in 
December 2009 for obtaining EC. The chapter-2, Table No: 2.2, the area requirement of 
65.936 Ha and 8.30 Ha was also mentioned. (Copy enclosed). 
 The questionnaire submitted to  MOEFCC in December 2009 also contains area 
requirements of 65.936 Ha and 8.30 Ha at s.no; 2. (Copy enclosed).     
 The PPT presented before the Expert Appraisal Committee, MoEFCC on 22/1/2010 has 
also presented the above land requirement details. (Copy enclosed). 
  However, while issuing EC by MOEFCC on 5/11/2013 (after obtaining stage -1 Forest 
clearance for 65.936 Ha Forest land on 17/01/2012), they have mentioned only 65.936 
Ha of forest land which was acquired under FC Act, 1980. 
 NMDC was of the opinion that since 8.30 Ha of land in the lease area of Deposit-14 NMZ 
was already under possession, the same was not mentioned by MOEFCC in the 
Environmental clearance letter dated 5/11/2013.  
  However, during the presentation before CECB, Raipur for obtaining Con sent to 
Establish, the requirement of total land of 74.236 Ha was mentioned (application was also 

38 
 
submitted for 74.236 Ha) and given break up details. At that time, NMDC officials have 
made all efforts to convince the CECB officials by showing the above fa cts.  However, 
CECB has advised NMDC to get corrigendum to EC mentioning the area of 8.30 Ha also 
to avoid any legal complications in future. 
  Since NMDC has included the requirement of 8.30 Ha (which is already in possession of 
NMDC) in documents of public hearing presentation, Final EIA/EMP report, questionnaire 
and made presentation before EAC, MOEFCC, due to which MOEFCC has issued 
corrigendum on 28/3/2017 without any adverse remarks on NMDC.  
 Thereafter, the CTE was issued by CECB, Raipur on 28/7/2017.  
Conclusion 
 From the above-mentioned facts, it has been clearly indicated that NMDC has mentioned 
complete land requirement and its break up. 
Action Taken 
 NMDC is examining all statutory clearances once received from MOEF&CC whether they 
are in accordance with the application submitted in terms of production capacity and area 
requirement. 
 The Top Management is conducting review meeting once in a month in which all the time 
lines fixed for various works are being monitored to avoid any delays. 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
“The effectiveness of the review meetings taken by the Top Management and their follow up 
needs to be watched over a period of time to comment upon. Hence, Audit has no further 
remarks to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
Delay in Kirandul project due to denial of permission for blasting 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
8. The Committee are informed that the work for the Screening Plant III Project, Kirandul is 
being executed through eight packages and as per the revised schedule, the project is to be 
completed by August 2024. The Committee however note that work in 2 packag es is yet to be 
awarded. NMDC clarified that during execution of the site development & construction package, 
the Company could not do the blasting of hard rocks as Chhattisgarh Government Authorities 

39 
 
did not permit them for blasting in view of the sensitiveness of the area. So the Company had to 
consider other means like using expansive cement mortar for breaking of the hard rock in place 
of blasting which resulted in a time-consuming process. The Committee do not understand how 
the Company failed to take stock of the ill consequences of carrying out blasting in a ecologically 
sensitive area. The Committee feel that proper due diligence was not done by NMDC at the time 
of conceiving the project, carrying out survey of the area, preparing the DPRs, etc other wise 
such critical aspects could have been noticed beforehand and delay in the project would have 
been avoided. The Committee express their strong displeasure and desire NMDC to be more 
cautious in future. 
Reply of the Government 
District Administration had denied permission for blasting due to the strong presence of 
Extremists in the area, not due to being an ecologically sensitive area.  
Now the construction work for the Dry circuit package and MRSS etc. is in progress at the sit e. 
The project work is 38 % completed and is scheduled for completion by Aug-2024. All efforts are 
being made to complete the project within the scheduled time period. 
 [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Since the Screening Plant – III is now scheduled for completion only by August 2024, Audit has 
no comments to offer for the present.” 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25(e) of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

40 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
Delay in obtaining of Environmental Clearance for Screening Plant-II of Kumaraswamy 
Iron Ore Project (KIOP) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
1. The Committee note that in order to identify additional reserves in Donimalai Iron Ore 
Project (DIOP), NMDC decided for construction of a second Screening Plant (SP -II) at 
Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project (KIOP). The Company applied for Environmental Clearance 
(EC) for the Screening Plant II in March 2014. However, the EC was received after more than 
03 years of application made by the Company. The inordinate delay was attributable on the part 
of State Pollution Control Board (PCB) in conducting Gram Sabha coupled with failure on the 
part of NMDC in taking prompt action for applying for revised Terms of Reference (ToR) and 
delay in submitting the required information to the Ministry of Environment & Forests & Climatic 
Change (MoEF&CC). Similarly the Forest Clearance (FC) for the SP -II (Stage-I) which NMDC 
applied in December 2014, could not be received even after 7 years.  The FC was held up due 
to delay in submission of Differential Global P ositioning System (DGPS) map to Forest 
Department and resubmission of application for revision of ToR. During the course of evidence, 
the Ministry of Steel admitted the delay and submitted that these were priority items for them 
and work is now being monit ored on real time basis.  The Committee are, however, perturbed 
with the lackadaisical approach on the part of the management of the Company that failed in 
timely submission of documents to the concerned authorities and pursue various clearances. 
The Committee feel that had some concrete monitoring mechanism been in place to keep track 
of the progress of work in various stages, the delay of so many years could have been avoided. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all -out efforts be made to obtain all t he necessary 
statutory clearances to complete the Screening Plant II without any further delay to enable 
identification of additional reserves in Donimalai Iron Ore Project (DIOP) and enhancement of 
its capacity. 
 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
Stage-2 Forest cl earance order was obtained on 10th July, 2023. The compliance of the 
condition set out therein has also been furnished on 24th July, 2023 to the Government of 
Karnataka for issue of Final Forest clearance orders. 
  
Environmental clearance: The  proposal was  recommended by Expert Appraisal Committee, 
MOEFCC during the meeting held on 8th June, 2017 subject to obtaining Stage -1 Forest 
clearance. As per MOEFCC requirements, the updated EIA/EMP report with fresh baseline data 
collected from March to May, 2023 ha s been submitted to MOEFCC on 15th July, 2023 for 
obtaining Environmental clearance. EAC is scheduled to consider the same on 2nd August, 
2023. 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
“The Environmental Clearance shall be followed by obtaining of Consent for Establishment from 
the concerned State Pollution Control Board before initiating work at site for the proposed 
Screening Plant – II at Kumaraswamy Iron Ore Project. This shall further be followed by Consent 
for Operations before the commencement of operations of Screening Plant after the same is 
commissioned. Hence, as such, since NMDC is yet to obtain the Environmental Clearance, Audit 
has no comments to offer for the present.” 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Setting up of Integrated Steel Plant at Nagarnar, Chhattisgarh 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
2. The Committee note that in line with the National Steel Policy 2005, the Government in 
March 2008 decided that NMDC may set up a Steel Plant on its own in view that the Company 
had adequate cash reserves and easy access to the primary raw material i.e. iron ore. The Board 
of NMDC in July 2008 appointed MECON Limited as a Consultant for preparation of Techno 
Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) for the project which was submitted by MECON in 
December 2008. After carrying out due diligence, the Board of NMDC in January 2010 accorded 
approval for setting up the Nagarnar Integrated Steel Plant (NISP) in Chhattisgarh with an 

43 
 
estimated cost of Rs. 15,525 crore. NISP was scheduled to be completed and commissioned by 
March 2014. The Committee, however are perturbed to note that the project was delayed as the 
work for the project was awarded on the basis of a tentative TEFR instead of a Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) which is more elaborate and accurate. The decision to depend on TEFR lead to 
revision of technical specifications, modification of tenders, time overruns and upward revision 
of estimated cost of the project from Rs. 15,525 crore to Rs. 22,196 crore. NMDC contended 
that preparation of DPRs has lost its relevance as its preparation is time consuming which further 
leads to increase in project time schedule and increase in cost of project, and also that many 
private players and steel companies in the past have executed their expansion projects/ new 
projects based on TEFR. The Committee, however, are not in agreement with the view of NMDC 
as even after proceeding with TEFR, the NISP project has been delayed for more than 8 years 
and the project is still incomplete. The Committee believe that TEFR lead to change in technical 
specifications in works and contracts par ticularly in 03 major works namely (i) Raw Material 
Handling System, (ii) By -Product Plant, and (iii) Line & Dolomite Calcined Plant leading to 
termination and re-awarding contracts to new contractors. Further, the cost of the NISP project 
escalated from 15, 525 crore to Rs. 22,196 crore and even after regular monitoring at Company 
and Ministry level, the NISP project is scheduled to be completed by March 2024 after an 
estimated delay of 9 years. The Committee are of the opinion that NMDC willingly erred in  
deciding not to prepare DPR in such a huge ambitious project although it was new in the field of 
establishment of steel plants and instead heavily depended on tentative TEFR that resulted in 
additional burden of Rs. 6671 crore on the public exchequer and time overrun of 9 years. The 
Committee are also apprehensive of cost overrun and time overruns in the project that has lead 
the Government to decide on the disinvestment/ demerger of NISP which is also simultaneously 
under process. The Committee only hope that with the constant monitoring by the Ministry of 
Steel, the project would be completed as per the revised schedule without any further cost and 
time overrun. 
Reply of the Government 
NMDC decision to proceed the project with TEFR submitted by M/s MECON,  was taken after 
due diligence of TEFR by Price Waterhouse Coopers. Feasibility reports covering techno -
economic portions for various SAIL plants (BSP, RSP, DSP) were also prepared by their 
Consultant MECON. As such the procedure of approval of projects based on TEFR is in practice 
and the same was followed in NMDC. NMDC was not having requisite experience in construction 
and commissioning of steel plant, hence MECON was appointed as PMC/EPCM consultant for 

44 
 
construction and commissioning of NISP Steel plant . For such type of large project, there is 
always a possibility and requirement of change in technical specifications in works which cannot 
be predicted at the start of the project.  
  
Major reasons for Delay are:  
 
1. Contract award could not be done in sequ ential manner due to poor  response from 
bidders in tenders floated.  
2. Improper assessment/estimate of quantities/jobs by contractors before  quoting for 
tenders.  
3. Abnormal increase in labour price.  
4. Inordinate delay in completing the engineering.  
5. Delay in getting forest clearance for doing intake well in river Sabari at Tiriya.  
6. Change of name  of Package Contractors in Steel Melting Shop, Turbo blower and Sinter 
plant and Oxygen plant which have changed the name of their company due to mergers 
and acquisition and it resulted in delays of the project. This affected the supplies by the 
contractors.  
7. Delays due to financial crunch of Contractors. The financial health of  major contractors 
like M/s. Shapoorji, M/s. SEW, M/s. SEPC, M/s. NCC, M/s. TPL, M/s BEC, M/s Primetals 
etc. have been deteriorated due to external reasons beyond control. This has resulted in 
inadequate resource deployment.  
8.  Difficulty in availability of skilled manpower locally due to remote   geographical location 
and lack of an ecosystem of steel making nearby.   
9. Commercial issues raised by various contractors like M/s Primetals, M/s  BEC, M/s 
SPCPL, M/s Danieli, M/s Linde etc. which resulted in slow down of supplies and execution 
of work at site.  
10. Mismatch in shell manufacturing by the contrac tor with respect to approved design in 
Blast Furnace Package resulted in a considerable delay because of time taken in 
finalizing the  modification of shell.  
12. Inter consortium disputes in multiple packages has resulted in delay in  supply and 
execution of work.  
13. Non sequential supply of structure and equipment’s by contractors.  
14. Poor performance of contractors in RMHS, BPP & LDCP etc resulted in  delay in 
commissioning of plant in an integrated manner.  
15. Covid-19 has also severely impacted the progress and commissioning plant as work was 
entirely stopped during this period and after effects of covid which resulted in delay in 
deputation of foreign experts and supply of imported items.  
16. Refurbishment of equipment due to idling/delay etc.  

45 
 
  
The reasons which are mentioned above clearly indicate that the progress of plant was 
hampered due to reasons beyond the control of NMDC which has also resulted in cost 
overrun. Even through the management has taken concrete step with support of MECON 
for planning, monitoring and execution so as to ensure that works are completed in 
earliest possible duration, many unforeseen issues cropped up during execution of NISP 
project, and all efforts were made by management to resolve the issues, which has 
brought plant upto the present level of progress.  
  
The present progress of plant where in physical works are broadly completed and 
commissioning activities are in full swing. Raw Material Handling system is functioning in 
line with the requirements of overall pl ant. Coal, Coke, Sinter route are operational, rest 
other routes are also ready and will be operated as per commissioning sequence of 
packages. By -Product Plant is operational since 27 th Oct’22 and is under process of 
stabilization. Lime Dolomite Calcination Plant (LDCP) balance work has been awarded in 
Jan’23 to new contractor M/s Offshore and consortium and work is in progress. However, 
completion of LDCP is not a prerequisite for the c ommissioning of overall steel plant as 
the requirement of Lime & Dolo will be met through the purchased calcined lime and 
Calcined Dolo from the market, and necessary arrangements has been done for storing 
and handling of calcined lime and Dolo.  
  
Brief status of commissioning activities are as follows:  
 
 Coke Oven Battery-1 and By-Product Plant commenced Operations from 27th Oct ‘22  
 Coke Oven Battery-2 commenced Operations from 24th April ’23  
 Sinter Plant and Oxygen Plant (ASU-2) commenced operation on 19.04.2023.  
 Steam Turbo Generators (STG) -1 & 2 is synchronised and started power generation. 
All 3 boilers are ready and 2 are operational. Turbo Blowers (3 No’s) hot trial for cold 
blast generation taken & hooking up with blast furnace completed.  
 Blast Furnace all 3 stoves heating under progress.  
 All auxiliary units/services department like MRS, PPDS, PBS, Water Depts. CAS, DG 
Station, Central Stores are operational.   
 Trial production with purchased plate started in Hot Strip mill and first coil rolled on 
30.06.2023  
  

46 
 
Prerequisite activities for Hot Metal from Blast Furnace and Liquid Steel production from 
Steel Melting Shop are in progress and will be ready by end of July’23.  
 
[Ministry of Steel(NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023)  
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“The Integrated Steel Plant has been operational since August 2023 and is currently in 
stabilization stage. Hence, Audit has no further remarks to offer.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Sponge Iron Unit at Paloncha, Telengana 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
3. The Committee note that NMDC at the instance of Ministry of Steel, in July 2010, acquired 
a loss making Sponge Iron India Limited (SIIL) at Paloncha, Telangana. The sponge iron 
production turned unviable due to higher cost of production and the losses of SIIL accumulated 
to Rs. 194.77 crore in 2017 which further grew to Rs. 273.69 crore as on 31 March 2021. The 
Committee are disappointed to note that the turnaround plans of the sick Sponge Iron Unit, 
initially with the construction of a Super Critical Thermal Power Plant and then with a Cold Rolled 
Coil Unit have been shelved for different reasons by NMDC. As a measure of turnaround plan, 
the Company had intended to utilize the available land of 428 acres for setting up of Thermal 
and Solar Power Plants. The Committee are unhappy to note that although the Government had 
tried to sell the SIIL Unit by issuing expression of interest, there was no response. The 
Committee also find it surprising on the Government insisting to acquire a sick & loss making 
Sponge Iron Unit in July 2010 and would like to know the reasons therefor. The Committee are 
not aware of the turnaround plan of the Company to set up a Solar Power Plant to bring the 
Company out of losses. Since the loss of the Company are accumulating year after  year and 
that there are no prospective buyers of the Unit, the Committee recommend that a concrete 
turnaround plan be drawn and implemented to bring SIIL Unit of Paloncha out of losses. 
 

47 
 
Reply of the Government 
 NMDC is having free land bank of around 350 Acres (290 acres of free land bank and 
60 acres of non-operational plant) at Paloncha.  
 NMDC has prepared a detailed report for setting up of a 4.5 MW ground-mounted, grid-
connected Solar Power Plant at SIU, Paloncha. 
 The proposal is under finalization and has an implementation timeline of 12 months. 
 A part of the land area (as shown below) is being currently utilized for the Solar Power 
Plant. For the remaining land area, NMDC is looking for other business opportunities 
including expansion of the Solar Power Plant. 
 
 [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“The progress made in setting up of Solar Power Plant will have to watched. Hence, Audit has 
no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Investment by NMDC in non-profitable Joint Ventures 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
4. The Committee note that with the objective of sourcing Metallurgical Coking Coal and 
Thermal Coal supplies from overseas, a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) namely International 
Coal Ventures Limited (ICVL) was formed in May 2009. In July 2014, ICVL de cided to acquire 
the ownership of coal mine and coal assets located in Mozambique. NMDC had invested Rs. 
376.36 crore in ICVL. However, NMDC further remitted an equity contribution of over Rs. 2.50 
crore to ICVL's to meet expenditure budget and also to cle ar the ICVL's outstanding liabilities. 
The Committee note that the NMDC has so far invested Rs. 590.51 crore in ICVL despite an 
adverse report of the consultant and the investment not yielded any returns so far. Similarly, 

48 
 
NMDC in May 2011 acquired 50 percent shares in Legacy Iron Ore Limited (LIOL), Australia to 
secure management control on the mining tenements that would be acquired by LIOL. NMDC 
made a total investment of Rs. 168.53 crore in LIOL despite the fact that the consultant appointed 
for conducting the evaluation study had opined that it was a negative Net Present Value (NPV) 
project and was a marginal asset in the short to medium term. Further, due to erosion of the 
share value of LIOL, the value of investment made by NMDC declined from Rs. 168.53 crore to 
Rs. 17.13 crore. The Committee are disheartened to note that in both the cases, the investments 
were made by NMDC despite a negative opinion tendered by the Consultants and would like to 
know the reasons therefor. The Committee are of the view that NMDC should have given due 
cognizance to the opinion tendered by the project consultants before making any investment 
overseas. From the experience gained, the Committee expect NMDC to be more careful in 
making strategic investments in Joint Ventures in future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
ICVL – Total investment made by NMDC till date is Rs 378.9 crores and the present valuation 
of NMDC shareholding in ICVL is Rs  616.81 crores (31.03.2022). With the scale of operations 
being upgraded and new mines opened at Mozambique, the valuation of NMDC investment is 
likely to increase in future. These projects are long gestation ones. 
It is to inform that NMDC shareholding in ICVL is 25.94 % whereas the shareholding of SAIL is 
47.83%. The Coal produced at Mozambique is imported and being used by SAIL and RINL. 
  
Legacy Iron Ore Limited – To progress Mt Bevan iron ore project, Legacy (60% stake) along 
with its partner Hawthorn Resources(40% stake) had signed a non-binding term sheet with M/s 
Hancock Magnetite Holdings Pty Ltd and as per the terms, M/s Hancock will acquire 51% stake 
in Mt Bevan iron ore project (only at project level and not at company level) in two phases for an 
investment of A$16mn (A$4.8mn to Legacy, A$3.2mn to Hawthorn and the rest A$8mn into the 
new JV). They will complete PFS studies on Mt Bevan within two years from the date of signing 
the JV agreement. Pursuant to this arrangement, Legacy will have 29.4% s take in Mt Bevan 
JV(Joint Venture) whereas NMDC continues to hold 90.05% stake in Legacy Iron Ore Ltd. 
M/s Hancock Prospecting Ltd which is 100% owner of M/s Hancock Magnetite Holdings Pty Ltd 
is already producing Mt~70Mtpa iron ore in Australia. This partnership with a strong partnership 
with local experience provides a great opportunity to progress Mt Bevan and share the 

49 
 
costs.  Hancock will also progress this project up to the PFS stage which removes most of the 
uncertainties in the project and then NMDC/Legacy can take a call on further participation in the 
project based on the outcome of the studies. This investment would help Legacy to increase its 
resource base and increase exploration activities. 
Further, in continuation to the above agreement (which was for iron ore only), Legacy has again 
signed a tripartite JV agreement with M/s Hancock for the Exploration of Other minerals (lithium 
and other minerals) against which M/s Hancock will invest a max of A$22mn towards the 
exploration of other minerals. 
With the JV agreement, the share values of Legacy have improved substantially increasing the 
value of NMDC investment in Legacy.  
Legacy is progressing its Mt Celia gold tenements and by this calendar year itself, production of 
Gold will be started. 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“As these projects have long gestation periods, the benefit derived by NMDC from its investment 
in ICVL needs to be watched over a period of time. Hence, Audit has no remarks to offer for the 
present. As the studies relating to Mount Bevan Iron Ore Project are yet to be conducted and 
the proposed benefits from the Joint Venture are yet to accrue, Audit is not in a position to 
comment on the prudence of the investment made in Legacy Iron Ore Limited. Hence, Audit has 
no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

50 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Fixing of Unrealistic target in Strategic Management Plant(SMP) -Vision 2025 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
1. The Committee observe that NMDC had a Corporate Plan upto the year 2009 -10. 
Thereafter, no Corporate Plan was formulated till the year 2015 -16. Instead, production and 
other targets were fixed annually. In a review meeting held on 27 October 201 4, the 
Administrative Ministry had suggested for preparation of a vision document 'NMDC 2025' as the 
Company had intended to produce 75 million tons per annum (MTPA) by 2018-19 and 100 MTPA 
by 2021 -22. Subsequently, in January 2015, a Consultant, namely, M /s Accenture was 
appointed for a fee of Rs. 0.57 Crore by NMDC to evaluate the intended production in the vision 
document. The Consultant, in May 2015, after assessing the existing customers in the domestic 
market, potential volume of exports and captive  consumption, suggested that the intended 
objective of achievement of production of 75 MTPA and 100 MTPA would be difficult. Yet, NMDC 
in October 2015, ignored the advice of the consultant and fixed over-ambitious target of 75 MTPA 
by 2018-19 and 100 MTPA b y 2021-22 in its Strategic Management Plan (SMP) Vision 2025. 
However, sensing the subdued market condition, fall in international iron ore prices, NMDC 
revisited its SMPVision 2025 in September 2016 and lowered the target of iron ore production 
to 50 MTPA for 2018-19 and 67 MTPA for 2021-22. The Committee find that even this lowered 
target was on the higher side and NMDC failed to achieve the target of iron ore production during 
the financial years 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020 -21 which remained at 32.36, 31.4 9 and 34.15 
MTPA respectively. The Ministry of Steel reviewed the situation and further lowered the target 
of iron ore production to 47 MTPA for financial 2021 -22. The Committee note that even at this 
stage, the reduced target of 47 MTPA could not be achieved by NMDC and the Company could 
only produce 42.19 MTPA of iron ore during 2021 -22. The Committee do not understand why 
NMDC ignored the suggestions of the consultant to whom it paid a fee of Rs. 0.57 crore which 

51 
 
may be construed as wasteful, now appears  to be thoughtless expenditure of public money. In 
the opinion of the Committee, the targets fixed by NMDC at different stages were over ambitious 
and irrational taking in view the unfavorable market condition, fall in international iron ore prices, 
unfinished projects related to doubling of various railway lines, inability in finding new potential 
customers, termination of long term agreements with some countries, delay in execution of 
various packages & enhancement facilities, etc. On an overall review of  the position, the 
Committee note that against the initial target of 100 MTPA fixed by NMDC to be achieved by 
2021-22, the Company could ultimately achieve only 42.19 MTPA of production. The Committee 
suggest that NMDC should seriously consider the profess ional advice given by consultants on 
time and undertake proper realistic assessment while fixing of various targets in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The Strategic Management Plan “Vision 2025” was prepared in 2015 considering various 
assumptions and w as based on various conditions stipulated therein. The revised SMP 
stipulates an ambitious plan of producing 67 MTPA of iron ore by 2025 and 100 MTPA by 2030 
by NMDC. The Vision document stressed a total of six strategies which included Business 
Strategy, Operations Strategy, Human Resources Strategy, IT Strategy, R&D Strategy, 
Sustainability Strategy.  
NMDC has gradually transformed itself according to the stipulations made in the Vision 
document and the same can be seen by the continuous improvement in th e production 
capacities. Evacuation was  and continues to remain one of the important factors affecting the 
capacities. Due to the locational disadvantage, there are many constraints in increasing 
evacuation capacities. The doubling of KK line is one such aspect. By doubling of the line, the 
rail evacuation capacity will increase to 40MTPA from the existing 28 MTPA. This project is being 
executed by railways and NMDC is funding it. The same is expected to be completed by 2025 
and will support in achieving t he envisaged targets. The commissioning of Slurry pipeline will 
also add to the evacuation capacity which in turn will add to the production capacities. 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
 
During the last two financial years, NMDC has continuously crossed the 40 MTPA 
production and is poised to achieve 50 MT of production during FY 2023 -24. During the 
first quarter of FY 2023-24, NMDC achieved its highest-ever production. 
 
  Q1 OF 2022-23 Q1 OF 2023-24 
IN MILLION 
TONNES 
PRODUCTION SALES PRODUCTION SALES 
8.92 7.80 10.70 11.15* 
 
Achievements of SMP Targets – 
  
While the production decisions are based on demand and supply dynamics of the iron 
ore market and feasibility of evacuation, the NMDC has worked hard to repare itself for a 
higher volume of prouction. If market and other con ditions are favourable, the company 
would be able to meet its revised goals on the basis of said developments. These are 
detailed below:- 
 
  Strategies and Key 
Enablers  
Achievements 
1 Business Strategy:  From “single commodity, geography” to “multiple 
commodities and globally diversified” 
  Expansion to New 
Products, New 
Geographies 
 Two Coal Blocks in Jharkhand and one 
Gold Block in Andhra Pradesh have been 
allocated and action is on hand for start of 
production activities. 
 NMDC is a part of ICVL which acquired 
Operational Coal Mine in Mozambique. 
 NMDC Exiting the Steel business by 
demerging NMDC Steel Limited to 
concentrate on Core activity of Mining 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________
*updated to 10.98 MT (for Q1 of 2023-24) as per extract of 557th meeting of the Board of 
Directors of NMDC Ltd. held on 11.08.2023.                           
[MoS O.M. No. S-28011/17/2021-NMDC dated 18th November, 2024] 

53 
 
2 Operations Strategy: Capacity augmentation of existing mines to optimise 
capital spent along with development of new mines as JVs. Parallelly, 
investment in evacuation infrastructure. Develop and deploy strategies to 
enter new markets.  
  Iron ore Production 
Capacity to be enhanced 
from Existing Operating 
Mines & starting of New 
Mines 
 Capacity augmentation of existing mines 
is an ongoing process and is achieved by 
enhancing the capacities of the plants and 
mines.  
 Moving close to the customers: 
Developed intermediary stockpile at 
strategic locations - First intermediate 
stockpile at Kumarmarenga near 
Jagdalpur is operational.  
  Evacuation Infrastructure  Implementation of Rapid Wagon Loading 
System (RWLS) at Kirandul Complex 
 Doubling of KK railway line is in its final 
stage 
 Construction of railway line between 
Rowghat and Jagdalpur –  Activities going 
on 
 Construction of slurry pipeline in Bailadila 
region – First Phase from Bailadila to 
Nagarnar is in advanced stage 
  Capital Projects Strategy  For managing the ongoing/ under 
construction Projects, a new vertical of 
HOP-Works has been created at 
Project level and HO 
 Dedicated Project Management Cell 
(PMC) is created to monitor the ongoing 
Projects 
 Procurement and Works Manuals have 
been prepared with latest guidelines and 
practices  
 Tender and Contract management 
processes have been made more 
effective by 
 Use of IT and project management 
Softwares 
 online tendering process & Pre bid 
discussions 

54 
 
 Regular review meetings with top 
management and creation of 
Digital Record Depository 
 Providing early completion Bonus 
to the contractors 
  Enhanced Customer 
Orientation: Customer 
Relationship Management 
 Aligning Product mix with the 
requirements of customers, e.g. 10- 20 
mm sized ore for the Sponge Iron 
customers – already producing 
 Development of a dedicated Customer 
Portal 
3 Human Resources Strategy:  From having core competencies in iron ore 
mining to honing competencies in mining, metals, metallurgy and other 
businesses.  
  Strengthen Performance 
Management System 
(PMS):  
 The Performance Management System 
has been revised and Integrated with ERP 
  Leadership Development 
and Succession Planning 
to drive the expansion plan 
 Leadership Development Programmes 
are being organized with the help of 
professional institutes 
 NMDC has identified competency-led 
Leadership Capability Development as a 
basis for Succession Planning, through 
which it is looking at development of its 
senior executives to occupy key positions 
based on their performance and 
potential.  In working towards the same, 
NMDC has decided to carry out 
Assessment Centre (AC) as a 
development-focused intervention. 
  Employee Training & 
Development: 
 The executives are being provided 
professional development training in 
reputed institutes like IIM, ISB etc 
    Corporate HRD Department is committed 
towards the development of its employees by 
imparting different types of Training and 
customized Learning interventions which are 
meticulously designed separately like 
Behavioral Interventions, Technical 
Interventions, Psycho-Analytical Interventions 
etc and more precisely Customized Learning 
Interventions, Focused Learning Initiatives, 
Structured Initiatives (Small Group Activities) 
etc. some of them are given below: 

55 
 
o Assessment Development centre 
for succession planning 
o High Potential Executives (HIPO) 
programme 
o Knowledge Management System in 
line with Learning Management 
System to create a learning eco-
system 
o General Management Programmes 
o Advance Management 
Programmes 
o Supervisory Development 
Programmes 
o Behavioral Based Safety Training 
Programmes 
o Learning Intervention on 
communication and Presentation 
Skills 
o Learning Intervention on Finance 
for Non-Finance Executives 
o Learning Intervention on Mentoring 
& Coaching 
o Assessment Centre Workshop 
o Performance Appraisal System 
through trained Internal Resource 
Persons 
o Employees satisfaction and 
Organization culture survey 
  New Initiatives  IKIGAI – A Happy Workforce 
 Strengthening of Quality Circles 
4 IT Strategy:  Enhance productivity through automation and digitization of 
operations. 
  Develop an IT / digital 
blueprint for “NMDC of 
Future” considering 
emerging IT and digital 
concepts and Best 
Practices including:  
 As a first step towards Digital Journey, 
NMDC has implemented Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) on SAP S/4 
HANA platform which covers entire value 
chain of mining, starting from Exploration 
to mine development & Production to 
mine closure with a complete visibility 
from Pit to Port. 

56 
 
 ERP Modules such as Production 
Planning, Plant Maintenance, Quality 
Management, Sales & Distribution, 
Materials Management, Human Capital 
Management, Environment Health & 
Safety, and Finance & Costing etc. have 
been successfully implemented. 
 Subsequently NMDC has launched 
Management Dashboards for providing 
information and insights on Production, 
Sales, Material Management, Quality 
Management, HCM, EHS, CSR, etc. in 
real time 
  
  Implementation of ERP 
(Project Kalpataru) 
 Implementation of SAP S/4 HANA – First 
Indian PSU to achieve this 
 NMDC has also started initiatives for the 
Phase II and Phase III of its digital 
roadmap 
 The Phase II solutions includes IT / OT 
Integration in the following aspects 
 Automated Data Capturing from OCSL 
Plant to ERP 
 Integration of Field and Plant Operations 
with ERP 
 Fleet Management System 
 Back Office Automation 
 Linear Asset Management 
 The Phase III solutions includes 
Intelligent Mines in the following 
aspects 
 Advanced Analytics 
 Artificial Intelligence 
 Condition based Maintenance 
 Integrated Command & Control Center  
  
  Mine Transport & 
Surveillance System 
(MTSS) 
 Implementation of MTSS (Mine Transport 
Surveillance System) – already 
implemented & operational at Donimalai 
Complex and in process for Bailadila 
region 

57 
 
 Implementation of FMS (Fleet 
Management System) in NMDC mines is 
in final stage 
 Action on hand for implementation of 
Automatic Sampling and analysis System 
  
5 R&D Strategy: Develop and deploy technologies for beneficiation of lean 
ores to extend life of mine and move towards zero waste mining Confidential 
  Value addition to iron ore   Pellet Plant at Donimalai has been 
commissioned to utilize the low grade ore 
 Beneficiation plant (as part of the Slurry 
Pipeline System) is under construction at 
Bailadila 
  Evacuation of iron ore from 
mines  
 Study for transportation through slurry 
pipeline  
  Tailing disposal   Beneficiation of tailing and sale of slimes 
 Improving screening efficiency of 
secondary screens in screening plants of 
Kirandul Complex 
 Modification in transfer chutes to reduce 
jamming at Kirandul Complex  
 Installation of Online moisture analysers 
in Kirandul, Bacheli and Donimalai 
complex 
 Utilization of ultra-fine iron ore (-75micron) 
in iron ore sintering process 
 Utilization of sub-grade iron resources 
and lean grade iron resources (BHJ/BHQ) 
 Focus on Dry Beneficiation 
 Development of research equipment 
under Aatma Nirbhar Bharat  
 Developments of Indigenous vendor base 
for sourcing wear resistance liners under 
Aatma Nirbhar Bharat  
 Developments of process for reduction 
roasting of goethitic iron ore using 
microwave assisted heating furnace:  
 NMDC Innovation & Incubation Centre 
(NICE) 
  Collaborative approach  R&D Centre NMDC Ltd and RDCIS -SAIL 
has signed MOU in the year Jan 2019 to 
support each other in meeting individual 

58 
 
organization goal. MOU is in force till 
January 2024 (Five years ) 
     IMMT Bhubaneswar - Modeling & 
Optimization of High Concentration Iron 
ore concentrate slurry Pipelines for Indian 
Iron Ore Processing Industries 
 IMMT Bhubaneswar– Evaluation of Nano 
iron powder for high end application like 
batteries and sensors 
 CSIRO Australia 
 IIT Bhubaneswar– Optimization of silos, 
bins and hoppers designs through 
modeling, primarily intended for iron ore 
storage  
 CSIR-CIMFR-Dhanbad– Development of 
vision enhancement system for foggy 
weather 
 IMMT Bhubaneswar - Dry Beneficiation 
tests of coal and iron ore with Air 
classification equipment named “VSK 
Separator”.  
 IMMT Bhubaneswar –  Feasibility 
Studies for Preparation of Fused 
Magnesia from Kimberlite Tailings  
6 Sustainability Strategy: Adopt environmentally safe and scientific mining 
practices and integrate sustainability in all our processes. 
  Design and deploy 
“License to Operate” office 
(LTO)  
 Operational 
  Design and deploy 
Enterprise Risk 
Management capability  
 Operational 
 [Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 31.07.2023) 
 
 
Vetting Comments of the Office of C&AG 
 
“As stated by the Ministry, the achievement of targets envisaged in the Strategic Management 
Plan “Vision 2025” is dependent on the timely completion of evacuation facilities commensurate 
with the production facilities. As doubling of Kirandul Kothavalasa R ailway Line and 
commissioning of Slurry Pipeline are still under execution, Audit is not in a position to comment 

59 
 
as to whether the revised targets could be achieved by NMDC by 2025 and subsequent targets 
by 2030. Hence, Audit has no comments to offer for the present.” 
 
[Ministry of Steel (NMDC Division)] 
(F. No.S-28011/17/2021-NMDC Dated 06.12.2023) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 8 and 25(a)of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  New Delhi;                 Baijayant Panda     
  11 December, 2024        Chairperson 
  20 Agrahayana, 1946(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

60 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 24th October, 2024 from 1330 hrs. to 1340 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda        -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3.  Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
4.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5.  Shri B.Y Raghavendra 
6.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
7.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
8.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
9.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
10.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. After the Committee reassembled for the afternoon session, Hon’ble Chairperson chaired 
the Second agenda item of the day.  The Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the two 
draft Reports and requested to consider as part of unfinished work of the Committee  (2023-24). 
The Committee then considered and adopted the following two draft report s, without any 
changes/modifications, on the following two selected subjects: - 

61 
 
i. ‘Para No. 2.1 of Report No.14 of 2021 related to “Undue enrichment through Recovery 
of Turnover Tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) 
(Based on Audit Examination); and 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observation/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings on Operational Performance of NMDC Ltd. relating to NMDC Limited 
(Based on C&AG Report No. 5 of 2019) 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize  the draft Reports on the basis of 
factual verification as suggested by C&AG and concerned Ministry/Department and presenting 
the Reports during the next session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned to take-up next agenda item of the afternoon sittings. 
/-------/ 
  

62 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS                  
(2022-23) ON “NMDC LIMITED" [BASED ON C&AG REPORT NO. 5 OF 2019 RELATING TO 
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE OF NMDC LTD.] 
 
I Total number of recommendations: 13 
 
II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,5,6,7,9, and 10 
 
 
Total- 08 
Percentage- 61.53 
 
III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
 
Total- NIL 
Percentage- NA 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and need reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 8, 11, 12 and 13 
 
 
 
Total- 04 
Percentage- 30.76 
 
V Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies: 
Sl. No. 2 
 
 
Total- 01 
Percentage- 07.69 
 
 