36 
 
REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF PETROLEUM & 
NATURAL GAS SECTOR CPSUs 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 


ii  
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF PETROLEUM & 
NATURAL GAS SECTOR CPSUs 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Twe nty-First Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs”] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 August, 2026  
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Shravan, 1948(Saka)


iii  
 
 
CPU No. 1092 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 
 
 
  

iv  
CONTENTS 
   Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2026-27)  v 
 INTRODUCTION  vi 
CHAPTER I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 18 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies 
 46 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 47 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government has furnished interim replies and final 
replies are still awaited 
 48 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 13 th Sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2026-27) held on 03 August, 2026 
 
 51 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-First Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of 
Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector 
CPSUs’ 
 53 
 
  

v  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2026-27) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson  
Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
7. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
9. Shri Rajeev Rai 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Prof. Sougata Ray 
13. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy   
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
19. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. vacant 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
5. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh - Executive Officer 
 
 Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Debashish Samantaray from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 
May,2026 vide Rajya Sabha Builletin Part-II No. 66428 

vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2026 -27) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-
Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-First Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Review of Performance of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs”. 
2. The Twenty-First Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 
December, 2025. The Action taken Replies to all the Twenty -Eight (28) 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas on   14 May, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on       
03 August, 2026. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -First Report of the Committee (18 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
  
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
03 August, 2026                                 Chairperson 
 12 Shravan, 1948(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

1  
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on the subject ‘Review of 
Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs’, which was presented to 
Parliament on 11 December, 2025. It contained twenty -eight (28) Observations/  
Recommendations. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the twenty -eight (28) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee. The 
introductory paragraph at Sl. No. 1 was an overview and general observation, on which 
the Ministry has not  offered any specific comments. The replies received have been 
categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 
  
(Chapter II) 
 
 
(Total: 27) 
  
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
NIL 
(Chapter III) 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration    
 
NIL 
(Chapter IV) 
 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
  
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited   
 
Sl. Nos. 2 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
(Total: 01) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG) to 
furnish final Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report. The Committee further 
desire that the final replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations  

2  
contained in Chapter V for which only interim replies have been given by 
Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
OPTIMIZING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (CAPEX) FOR PRODUCTION 
ENHANCEMENT AND ENERGY TRANSITION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee, in their Twenty -first Report had recommended the following 
regarding optimizing capex for production enhancement and energy transition: 
“The Committee note that despite a steady increase in CAPEX by petroleum and 
natural gas sector CPSUs from ₹1,33,331.93 crore in 2020 -21 to a projected 
₹1,69,966 crore in 2024-25, crude oil production has declined from 34.20 MMT 
in 2018-19 to a projected 2 8.70 MMT in 2024 -25, while natural gas output has 
shown modest growth. The Committee observe that long gestation periods in 
exploration, ageing oil fields, natural production declines, and COVID-19-related 
disruptions have constrained output growth despite  substantial investments. 
While appreciating the steps taken, such as technology upgrades, replacement 
of ageing infrastructure, and collaborations with global experts, the Committee 
recommend that CAPEX allocations be closely linked to measurable production 
enhancement outcomes through accelerated development of newly discovered 
fields, wider adoption of Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) techniques, and efficient 
maintenance of existing assets. The Committee would like to a balanced 
approach where investment in conventional oil and gas production is 
complemented with clear, time-bound allocations for energy transition initiatives 
like renewable energy integration, gas flaring reduction, and electrification of 
operations, thus ensuring both energy security and sustainability.” 
 
6. MoPNG, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
“Government have launched Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy 
(HELP) in 2016. Under this policy, Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) was 
started. During the last three years, total 38 exploration blocks under OALP bid 
Round VIII and IX covering 1,72,912.95 Square Kilometer in offshore areas have 
been awarded to successful bidders. Geoscientific survey of the blocks awarded 
under these OALP Bid Rounds indicate enhancement in country’s existing 
resource potential. Further, OALP bid Round X offering 25 exploration blocks 
covering 1,91,986.21 sq. km in 6 states, was launched on15.04.2025. 
 
Government have taken various policy decisions and steps to boost domestic 
crude oil and natural gas production and reduce dependency on import of oil and 
gas with the objective of strengthening the country’s energy security which, inter 
alia, include: 

3  
i. Policy under PSC regime for early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries, 
   2014. 
ii. Discovered Small Field Policy, 2015. 
iii. Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 2016. 
iv. Policy for Extension of PSCs, 2016 and 2017. 
v.   Policy for early monetization of Coal Bed Methane, 2017. 
vi.  Setting up of National Data Repository, 2017. 
vii. Appraisal of Un -appraised areas in Sedimentary Basins under National 
Seismic Programme, 2017. 
viii. Policy framework for extension of PSCs for Discovered Fields and  
Exploration Blocks under Pre-New Exploration Licensing Policy (Pre-NELP), 
2016 and 2017. 
ix.  Policy to Promote and Incentivize Enhanced Recovery Methods for Oil and 
Gas, 2018. 
x. Policy Framework for exploration and exploitation of Unconventional 
Hydrocarbons under Existing Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs), Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) Contracts and Nomination Fields, 2018. 
xi.   Natural Gas Marketing Reforms, 2020. 
xii.  Lower Royalty Rates, Zero Revenue Share (till Windfall Gain) and no drilling 
commitment in Phase-I in OALP Blocks under Category II and III basins to 
attract bidders. 
xiii. Release of about 1 Million Sq. Km. (SKM) 'No -Go' area in offshore which 
were blocked for exploration for decades. 
xiv. Government is also spending about Rs.7500 Cr. for acquisition of seismic 
data in onland and offshore areas and drilling of stratigraphic wells to make 
quality data of Indian Sedimentary Basins available to bidders. Government 
has approved acquisition of additional 2D Seismic data of 20,000 LKM in 
onland and 30,000 LKM in offshore beyond Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) 
of India. 
Also, there is a natural decline in production year on year from mature fields. To 
help arrest such natural decline, the Government approved the Policy framework 
in 2018 to promote and incentivize Enhanced Recovery (ER)/Improved Recovery 
(IR)/ Unconvention al Hydrocarbon (UHC) production methods through fiscal 
incentives in the form of partial waiver of royalty and cess. 
 
Government have implemented various initiatives aligned with India’s broader 
energy transition goals to promote domestic Exploration and Production and 
alternative fuels such as biofuels, green hydrogen, compressed biogas, liquefied 
natural gas (LNG), energy efficiency and electric mobility, which inter-alia include 
achieving 20% ethanol blending under the Ethanol Blending Programme (EBP), 
and broadening the scope of feedstock to enhance the availability of ethanol. 
The Pradhan Mantri Jaiv Indhan -Vatavaran Anukool Fasal Awashesh Nivaran 
(PM JI-VAN) Yojana has been launched to provide financial assistance for setting 
up projects for advanced biofuels, including Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF). For 
the promotion of Compressed Biogas (CBG), the Sustainable Alte rnative 

4  
Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme has been launched, and 
schemes like BAM (Biomass Aggregation Machinery) and DPI (Direct Pipeline 
Infrastructure) have been introduced to support biomass aggregation and to 
connect CBG plants to the existing pipeline network. National Green Hydrogen 
Mission (NGHM) has been launched with the objective of production of 5 MMTPA 
green hydrogen by 2030. Government have also taken various steps to augment 
the availability of LNG for various sectors which, inter -alia, includes 
establishment of LNG infrastructure including LNG terminals and LNG stations. 
Refineries are included in PAT (Perform, Achieve and Trade) energy efficiency 
improvement scheme of Government. Ministry of Heavy industries have 
sanctioned Rs. 873.5 Cr to PSU Oil Marketing companies (OMCs) under FAME 
II Subsidy scheme for setting up 8,932 Electric Vehicle Charging stations 
(EVCS).” 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the multi -pronged policy measures and 
structural reforms initiated by MoPNG, particularly the successful rollout of 
subsequent OALP bidding rounds, the release of substantial offshore "No -Go" 
areas, and the extensive financial commitments toward seismic data acquisition. 
Further, the active implementation of energy transition schemes —such as the 
Ethanol Blending Programme (EBP), PM JI -VAN Yojana, SATAT scheme, and the 
deployment of EV charging stations through OMCs —is also a welcome  step in 
the right direction. The Committee are of the view that these initiatives have laid 
a strong foundation for enhancing domestic energy availability, attracting 
investment and strengthening long-term energy security. 
8. However, the Committee note that despite these efforts, the need for 
improved correlation between increasing CAPEX and declining domestic crude 
oil output remains an area requiring closer attention, given that output dropped 
to a projected 28.70 MMT in 2024-25 from 34.20 MMT in 2018-19 despite elevated 
capital deployment. The Committee are of the considered view that substantial 
investments in exploration and production should be accompanied by clearly 
defined performance benchmarks, periodic evaluation and accountability 
mechanisms. The Committee also emphasize that the real returns on these 
massive investments must reflect in reversed production curves —changing the 
trajectory of oil or gas output from a period of continuous decline to a period of 
growth or stabilization. While recognizing the long gestation nature of 
exploration activities and the positive impact expected from recent policy 
reforms, the Committee would nevertheless like to be apprised of measurable 
production outcomes arising from newly awarded blocks and major CAPEX 
investments. The Committee consider the current response as an interim reply 

5  
and expect a comprehensive outcome -linked report detailing how the newly 
awarded fields and OALP rounds translate to tangible volume additions over the 
medium term. 
STRENGTHENING INFRASTRUCTURE, POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND CAPEX 
MONITORING 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report had recommended the following with 
regard to strengthening infrastructure, policy implementation and capex monitoring: 
“The Committee take note of significant CAPEX allocation towards major 
integration projects such as OPaL (ONGC Petro Additions Ltd.) for ₹18,365.28 
crore, OGL (ONGC Green Ltd.) for ₹4,600 crore and IGGL (Indradhanush Gas 
Grid Ltd.) for ₹8.20 crore, as well  as reforms like Open Acreage Licensing 
Programme (OALP), Discovered Small Fields (DSF), and opening of ‘No -Go’ 
areas for exploration, which are expected to boost long -term domestic energy 
security. The Committee recommend a robust monitoring framework to track 
CAPEX allocation, ensure timely completion of infrastructure projects, and avoid 
cost overruns or implementation delays. The Committee also highlighted the 
need for MoPNG and CPSUs to leverage policy reforms, accelerate appraisal of 
newly acquired ex ploration blocks, and strengthen global technology 
partnerships to maximize resource monetization. The Committee expect that 
sustained investment in infrastructure, data acquisition, and exploration under a 
structured review mechanism will optimize returns  on CAPEX and contribute to 
India’s self-reliance in energy production over the medium to long term.” 
  
 
10. MoPNG, in their reply have furnished the following:  
 
“The Government has constituted an Inter -Ministerial Committee for effective 
monitoring and implementation of the important projects. The projects are also 
registered in the Pragati and PM Gatishakti portals for regular reviews taken up 
by the Competent Authorities. Ministry also monitors and review the progress of 
the schemes periodically through periodic review meetings and site visits for 
resolution of issues enabling timely completion of the project 
Oil & Gas CPSEs also have a robust online monitoring system for assessing the 
implementation status of their projects. Government provides supportive 
supervision through online project monitoring portal (www.pariyojana.gov.in), 
periodic review meetings and  site visits for resolution of issues enabling timely 
completion of the projects. They also have a robust Contract and Procurement 
framework. This mechanism ensures an objective assessment of delay 
attribution, covering both controllable and uncontrollable factors such as delays 
in statutory permissions and clearances, site -specific constraints, and the 
contractor’s performance. The evaluation is carried out in line with established 
procedures and compliance required to maintain transparency, accountability , 
and contractual integrity. The contract framework also includes provisions for 
enforcing appropriate contractual remedies, which include imposition of 

6  
liquidated damages, performance -related penalties, and forfeiture of the 
Contract cum Performance Bank Guarantee.”  
 
11. The Committee appreciate the proactive measures taken by MoPNG, 
particularly the establishment of an Inter -Ministerial Committee for effective 
project monitoring and the integration of major infrastructure projects into the 
Pragati, PM Gatishakti, and Pari yojana portals. Further, the implementation of a 
robust online monitoring system by Oil & Gas CPSUs, alongside a transparent 
contract and procurement framework that strictly enforces contractual remedies 
like liquidated damages and performance penalties, is also a welcome step in the 
right direction. The Committee are encouraged by the increasing use of 
technology-driven monitoring mechanisms and expect that such systems will 
contribute to improved project governance, timely execution and better 
utilisation of public resources. 
12. To improve further, the Committee desire that concrete steps may be taken 
to ensure that these digital monitoring frameworks and supportive supervision 
mechanisms translate directly into the accelerated appraisal of newly acquired 
exploration blocks and the timely monetization of major integration projects like 
OPaL, OGL, and IGGL. The Committee would also like the Ministry to periodically 
review the effectiveness of these monitoring arrangements so that emerging 
implementation bottlenecks are identified and addressed in a timely manner. 
 
NATURAL GAS GRID AND PIPELINE INFRASTRUCTURE 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
13. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to natural gas grid and pipeline infrastructure: 
 
“The Committee note that GAIL and other CPSUs are executing major pipeline 
projects under the National Gas Grid (NGG), including the Jagdishpur -Haldia & 
Bokaro-Dhamra (JHBDPL) and Mumbai-Nagpur-Jharsuguda pipelines, with over 
3,851 km already commissioned and 3,189 km under execution. While 
appreciating these efforts, the Committee acknowledged areas requiring 
attention, including delays, cost overruns, and land acquisition challenges in 
several projects . In view of this, the Committee recommend that CPSUs 
strengthen coordination with Central and State authorities for faster clearances, 
adopt standardized compensation frameworks, and leverage technology for 
pipeline integrity and safety. Further, measures like Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition (SCADA), predictive maintenance through AI, and renewable 

7  
energy integration at pumping stations should be accelerated to ensure cost 
efficiency, safety, and timely delivery of the NGG vision.” 
 
14. MoPNG, in their reply, have furnished stated as under: 
“To address the various external challenges faced during construction and faster 
clearances, permissions, ROU/Land acquisition, RoU issues etc., CPSEs are  
coordinating with Central Ministries, respective State Governments and local 
authorities on regular basis. The progress of pipeline projects under National 
Gas Grid are being monitored on regular basis through conducting meetings at 
various levels to accelerate the completion including necessary actions require 
for resolution of issues through intervention of ministry.  Further, there is an online 
monitoring mechanism for these projects, i.e. Ministry Monitoring Cell (MMC) of 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) where status are updated on 
monthly basis.  
 
The following major actions and measures have been taken against adopting 
new technology for pipeline integrity and safety: 
• Mapping of the pipelines in Geographic Information System (GIS) Platform 
containing pipeline related information along with satellite imagery, cadastral 
maps, and points of interest have been carried out. 
• Leveraging Digital Technology for safety enhancement, Incident Reporting & 
Management System, Work Permit System, Plant Inspection & Maintenance, 
Management of Change, Job Safety Analysis, Safety Audits/Activities 
Compliance etc. have been made Online for effective implementation of HSE 
Management System. 
• Pipeline foot patrolling is being carried out using GPS device for tracking, 
monitoring & reporting any safety related issues along the pipeline.  
• Installation of CCTV Cameras at Pipeline Installations and monitoring through 
Centralized Control Rooms to ensure Safety and Security.” 
 
15. The Committee appreciate the structured efforts made by MoPNG and its 
CPSUs, particularly the regular coordination with Central and State authorities to 
resolve Right of Use (RoU) and land acquisition challenges, alongside the 
monthly project tracking through the Ministry Monitoring Cell (MMC). Further, the 
active deployment of advanced technological interventions for pipeline integrity 
and safety —such as Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping, GPS -
enabled foot patrolling, centralized CCTV monitori ng, and digitized HSE 
Management Systems —is also a welcome step in the right direction. The 
Committee note that such technology-enabled monitoring mechanisms have the 
potential to significantly improve project execution, operational reliability and 
public safety across the National Gas Grid network. 

8  
16. The Committee desire that the Ministry may continue to strengthen 
coordination mechanisms for timely resolution of external statutory clearances 
and adoption of standardized compensation frameworks, supported by regular 
monitoring, so that the remaining 3 ,189 km of pipeline under execution may be 
completed smoothly and India may steadily move towards realizing the full vision 
of the NGG. The Committee also expect that sustained coordination with State 
Governments and other stakeholders will facilitate f aster resolution of pending 
issues and enable timely completion of strategic pipeline infrastructure. 
 
IMPACT OF GEOPOLITICS ON INDIA’S CRUDE OIL IMPORT AND ENERGY 
SECURITY  
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 11 & 12) 
 
17. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report had recommended the following with 
regard to the impact of geopolitics on India’s crude oil import and energy security: 
“The Committee note that India imports nearly 89% of its crude oil requirements, 
exposing the Country to heightened geopolitical risks such as conflicts in oil -
producing regions, sanctions, civil unrest, and disruptions in key transport routes 
like the Sue z Canal and the Red Sea. Recent global events, including the 
Russia-Ukraine conflict and tensions in the Middle East, have underscored the 
vulnerability of India’s energy supply chain and its dependence on international 
trade flows. In view of this, the Committee recommend that MoPNG and CPSUs 
should intensify efforts to diversify crude oil sourcing both geographically and 
contractually, strengthen strategic petroleum reserves, and enhance alternative 
import routes. Further, risk management practices, including hedging and flexible 
term contracts, must be institutionalized to safeguard India’s energy security 
against future geopolitical shocks.” 
 
18.  MoPNG, in their reply have furnished the following: 
“India has mitigated volatility in the global energy market through increasing 
diversification of sources. India pursues a market -based and diversified 
approach to sourcing crude oil, guided by energy security, affordability, and 
reliability, keeping in view the needs of its 1.4 billion people. Currently, India is 
importing crude oil from over 41 countries across Middle East, U.S., Africa, Latin 
America, and other markets, mitigating its  dependence on any particular 
geographies or regions. Also, the Governm ent always encourage Oil PSUs to 
regularly optimize procurement through a mix of term contracts and spot 
purchases under different arrangements, to ensure flexibility and cost 
competitiveness. 
In order to build the capacities of strategic crude storage, Government, through 
a Special Purpose Vehicle, called Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited 
(ISPRL), has established Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) facilities with total 
capacity of 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) of crude oil at 3 locations namely 
Vishakhapatnam-1.33 MMT, Mangaluru-1.5 MMT and Padur-2.5 MMT.”   

9  
19.  The Committee further recommended the following regarding the impact of 
geopolitics on India’s crude oil import and energy security: 
“The Committee observe that while proactive steps have been taken by CPSUs 
such as IOCL and ONGC Videsh to diversify crude oil sources and manage 
geopolitical risks, challenges persist due to sanctions, financial market volatility, 
and regulatory changes in  host countries where overseas projects are located. 
These issues not only affect India’s energy import bill but also impede the ability 
of CPSUs to secure overseas exploration and production assets, thereby limiting 
long-term energy security. The Committee recommend that MoPNG should work 
closely with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and other relevant Government 
agencies to strengthen diplomatic engagement with oil -producing nations, 
secure favourable investment terms, and address taxation and regu latory 
hurdles faced by CPSUs abroad. At the same time, CPSUs should adopt digital 
and enterprise risk management frameworks to continuously assess geopolitical 
vulnerabilities, ensuring a more resilient and sustainable energy strategy for the 
Country.” 
 
20.  MoPNG have furnished the following in their reply: 
“MoPNG works in close coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
as well as Indian Missions abroad to strengthen diplomatic engagement with 
resource-rich countries, facilitate government -to-government cooperation, and 
address regulatory issues affecting Indian CPSUs. Such engagements are aimed 
at creating a stable investment environment for Indian companies and securing 
favourable terms for overseas exploration and production assets. 
Indian Oil & Gas PSUs have been actively pursuing opportunities to acquire high-
quality oil and gas assets overseas to strengthen the country’s energy security. 
As of today, Indian PSUs hold Participating Interest (PI) in 45 assets across 21 
countries. During FY 2025 -26 (April to December), the total equity production 
from these overseas assets is 14.5 Million Metric Tonnes of Oil Equivalent 
(MMTOE), accounting for around 30.5% of India’s total domestic production.” 
  
21. The Committee appreciate the proactive efforts and effective coordination 
demonstrated by the Ministry and the CPSUs in responding to the prevailing 
complex global geopolitical scenario. At a time when international supply chains 
are severely strained by p ersistent conflicts and regional tensions, India's 
strategic foresight in diversifying its crude oil sourcing to over 41 countries 
across multiple continents is highly commendable. This mature, market -based 
approach has successfully shielded the domestic e conomy from severe price 
shocks while simultaneously reinforcing our national energy security. 
Furthermore, the Committee note with satisfaction that Indian CPSUs have 
successfully secured participating interests in 45 overseas assets across 21 
countries, yielding a substantial equity production that accounts for 

10  
approximately 30.5% of India's total domestic production. The Committee also 
appreciate the successful establishment of 5.33 MMT of strategic storage under 
Phase-I of SPR programme and have also learned the Government's approval of 
Phase-II of the SPR prog ramme and feel that these steps reflect a robust long -
term vision. To build upon these impressive achievements, the Committee desire 
that the Government fast-track the execution of Phase -II of the SPR programme 
and continue its fruitful coordination with t he Ministry of External Affairs to 
secure even more favourable investment terms and regulatory stability for our 
overseas exploration assets. The Committee are of the view that continued 
diversification of supply sources, strategic petroleum reserves and o verseas 
energy asset acquisitions will remain critical pillars of India's long -term energy 
security architecture. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS AND NET ZERO EMISSION INITIATIVES 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 13 & 14) 
 
22. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to environmental concerns and net zero emission initiatives: 
“The Committee note that the operations of P&NG sector CPSUs affect 
significantly to environmental externalities such as greenhouse gas emissions, 
air and water pollution, biodiversity loss, and hazardous waste generation. 
Despite ongoing measures such as ethanol blending, adoption of compressed 
biogas, green hydrogen, and sustainable aviation fuel, as well as efforts in 
wastewater recycling and waste segregation, the sector continues to face critical 
challenges in reducing its environmental footprint. The Committee recommend 
that MoPNG and CPSUs consider setting clear, time-bound targets for emission 
reductions, enhancing monitoring mechanisms, and investing in advanced 
technologies for carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS). Further, 
CPSUs must en sure robust water conservation strategies and biodiversity 
protection measures in all project areas to balance industrial growth with 
environmental sustainability.” 
 
23. MoPNG, in their reply, have stated as under: 
  
“India has formally committed to achieving net -zero carbon emissions by 2070 
and MoPNG aligns its policies, programmes and sectoral initiatives with this 
national commitment. The Ministry is implementing a range of policy measures 
and initiatives such as p romotion of biofuels, energy efficiency improvements, 
adoption of cleaner fuels, reduction of methane emissions, carbon capture, 
utilisation and storage (CCUS) and support for research and development, which 
collectively contribute towards emission reducti on and the long -term Net Zero 
objective. In line with the India’s Energy transition goals, Oil and Gas companies 
are adopting several methods to decarbonize its operations and value chain, 

11  
such as advancing renewable hydrogen projects, renewable energy sources, 
enhancing energy efficiency, adopting cleaner technologies, and tapping low -
carbon energy sources. 
 
PSU Oil and Gas companies have prepared plans to achieve goal of becoming 
net zero encompassing scope -1 and 2 emissions. These companies have 
planned to achieve Net Zero (scope-1 and scope-2) between 2035 to 2046 while 
ensuring a secure, reliable and affordable supply of energy.  
 
To accelerate the Net Zero Mission, the Government has undertaken the 
following measures in petroleum sector: 
• EBP (Ethanol Blended Petrol): The Government has been promoting blending 
of ethanol in petrol under the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme 
wherein Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) sell ethanol blended 
with petrol. Under Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme, ethanol blending 
in petrol has increased from 38 crore litres in Ethanol Supply Year (ESY) 2013-
14 to more than 1000 crore litres in ESY 2024-25, thereby achieving an average 
blending of 19.24% ethanol in Petrol during ESY 2024-25. Ethanol blending of 
20% has been achieved in the current ESY 2025-26.  
• PM JI-VAN Scheme: The Government of India launched Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN 
Yojana, to provide financial assistance of approximately $250 million USD from 
2018–19 to 2023-24 (now extended till 2028-29) to support commercial, as well 
as demonstration, projects for Advanced Biofuels. 
• Promotion of CBG & Sustainable Alternative In order to promote the production 
and consumption of CBG in the country, National Biofuels Coordination 
Committee (NBCC) on 24.11.2023 approved, the introduction of phase wise 
mandatory selling of CBG in CNG (Transport) & PNG (Domestic) segments of 
CGD sector. 
• Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) : Further to decarbonize aviation sector, 
Government also has set an indicative target of 1%, 2% and 5% blending of 
SAF in Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) initially for international flights with effect 
from 2027, 2028 and 2030 respectively. 
• Green Hydrogen Mission : Govt. has announced National Green Hydrogen 
Mission, which is aimed at promoting green hydrogen and demonstration/ 
development of associated infrastructure including its export with target to 
produce 5 MMTPA of green Hydrogen by 2030. MoP&NG has further directed 
the Oil & Gas PSUs to setup green hydrogen projects across the country. 
• Increasing share of Natural gas: Natural gas as a transition fuel the government 
has set targets to increase the share of natural gas in India’s energy mix from 
around 6% to 15%.”  
 
24. The Committee further recommended the following on the same issue: 
“The Committee observe that while P&NG CPSUs have announced ambitious 
Net Zero targets—ranging from ONGC’s 2038 goal to IOCL’s 2046 roadmap —
and initiated substantial investments in renewable energy, EV charging 
infrastructure, and green subsidiaries, chall enges remain in scaling renewable 
capacity, managing costs of emerging technologies like battery storage, and 
ensuring supply chain integration. The Committee recommend that MoPNG 
should prepare a coordinated roadmap to align CPSUs’ Net Zero strategies with 

12  
India’s 2070 climate commitment, with clear interim milestones, cross -sector 
collaboration, and periodic reviews. CPSUs should prioritize accelerated 
deployment of renewable energy projects, indigenous technology development 
in solar modules and green hydrogen, and enhanced public-private partnerships 
to ensure affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy transition.”  
 
25. MoPNG have furnished the following in their reply: 
 
“PSU Oil & Gas Companies plan to progressively integrate low -carbon energy 
sources such as solar and other renewables with conventional operations 
through pilot projects, feasibility studies, and phased implementation, subject to 
technological readiness an d site -specific conditions across all its operational 
areas.  
 
India has formally committed to achieving net -zero carbon emissions by 2070, 
in line with the India’s Energy transition goals, Oil and Gas companies are 
adopting several methods to decarbonize its operations and value chain, such 
as advancing renewable hyd rogen projects, renewable energy sources, 
enhancing energy efficiency, adopting cleaner technologies, and tapping low -
carbon energy sources. 
 
PSU Oil and Gas companies have prepared plans to achieve goal of becoming 
net zero encompassing scope -1 and 2 emissions. These companies have 
planned to achieve Net Zero (scope-1 and scope-2) between 2035 to 2046 while 
ensuring a secure, reliable and affordable supply of energy.  
 
Energy efficiency remains a core focus area for oil companies, not only for 
minimizing environmental impact but also for optimizing operating costs and 
enhancing upstream/downstream performance. CPSEs continuously monitor its 
energy consumption across oper ations and implement a range of measures to 
drive efficiency improvements. Petroleum companies are making significant 
investments in renewable energy sources such as solar and wind and are 
progressively integrating these sources with their existing operational networks.”  
 
26. The Committee appreciate the Government's efforts towards energy 
transition and the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry and the CPSUs to 
decouple industrial growth from environmental impact and welcome the progress 
made in biofuels, green hydrogen, ren ewable energy, and the Net Zero 
commitments of CPSUs. At a time when climate action requires immediate 
transition, India's strategic foresight in achieving the historic 20% ethanol 
blending target in the current ESY 2025 -26 and mandating CBG integration  is 
highly commendable. The Committee note with satisfaction that key CPSUs have 
formalized ambitious Net Zero roadmaps well ahead of the national timeline. They 
also appreciate the forward-looking frameworks established for Green Hydrogen 
and Sustainable Aviation Fuel. To build upon these achievements, the Committee 

13  
desire that the Government establish a synchronized inter -CPSU monitoring 
dashboard for interim milestones and fast -track public -private partnerships to 
advance indigenous CCUS and battery storage technologies, ensuring a self -
reliant and sustainable energ y transition. The Committee further expect that 
periodic monitoring of sector -wide transition targets and dissemination of best 
practices across CPSUs will facilitate the timely achievement of national climate 
and energy objectives. 
 
INDIA’S GREEN HYDROGEN MISSION 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 16 & 17) 
 
27. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended the following with 
regarding India’s Green Hydrogen Mission: 
“The Committee note that green hydrogen has emerged as a transformative 
clean energy solution for meeting India’s Net Zero goals and de -carbonizing 
hard-to-abate sectors such as steel, cement, fertilizers, refineries, and mobility. 
The Government launched the National Green Hydrogen Mission in 2023 with 
an outlay of ₹19,744 crore, targeting 5 MMTPA of green hydrogen production by 
2030, requiring 125 GW of renewable energy capacity. MoPNG CPSUs have 
already initiated significant projects —IOCL’s 10 KTPA green  hydrogen plant at 
Panipat, BPCL’s hydrogen refuelling station at Cochin Airport and 5 MW plant at 
Bina, HPCL’s pilot projects in refineries and transport, GAIL’s 4.3 TPD green 
hydrogen plant at Vijaipur, and OIL’s pilot blending initiatives —indicating 
progress across the value chain . The Committee recommend that MoPNG 
should ensure time-bound implementation of these projects, establish a robust 
regulatory framework for hydrogen production, storage, transport and blending, 
and incentivize large-scale electrolyser manufacturing to reduce costs. Further, 
CPSUs should accelerate R&D collaborations on hydrogen fuel cells, biomass -
to-hydrogen pathways, and storage technologies, while also building hydrogen 
hubs, refuelling infrastructure, and export-oriented capacities. The Ministry may 
regularly monitor milestones under the National Green Hydrogen Mission to 
ensure India emerges as a global leader in this sunrise sector, contributing to 
energy security, emission reduction, and industrial competitiveness.”  
 
28. MoPNG, in their reply, have stated as under: 
 
“The Government of India is implementing the National Green Hydrogen 
Mission (NGHM),  with an objective to make India a global hub of production, 
usage and export of green hydrogen and its derivatives. India’s Green 
Hydrogen production capacity is likely to reach 5 Million Metric Tonnes per 
annum by 2030 
 
Under the Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen Transition - 2B (SIGHT-
2B) mode of the National Green Hydrogen Mission (NGHM), refineries have 
been allocated 200 KTPA of green hydrogen procurement capacity, of which 
PSU refineries have been assigned a target of 170 KTPA, up to 2030.  

14  
 
The Government has allowed hydrogen blending pilot project in five 
Geographical Areas (GAs) of City Gas Distribution (CGD) networks. These pilots 
cover domestic, commercial, industrial and CNG segments in limited areas and 
involve injection into MDPE and steel pipeline networks to assess aspects such 
as pipeline behaviour, stratification, leakage characteristics, metering impacts 
and consumer -end performance. OISD -STD-241 (Safety in the production, 
storage and transportation of hydrogen and hydrogen blends) covers Hydrogen 
Blending with Natural Gas (including both CGD & Natural Gas pipeline 
networks).” 
 
29.  The Committee further recommended the following on the same issue:  
“The Committee observe that while CPSUs under MoPNG have undertaken 
several initiatives such as pilot hydrogen blending in city gas networks, 
development of hydrogen fuel cell buses, indigenous electrolyser technologies, 
and small-scale biomass-to-hydrogen projects, challenges remain in scaling up 
these innovations to commercial levels. Furthermore, global competition and 
rapidly evolving technologies necessitate accelerated R&D, technology transfer, 
and international partnerships to keep pace with global leaders. The Committee 
recommend that MoPNG, in collaboration with MNRE and other relevant 
agencies, should establish a coordinated research and innovation framework for 
hydrogen, integrating CPSUs, academia, and private sector start -ups. Greater 
emphasis s hould be placed on pilot demonstrations of hydrogen in public 
transport, heavy-duty vehicles, and shipping, with comprehensive field trials and 
cost-benefit assessments. CPSUs should also leverage international 
collaborations and joint ventures to access c utting-edge technologies in fuel 
cells, hydrogen storage, and supply chain infrastructure. The Ministry may lay 
down clear timelines and performance benchmarks for these initiatives to ensure 
that R&D efforts translate into commercially viable solutions, positioning India as 
a competitive hub for green hydrogen technologies globally.” 
 
30. MoPNG have furnished the following in their reply: 
“The Government has been enhancing global collaboration with major 
economies and companies on technological advancement in green Hydrogen 
and other emerging fuels. In June 2024, India and Italy have signed a Letter of 
Intent (LoI) on cooperation on Biofuel s & Green Hydrogen. The India - USA 
Energy Security Partnership (ESP) would also emphasize robust collaboration 
on advancing clean energy innovation, technology deployment, and sustainable 
energy transitions; across key areas, including renewables, energy efficiency, 
and hydrogen, to secure clean energy supply chains. Under the EU-India Trade 
and Technology Council, collaboration is expanding, with  over 30 joint 
proposals received on hydrogen production from waste.” 
 
 31. The Committee commend the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry and the 
CPSUs to build a robust domestic green hydrogen ecosystem, and welcome the 
progress made in infrastructure pilots, capacity allocations, and international 

15  
partnerships. The concrete allocation of 170 KTPA green hydrogen capacity to 
PSU refineries by 2030 under the Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen 
Transition-2B (SIGHT -2B) mode is a definitive and measurable step toward 
decarbonizing hard-to-abate sectors. India's strategic foresight in implementing 
SIGHT-2B procurement mandates and formalizing global technology alliances 
with major economies is highly commendable. The Committee are encouraged 
by the steady progress made under the National Green Hydro gen Mission and 
are of the view that continued policy support, technological innovation and 
industry participation can position India as a leading global hub for green 
hydrogen production, utilization and innovation. 
32. Additionally, the Committee appreciate the initiation of hydrogen blending 
pilot projects in five Geographical Areas covering domestic, commercial, and 
industrial segments. These pilots are crucial for assessing technical parameters 
such as pipeline behav iour, stratification, leakage characteristics, and metering 
impacts. The Committee note with satisfaction that key CPSUs have moved 
beyond conceptual stages to deploy operational pilot projects across the value 
chain, backed by crucial safety standards like OISD -STD-241. To sustain this 
formidable momentum, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
institute a high -level annual review mechanism to meticulously track the 
transition of these pilot green hydrogen projects into commercial -scale 
deployments. The Committee also urge the CPSUs to further accelerate their R&D 
collaborations focused on advanced hydrogen fuel cells and indigenous 
electrolyser manufacturing, biomass -to-hydrogen technologies to ensure self -
reliant and globally competitive energy transition. The Committee are of the view 
that the early commercialization of successful pilot projects will be essential for 
achieving economies of scale, reducing costs and strengthening the 
competitiveness of India's emerging hydrogen ecosystem. 
 
SAFETY AND SECURITY OF WORKERS OIL FIELDS AND REFINERIES 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
33. The Committee, in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended the following with 
regarding safety and security of workers oil fields and refineries: 
“The Committee note that safety and security remain critical concerns in the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas sector given the hazardous nature of operations in 

16  
oil fields, pipelines, and refineries. Following the IOCL Jaipur fire incident in 
2009, the MB Lal Committee made 118 safety recommendations, most of which 
have been implemented by IOCL, though similar status across other CPSUs 
remains unclear. The Committ ee also observe that OMCs have adopted 
comprehensive Health, Safety & Environment (HSE) management systems, 
incorporating hazard identification and risk analysis, integrity management, 
personal protective equipment (PPE), work permit systems, and regular m ock 
drills under certified Emergency Response Disaster Management Plans 
(ERDMPs). Further, training initiatives using AI/VR tools, contractor safety 
protocols, safety audits, and innovative approaches such as Safety Innovation 
Parks have enhanced preparedness and awareness. While these are welcome 
steps, the Committee also recommend that MoPNG should ensure uniform 
compliance with MB Lal Committee recommendations across all CPSUs, 
strengthen periodic safety audits by independent agencies, and mandate the 
adoption of digital monitoring tools such as AI-enabled hazard detection, Internet 
of Things (IoT) based sensors, and real -time risk dashboards. The Committee 
also desire that CPSUs must institutionalize regular training for employees and 
contract workers, i mprove community safety awareness around installations, 
and enhance coordination with local authorities for emergency response. The 
Ministry may closely monitor implementation of the above step to ensure zero 
tolerance towards shortcomings in safety standa rds, thereby safeguarding 
workers, assets and communities.” 
 
34. MoPNG, in their reply, have stated the following: 
 
“Regular and serious efforts are being made by CPSEs to monitor 
implementation of the above step to ensure zero tolerance towards shortcomings 
in safety standards, thereby safeguarding workers, assets and communities such 
as:  
 
• Compliance with M.B. Lal Committee Recommendations: 
 CPSEs have implemented all major recommendations of the M.B. Lal 
Committee. 
 
• Audits by Independent Agencies: 
    Audits by independent agencies are carried out at defined intervals to ensure 
compliance with statutory and safety requirements. The Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) conducts Technical Standards and 
Specifications including Safety Sta ndards (T4S) and Integrity Management 
System (IMS) audits through PNGRB -approved third -party agencies. 
Additionally, the Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) conducts periodic 
safety audits of oil and gas installations.  
 
• Digital Monitoring and Surveillance: 
    All locations are equipped with CCTV surveillance systems capable of 
generating automatic alerts in the event of intrusions and deviations from 
prescribed safety procedures. All tank trucks are monitored through a Vehicle 
Tracking System (VTS), which generates automated alerts for over-speeding, 
route deviation, harsh driving, braking events, etc. 
 
• Digital Training and Capacity Building: 

17  
    The Operator Training Simulator (OTS) is an advanced computer -based 
training platform designed to enhance the competency of Distributed Control 
System (DCS) operators by providing a realistic, non -intrusive simulation of 
actual plant operations. OTS enables operators to gain hands-on experience 
in a controlled, offline environment. E-learning modules are effectively utilized 
to train employees on both functional and behavioural competencies.  
 
• Community Awareness and Preparedness: 
    Off-site mock drills are conducted periodically in coordination with district 
authorities, followed by review meetings involving industry representatives 
from neighbouring areas, fire brigade and local administrative bodies.”  
35.  The Committee note with immense satisfaction that all major 
recommendations of the MB Lal Committee have been implemented across the 
board and that comprehensive digital monitoring frameworks have been firmly 
established. The proactive deployment of real-time digital surveillance, including 
CCTV systems capable of generating automatic intrusion alerts and the 
mandatory monitoring of all tank trucks via Vehicle Tracking Systems (VTS) to 
prevent over-speeding and route deviations, highlights a robust, mo dern safety 
culture. Moreover, the utilization of advanced Operator Training Simulators (OTS) 
to enhance the competency of Distributed Control System (DCS) operators 
through realistic, non -intrusive simulations is a highly commendable 
technological leap. T he Committee are encouraged by the sustained emphasis 
on technology -driven safety management and expect that continuous 
technological upgradation, capacity building and independent safety oversight 
will further strengthen operational safety and risk mitiga tion across the 
petroleum sector. 
36. Recognizing that independent oversight is vital, the Committee appreciate 
the periodic technical and integrity audits conducted by PNGRB and OISD. The 
Committee desire that these digital safety measures, particularly AI-based hazard 
detection algorithms a nd IoT sensors, be continuously upgraded in strict 
alignment with evolving global best practices. Furthermore, the Committee 
emphasize that regular off -site mock drills must continue to be conducted in 
close coordination with district authorities and lo cal communities to ensure a 
state of absolute preparedness and maintain a zero -tolerance policy toward 
workplace accidents. 
  

18  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Overview 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that the Petroleum and Natural Gas (P&NG) sector plays a 
critical role in India’s energy security, economic growth and self -reliance goals. The 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) oversees twelve Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) operating across this sector, eight of which — Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL), Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL), Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
(ONGC), Oil India Limited  (OIL), GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL), Engineers India Limited 
(EIL), and Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. (Balmer Lawrie)— have been extensively reviewed 
by the Committee. While the review takes a holistic approach, special attention is given 
to the unique operational contexts of EIL and Balmer Lawrie. The Committee recognize 
that these CPSUs operate across upstream, midstream, and downstream segments of 
the hydrocarbon value chain, ensuring energy accessibility, affordability, and 
sustainability. 
The Committee observe that India’s oil and gas exploration history dates back to 
1867, culminating in the discovery of the first commercial well at Digboi in 1889, marking 
the birth of the Indian petroleum industry. The establishment of the Directorate General 
of Hydrocarbons (DGH) in 1993 was a landmark step toward structured exploration and 
production (E&P) governance, policy promotion, and environmental and safety 
stewardship. Presently, India’s 26 sedimentary basins span 3.36 million sq. km, with 
72.8% of basinal areas appraised. The basins are categorized into three groups based 
on proven and potential hydrocarbon reserves, reflecting untapped exploration 
opportunities. 
India’s refining sector, which began with the Digboi refinery in 1901, has evolved 
into the world’s fourth-largest refining hub with a total capacity of 256.8 MMTPA, spread 
across 23 refineries. The Committee note that India has transitioned from a deficit  to a 
surplus refining nation, exporting quality petroleum products globally. Key technology 
upgrades—such as catalytic reforming, hydrocrackers, desulphurisation, and LPG 
maximisation—have been instrumental in achieving BS -VI fuel standards from April 
2020, reinforcing India’s leadership in clean fuels. 
The Committee further note that CPSUs in the P&NG sector are major 
contributors to India’s energy infrastructure. Companies such as IOCL, BPCL and HPCL 
have integrated operations in refining, marketing, petrochemicals and renewable 
energy, while ONGC and OIL lead in domestic exploration and production, contributing 
over 75.6% of crude oil and 61.5% of natural gas production in FY 2023 -24. GAIL 
remains a pioneer in natural gas transmission, city gas distribution, LNG sourcing and 
green hydrogen initiatives, while EIL provides world -class engineering and project 
management services, and Balmer Lawrie maintains a strong presence in 
manufacturing and logistics. Subsidiaries and Joint Ventures across these entities 
support pipeline networks, LNG terminals, refine ries, petrochemical complexes and 
renewable energy projects. 

19  
The Committee also learn that the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(PNGRB) was established to protect consumer interests, promote competition, and 
regulate the refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing, and 
sale of petroleum, petroleum products, and natural gas (excluding production) to ensure 
an uninterrupted and adequate supply across the country. Its Action Plan 2025 –26 
outlines strategic priorities to strengthen India’s downstream oil and gas ecosystem, 
emphasizing transparency, efficiency, and sustainability while supporting the country’s 
energy transition goals. Moreover, India currently maintains Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves in underground rock caverns for crude storage at Visakhapatnam, Mangaluru, 
and Padur with a combined capacity of 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) as a critical 
buffer during emergencies and price volatility. 
The Committee appreciate the sector’s significant role in Atmanirbhar Bharat 
through initiatives to increase domestic oil and gas production, ethanol blending, natural 
gas infrastructure expansion, refining capacity augmentation, and promotion of 
renewable and green fuels. Programmes such as Hydrocarbon Exploration & Licensing 
Policy (HELP), Discovered Small Fields (DSF) policy, and city gas distribution 
expansion underscore the government’s efforts to reduce import dependency, enhance 
domestic resource utilization, and foster energy security. 
Overall, the Committee recognize that India’s P&NG sector has transformed from 
its nascent beginnings in Assam to a globally competitive industry with strong upstream, 
midstream and downstream capacities. The CPSUs under MoPNG continue to 
demonstrate operational excellence, technological advancements and robust financial 
performance, while aligning with national priorities of sustainability and energy 
transition. 
The Committee are also aware of the fact that India’s P&NG sector is also 
currently facing some significant challenges both internally and externally. Internal 
challenges include ageing oil fields, crude oil production not commensurate with the 
CAPEX made, rising cost of land acquisition for new projects, delay in land acquisition, 
cost and time overruns of projects. India meets about 89% of crude oil requirements 
through imports and given the current geopolitical events such as Russia Ukraine 
conflict, Israel-Hamas conflict, sanctions on some of the oil producing Countries (Eg: 
Iran, Venezuela, Russia), Political/Civil unrest/Strikes in any oil producing Country 
anytime, India could face risk of crude oil import uncertainty, which in turn could have 
an adverse impact on smooth supply of crude oil and its prices. Moreover, P&NG sector 
faces several environmental concerns due to the nature of their operations, which 
include greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollution, and waste management. 
Taking into consideration all these challenges being faced by P&NG sector today, the 
Committee have put forth their Observations/ Recommendations in the subsequent 
paras after having heard the views of MoPNG and eight of the P&NG sector CPSUs. 
The Committee hope that MoPNG would make earnest efforts for implementation of the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in this Report for helping P&NG sector 
CPSUs to grow holistically. 
 
Reply of the Government 
No comments. 
 
Strengthening Infrastructure, Policy Implementation and CAPEX Monitoring 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 

20  
 
The Committee take note of significant CAPEX allocation towards major 
integration projects such as OPaL (ONGC Petro Additions Ltd.) for ₹18,365.28 crore, 
OGL (ONGC Green Ltd.) for ₹4,600 crore and IGGL (Indradhanush Gas Grid Ltd.) for 
₹8.20 crore, as well as reforms like Open Acreage Licensing Programme (OALP), 
Discovered Small Fields (DSF), and opening of ‘No-Go’ areas for exploration, which are 
expected to boost long -term domestic energy security. The Committee recommend a 
robust monitoring framework to t rack CAPEX allocation, ensure timely completion of 
infrastructure projects, and avoid cost overruns or implementation delays. The 
Committee also highlighted the need for MoPNG and CPSUs to leverage policy 
reforms, accelerate appraisal of newly acquired exp loration blocks, and strengthen 
global technology partnerships to maximize resource monetization. The Committee 
expect that sustained investment in infrastructure, data acquisition, and exploration 
under a structured review mechanism will optimize returns on CAPEX and contribute to 
India’s self-reliance in energy production over the medium to long term.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has constituted an Inter -Ministerial Committee for effective 
monitoring and implementation of the important projects. The projects are also 
registered in the Pragati and PM Gatishakti portals for regular reviews taken up by the 
Competent Authorities. Ministry also monitors and review the progress of the schemes 
periodically through periodic review meetings and site visits for resolution of issues 
enabling timely completion of the project 
Oil & Gas CPSEs also have a robust online monitoring system for assessing the 
implementation status of their projects. Government provides supportive supervision 
through online project monitoring portal (www.pariyojana.gov.in), periodic review 
meetings and site visits for res olution of issues enabling timely completion of the 
projects. They also have  a robust Contract and Procurement framework. This 
mechanism ensures an objective assessment of delay attribution, covering both 
controllable and uncontrollable  factors such as delays in statutory permissions and 
clearances, site-specific constraints, and the contractor’s performance. The evaluation 
is carried out in line with established procedures and compliance required to maintain 
transparency, accountability, and contractual integrity.  The contract framework also 
includes provisions for enforcing appropriate contractual remedies, which  include 
imposition of liquidated damages, performance -related penalties, and forfeiture of the 
Contract cum Performance Bank Guarantee.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 7 & 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Crude Oil, Ageing Fields and Exploration 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee note that ONGC and OIL together account for nearly 77% of 
India’s domestic crude oil production and 61.5% of natural gas production, with ONGC 

21  
contributing 65.4% of crude oil output and OIL 11.4%. The Committee also observe that 
a significant portion of India’s oil production is derived from ageing fields, which have 
entered natural decline phase despite heavy investments. While appreciating the 
initiatives undertaken by ONGC and OIL, including water injection, Enhanced Oil 
Recovery (EOR) techniques, adoption of Artificial Lift Technologies, strategic 
collaborations with international experts, and aggressive participation in Open Acreage 
Licensing Policy (OALP) rounds, the Committee desire that these companies further 
expedite field development activities, adopt cutting -edge recovery methods, and 
prioritize exploration in frontier basins. The Committee emphasize that with sustained 
investments, systematic reservoir management, and global technology tie -ups, India’s 
upstream oil and gas sector should aim to reverse declining trends and increase 
domestic production in the medium to long term. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Production is impacted due to natural decline in mature and ageing oil and gas 
fields. Further, subsurface complexities sometimes restrict the effectiveness of 
workover operations, new drilling and infill wells, thereby affecting the overall 
contribution t o production . To help arrest  such natural decline, the Government 
approved the Policy framework in 2018 to promote and incentivize Enhanced Recovery 
(ER)/Improved Recovery (IR)/ Unconventional Hydrocarbon (UHC) production methods 
through fiscal incentives in the form of partial waiver of royalty and cess. 
 
The Government has, from time to time, taken several measures to enhance 
crude oil production, including expansion of exploration acreage under the Hydrocarbon 
Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), reduction of ‘No -Go’ areas, de -risking of 
exploration through provision of geoscientific data, and implementation of various policy 
reforms, including Deregulation of sale of domestically produced crude oil in 2022 -23, 
Enactment of Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act and 
Promulgation of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 2025 to promote ease of doing 
business, contractual stability and operational efficiency and providing for single 
petroleum lease system, protection in case of change in law and effective dispute 
resolution mechanism, etc. Un der the framework of Open Acreage Licensing 
Programme (OALP), Discovered Small Fields (DSF) Policy and Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) various bidding rounds are conducted periodically and blocks awarded for 
Exploration and Production of crude oil, natural gas and coal bed methane. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
 
Refining Capacity and Marketing Infrastructure 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that India has emerged as one of the largest refining hubs 
globally, with a total installed refining capacity of 258.1 MMTPA in FY 2024-25, projected 
to increase to over 305 MMTPA by FY 2028 -29, primarily through public sector 
expansions such as HRRL (HPCL Rajasthan Refinery Limited) and CPCL -
Nagapattinam projects. The Committee appreciate the proactive steps taken by CPSUs 
to meet India’s growing oil demand, which is expected to reach 8 million barrels per day 
by 2030, and desire that these companies ensure timely execution of planned capacity 

22  
expansions, strengthen export competitiveness, and maintain global quality standards. 
The Committee further emphasize the importance of optimizing marketing and 
distribution networks, given the wide reach of CPSUs such as IOCL, BPCL and HPCL, 
which togethe r manage about 1,37,000 retail outlets, terminals, depots and bottling 
plants. Enhanced integration of supply chain operations with pipeline networks and 
digital infrastructure is recommended to improve operational efficiency, reduce costs, 
and strengthen India’s position as a regional refining and marketing hub. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Oil and Gas  
Oil and Gas CPSEs are  optimizing their petroleum marketing and distribution 
networks by expanding retail outlets promoting digitally enabled fuel stations, and 
expanding City Gas Distribution (CGD) to cover the nation, supporting energy security 
and last -mile availability. Key initiatives incl ude, fuel doorstep delivery, digitalizing 
supply chains and implementing faster pipeline expansion etc.  
 
Success in value -chain integration is being achieved through integrating 
traditional refining with petrochemical production to enhance efficiency and profitability. 
The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has conceptualised cluster -based 
model of de velopment with common infrastructure and support services and has 
notified three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha 
 
Technological upgrades such as Advanced Process Control (APC), real -time 
optimisation, and digital monitoring systems have enhanced energy efficiency and 
throughput. Industry 4.0 initiatives which, inter-alia, include predictive maintenance, IoT-
based moni toring and data analytics have reduced downtime and improved asset 
reliability. Environment compliance has improved through sulphur recovery units, zero 
liquid discharge systems, flare gas recovery and energy efficiency measures lower 
carbon intensity. Improvements in safety as a result of technological upgradation inter 
alia include AI -enabled video analytics for PPE compliance and safety violation 
monitoring, AI cameras for capturing unsafe acts and conditions during turnarounds, 
virtual reality training for immersive and practical safety learning and GPS enabled fire 
tenders improving emergency response readiness 
 
Refinery expansion projects on the West Coast have leveraged proximity to 
crude import routes and export markets, strengthening India’s position as a refining hub. 
Projects in the North  East have promoted regional economic development, 
infrastructure growth and local employment. Coastal refinery projects have improved 
logistics efficiency, reduced transportation costs, and enabled development of port -
based industrial corridors. These proj ects generate largescale direct and indirect 
employment during constru ction and operation phases.  Technological upgrades such 
as Advanced Process Control, real -time optimisation, and digital monitoring systems 
have enhanced energy efficiency and throughput. Success in value-chain integration is 
being achieved through integrating traditional refining with petrochemical production to 
enhance efficiency and profitability.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 

23  
Natural Gas Grid and Pipeline Infrastructure 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that GAIL and other CPSUs are executing major pipeline 
projects under the National Gas Grid (NGG), including the Jagdishpur-Haldia & Bokaro-
Dhamra (JHBDPL) and Mumbai -Nagpur-Jharsuguda pipelines, with over 3,851 km 
already commissioned and 3,189 km under execution. While appreciating these efforts, 
the Committee acknowledged areas requiring attention, including delays, cost overruns, 
and land acquisition challenges in several projects . In view of this, the Committee 
recommend that CPSUs strengthen coordination with Central and State authorities for 
faster clearances, adopt standardized compensation frameworks, and leverage 
technology for pipeline integrity and safety. Further, measures like Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA),  predictive maintenance through AI, and renewable 
energy integration at pumping stations should be accelerated to ensure cost efficiency, 
safety, and timely delivery of the NGG vision. 
Reply of the Government 
To address the various external challenges faced during construction and faster 
clearances, permissions, ROU/Land acquisition, RoU issues etc., CPSEs are 
coordinating with Central Ministries, respective State Governments and local authorities 
on regular basis. The progress of pipeline projects under National Gas Grid are being 
monitored on regular basis through conducting meetings at various levels to accelerate 
the completion including necessary actions require for resolution of issues through 
intervention of ministry.  Further, there is an  online monitoring mechanism for these 
projects i.e Ministry Monitoring Cell (MMC) of Ministry of Pet roleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG) where status are updated on monthly basis.  
 
The following major actions and measures have been taken against adopting 
new technology for pipeline integrity and safety: 
• Mapping of the pipelines in Geographic Information System (GIS) Platform 
containing pipeline related information along with satellite imagery, cadastral maps, 
and points of interest have been carried out. 
• Leveraging Digital Technology for safety enhancement, Incident Reporting & 
Management System, Work Permit System, Plant Inspection & Maintenance, 
Management of Change, Job Safety Analysis, Safety Audits/Activities Compliance 
etc. have been made Online for effective implementation of HSE Management 
System. 
• Pipeline foot patrolling is being carried out using GPS device for tracking, monitoring 
& reporting any safety related issues along the pipeline.  
• Installation of CCTV Cameras at Pipeline Installations and monitoring through 
Centralized Control Rooms to ensure Safety and Security.  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas[ 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 11 & 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

24  
Supply Chain, Distribution Networks and Strategic Resilience 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee observe that supply chain operations in remote and 
geographically challenging areas such as the Northeast, Ladakh, and flood -prone 
regions face high operational costs and lead times. The Committee appreciate the 
resilience of CPSUs in maintai ning uninterrupted fuel supplies through coordinated 
logistics with refineries, ports, and railways, and stress the need for strategic 
investments in advanced storage facilities, AI -driven demand forecasting, and 
digitalized inventory management. The Commi ttee further recommend strengthening 
emergency preparedness to counter natural disasters, port congestion, and other 
disruptions to ensure seamless delivery. The Committee also desire that CPSUs adopt 
greener logistics solutions, enhance collaboration with  private refiners, and create 
shared infrastructure to reduce duplication and operational costs. 
Reply of the Government 
India, the world’s third-largest oil consumer, is steadily strengthening its energy 
security framework through the creation and expansion of Strategic Petroleum 
Reserves (SPRs) to safeguard against geopolitical risks and supply 
disruptions. Under Phase-I of the SPR programme, the Government of India, through 
its Special Purpose Vehicle, Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited (ISPRL), has 
established 5.33 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) of crude oil storage capacity across three 
locations in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. 
  
Towards further enhancing the strategic crude oil storage capacity, the 
Government approved  Phase-II of the SPR programme in  July 2021, involving the 
development of  two commercial -cum-strategic storage facilities  with a combined 
capacity of  6.5 MMT  in Odisha and Karnataka  under the  Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) model. These projects entail a total investment of  ₹14,527 crore, with  Viability 
Gap Funding (VGF) capped at 60%, and are currently under various stages of 
implementation. PNGRB has notified the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
(Codes of Practices for Emergency Response and Disaster Management Plan 
(ERDMP) Regulations, 2010 providing, inter -alia, for identification of probable 
emergency scenarios, mitigation measures and preparedness of emergency plans.  
 
Oil and Gas CPSEs are  optimizing their petroleum marketing and distribution 
networks by expanding retail outlets , promoting digitally enabled fuel stations, and 
expanding City Gas Distribution (CGD) to cover the nation, supporting energy security 
and last -mile availability. Key initiatives include, fuel doorstep delivery, digitalizing 
supply chains and implementing faster pipeline expansion etc.  
 
Success in value -chain integration is being achieved through integrating 
traditional refining with petrochemical production to enhance efficiency and profitability. 
The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has conceptualised cluster -based 
model of de velopment with common infrastructure and support services and has 
notified three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 

25  
Financial Performance 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee highlighted that the financial performance of major CPSUs under 
MoPNG has reflected revenue and profitability variations over the last four years, 
shaped by crude oil price dynamics, moderate operating margins, and higher overhead 
costs in ce rtain entities, with corresponding variations in EBITDA and PAT. While 
companies like ONGC and OIL have consistently contributed substantial profits and 
taxes to the Government, some downstream companies like HPCL have faced sharp 
declines in profitability  in certain years, reflecting high vulnerability to crude oil price 
volatility and market fluctuations. The Committee also observe that despite large 
revenues and significant contributions to the Government exchequer through taxes and 
dividends, the return  on net worth (RONW) and operating margins of several CPSUs 
remain relatively modest when compared with global benchmarks. For instance, while 
ONGC has maintained strong margins, companies such as IOCL and HPCL have 
reported consistently low operating marg ins in recent years. Further, high employee 
expenses in certain entities like IOCL and EIL continue to weigh on profitability. To 
ensure long -term financial resilience , the Committee recommend that the CPSUs 
should strengthen risk management mechanisms by adopting better hedging practices, 
diversifying revenue sources, and improving efficiency in refining and marketing 
operations. The Ministry may also explore policy su pport measures to ensure that the 
financial health of downstream CPSUs remains stable and resilient to global energy 
price shocks. The Committee also recommend that CPSUs under MoPNG should adopt 
robust cost-optimization strategies, including digital trans formation, energy efficiency 
measures, and rationalization of overheads. The Ministry may regularly monitor the 
implementation of these measures to ensure long -term financial sustainability of 
CPSUs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the backdrop of a volatile crude price environment and increasing global 
emphasis on operational efficiency, CPSEs has initiated a comprehensive drive to 
strengthen cost consciousness, cost control and to improve efficiency across all 
onshore & offshore operations.  Like ONGC has developed “Sanchay Council” has been 
constituted to drive accountability and ensure sustained savings across the 
organisation. Sanchay Council has chalked out Cost Optimization Strategies for short -
term, medium-term and long-term.  
 
GAIL is sourcing natural gas from various domestic and international gas 
suppliers and supplying/distributing in domestic market. GAIL has also been 
importing/sourcing liquefied natural gas from international market on different 
international price benchma rks. IOCL is also implementing Project SPRINT, a three -
year flagship transformation initiative, to accelerate Indian Oil’s leadership in the energy 
sector.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
 
 

26  
Under Recoveries 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that under -recoveries arose because Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) such as IOCL, BPCL, and HPCL were mandated to sell products like LPG, 
kerosene, and diesel below cost, with the gap compensated through a burden -sharing 
mechanism involving the Government, upstream oil companies (ONGC, OIL, GAIL), 
and OMCs themselves. Between 2003 -04 and 2015 -16, ONGC alone contributed 
₹3,10,116 crore by way of discounts on crude oil and other petroleum products, 
significantly reducing its net realizations  compared to international prices. The 
Committee observe that this prolonged subsidy -sharing arrangement adversely 
affected the financial performance of upstream companies, particularly ONGC, by 
lowering profitability and limiting reinvestment capacity. With under-recoveries reduced 
to zero since 2016-17, the Committee recommend that the Government should ensure 
predictability and stability in the pricing policy framework, so that upstream companies 
are not subjected to ad-hoc burden-sharing in the future. Further, the Committee desire 
that ONGC’s financial resilience be strengthened by providing clarity on subsidy 
management, thereby enabling long -term planning and investment in exploration and 
production activities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Pursuant to the deregulation of the oil sector, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
incurred under-recoveries on sale of MS/HSD/LPG/SKO, a part of which was shared by 
upstream oil companies such as ONGC, OIL and GAIL. Subsequently, petrol and diesel 
prices were decontrolled on 26.06.2010 and 19.10.2014 respectively. LPG subsidies is 
being met through the Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG (DBTL) scheme and targeted 
subsidies to PMUY consumers scheme from the Consolidated Fund of India, and w.e.f. 
01.03.2020, retail selling prices of PDS kerosene have been maintained at NIL under -
recovery on a pan-India basis. 
 
During the period 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, as the increase in international LPG 
prices was not fully passed on in retail prices, the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
suffered significant losses on domestic LPG. To compensate the OMCs for these 
losses, Government paid a one -time compensation of Rs. 22,000 crore to OMCs in 
January 2023.The international prices of LPG again went up during 2024 -25 and 
continue to remain high. However, to insulate consumers from fluctuations in 
international LPG prices, the increase in  cost was not passed on to consumers of 
domestic LPG. The expenditure of under-recoveries in domestic LPG was fully paid by 
the Government and not transferred to ONGC or any other upstream Oil and Gas  
CPSEs. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Under Recoveries 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that deregulation of petroleum pricing, coupled with lower 
crude prices and fiscal measures, has eliminated the need for sharing under-recoveries 
post 2015 -16. However, historical under -recovery sharing has already imposed a 

27  
cumulative burden of over ₹3.7 lakh crore on upstream oil companies. The Committee 
are of the view that such financial transfers, though intended to protect consumers, 
created structural inefficiencies and curtailed the growth potential of the upstream 
sector. Going forward , the Committee suggests that the Government consider 
developing a transparent compensation mechanism for OMCs, designed to safeguard 
the profitability of upstream producers and align with adjustments under the 
Government’s windfall tax s ystem. The Committee also advise that in case of 
extraordinary volatility in international crude prices, a balanced approach should be 
adopted wherein fiscal support measures are prioritized over mandatory discounts by 
upstream companies if it is costing too much under-recoveries. This will safeguard both 
consumer interest and the financial sustainability of India’s strategic energy companies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India introduced Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED), 
commonly referred to as windfall tax, on petroleum crude with effect from 01.07.2022. 
The duty was initially levied at ₹23,250 per tonne and was subsequently revised from 
time to time in line with fluctuations in international crude oil prices. The rate of SAED 
was reduced to Nil per tonne with effect from 18.09.2024, and the levy was ultimately 
rescinded with effect from 02.12.2024.  
 
Pursuant to the deregulation of the oil sector, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
incurred under-recoveries on sale of MS/HSD/LPG/SKO, a part of which was shared by 
upstream oil companies such as ONGC, OIL and GAIL. Subsequently, petrol and diesel 
prices were decontrolled on 26.06.2010 and 19.10.2014 respectively. LPG subsidies is 
being met through the Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG (DBTL) scheme and targeted 
subsidies to PMUY consumers scheme from the Consolidated Fund of India, and w.e.f. 
01.03.2020, retail selling prices of PDS kerosene have been maintained at NIL under -
recovery on a pan-India basis. 
 
During the period 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, as the increase in international LPG 
prices was not fully passed on in retail prices, the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
suffered significant losses on domestic LPG. To compensate the OMCs for these 
losses, Government paid a one -time compensation of Rs. 22,000 crore to OMCs in 
January 2023. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Impact of Geopolitics on India’s crude oil import and energy security 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that India imports nearly 89% of its crude oil requirements, 
exposing the Country to heightened geopolitical risks such as conflicts in oil-producing 
regions, sanctions, civil unrest, and disruptions in key transport routes like the Suez  
Canal and the Red Sea. Recent global events, including the Russia -Ukraine conflict 
and tensions in the Middle East, have underscored the vulnerability of India’s energy 
supply chain and its dependence on international trade flows. In view of this , the 
Committee recommend that MoPNG and CPSUs should intensify efforts to diversify 
crude oil sourcing both geographically and contractually, strengthen strategic petroleum 
reserves, and enhance alternative import routes. Further, risk management practices, 

28  
including hedging and flexible term contracts, must be institutionalized to safeguard 
India’s energy security against future geopolitical shocks. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India has mitigated volatility in the global energy market through increasing 
diversification of sources. India pursues a market -based and diversified approach to 
sourcing crude oil, guided by energy security, affordability, and reliability, keeping in 
view the needs of its 1.4 billion people. Currently, India is importing crude oil from over 
41 countries across Middle East, U.S., Africa, Latin America, and other markets, 
mitigating its  dependence on any particular geographies or regions. Also, the 
Government always encourage Oil PSUs to regularly optimize procurement through a 
mix of term contracts and spot purchases under different arrangements, to ensure 
flexibility and cost competitiveness. 
In order to build the capacities of strategic crude storage, Government, through 
a Special Purpose Vehicle, called Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Limited 
(ISPRL), has established Strategic Petroleum Reserves (SPR) facilities with total 
capacity of 5.3 3 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) of c rude oil at 3 locations namely 
Vishakhapatnam-1.33 MMT, Mangaluru-1.5 MMT and Padur-2.5 MMT.   
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Impact of Geopolitics on India’s crude oil import and energy security 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee observe that while proactive steps have been taken by CPSUs 
such as IOCL and ONGC Videsh to diversify crude oil sources and manage geopolitical 
risks, challenges persist due to sanctions, financial market volatility, and regulatory 
changes in host countries where overseas projects are located. These issues not only 
affect India’s energy import bill but also impede the ability of CPSUs to secure overseas 
exploration and production assets, thereby limiting long -term energy security . The 
Committee recommend that MoPNG should work closely with the Ministry of External 
Affairs (MEA) and other relevant Government agencies to strengthen diplomatic 
engagement with oil -producing nations, secure favourable investment terms, and 
address taxation and regul atory hurdles faced by CPSUs abroad. At the same time, 
CPSUs should adopt digital and enterprise risk management frameworks to 
continuously assess geopolitical vulnerabilities, ensuring a more resilient and 
sustainable energy strategy for the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoPNG works in close coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
as well as Indian Missions abroad to strengthen diplomatic engagement with resource-
rich countries, facilitate government-to-government cooperation, and address regulatory 
issues affecting Indian CPSUs. Such engagements are aimed at creating a stable 

29  
investment environment for Indian companies and securing favourable terms for 
overseas exploration and production assets. 
Indian Oil & Gas PSUs have been actively pursuing opportunities to acquire high-
quality oil and gas assets overseas to strengthen the country’s energy security. As of 
today, Indian PSUs hold Participating Interest (PI) in 45 assets across 21 countries. 
During FY 2025-26 (April to December), the total equity production from these overseas 
assets is 14.5 Million Metric Tonnes of Oil Equivalent (MMTOE), accounting for around 
30.5% of India’s total domestic production. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Environmental concerns and Net Zero Emissions Initiatives 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the operations of P&NG sector CPSUs affect 
significantly to environmental externalities such as greenhouse gas emissions, air and 
water pollution, biodiversity loss, and hazardous waste generation. Despite ongoing 
measures such as ethanol blending, adoption of compressed biogas, green hydrogen, 
and sustainable aviation fuel, as well as efforts in wastewater recycling and waste 
segregation, the sector continues to face critical challenges in reducing its 
environmental footprint. The Committee recommend that MoPNG and CPSUs consider 
setting clear, time -bound targets for emission reductions, enhancing monitoring 
mechanisms, and investing in advanced technologies for carbon capture, utilization, 
and storage (CCUS). Further, CPSUs must ensure robust water conservation strategies 
and biodiversity protection measures in all project areas to balance industrial growth 
with environmental sustainability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
India has formally committed to achieving net -zero carbon emissions by 2070 
and MoPNG aligns its policies, programmes and sectoral initiatives with this national 
commitment. The Ministry is implementing a range of policy measures and initiatives 
such as pr omotion of biofuels, energy efficiency improvements, adoption of cleaner 
fuels, reduction of methane emissions, carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) 
and support for research and development, which collectively contribute towards 
emission reduction and the long-term Net Zero objective. In line with the India’s Energy 
transition goals, Oil and Gas companies are adopting several methods to decarbonize 
its operations and value chain, such as advancing renewable hydrogen projects, 
renewable energy sour ces, enhancing energy efficiency, adopting cleaner 
technologies, and tapping low-carbon energy sources. 
 
PSU Oil and Gas companies have prepared plans to achieve goal of becoming 
net zero encompassing scope -1 and 2 emissions. These companies have planned to 
achieve Net Zero (scope -1 and scope -2) between 2035 to 2046 while ensuring a 
secure, reliable and affordable supply of energy.  

30  
 
To accelerate the Net Zero Mission, the Government has undertaken the 
following measures in petroleum sector: 
• EBP (Ethanol Blended Petrol) : The Government has been promoting blending of 
ethanol in petrol under the Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme wherein Public 
Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) sell ethanol blended with petrol. Under 
Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) Programme, ethanol blending in petrol has increased 
from 38 crore litres in Ethanol Supply Year (ESY) 2013 -14 to more than 1000 crore 
litres in ESY 2024-25, thereby achieving an average blending of 19.24% ethanol in 
Petrol during ESY 2024 -25. Etha nol blending of 20% has been achieved in the 
current ESY 2025-26.  
• PM JI -VAN Scheme: The Government of India launched Pradhan Mantri JI -VAN 
Yojana, to provide financial assistance of approximately $250 million USD from 
2018–19 to 2023-24 (now extended till 2028 -29) to support commercial, as well as 
demonstration, projects for Advanced Biofuels. 
• Promotion of CBG & Sustainable Alternative In order to promote the production and 
consumption of CBG in the country, National Biofuels Coordination Committee 
(NBCC) on 24.11.2023 approved, the introduction of phase wise mandatory selling 
of CBG in CNG (Transport) & PNG (Domestic) segments of CGD sector. 
• Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF): Further to decarbonize aviation sector, Government 
also has set an indicative target of 1%, 2% and 5% blending of SAF in Aviation 
Turbine Fuel (ATF) initially for international flights with effect from 2027, 2028 and 
2030 respectively. 
• Green Hydrogen Mission: Govt. has announced National Green Hydrogen Mission, 
which is aimed at promoting green hydrogen and demonstration/ development of 
associated infrastructure including its export with target to produce 5 MMTPA of 
green Hydrogen by 2030. MoP&NG has further directed the Oil & Gas PSUs to setup 
green hydrogen projects across the country. 
• Increasing share of Natural gas: Natural gas as a transition fuel the government has 
set targets to increase the share of natural gas in India’s energy mix from around 6% 
to 15%.  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Environmental concerns and Net Zero Emissions Initiatives 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee observe that while P&NG CPSUs have announced ambitious 
Net Zero targets —ranging from ONGC’s 2038 goal to IOCL’s 2046 roadmap —and 
initiated substantial investments in renewable energy, EV charging infrastructure, and 
green subsidiaries, challenges remain in scaling renewable capacity, managing costs 
of emerging technologies like battery storage, and ensuring supply chain integration. 
The Committee recommend that MoPNG should prepare a coordinated roadmap to 
align CPSUs’ Net Zero strategies with  India’s 2070 climate commitment, with clear 
interim milestones, cross -sector collaboration, and periodic reviews. CPSUs should 
prioritize accelerated deployment of renewable energy projects, indigenous technology 

31  
development in solar modules and green hydrogen, and enhanced public -private 
partnerships to ensure affordable, reliable, and sustainable energy transition.  
 
Reply of the Government 
PSU Oil & Gas Companies plan to progressively integrate low -carbon energy 
sources such as solar and other renewables with conventional operations through pilot 
projects, feasibility studies, and phased implementation, subject to technological 
readiness and site-specific conditions across all its operational areas.  
India has formally committed to achieving ne t-zero carbon emissions by 2070, 
in line with the India’s Energy transition goals, Oil and Gas companies are adopting 
several methods to decarbonize its operations and value chain, such as advancing 
renewable hydrogen projects, renewable energy sources, enhancing energy efficiency, 
adopting cleaner technologies, and tapping low-carbon energy sources. 
PSU Oil and Gas companies have prepared plans to achieve goal of becoming 
net zero encompassing scope -1 and 2 emissions. These companies have planned to 
achieve Net Zero (scope -1 and scope -2) between 2035 to 2046 while ensuring a 
secure, reliable and affordable supply of energy.  
Energy efficiency remains a core focus area for oil companies, not only for minimizing 
environmental impact but also for optimizing operating costs and enhancing 
upstream/downstream performance. CPSEs continuously monitor its energy 
consumption across operations and implement a range of measures to drive efficiency 
improvements. Petroleum companies are making significant investments in renewable 
energy sources such as solar and wind and are progressively integrating these sources 
with their existing operational networks.   
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Ethanol Blending Programme 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that the Government’s Ethanol Blending Programme (EBP) 
has emerged as a significant initiative to reduce dependence on crude oil imports, 
promote sustainable energy, and enhance farmers’ income. The blending rate has risen 
steadily from 1.53% in Ethanol Supply Year (ESY) 2013 -14 to 18.36% as on March 
2025, with a target of achieving 20% blending by 2025-26. As submitted by the Ministry, 
the programme has already resulted in estimated foreign exchange savings of about 
₹1.4 lakh crore as of  March 2025 and has expanded ethanol supply by diversifying 
feedstocks to include sugarcane juice, molasses, damaged food grains, surplus rice, 
maize, and agricultural residues. To secure adequate supply, Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) under MoPNG have ini tiated long -term contracts, floated Expressions of 
Interest for setting up 238 dedicated etha nol plants, and supported the establishment 
of 2G bio -refineries. While appreciating the efforts, the Committee recommend that 
MoPNG should ensure time -bound completion of these bio -refineries, incentivize 
diversification into low-water and climate-resilient crops such as maize, sweet sorghum, 
and pearl millet, and strengthen storage and distribution infrastructure across the 

32  
Country. At the same time, the Committee feel that research and technology adoption 
for 2G and 3G ethanol production must be accelerated through schemes like the 
Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN Yojana, with adequate financial and policy support. The Ministry 
may regularly monitor blending targets, regional supply imbalances, and cost efficiency 
to ensure that the EBP not only achieves its environmental and economic objectives 
but also contributes to long -term energy security and rural development and 
employment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
National Policy on Biofuels identifies maize, sweet sorghum and sugar beet as 
the potential feedstock as less -water intensive and climate resilient crop, for ethanol 
production. To promote maize Public Sector Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) have 
provided incentives on maize-based ethanol, which has resulted in manifolds increase 
in the contribution of maize-based ethanol. Maize ethanol now accounts for about 48% 
of the total ethanol supplies under the EBP Programme.  Advanced biofuel technology 
for commercial  scale production is still at a nascent stage, and project developers 
worldwide are facing challenges in the biomass conversion. These projects are also 
facing several other challenges such as limited availability of specialized technology 
vendors, unavailability of certain critical equipment, land availability, irregular feedstock 
supply, technological issues, poor market demand for by-products, and local community 
resistance. 
 
OMCs have also strengthened their storage and distribution across the country which 
has enabled increase in ethanol blending from 10% during ESY 2021-22 to E20 levels 
during ongoing ESY 2025 -26. The ethanol storage capacity with OMCs has also 
improved from approximately 20 crore litres in 2021 to around 82 crore litres which is 
equivalent to 26 days of E20 cover.   EBP is being implemented with close coordination 
among three Public Sector OMCs having a network of 300+ plus supply locations and 
450+ suppliers mapped to these locations. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312 Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
India’s Green Hydrogen Mission 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that green hydrogen has emerged as a transformative clean 
energy solution for meeting India’s Net Zero goals and de -carbonizing hard-to-abate 
sectors such as steel, cement, fertilizers, refineries, and mobility. The Government 
launched the National Green Hydrogen Mission in 2023 with an outlay of ₹19,744 crore, 
targeting 5 MMTPA of green hydrogen production by 2030, requiring 125 GW of 
renewable energy capacity. MoPNG CPSUs have already initiated significant projects—
IOCL’s 10 KTPA green hydrogen plant at Panipat, BPCL’s hydrogen refuelling station 
at Cochin Airport and 5 MW plant at Bina, HPCL’s pilot projects in refineries and 
transport, GAIL’s 4.3 TPD green hydrogen plant at Vijaipur, and OIL’s pilot blending 
initiatives—indicating progress across the value chain. The Committee recommend that 
MoPNG should ensure time-bound implementation of these projects, establish a robust 
regulatory framework for hydrogen production, storage, transport and blending, and 
incentivize large -scale electro lyser manufacturing to reduce costs. Further, CPSUs 
should accelerate R&D collaborations on hydrogen fuel cells, biomass -to-hydrogen 

33  
pathways, and storage technologies, while also building hydrogen hubs, refuelling 
infrastructure, and export -oriented capacities. The Ministry may regularly monitor 
milestones under the National Green Hydrogen Mission to ensure India emerges as a 
global leader in this sunrise sector, contributing to energy security, emission reduction, 
and industrial competitiveness.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India is implementing the National Green Hydrogen Mission 
(NGHM), with an objective to make India a global hub of production, usage and export 
of green hydrogen and its derivatives. India’s Green Hydrogen production capacity is 
likely to reach 5 Million Metric Tonnes per annum by 2030  
 
Under the Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen Transition - 2B (SIGHT-
2B) mode of the National Green Hydrogen Mission (NGHM), refineries have been 
allocated 200 KTPA of green hydrogen procurement capacity, of which PSU refineries 
have been assigned a target of 170 KTPA, up to 2030.  
 
The Government has allowed hydrogen blending pilot project in five 
Geographical Areas (GAs) of City Gas Distribution (CGD) networks. These pilots cover 
domestic, commercial, industrial and CNG segments in limited areas and involve 
injection into MDPE and s teel pipeline networks to assess aspects such as pipeline 
behaviour, stratification, leakage characteristics, metering impacts and consumer -end 
performance. OISD-STD-241 (Safety in the production, storage and transportation of 
hydrogen and hydrogen blends) covers Hydrogen Blending with Natural Gas (including 
both CGD & Natural Gas pipeline networks). 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 31 & 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
India’s Green Hydrogen Mission 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee observe that while CPSUs under MoPNG have undertaken 
several initiatives such as pilot hydrogen blending in city gas networks, development of 
hydrogen fuel cell buses, indigenous electrolyser technologies, and small -scale 
biomass-to-hydrogen projects, challenges remain in scaling up these innovations to 
commercial levels. Furthermore, global competition and rapidly evolving technologies 
necessitate accelerated R&D, technology transfer, and international partnerships to 
keep pace with global le aders. The Committee recommend that MoPNG, in 
collaboration with MNRE and other relevant agencies, should establish a coordinated 
research and innovation framework for hydrogen, integrating CPSUs, academia, and 
private sector start-ups. Greater emphasis should be placed on pilot demonstrations of 
hydrogen in public transport, heavy -duty vehicles, and shipping, with comprehensive 
field trials and cost -benefit assessments. CPSUs should also leverage international 
collaborations and joint ventures to access cu tting-edge technologies in fuel cells, 
hydrogen storage, and supply chain infrastructure. The Ministry may lay down clear 

34  
timelines and performance benchmarks for these initiatives to ensure that R&D efforts 
translate into commercially viable solutions, positioning India as a competitive hub for 
green hydrogen technologies globally.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has been enhancing global collaboration with major economies 
and companies on technological advancement in green Hydrogen and other emerging 
fuels. In June 2024, India and Italy have signed a Letter of Intent (LoI) on cooperation 
on Biofuels & Green Hydrogen. The India - USA Energy Security Partnership (ESP) 
would also emphasize robust collaboration on advancing clean energy innovation, 
technology deployment, and sustainable energy transitions; across key areas, including 
renewables, energy e fficiency, and hydrogen, to secure clean energy supply chains. 
Under the EU -India Trade and Technology Council, collaboration is expanding, 
with over 30 joint proposals received on hydrogen production from waste. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 31 & 32 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Green Mobility initiatives 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee note that with India’s transition towards clean mobility, OMCs 
under MoPNG have played a significant role in enabling adoption of Electric Vehicles 
(EVs) by establishing 26,279 EV charging stations and 244 battery swapping stations 
across the  Country as on March 2025. These initiatives align with NITI Aayog’s 
projections of 30% EV penetration in private cars, 70% in commercial vehicles, and 
80% in two- and three-wheelers by 2030. The Committee also observe that CPSUs are 
actively engaged acros s the EV value chain through research and development of 
advanced battery chemistries, indigenous multi -walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) 
technologies for Li -ion cells, and collaborations with key automobile and technology 
players such as Tata Power, Ola Electric, Hero MotoCorp, Ather Energy, Tata Motors, 
and MG Motor. The Committee recommend that MoPNG should ensure timely scaling 
up of EV charging and swapping networks, promote indigenous battery manufacturing 
capabilities, and facilitate greater integration of CPSUs with private sector partnerships 
to enhance infrastructure utilization. Further, targeted R&D support and financial 
incentives should be extended to accelerate the commercialization of advanced battery 
technologies and develop a resilient domesti c supply chain. The Ministry should 
periodically review progress to ensure that CPSUs significantly contribute to India’s 
green mobility ecosystem, thereby reducing dependence on fossil fuels and 
strengthening energy security.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Government is taking concerted efforts to increase share of natural gas, 
biofuels, green hydrogen and renewable energy in the energy mix. This inter -alia, 
includes increasing share of natural gas in primary energy mix; increasing ethanol 
blending in petrol, blending of biodiesel in diesel; setting up compressed biogas plants 

35  
under Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT); 
developing green hydrogen production capacity of at least 5 MMT (Million Metric 
Tonne) 
per annum and installation of Alternate Fuel  Stations (EV charging).  
 
Under the EBP Programme, the average ethanol blending achievements made 
during the last three years (Ethanol Supply Years) were 12.06%, 14.60% and 19.24%, 
against the targets of 12%, 15%, and 20%, respectively. In the current Ethanol Supply 
Year (ESY), tar get of 20% has been achieved in December, 2025. Under the SATAT 
initiative, a phase -wise mandatory blending of CBG in the CNG (Transport) and PNG 
(Domestic) segments of the City Gas Distribution (CGD) sector has been fixed at 1%, 
3%, and 4% of total CNG/PN G consumption for Financial Year(FY) 2025 –26, 2026–
27, and 2027 –28 respectively, and 5% from FY 2028 –29 onwards. For SAF, 
Government has approved indicative blending targets of l% by 2027, 2% by 2028, and 
5% by 2030 in ATF, initially for international flig ht 
 
The Government is also implementing the National Green Hydrogen Mission to 
position India as a global hub for green hydrogen, targeting 5 MMT annual production 
by 2030 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Human Resource Management 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee note that as on 31.03.2025, eight CPSUs under MoPNG together 
had more than 3,700 vacancies, with IOCL, GAIL and OIL accounting for a significant 
share. While the CPSUs have developed systematic manpower planning mechanisms 
and recruitment str ategies—including BPCL’s twin -track recruitment through campus 
selection and open competition, HPCL’s 5-year workforce strategy, and IOCL’s annual 
business-linked workforce analysis —persistent gaps in staffing remain, particularly in 
technical and specialized roles. The Committee also observe that CPSUs are making 
commendable efforts to bridge skill gaps through structured onboarding, leadership 
development programs, e -learning platforms like IOCL’s Swadhyaya, BPCL’s 
Behavioral Learning Framework and leadership journeys, and HPCL’s role -based 
competency frameworks supported by MOOC platforms and academic collaborations. 
The Committee are in praise of the thoughtful efforts but at the same time recommend 
that MoPNG should ensure timely recruitment to fill cri tical vacancies, strengthen 
workforce planning with predictive analytics, and adopt a unified skill development 
framework across CPSUs to meet the evolving demands of the energy transition. 
Further, CPSUs should expand leadership programs, women workforce participation 
initiatives, and collaborations with premier institutes to create a future-ready workforce. 
The Ministry may monitor progress regularly to ensure that human resource strategies 
contribute effectively to operational efficiency, contemporary technical know-how skills 
of youth, innovation, and long-term sustainability of the sector.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Oil & Gas Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) have progressively adopted lateral 
hiring as a strategic tool to strengthen capabilities in emerging domains critical to India’s 

36  
energy transition. While traditional recruitment continues to serve core operational 
needs, lateral hiring is increasingly being used to onboard sector -specific experts in 
areas such as data analytics, artificial intelligence, green energy, and digital 
transformation.  
To promote greater representation of women in leadership roles, Oil & Gas 
CPSEs are addressing systemic and operational challenges through focused career 
development, mentoring, and enabling policies. They also support women employees 
through comprehensive leave provisions, including maternity leave, child care leave, 
child adoption leave, special leave to join husband, special maternity leave, enhanced 
sick leave, etc.  
Further, Oil & Gas CPSEs actively collaborates with premier academic and 
professional institutions like IITs & IIMs to enhance capability development in 
leadership, technology, and emerging domains. These partnerships enable access to 
contemporary knowledge, global best practices, and research-driven learning, thereby 
supporting the development of a resilient and future -ready workforce aligned with the 
evolving requirements of the energy sector.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Safety and Security of workers in oil fields and refineries 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that safety and security remain critical concerns in the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas sector given the hazardous nature of operations in oil fields, 
pipelines, and refineries. Following the IOCL Jaipur fire incident in 2009, the MB Lal 
Committee made 118 safety recommendations, most of which have been implemented 
by IOCL, though similar status across other CPSUs remains unclear. The Committee 
also observe that OMCs have adopted comprehensive Health, Safety & Environment 
(HSE) management syst ems, incorporating hazard identification and risk analysis, 
integrity management, personal protective equipment (PPE), work permit systems, and 
regular mock drills under certified Emergency Response Disaster Management Plans 
(ERDMPs). Further, training ini tiatives using AI/VR tools, contractor safety protocols, 
safety audits, and innovative approaches such as Safety Innovation Parks have 
enhanced preparedness and awareness. While these are welcome steps,  the 
Committee also recommend that MoPNG should ensure  uniform compliance with MB 
Lal Committee recommendations across all CPSUs, strengthen periodic safety audits 
by independent agencies, and mandate the adoption of digital monitoring tools such as 
AI-enabled hazard detection, Internet of Things (IoT) based sensors, and real-time risk 
dashboards. The Committee also desire that CPSUs must institutionalize regular 
training for employees and contract workers, improve community safety awareness 
around installations, and enhance coordination with local authorities  for emergency 
response. The Ministry may closely monitor implementation of the above step to ensure 
zero tolerance towards shortcomings in safety standards, thereby safeguarding 
workers, assets and communities.  
 
 

37  
Reply of the Government 
Regular and serious efforts are being made by CPSEs to monitor implementation 
of the above step to ensure zero tolerance towards shortcomings in safety standards, 
thereby safeguarding workers, assets and communities such as:  
• Compliance with M.B. Lal Committee Recommendations: 
 CPSEs have implemented all major recommendations of the M.B. Lal Committee. 
 
• Audits by Independent Agencies: 
Audits by independent agencies are carried out at defined intervals to ensure 
compliance with statutory and safety requirements. The Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) conducts Technical Standards and Specifications 
including Safety Standar ds (T4S) and Integrity Management System (IMS) audits 
through PNGRB-approved third-party agencies. Additionally, the Oil Industry Safety 
Directorate (OISD) conducts periodic safety audits of oil and gas installations.  
 
• Digital Monitoring and Surveillance: 
All locations are equipped with CCTV surveillance systems capable of generating 
automatic alerts in the event of intrusions and deviations from prescribed safety 
procedures. All tank trucks are monitored through a Vehicle Tracking System (VTS), 
which generates automated alerts for over-speeding, route deviation, harsh driving, 
braking events, etc. 
 
• Digital Training and Capacity Building: 
The Operator Training Simulator (OTS) is an advanced computer -based training 
platform designed to enhance the competency of Distributed Control System (DCS) 
operators by providing a realistic, non-intrusive simulation of actual plant operations. 
OTS enable s operators to gain hands -on experience in a controlled, offline 
environment. E-learning modules are effectively utilized to train employees on both 
functional and behavioural competencies.  
 
• Community Awareness and Preparedness: 
Off-site mock drills are conducted periodically in coordination with district authorities, 
followed by review meetings involving industry representatives from neighbouring 
areas, fire brigade and local administrative bodies.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 35 & 36 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
The Committee note that Petroleum and Natural Gas CPSUs such as IOCL, 
ONGC, HPCL, and BPCL have made significant contributions in the area of public 
healthcare through large -scale CSR programmes. Notable initiatives include IOCL’s 

38  
Intensive TB Elimination Project in partnership with MoH&FW, ONGC’s financial 
support for high-end cancer care equipment in government hospitals, and HPCL’s rural 
healthcare programmes through Mobile Medical Units under Project Dhanwantari. 
These initiativ es have benefitted millions of citizens, particularly those from 
underprivileged and tribal communities, by improving access to diagnostics, treatment, 
and preventive care.  
 
        While appreciating these commendable interventions, the Committee recommend 
that CPSUs continue to prioritise healthcare as a thrust area of CSR and scale up their 
investments in preventive healthcare, including nutrition, sanitation, and maternal and 
child health. The Committee also desire that CPSUs develop long -term partnerships 
with State Governments, public hospitals, and research institutions to ensure 
sustainable delivery of health services and measurable outcomes. Special focus should 
be placed on addressing region-specific health challenges such as sickle cell anaemia 
in tribal regions, cancer prevalence in North -East India, and communicable disease 
control. Further, CPSUs must conduct regular impact assessments through 
independent agencies and publish results transparently to ensure accountability and 
replication of best practices.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Oil & Gas Public Sector Petroleum Companies undertake CSR activities under 
the heads identified under Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 with special focus 
on Health (Nutrition, Sanitation, and Drinking Water), Education, Skill Development, 
Rural Development, Women Empowerment, Environment Oriented Initiatives and 
Care for the Elderly  & Differently-abled Persons.  
 
CSR is a Board -driven process and the Board of the company is empowered  
to plan, approve, execute, and monitor the CSR activities of the company based on 
the recommendations of its CSR Committee. Details of the CSR proposals /activities 
undertaken by the oil and gas PSUs are available on the respective websites of public 
sector petroleum companies. The CSR projects are undertaken for socio -economic 
development of area and society where the project is executed.  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
The Committee observe that P&NG CPSUs have been actively supporting 
educational infrastructure, skill -building initiatives, and community empowerment 
programmes under CSR. ONGC has expanded its successful ‘Super 30’ model to 14 
centres across eight States,  achieving high success rates in JEE and NEET 
examinations. BPCL and HPCL have established Skill Development Institutes, 
empowering youth and women artisans with employable skills in traditional and modern 
sectors. IOCL has consistently supported nursing education through Assam Oil School 
of Nursing, providing livelihood opportunities for underprivileged girls with a 100% 
placement record. Such initiatives are transformative in reducing inequality and 
fostering socio-economic development.  
 

39  
         The Committee, while lauding these initiatives, desire that CPSUs further 
strengthen their CSR programmes in education and skill development by aligning them 
with the national priorities of the Skill India Mission, Digital India, and Atmanirbhar 
Bharat. The Committee desire that CPSUs should focus on modern vocational training 
in emerging areas such as renewable energy, AI, and healthcare technologies, while 
continuing to promote traditional crafts and women’s empowerment. They should also 
adopt a cluster-based approach in Aspirational Districts to integrate education, digital 
literacy, livelihood generation, and entrepreneurship. Furthermore, CPSUs should 
leverage digital platforms for wider outreach, ensure gender equity in participation, and 
establish robust monitoring frameworks to evaluate the long -term impact of such 
programmes on community empowerment. The Committee are hopeful that these 
initiatives under CSR will go a long way for achieving the goal of ‘Vikshit Bharat’ in near 
future.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Oil & Gas Public Sector Petroleum Companies undertake CSR activities under 
the heads identified under Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 with special focus 
on Health (Nutrition, Sanitation, and Drinking Water), Education, Skill Development, 
Rural Development, Women Empowerment, Environment Oriented Initiatives and 
Care for the Elderly  & Differently-abled Persons.  
 
CSR is a Board -driven process and the Board of the company is empowered  
to plan, approve, execute, and monitor the CSR activities of the company based on 
the recommendations of its CSR Committee. Details of the CSR proposals /activities 
undertaken by the oil and gas PSUs are available on the respective websites of public 
sector petroleum companies. The CSR projects are undertaken for socio -economic 
development of area and society where the project is executed.  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Balmer Lawrie’s Business Strategy, Diversification and Sustainability 
Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
The Committee note that Balmer Lawrie has retained strong capabilities in 
Industrial Packaging, holding about 45% of the steel barrels market, while its Greases 
& Lubricants division faces stiff competition from both private and public sector players. 
The company has also diversified into travel and logistics, expanding its presence as 
one of the few authorized travel agents for the Central Government and offering 
integrated logistics solutions. While this diversification complements its core operations, 
the Committee highlighted opportunities for the company to build on its core strengths 
in greases, lubricants, and packaging by sharpening focus in these areas to strengthen 
competitiveness and profitability.  
         The Committee, while appreciating Balmer Lawrie’s strategy of focusing on niche 
segments like Railways, Defence, and Industries, recommend that the company should 
substantially strengthen its R&D investments, improve branding and distribution 
networks, and develop eco-friendly, high-performance lubricants in collaboration with 
OEMs (original equipment manufacturers). The Committee further desire that Industrial 
Packaging should be expanded into new product lines and export markets through 
adoption of sustai nable materials and automation. To ensure long -term viability, the 

40  
company must strike a balance between strengthening its core sectors and judiciously 
scaling up diversification, ensuring clarity in its market positioning. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Various efforts being made by BL to ensure long-term viability such as:  
 
SBU : Greases & Lubricants. 
1. Strengthening of R&D Investments 
Enhanced budgetary support has been planned for R&D activities, with focused 
emphasis on formulation development, performance enhancement, sustainability, and 
application engineering.  
  
2. Collaboration with OEMs for High-Performance Products 
The R&D team has intensified engagement with leading OEMs across key 
sectors including Railways, Defence, Mining, Steel, and Automotive (Tata Motors) . 
Structured collaborative programmes have been initiated for the development, testing, 
and validation of high-performance and eco-friendly grease formulations. 
3. Branding Initiatives 
To enhance market visibility and brand recall of Balmerol lubricants, the SBU has 
proposed a doubling of the branding and promotional budget . The strengthened 
branding strategy includes increased participation in industry forums, technical 
seminars, digital platforms, and targeted customer outreach programmes 
 4. Strengthening of Distribution Network 
Initiatives are underway to widen dealer coverage, strengthen distributor 
engagement, and improve last-mile reach, particularly in high-growth and under-served 
markets. 
SBU: Industrial Packaging. 
To offer a comprehensive product portfolio, BL SBU–IP continues to focus on 
introducing new products across its existing manufacturing facilities. 
Sustainability Initiatives: 
 
The following sustainable practices are being implemented across SBU -IP 
operations: 
1. Adoption of sustainable materials 
2. Solar power generation across IP plants 
3. Reduction in steel consumption 
4. Implementation of innovative and sustainable technologies 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
 
 

41  
Balmer Lawrie’s Business Strategy, Diversification and Sustainability 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 24) 
 
The Committee observe that Balmer Lawrie has identified significant 
opportunities in cold chain logistics, particularly for pharmaceuticals and perishable 
goods, and has initiated steps such as establishing Mega and Mini Temperature 
Controlled Warehouses (TCWs) across Tier-I, II, and III cities. The Committee also note 
that the company has partnered with Central Warehousing Corporation to speed up 
location acquisition and developed a joint venture with Visakhapatnam Port Trust to set 
up a Multi-Modal Logistics Hub. These steps are commendable as India’s demand for 
temperature-controlled storage and efficient supply chain systems is growing rapidly, 
especially in food and pharma sectors.  
 
The Committee recommend that Balmer Lawrie should expedite its cold chain 
expansion by prioritising dust -free, pharma -compliant facilities, acquiring necessary 
licences, and building integrated end -to-end logistics solutions including first -mile and 
last-mile delivery. The Committee further desire that Balmer Lawrie should leverage 
digital technologies such as IoT-enabled monitoring and predictive analytics to improve 
efficiency, reduce wastage, and ensure regulatory compliance in temperature-sensitive 
sectors. The company should also expand its logistics footprint in emerging Tier-II and 
III markets and explore public -private partnerships to strengthen infrastructure, 
positioning itself as a leading integrated logistics provider.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Various efforts being made by BL to expand its logistics footprint in emerging 
Tier-II and III markets and explore public-private partnerships to strengthen 
infrastructure, positioning itself as a leading integrated logistics provider such as 
 
SBU : Cold Chain. 
Based on its growth strategy, the SBU has initiated the following actions  to 
achieve its growth objectives: 
a. Expansion of Refer Transportation and Value-Added Services 
b. Expansion of Cold Warehousing Infrastructure 
SBU : Logistics Services. 
  Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd.  proposes to expand its Third-Party Logistics (3PL)  
footprint in emerging Tier-II markets  as part of its strategic growth and network 
expansion plan.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
Balmer Lawrie’s Business Strategy, Diversification and Sustainability 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 25) 
 
The Committee acknowledge Balmer Lawrie’s initiatives to align with global de -
carbonisation trends by developing ester-based and long-life lubricants, replacing fossil 
fuels in boilers and dryers with LPG and bio -diesel, and scaling up renewable energy 

42  
through solar panel installations. These efforts, coupled with its Chemicals division’s 
shift towards eco -friendly products, demonstrate the company’s recognition of 
sustainability as a driver of competitiveness. However, the Committee note that given 
the increasing international pressure on reducing carbon footprints, such initiatives 
need to be more ambitious and consistently scaled up.  
 
         The Committee recommend that Balmer Lawrie should adopt a comprehensive 
roadmap for sustainability across all divisions, with measurable targets for emission 
reduction, renewable energy adoption, and circular economy practices. The Committee 
desire that the company intensify its collaboration with premier institutions like IITs and 
IISc for green R&D, expand bio-based and biodegradable chemical solutions, and adopt 
green packaging practices in its Industrial Packaging division. Furthermore, the 
company must integrate sustainability reporting into its annual disclosures, ensuring 
transparency and alignment with global ESG benchmarks. Such measures would not 
only future -proof Balmer Lawrie’s business but also strengthen its reputation as an 
environmentally responsible PSU.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Company already publish information  as a part of Annual Report which 
include sustainability reporting. In alignment with global de -carbonisation trends, the 
company has implemented the following measures: 
• Renewable Energy Adoption 
• Emission Reduction and Fuel Replacement 
• Green Product Development 
• Green R&D and Collaboration 
• Green Packaging and Circular Economy 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
EIL’s Business Strategy, Innovation and International Presence 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 26) 
The Committee note that Engineers India Limited (EIL) plays a vital role in the 
hydrocarbon value chain by providing integrated services from concept to 
commissioning, including engineering, procurement, construction, and project 
management. The Committee also observe that EIL has significant experience in Open 
Book Estimate (OBE) mode, which ensures transparency and competitive costs to 
project owners, while adhering to public procurement guidelines. However, given the 
rising global competition and complex ity of mega projects in the energy and 
petrochemicals sector, the Committee believe that EIL must further enhance its project 
execution methodologies to deliver projects within time and cost parameters while 
managing risks effectively.  
 
The Committee, while appreciating EIL’s efforts in risk analysis, due diligence 
and adoption of modularization and digital monitoring tools, strongly recommend that 
EIL should strengthen its project management systems by integrating advanced digital 
technologies such as AI -driven project monitoring, predictive analytics, and BIM 
(Building Information Modelling). The Committee also desire that EIL enhance its 

43  
capacity in managing EPC contracts by building stronger in -house expertise in cost 
control, cash flow management, and supply chain resilience. The Committee believe 
that greater collaboration with global technology licensors and capacity -building of 
human resources through specialised training in project execution will further improve 
EIL’s competitiveness in this domain.  
 
Reply of the Government 
EIL has undertaken several significant measures to strengthen its project 
execution capabilities. EIL's 'Digital EIL' initiative integrates automation, artificial 
intelligence, and advanced analytics into project workflows, enhancing operational 
efficiency, decision -making, and collaborative work environments. Advanced 
engineering software tools supporting process simulation, 3D modelling, stress 
analysis, and computational fluid dynamics are already in use, enabling optimization of 
designs before construct ion, while Building Information Modelling (BIM) has been 
adopted to facilitate coordination among engineering disciplines and provide 
visualization tools for stakeholders. Project Management Information Systems (PMIS) 
provide integrated platforms for sched ule management, cost control, document 
management, and real -time progress reporting, enabling seamless collaboration 
among geographically distributed teams. EIL has developed a Project Dashboard 
enabling EIL to control projects using Innovative techniques.  
 
Further, EIL has also been successful in gaining Prestigious projects on 
Depositary Mode from institutes of repute. EIL has also been awarded projects from 
ONGC on OBE Mode. EIL is also diversified in to Nuclear sector with small modular 
reactor projects being awarded to EIL.Building on these strong foundations. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
EIL’s Business Strategy, Innovation and International Presence 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 27) 
 
The Committee observe that EIL has demonstrated commendable capabilities in 
developing indigenous technologies, filing over a hundred patents, and commercialising 
more than 60% of them. The Committee further note its contribution to frontier projects 
such as the Assam Bio Refinery Project, the first-of-its-kind bamboo-based bio-refinery 
in the Country, which is expected to produce ethanol, acetic acid, and furfural alcohol 
while generating employment and reducing crude oil imports. The Committee feel that 
these efforts underline EIL’s potential as a leader in India’s energy transition and 
sustainability agenda.  
 
The Committee, while appreciating these achievements, recommend that EIL 
should significantly scale up its R&D investment in emerging areas such as green 
hydrogen, carbon capture and storage (CCS), waste-to-energy and advanced biofuels. 
The Committee also desire that EIL strengthen partnerships with leading academic and 
research institutions, both in India and abroad, to fast -track innovation in clean energy 
technologies. The Committee feel that EIL should also build pilot -scale demonstration 
plants for new  technologies before commercial roll -out and ensure that its R&D 
outcomes are aligned with the Government’s renewable energy and de -carbonisation 

44  
targets. By doing so, EIL can position itself as a strategic enabler of India’s net -zero 
vision while building a global reputation for innovation-driven consultancy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
EIL, as a technology provider, has been ensuring availability of technologies 
which not only boost energy efficiency but also produce cleaner fuels.  
 
• EIL has its own patented solvent formulation for CO2 capture and is also exploring 
collaboration with potential technology development partner in area of CO2 capture 
towards process intensification and lower cost per ton CO2 capture.  
• EIL has developed indigenous Bio-ATF technology for sustainable aviation fuel (SAF) 
production in collaboration with CSIR- Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR-IIP).  
• EIL is also pursuing recovery of Helium from Natural Gas, in collaboration with ONGC 
Energy Centre and CSIR-IIP 
• Development of technology for catalytic solar thermal decomposition of Ammonia to 
produce Hydrogen is being done in collaboration with IIT-Kanpur.  
• EIL is working on development of De OXO reactor for purifi cation of H2  from 
Electrolyser. 
• EIL is setting up a pilot facility for generation and purification of biogas. Biogas facili
ty shall be used for carrying out experimental works related to biogas treatment, thus 
supporting the National Bioenergy programme. 
 
  EIL is also having a continued relationship with both the international educational 
institutes as well as industrial consortium. Some of the key partnerships are listed 
below:  
 
i.  Process Integration Research Consortium (PIRC) Membership - offered by University 
of Manchester  
ii. Fractionation Research Inc, US has 71 members worldwide, including the world’s 
leading petroleum, chemical, engineering, and distillation equipment supplier 
companies  
iii. PSTC is an industry -academia collaboration that carries out advanced research in 
the three focus areas of separations technology development, process optimization, 
control & safety and energy & environmental research.  
 
  EIL recently developed Desalter technology (in collaboration with BPCL) had a 
prototype installed at refinery, followed by a demonstration unit before declaring it as 
commercially available. Similarly, Super Absorbent Polymer production technology is 
being demo nstrated at one of the refineries. The inputs and feedback from such 
demonstration units help us to refine the technology for commercial scale 
implementation. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
 
EIL’s Business Strategy, Innovation and International Presence 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 28) 
 
The Committee note that EIL has successfully executed projects in the Middle 
East, North Africa, and South -East Asia, including several prestigious contracts for 

45  
ADNOC (Abu Dhabi National Oil Company) and other major oil and gas companies. 
The Committee also recognise that EIL has scaled up its presence in the UAE by tripling 
manpower and securing framework agreements for large projects. However, challenges 
such as  In-Country Value (ICV) requirements, restrictions on deployment of Indian 
manpower, and intense competition from international firms continue to hinder its ability 
to secure larger contracts.  
 
          The Committee, while appreciating EIL’s efforts to improve its ICV score and 
increase its global footprint, recommend that EIL should adopt a multi-pronged strategy 
to strengthen its international business. This includes forging joint ventures with reputed 
global engineering firms, recruiting multinational teams to meet client requirements, and 
setting up regional centres of excellence to improve client engagement. The Committee 
also desire that EIL diversify its global portfolio by tapping opport unities in renewable 
energy, LNG, and petrochemicals in emerging markets such as Africa, Central Asia and 
Latin America. By enhancing its competitiveness and adaptability in international 
markets, EIL can significantly increase foreign exchange earnings and reinforce India’s 
position as a trusted global engineering solutions provider.  
 
Reply of the Government 
EIL has successfully executed prestigious projects for ADNOC and other major 
oil and gas companies across the Middle East, North Africa, and South -East Asia, and 
has significantly scaled up its UAE presence by tripling its manpower and securing 
framework agreements for large projects. EIL has already signed MoUs with reputed 
organizations including NMDC, BP, and Dangote Oil Refinery, aimed at leveraging 
complementary expertise, sharing risks, and gaining access to new markets and 
technologies, thereby enhan cing its credibility and competitive positioning in the 
international arena. To address client requirements for multinational teams, EIL has 
undertaken recruitment of multinational specialists to strengthen its Abu Dhabi office.  
 
EIL is also actively working towards improving its In-Country Value (ICV) scores 
and is exploring opportunities to diversify its global portfolio by tapping into emerging 
sectors such as renewable energy, LNG, and petrochemicals in markets across Africa, 
Central Asia, and Latin America.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
  

46  
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

47  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  

48 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Optimizing Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) for Production Enhancement and Energy 
Transition 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that despite a steady increase in CAPEX by petroleum and 
natural gas sector CPSUs from ₹1,33,331.93 crore in 2020 -21 to a projected ₹1,69,966 
crore in 2024 -25, crude oil production has declined from 34.20 MMT in 2018 -19 to a 
projected 28.70 MMT in 2024 -25, while natural gas output has shown modest growth. 
The Committee observe that long gestation periods in exploration, ageing oil fields, 
natural production declines, and COVID -19-related disruptions have constrained output 
growth despite substantial investments. While appreciating the steps taken, such as 
technology upgrades, replacement of ageing infrastructure, and collaborations with 
global experts, the Committee recommend that CAPEX allocations be closely linked to 
measurable productio n enhancement outcomes through accelerated development of 
newly discovered fields, wider adoption of Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) techniques, 
and efficient maintenance of existing assets. The Committee would like to a balanced 
approach where investment in conventional oil and gas production is complemented with 
clear, time -bound allocations for energy transition initiatives like renewable energy 
integration, gas flaring reduction, and electrification of operations, thus ensuring both 
energy security and sustainability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government have launched Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy 
(HELP) in 2016. Under this policy, Open Acreage Licensing Policy (OALP) was started. 
During the last three years, total 38 exploration blocks under OALP bid Round VIII and 
IX covering 1, 72,912.95 Square Kilomet re in offshore areas have been awarded to 
successful bidders. Geoscientific survey of the blocks  awarded under these OALP Bid 
Rounds indicate enhancement in country’s existing resource potential. Further, OALP bid 
Round X offering 25 exploration blocks covering 1,91,986.21  sq. km in 6 states, was 
launched on15.04.2025. 
 
Government have taken various policy decisions and steps to boost domestic 
crude oil and  natural gas production and reduce dependency on import of oil and gas 
with the objective of strengthening the country’s energy security which, inter alia, include: 
i.  Policy under PSC regime for early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries, 2014. 
ii. Discovered Small Field Policy, 2015. 
iii. Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 2016. 
iv. Policy for Extension of PSCs, 2016 and 2017. 
v.   Policy for early monetization of Coal Bed Methane, 2017. 
vi.  Setting up of National Data Repository, 2017. 

49 
 
vii. Appraisal of Un -appraised areas in Sedimentary Basins under National Seismic  
Programme, 2017. 
viii. Policy framework for extension of PSCs for Discovered Fields and  Exploration 
Blocks under Pre-New Exploration Licensing Policy (Pre-NELP), 2016 and 2017. 
ix.  Policy to Promote and Incentivize Enhanced Recovery Methods for Oil and Gas, 
2018. 
x. Policy Framework for exploration and exploitation of Unconventional Hydrocarbons 
under Existing Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs), Coal Bed Methane (CBM) 
Contracts and Nomination Fields, 2018. 
xi.   Natural Gas Marketing Reforms, 2020. 
xii. Lower Royalty Rates, Zero Revenue Share (till Windfall Gain) and no drilling  
commitment in Phase-I in OALP Blocks under Category II and III basins to attract 
bidders. 
xiii. Release of about 1 Million Sq. Km. (SKM) 'No -Go' area in offshore which were 
blocked for exploration for decades. 
xiv. Government is also spending about Rs.7500 Cr. for acquisition of seismic data in 
onland and offshore areas and drilling of stratigraphic wells to make quality data of 
Indian Sedimentary Basins available to bidders. Government has approved 
acquisition of additional 2D Seismic data of 20,000 LKM in onland and 30,000 LKM 
in offshore beyond Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of India. 
 
Also, there is a natural decline in production year on year from mature fields. To 
help arrest such natural decline, the Government approved the Policy framework in 2018 
to promote and  incentivize Enhanced Recovery (ER)/Improved Recovery (IR)/ 
Unconventional Hydrocarbon (UHC) production methods through fiscal incentives in the 
form of partial waiver of royalty and cess. 
 
Government have implemented various initiatives aligned with India’s broader 
energy transition goals to promote domestic Exploration and Production and alternative 
fuels such as biofuels, green hydrogen, compressed biogas, liquefied natural gas (LNG), 
energy efficiency and electric mobility,  which inter-alia include achieving 20% ethanol 
blending under the Ethanol Blending Programme  (EBP), and broadening the scope of 
feedstock to enhance the availability of ethanol. The Pradhan Mantri Jaiv Indhan -
Vatavaran Anukool Fasal Awashesh Nivaran (PM JI-VAN) Yojana has been launched to 
provide financial assistance for setting up projects for advanced biofuels,  including 
Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF). For the promotion of Compressed Biogas (CBG), the  
Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme has been 
launched, and  schemes like BAM (Biomass Aggregation Machinery) and DPI (Direct 
Pipeline Infrastructure) have  been introduced to support biomass aggregation and to 
connect CBG plants to the e xisting pipeline network. National Green Hydrogen Mission 
(NGHM) has been launched with the objective of production of 5 MMTPA green hydrogen 
by 2030. Government have also taken various steps to  augment the availability of LNG 
for various sectors which, inter -alia, includes establishment of LNG  infrastructure 
including LNG terminals and LNG stations. Refineries are included in PAT (Perform,  
Achieve and Trade) energy efficiency improvement scheme of Government. Ministry of 
Heavy industries have sanctioned Rs. 873.5 Cr to PSU Oil Marketing companies (OMCs) 

50 
 
under FAME II Subsidy scheme for setting up 8,932 Electric Vehicle Charging stations 
(EVCS). 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas] 
(OM No Q-21017/2/2022-ED-PNG (E-44312) Dated:14th May 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
03 August, 2026                                 Chairperson 
  12 Shravan, 1948(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
------------ 
  

51 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2026-27) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3rd August, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Rajeev Rai 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
11. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. John Brittas 
13. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
14 Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
2. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the six draft Reports. 
The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft report s, without any 
changes/modifications: - 
(i)    xxx                xxx                    xxx                    xxx 
(ii)   xxx                xxx                    xxx                    xxx  
(iii)   xxx                xxx                    xxx                    xxx 

52 
 
(iv)   xxx                xxx                    xxx                    xxx  
(v)    xxx                xxx                    xxx                    xxx 
(vi)  Action Taken Report based on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Review of 
Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned CPSUs/Ministry/  
Department/C&AG and presentation of the Reports to Parliament soon.   
 
(The Committee, then, took up another agenda for the day) 
/-------/ 
  

53 
 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWE NTY-FIRST 
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (18TH LOK SABHA) ON THE 
SUBJECT “REVIEW OF PERFORMANCE OF PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS 
SECTOR CPSUs” 
I. Total number of recommendations  28 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
27 
 
 
96.43% 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
00 
 
00.00% 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
00 
 
00.00% 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are 
still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 2  
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
01 
 
3.57% 
 
 