 
17 
    
 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY FINANCE CORPORATION 
LIMITED (IRFC) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 


 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
INDIAN RAILWAY FINANCE CORPORATION 
LIMITED (IRFC) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Indian 
Railway Finance Corporation Limited (IRFC)] 
 
 
 
      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2025  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947(Saka)


ii  
CPU No. 1073 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 
 
 
  

iii  
CONTENTS 
   Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  iv 
 INTRODUCTION  v 
CHAPTER I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies 
 20 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 21 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government has furnished interim replies and final 
replies are still awaited 
 23 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 07.08.20254  27 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report of Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 
(IRFC)’ 
 29 
  

iv  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.   Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13.   Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy   
15.  Shri Lalji Verma  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Dr. John Brittas 
17.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Director 
3. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh - Executive Officer 

v  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (202 5-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventeenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited (IRFC)’. 
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2024. The 
Action taken Replies to all the six (06) Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report were received from the Ministry of Railways on 20 May, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 0 8 
August, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee (18th Lok Sabha) is given 
in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 New Delhi;                                                                                 BAIJAYANT PANDA 
08 August, 2025                                                                              Chairperson 
17Sravana, 1947(S)                                                         Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 

1  
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertaking on ‘Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited (IRFC)’, 
which was presented to Parliament on 18 December, 2024. It contained six (06) 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect all the six 
(06) O bservations/Recommendations of the Committee and since the 
Observation/Recommendation Sl. No.  1 was introductory, the Ministry did not offer 
comments on it. The six (06) Observations/Recommendations  have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 4 & 6 
(Chapter II) 
 
 
(Total: 03) 
  
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
                        
Nil 
(Chapter III) 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration    
 
Sl. No. 3 
(Chapter IV) 
 
 
 
(Total: 01) 
 
  
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited   
                                                    
Sl. Nos. 2 & 5 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
(Total: 02) 
 

2  
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to furnish final Action Taken 
Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of 
the Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
RAISING OF FUNDS THROUGH ISSUANCE OF 54EC BONDS AND GREEN BONDS 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee, in their Sixth Report, had recommended the following with regard 
to raising cheaper funds: 
“The Committee note that raising funds through issuance of 54EC bonds is one of 
the cheapest sources of fund mobilization for IRFC. But due to limit imposed as per 
the provisions of Section 54EC of Income Tax Act, 1961, a maximum limit of 
investment of only ₹50.00 lakh is allowed by a single investor, and enhancement in 
this limit will facilitate IRFC to raise low cost borrowing from the market. It has further 
been submitted that raising of funds through green borrowing (bonds/loans) has 
matured in the global marketplace and these green funds are raised at competitive 
rate. Whereas, the domestic market is yet to experience any significant growth and 
development of green funds which in turn restricts IRFC’s options to raise domestic 
green borrowings. The Committee, therefore, desire that IRFC, alongwith the MoR, 
may take up with the Ministry of Finance and RBI the above issues of 54EC bonds 
and availability of domestic green funds, for exploring the possibility of enhancing 
the limit of investment by a single i nvestor in 54EC bonds beyond ₹50.00 lakh and 
for taking necessary/suitable steps to make available sufficient domestic green 
funds, which are relatively cheaper sources of fund mobilization for IRFC. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
"54EC Bonds: 
The current yearly investment limit of ₹50 Lakhs, introduced in FY 2015-16 onwards, 
may no longer reflect the realities of today’s inflated real estate market. Given the 
rising costs of properties and inflation and the fact that the limit was fixed 10 years 
back, it is proposed to raise the limi t to ₹1 crore or more, which will offer greater 
investment opportunities for genuine investors. This increase will also encourage 
compliance with tax laws, reducing revenue leakage and promoting transparency in 
real estate transactions. Ultimately, this would also increase the availability of low 
cost funding for infrastructure sector and improve viability of infrastructure project. 

3  
IRFC is taking up with Ministry of Railways (MoR)/ Ministry of Finance (MoF) for 
enhancement of current limit of ₹50 Lakhs.   
 
Green Bonds: 
Raising of funds through green borrowing (bonds/loans) has matured in the global 
marketplace and these green funds are raised at competitive rate. As regards the 
domestic market, although green framework has been put in place for sovereign 
green bonds, cor porate green bond market is yet to experience any significant 
growth and development due to lack of dedicated green funds. Further, in order to 
encourage issuance of Green Bonds, certain large institutional investors like 
Pension Funds/Insurance Companies/ Provident Funds should be mandated to 
invest upto to a certain percentage of their corpus in the green debt securities. Even 
if the initial mandated amount is small, it will go a long way in kick starting the 
issuance of these securities in the domestic debt market. 
 
IRFC is a dedicated borrowing arm of MoR and in line with the mission of the Indian 
Railways, to become Net Zero Carbon emission network by 2030 for which, IRFC 
has tapped international markets for green borrowing. These Green Bonds or Green 
Loans were use d for financing of rolling stock assets (i.e. Electric Locos and 
Passenger Coaches for electrified Rail) and electrification of Railway lines. IRFC 
has raised green funds of USD 2,100 million amounting to 25% of its total foreign 
currency borrowing portfol io of USD 8,508 million. Out of this, green loans have 
been raised to the tune of USD 1,100 million while green bonds issuance totals USD 
1,000 million. Company is examining the domestic green bond framework also and 
shall tap this market at opportune time.” 
 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the response of the Ministry that IRFC intends to 
take up the matter regarding the enhancement of the investment limit for 54EC 
bonds with the Ministry of Finance. However, since the final outcome is still awaited, 
the Committee treat this as an interim reply and desire to be apprised of the concrete 
action taken by the Ministry of Finance on this proposal. The Committee also urge 
IRFC and the Ministry of Railways to formally pursue the suggestion of mandating 
institutional inves tment in corporate green bonds to develop a robust domestic 
market for such instruments. 
 
POSSIBILITY OF IRFC LENDING TO MoR AT LESSER MARGIN 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
8. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended the following with regard to 
lending margins: 

4  
"The Committee are happy to note that IRFC has demonstrated steady financial 
growth, with consistent revenue generation and profitability. IRFC funds Indian 
Railways by way of a Finance leasing model for Rolling Stocks and Projects. The 
lease rentals are ca lculated by considering Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
(WACC) and margin. The Company is currently getting the margin of 0.40% (40 
basis points) and 0.35% (35 basis points) for Rolling Stocks and Project assets 
respectively from MoR on the funds disbursed during the year. When the Committee 
desired to know whether it is feasible for the Company to operate at lesser margin 
to reduce the cost burden on Indian Railways, IRFC stated that Debt to Equity ratio 
of the Company was 9.21 as on 31st March 2023 and the decrease in margin could 
lower profits, affecting the Company's net worth and putting stress on the debt -to 
equity ratio. It has also been stated that decreasing margin may also lead to reduced 
dividend payment to equity shareholders and infusion of fre sh equity may be 
required to maintain the debt-to-equity ratio at a prudent level. 
While understanding the Company’s inability and compulsion towards having the 
reduced dividend payment to equity shareholders and maintaining the Debt to 
Equity ratio at prudent level, the Committee would like IRFC to examine whether it 
is possible to re -consider these margins and explore means for reducing the 
financial burden on MoR, without vitiating the financial health and viability of IRFC 
itself.” 
 
9. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, has stated as follows: 
"IRFC has a market capitalisation of more than ₹200000 crore. Also the investor 
base has significantly increased to 55 lakh+. IRFC is charging a margin of 40 bps 
for Rolling Stock and 35 bps for projects, which is already low as compared to 
Industry standard for infra financing. Decrease in margin could  lower profits, 
affecting the investors’ sentiments and company's net worth and putting stress on 
the debt-to-equity ratio. This may also lead to reduced dividend payment to equity 
shareholders and infusion of fresh equity may be required to maintain the d ebt-to-
equity ratio at a prudent level as IRFC is looking to expand its lending portfolio in 
future. 
 
IRFC is also expanding its lending activities and broadening its portfolio. IRFC is 
exploring financing for projects that will help to decongest and expand the existing 
railway network. IRFC intends to use its position as the MoR's major finance partner 
to provide financial resources for joint ventures with State Governments and other 
public sector firms engaged in the development of railway infrastructure throughout 
India and to provide financial assistance for those activities which have a forward 
and backward linkages with railways. 
 
As IRFC's primary objective is to raise Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR) for MoR, 
IRFC continues to focus on supporting Indian Railways funding requirement while 
exploring business diversification opportunities. Accordingly, IRFC needs to 

5  
maintain Debt/Equity ratio at prudent level at all times. It is pertinent to mention here 
that IRFC’s Debt/Equity ratio is higher as compared to peer Govt. Non -Banking 
Financial Company (NBFC) and IRFC must keep a cushion for projects financing 
outside MoR. Considering this, it would not be feasible to reduce the margin for 
financing MoR”  
 
10. The Committee take note of the detailed justification provided by IRFC 
regarding its inability to reduce the lending margin for the Ministry of Railways. 
However, the Committee are not fully convinced by the assertion that it is entirely 
not feasible to re-examine the margins. As IRFC's business diversifies and its risk 
portfolio evolves, its cost of funds and operational efficiencies may improve. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that IRFC, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Railways, should periodically review these margins 
with an aim to pass on some benefit to its primary stakeholder, thereby reducing the 
cost burden on Indian Railways. 
 
FUTURE OF IRFC IN VIEW OF DECREASING DEMAND FROM M oR DUE TO 
INCREASED GBS 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
11. The Committee, in their Fifth Report, had recommended the following for exploring 
a wider mandate for IRFC: 
"The Committee note that yearly disbursement to MoR has been decreasing since 
2020-21 in which ₹1,04,369 crore was disbursed to MoR in 2020 -21, which has 
come down to ₹59,898.76 crore in 2021 -22 and ₹32,825.12 crore in 2022 -23. NIL 
allocations were set for both 2023-24 and 2024-25 from Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) as per Union Budget 2023 -24 and Interim Budget 2024 -25, respectively. It 
was further noted that due to increased Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) from 2021-
22 onwards, Capex of Indian Railways is majorly funded through Budgetary 
Support. For FY 2023-24, GBS of Indian Railways is highest ever at ₹2,40,000 crore 
and NIL target for EBR through IRFC and as a result, there will be no incremental 
increase in the lease rentals/lease income for IRFC. The C ommittee strongly feel 
that if MoR totally stops asking for funds from IRFC in future like in 2023 -24 due to 
strong GBS, sustainability/existence of IRFC as sole EBR financier of MoR will be 
in question. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Governm ent should 
evolve a  mechanism through which IRFC can finance projects of other 
Ministries/Organisations, apart from the existing MoR and its enterprises, so that 
other Ministries/Organisations can leverage IRFC’s good standing in the world 

6  
financial market as an Indian premier NBFC owing to its quasi-sovereign status, risk 
free business model, strong credit ratings and diversified sources of borrowing (both 
India and overseas).”  
 
12. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, has stated as follows: 
“IRFC is taking several steps to strengthen its business processes, so as to develop 
readiness for its planned business diversification and some of the notable initiatives 
include: 
i. Adoption of Credit Policy : IRFC has got its Board approved Credit Policy 
in place. The policy provides a framework for extending credit to entities/projects 
with forward and backward linkages with Indian Railways, in line with the 
Memorandum of Association (MoA) of IRFC. Having a credit policy in place will help 
IRFC manage risk and ensure that the credit extended is in line with the Company's 
risk appetite and credit standards. This will help IRFC maintain a healthy loan 
portfolio and minimize the business risk. 
 
ii. Appointment of Appraisal Agency/ Techno -Economic Viability (TEV) 
Study: IRFC has empanelled an agency to undertake TEV, commercial, financial, 
and environment feasibility of the proposed financing proposals of IRFC, on a case-
to-case basis, in accordance with IRFC's Credit Policy. 
 
iii. In-House Credit Committee:  Credit Committee has been constituted, in 
accordance with IRFC’s Credit Policy for recommendation & appraisal of financing 
proposals. It comprises of senior officials from Business Development, Finance, and 
Law departments. The said Committee is responsib le for appraisal and all related 
activities upto the sanction stage. 
 
iv. Promotion of IRFC as a Potential Lender : With the aim to promote IRFC 
as a potential and preferred lender, IRFC has held preliminary discussions with & 
also sent written communications to various entities viz. Dedicated Freight Corridor 
Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL), Rail Vikas Nigam Li mited (RVNL) (and its 
Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs)), Container Corporation of India Limited 
(CONCOR), National High Speed Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), Indian 
Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), Rail India Technical and 
Economic Service (RITES), National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), Haryana 
Rail Infrastructure Development Corporation (HRIDC), Indian Railway Construction 
International Limited (IRCON), National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
Limited (NCRTC), Steel Authority of  India Limited (SAIL), Bhartiya Rail Bijlee 
Company Limited (BRBCL), Chhattisgarh East Railway Limited (CERL), RailTel 
Corporation of India Limited (RailTel), etc.  The intent is to increase visibility of IRFC 
as a potential lender in the railway ecosystem  and create opportunities to finance 
projects in Railway Eco-system and have a diversified portfolio.  
IRFC has not received any budgetary allocation since 2023 -24 due to significant 
budgetary support for the Railways. Being a listed entity, it needs to keep its 
business model sustainable and profitable. As a result, IRFC must diversify its 

7  
operations within its mandate to stay competitive.  Accordingly,  IRFC is exploring 
the option in following sectors: 
i. Leasing of Rolling stock other than MoR 
ii. Funding of Railway Infrastructure being developed through State Joint 
Ventures (JVs) 
iii. Upcoming Dedicated Freight lines 
iv. Semi/High Speed Railway Corridors & High-speed train 
v. Multi-Modal Logistics Parks 
vi. Non-conventional sources of energy including Renewable Energy for railway 
network 
Some of the initial lending initiatives taken by IRFC outside MoR  to enhance and 
diversify its business are given below: 
i. Sanction of 20 Bogie Open Bottom Rapid (BOBR) rakes under General -
Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS) of MoR to NTPC for an amount 
up to ₹700 crores under Finance Lease. 
ii. In-principle approval for financing Haryana Orbital Rail Corridor (HORC), a 
railway line from Palwal to Sonipat, being promoted by Haryana Rail 
Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (HRIDC) (a JV of Government 
of Haryana and MoR). 
iii. IRFC has also entered into Memorandum of Understandings  (MoUs) with 
RITES, NTPC, Railway Energy Management Company (REMC) and India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) for strategic collaboration. 
iv. Exploring business opportunities to expand the lending portfolio and also in 
discussion with Infrastructure Finance Companies in the Government Sector for 
co-lending opportunities. 
Apart from the above, the Cabinet Secretary in the meeting of the Apex Committee 
held on 24.01.2025 to consider the proposal of grant of Navratna status to IRFC 
noted that as railway infrastructure financing is now primarily supported by the 
Government of India’s Budget, and market borrowings for railway capital 
expenditure expected to decline. To ensure business growth, IRFC should explore 
financing beyond Indian Railways and its Joint Ventures (JVs). The Cabinet 
Secretary emphasized the significant funding needs of Metro Rail projects in India, 
which currently lack domestic long-term financiers. Since these projects are backed 
by State Governments with very minimal credit risk, IRFC should actively consider 
entering the Metro Rail financing sector in India.”  
 
13. The Committee are pleased to note the proactive steps taken by IRFC to 
diversify its business portfolio, including the adoption of a formal Credit Policy and 
outreach to various entities within the railway ecosystem. The Committee also 
appreciate the strategic direction provided by the Cabinet Secretary, directing IRFC 
to explore financing for Metro Rail projects. This aligns perfectly with the 

8  
Committee's recommendation and provides a clear and viable path for IRFC's long-
term sustainability and growth. 
 
DELAY IN APPOINTMENT OF REGULAR CMD AND INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
14. The Committee, in their Fifth Report, recommended the following urging the 
Government to fill vacancies on the Board: 
“The Committee note that there is no regular CMD of the Company since 
15.10.2022. Moreover, out of the sanctioned four posts of non -official Independent 
Directors, two posts are lying vacant as on 18.09.2024. Though the Committee 
understand that the Company  has no role to play in the appointment of CMD and 
the power to appoint functional/official part -time Directors/non -official part -time 
Directors (Independent Directors) vest with the Government of India. The 
Committee feel that these vacancies not only ham per the functioning of the 
Company, but also violate the principle of Corporate Governance. Therefore, the 
Committee urge upon the Government of India through MoR, being the 
administrative Ministry, to fill up the vacant posts of two Independent Directors and 
appoint a regular CMD without any further delay. Also, if the Company is discharging 
their functions with less number of Independent Directors, they may think of 
reducing the sanctioned posts of Directors in the organization.” 
 
15. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“Composition of Board of IRFC and actual strength as on 31.03.2025 is as under:  
 
Directors Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
Functional Director 2 2 
Government (Official) Directors 2 2 
Non-official Independent Directors 4 0 
 
Shri Manoj Kumar Dubey, Ex -Director (Finance), CONCOR has since been 
appointed to the post of CMD, IRFC on regular basis. Shri Dubey assumed the 
charge of the post of CMD/IRFC on 10.10.24 (AN) and his five -year tenure is till 
10.10.29.  
The appointment of four Non -Official Independent Directors is currently under 
consideration of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and is set to convene a 
meeting on the matter.” 
 

9  
16. The Committee appreciate the appointment of a regular Chairman & Managing 
Director, which addresses a part of the original recommendation. However, the 
Committee express their grave concern over the situation the posts of four non -
official Independent Directors are still lying vacant as on 31.03.2025. This complete 
absence of Independent Directors is a serious breach of corporate governance 
norms. The Committee, therefore, treat the reply as interim and strongly reiterate 
their recommendation that the Ministry of Railways must pursue the matter with the 
Department of Public Enterprises ( DPE) and other concerned authorities with 
utmost urgency to ensure the appointment of all Independent Directors without any 
further delay. 
 
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER AND CAPACITY ENHANCEMENT  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
17. The Committee, in their Fifth Report, recommended the following with regard to 
strengthening the workforce: 
“The Committee note that IRFC plans to diversify its financial portfolio and make its 
business model more sustainable and also provide a boost to the Indian Railway 
ecosystem. To achieve these, IRFC intends to undertake the following activities for 
future sustainability: (i) to develop a roadmap for potential funding opportunities as 
a business development strategy which would entail details of the potential partners 
and projects having linkage with Railways; and (ii) to build a strong and capable 
workforce within the organization to ensure that it has the talent and expertise 
needed to achieve its long -term goals, and to achieve that IRFC plans to enhance 
the capacity and skill sets of its Business Development Department. The Committee 
also learnt that out of the total sanctioned posts of 47 executives, only 28 are in 
place. Therefore, there is a shortfall of 19 in executive category. When the 
Committee desired to know whether the Company is able to meet its mandate fully 
with the present workforce, IRFC subm itted that being a listed NBFC and the 
business requirements are evolving, regulatory and statutory compliance and 
procedure have increased manifolds, and there is a need to strengthen the 
manpower to meet the requirements. Accordingly, the Company is in the process to 
increase the present workforce mainly to meet the need of regulatory compliances. 
The Committee feel that not only for regulatory compliances, the Company need to 
increase its manpower strength in order to meet the future business development  
strategy planned by the Company for diversifying its financial portfolio and expand 
its avenues in the market and therefore, recommend that the Company should 
suitably increase its manpower strength having the required expertise and 
competency, in line wi th its future vision and to maintain growth in its business 
portfolio.  

10  
The Committee are further informed that there is a need to build a strong and 
capable work -force within the organization to ensure that it has the talent and 
expertise needed to achieve its long -term goals. Thereafter, it needs to focus on 
building a strong in-house team having the capabilities in project appraisal to meet 
the organization’s long-term needs. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in this direction.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“IRFC Workforce Development and Expansion Initiatives 
IRFC is actively building a robust and capable workforce to strengthen internal 
controls, meet statutory requirements of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), and 
prepare for future business growth. Key initiatives are outlined below: 
 
i. Recruitment Over the Past Five Years 
IRFC has recruited employees across various levels to enhance operational 
efficiency and strengthen its organizational structure. Details of recruitment in the 
past five years are as follows: 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
E3:02 
E5:02 
E6:01 
E7:01 
E1:2 
E2:1 
E4:2 
E8:1 
NE5:3 
E1:4 
NE5:3 
E1:4 E4:1 
E9:1 
Total 6 9 7 4 2 
 
ii. Personnel Recruitment for RBI Compliance 
To comply with RBI requirements, IRFC has recruited/is in the process of recruiting 
the following personnel on a fixed-tenure basis: 
a. Chief Compliance Officer 
b. Chief Risk Officer 
c. Head of Internal Audit (recruitment in progress) 
d. Chief Information Security Officer (recruitment in progress) 
 
iii. Creation of New Board-Level Positions 
To diversify its financing portfolio and ensure a sustainable business model, IRFC 
Board of Directors has approved the creation of two new board -level positions:  
a. Director (Techno-Commercial) 

11  
 
b. Director (Business Development) 
 
Matter is being taken up with MoR and Department of Public Enterprise/ other nodal 
agencies for creation of these posts.  
 
iv. Engagement of Experts/Consultants 
IRFC has hired consultants in key areas such as HR, Administration, and Legal. 
Additionally, plans are underway to engage consultants in IT and other critical 
domains to support organizational growth. 
 
v. Recruitment on Deputation 
IRFC has received approval from the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to 
recruit Nine (09) personnel on deputation. This initiative allows IRFC to onboard 
experienced professionals with specialized skill sets from Ministries/ CPSEs for 
short durations. Regular employees will also benefit from the knowledge transfer 
and expertise of deputationists. 
 
vi. Strategic Expansion of Workforce 
IRFC is planning to expand its business operations within the Ministry of Railways 
framework, focusing on projects with backward and forward linkages to the railways 
ecosystem. To align with its business growth plan, IRFC intends to increase its 
workforce from the current strength of 43 employees to 110 employees over the next 
two years.” 
 
19. The Committee express their satisfaction with the detailed and forward -
looking action plan presented by IRFC to enhance its manpower. The specific 
commitment to more than double the workforce to 110 employees over the next two 
years, along with the creation of new Director -level posts for Techno -Commercial 
and Business Development, directly addresses the Committee’s recommendation. 
This strategic approach to capacity building is essential for IRFC t o successfully 
execute its diversification plans, and the Committee commend IRFC for these 
proactive steps. 
 
 
  

12  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Overview 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Railway Finance Corporation (IRFC) is a  
Schedule-'A' Miniratna Central Public Sector Undertaking under the administrative  
control of the Ministry of Railways (MoR). The Company was incorporated as Indian  
Railway Finance Corporation Limited (IRFC) on December 12, 1986, as a public  
limited Company under the Companies Act, 1956, pursuant to a certificate of  
incorporation issued by the Registrar of Companies (RoC). Subsequently, IRFC was  
registered with RBI under Section 45 -IA of the RBI Act to carry on the business of a  
non-banking financial institu tion without accepting public deposits on 16 February,  
1998. IRFC was re -classified as an NBFC -ND-IFC (NBFC Non -Deposit Taking  
Infrastructure Finance Company) by RBI on 22 November, 2010. Currently  
Government of India hold 86.36% stake in the Company, the rest being held by  
Institutional Investors and public. 
The Committee were further informed that the primary objective of IRFC is to  
meet the predominant portion of ‘Extra Budgetary Resources’ (EBR) requirement of the 
Indian Railways through market borrowings at the most competitive rates and terms. The 
Company’s principal business, therefore, is to borrow funds from the financial marke ts to 
finance the acquisition/creation of assets which are then leased out to the Indian Railways. 
The lease agreements for rolling stock assets are being executed every year and advance 
lease rentals are paid by MoR on half yearly basis. The lease is for a period of 30 years. 
In that 30 years, 15 years is the primary lease period. During primary lease period, IRFC 
recovers all their investments. In balance15 years of secondary lease period, IRFC gets a 
very nominal rent. IRFC’s cumulative funding to Indian Railway sector has crossed ₹5.50 
lakh crore mark by the end of the financial year 22 -23. Indian Railways has embarked on 
massive investment outlay for modernization, up -gradation and growth of Indian Railway 
system. Correspondingly, the funding by IRFC has grown exponentially which is evident 

13  
from the fact that the cumulative funding has been of the order of ₹3.20 lakh crore during 
the last 5 years. 
The Committee further note that over the years, IRFC has played a pivotal role in 
facilitating the growth of one of the largest rail networks in the world and is planning to 
diversify its financing portfolio to make the business model of the Company more 
sustainable and also provide a boost to the Indian Railways ecosystem. In the succeeding 
paras, the Committee have put forth their Observations/ Recommendations regarding the 
subject after having heard the views of IRFC and MoR. The Committee hope that the 
Company would make earnest efforts for implementation of the Observations/  
Recommendations in this Report to augment their overall performance.  
Reply of the Government 
Factual Position. 
[Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
 
 
Future of IRFC in view of decreasing demand from MoR due to increased GBS  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that yearly disbursement to MoR has been decreasing since 
2020-21 in which ₹1,04,369 crores was disbursed to MoR in 2020 -21, which has come 
down to ₹59,898.76 crore in 2021-22 and 32,825.12 crore in 2022-23. NIL allocations were 
set for both 2023-24 and 2024 -25 from Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) as per Union 
Budget 2023-24 and Interim Budget 2024-25 respectively. It was further noted that due to 
Increased Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) from 2021 -22 onwards, Capex of Indian 
Railways is ma jorly funded through Budgetary Support. For FY 2023 -24, GBS of Indian 
Railways is highest ever at ₹2,40,000 crore and NIL target for EBR through IRFC and as 
a result, there will be no incremental increase in the lease rentals/lease income for IRFC. 
The Committee strongly feel that if MoR totally stops asking for funds from IRFC in future 
like in 2023-24 due to strong GBS, sustainability/existence of IRFC as sole EBR financier 
of MoR will be in question. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Governmen t 
should evolve a mechanism through which IRFC can finance projects of other 

14  
Ministries/Organisations, apart from the existing MoR and its enterprises, so that other 
Ministries/Organisations can leverage IRFC's good standing in the world financial market 
as an Indian premier NBFC owing to its quasi -sovereign status, risk free business model, 
strong credit ratings and diversified sources of borrowing (both India and overseas). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IRFC is taking several steps to strengthen its business processes, so as to develop 
readiness for its planned business diversification and some of the notable initiatives 
include: 
1. Adoption of Credit Policy: IRFC has got its Board approved Credit Policy in place. 
The policy provides a framework for extending credit to entities/projects with forward and 
backward linkages with Indian Railways, in line with the Memorandum of Association (MoA) 
of IRFC. Having a credit policy in place will help IRFC manage risk and ensure that the 
credit extended is in line with the company's risk appetite and credit standards. This will 
help IRFC maintain a healthy loan portfolio and minimize the business risk. 
 
2. Appointment of Appraisal Agency/ Techno -Economic Viability (TEV) Study : 
IRFC has empanelled an agency to undertake TEV, commercial, financial, and 
environment feasibility of the proposed financing proposals of IRFC, on a case -to-case 
basis, in accordance with IRFC's Credit Policy. 
3. In-House Credit Committee:  Credit Committee has been constituted, in 
accordance with IRFC’s Credit Policy for recommendation & appraisal of financing 
proposals. It comprises of senior officials from Business Development, Finance, and Law 
departments. The said Committee is responsible for appraisal and all related activities upto 
the sanction stage. 
4. Promotion of IRFC as a Potential Lender : With the aim to promote IRFC as a 
potential and preferred lender, IRFC has held preliminary discussions with & also sent 
written communications to various entities viz. Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of 
India Limited (DFCCIL), Rail Vikas Nigam Li mited (RVNL) (and its Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs)), Container Corporation of India Limited (CONCOR), National High Speed 

15  
Rail Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
(IRCTC), Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES), National Thermal Power 
Corporation (NTPC), Haryana Rail Infrastructure Development Corporation (HRIDC), 
Indian Ra ilway Construction International Limited (IRCON), National Capital Region 
Transport Corporation Limited (NCRTC), Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL), Bhartiya 
Rail Bijlee Company Limited (BRBCL), Chhattisgarh East Railway Limited (CERL), RailTel 
Corporation of India Limited (RailTel), etc.  The intent is to increase visibility of IRFC as a 
potential lender in the railway ecosystem and create opportunities to finance projects in 
Railway Eco-system and have a diversified portfolio.  
IRFC has not received any budgetary allocation since 2023 -24 due to significant 
budgetary support for the Railways. Being a listed entity, it needs to keep its business 
model sustainable and profitable. As a result, IRFC must diversify its operations withi n its 
mandate to stay competitive.  Accordingly, IRFC is exploring the option in following sectors: 
i. Leasing of Rolling stock other than MoR 
ii. Funding of Railway Infrastructure being developed through State Joint 
Ventures (JVs) 
iii. Upcoming Dedicated Freight lines 
iv. Semi/High Speed Railway Corridors & High-speed train 
v. Multi-Modal Logistics Parks 
            vi. Non-conventional sources of energy including Renewable Energy for 
railway   network 
 
Some of the initial lending initiatives taken by IRFC outside MoR to enhance and diversify 
its business are given below: 
i. Sanction of 20 Bogie Open Bottom Rapid (BOBR) rakes under General -Purpose 
Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS) of MoR to NTPC for an amount up to ₹700 crores 
under Finance Lease. 
ii. In-principal approval for financing Haryana Orbital Rail Corridor (HORC), a railway 
line from Palwal to Sonipat, being promoted by Haryana Rail Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited (HRIDC) (a JV of Government of Haryana and MoR). 
iii. IRFC has also entered into Memorandum of Understandings ( MoUs) with RITES, 
NTPC, Railway Energy Management Company (REMC) and India Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited (IIFCL) for strategic collaboration. 

16  
iv. Exploring business opportunities to expand the lending portfolio and also in 
discussion with Infrastructure Finance Companies in the Government Sector for co-lending 
opportunities. 
Apart from the above, the Cabinet Secretary in the meeting of the Apex Committee 
held on 24.01.2025 to consider the proposal of grant of Navratna status to IRFC noted that 
as railway infrastructure financing is now primarily supported by the Government of India’s 
Budget, and market borrowings for railway capital expenditure expected to decline. To 
ensure business growth, IRFC should explore financing beyond Indian Railways and its 
Joint Ventures (JVs). The Cabinet Secretary emphasized the significant fundin g needs of 
Metro Rail projects in India, which currently lack domestic long-term financiers. Since these 
projects are backed by State Governments with very minimal credit risk, IRFC should 
actively consider entering the Metro Rail financing sector in India. 
[Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Shortage of Manpower and Capacity Enhancement 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that IRFC plans to diversify its financial portfolio and make its 
business model more sustainable and also provide a boost to the Indian Railway 
ecosystem. To achieve these, IRFC intends to undertake the following activities for future 
sustainability: (i) to develop a roadmap for potential funding opportunities as a business 
development strategy which would entail details of the potential partners and projects 
having linkage with Railways; and (ii) to build a strong and capable workforce w ithin the 
organization to ensure that it has the talent and expertise needed to achieve its long -term 
goals, and to achieve that IRFC plans to enhance the capacity and skill sets of its Business 
Development Department. The Committee also learnt that out of the total sanctioned posts 

17  
of 47 executives, only 28 are in place. Therefore, there is a shortfall of 19 in executive 
category. When the Committee desired to know whether the Company is able to meet its 
mandate fully with the present workforce, IRFC submitted that being a listed NBFC and the 
business requirements are evolving, regulatory and statutory compliance and procedure 
have increased manifolds, and there is a need to strengthen the manpower to meet the 
requirements. Accordingly, the Company is in the process to increase the pr esent 
workforce mainly to meet the need of regulatory compliances. The Committee feel that not 
only for regulatory compliances, the Company need to increase its manpower strength in 
order to meet the future business development strategy planned by the Comp any for 
diversifying its financial portfolio and expand its avenues in the market and therefore, 
recommend that the Company should suitably increase its manpower strength having the 
required expertise and competency, in line with its future vision and to m aintain growth in 
its business portfolio.  
The Committee are further informed that there is a need to build a strong and capable 
work-force within the organization to ensure that it has the talent and expertise needed to 
achieve its long-term goals. Thereafter, it needs to focus on building a strong in-house team 
having the capabilities in project appraisal to meet the organization's long-term needs. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IRFC Workforce Development and Expansion Initiatives 
IRFC is actively building a robust and capable workforce to strengthen internal 
controls, meet statutory requirements of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), and prepare for 
future business growth. Key initiatives are outlined below: 
i.   Recruitment Over the Past Five Years 
IRFC has recruited employees across various levels to enhance operational 
efficiency and strengthen its organizational structure. Details of recruitment in the past five 
years are as follows: 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
E3:02 E1:2 E1:4 E1:4 E4:1 

18  
E5:02 
E6:01 
E7:01 
E2:1 
E4:2 
E8:1 
NE5:3 
NE5:3 E9:1 
Total 6 9 7 4 2 
 
ii. Personnel Recruitment for RBI Compliance 
To comply with RBI requirements, IRFC has recruited/is in the process of recruiting the 
following personnel on a fixed-tenure basis: 
a. Chief Compliance Officer 
b. Chief Risk Officer 
c. Head of Internal Audit (recruitment in progress) 
d. Chief Information Security Officer (recruitment in progress) 
iii. Creation of New Board-Level Positions 
To diversify its financing portfolio and ensure a sustainable business model, IRFC Board 
of Directors has approved the creation of two new board -level positions:  
a. Director (Techno-Commercial) 
b. Director (Business Development) 
Matter is being taken up with MoR and Department of Public Enterprise/ other nodal 
agencies for creation of these posts.  
iv. Engagement of Experts/Consultants 
IRFC has hired consultants in key areas such as HR, Administration, and Legal. 
Additionally, plans are underway to engage consultants in IT and other critical domains to 
support organizational growth. 
v. Recruitment on Deputation 
IRFC has received approval from the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to recruit 
Nine (09) personnel on deputation. This initiative allows IRFC to onboard experienced 
professionals with specialized skill sets from Ministries/ CPSEs for short durations. Regular 
employees will also benefit from the knowledge transfer and expertise of deputationists. 
vi. Strategic Expansion of Workforce 
IRFC is planning to expand its business operations within the Ministry of Railways 

19  
framework, focusing on projects with backward and forward linkages to the railways 
ecosystem. To align with its business growth plan, IRFC intends to increase its workforce 
from the current strength of 43 employees to 110 employees over the next two years. 
[Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

20  
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

21  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Possibility of IRFC Lending to MoR at lesser margin 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that IRFC has demonstrated steady financial 
growth, with consistent revenue generation and profitability. IRFC funds Indian Railways 
by way of a Finance leasing model for Rolling Stocks and Projects. The lease rentals are 
calculated by considering Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) and margin. The 
Company is currently getting the margin of 0.40% (40 basis points) and 0.35% (35 basis 
points) for Rolling Stocks and Project assets respectively from MoR on the funds disbursed 
during the year. When the Committee desired to know whether it is feasible for the 
Company to operate at lesser margin to reduce the cost burden on Indian Railways, IRFC 
stated that Debt-to-Equity ratio of the Company was 9.21 as on 31st March 2023 and t he 
decrease in margin could lower profits, affecting the Company's net worth and putting 
stress on the debt-to-equity ratio. It has also been stated that decreasing margin may also 
lead to reduced dividend payment to equity shareholders and infusion of fresh equity may 
be required to maintain the debt-to-equity ratio at a prudent level. 
 While understanding the Company's inability and compulsion towards  having the 
reduced dividend payment to equity shareholders and maintaining the Debt to Equity ratio 
at prudent level, the Committee would like IRFC to examine whether it is possible to re -
consider these margins and explore means for reducing the financial burden on MoR, 
without vitiating the financial health and viability of IRFC itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IRFC has a market capitalisation of more than ₹200000 crores. Also the investor 
base has significantly increased to 55 lakh+. IRFC is charging a margin of 40 bps for Rolling 
Stock and 35 bps for projects, which is already low as compared to Industry standard for 

22  
infra financing. Decrease in margin could lower profits, affecting the investors sentiments 
and company's net worth and putting stress on the debt-to-equity ratio. This may also lead 
to reduced dividend payment to equity shareholders and infusion of fresh equity may be 
required to maintain the debt-to-equity ratio at a prudent level as IRFC is looking to expand 
its lending portfolio in future. 
 IRFC is also expanding its lending activities and broadening its portfolio. IRFC is 
exploring financing for projects that will help to decongest and expand the existing railway 
network. IRFC intends to use its position as the MoR's major finance partner t o provide 
financial resources for joint ventures with State Governments and other public sector firms 
engaged in the development of railway infrastructure throughout India and to provide 
financial assistance for those activities which have a forward and ba ckward linkages with 
railways. 
As IRFC's primary objective is to raise Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR) for MoR, 
IRFC continues to focus on supporting Indian Railways funding requirement while 
exploring business diversification opportunities. Accordingly, IRFC needs to maintain 
Debt/Equity ratio at prudent level at all times. It is pertinent to mention here that IRFC’s 
Debt/Equity ratio is higher as compared to peer Govt. Non -Banking Financial Company  
(NBFC) and IRFC must keep a cushion for projects financing outside MoR. Considering 
this, it would not be feasible to reduce the margin for financing MoR. 
           [Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 

23 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Raising of funds through issuance of 54EC Bonds and Green Bonds 
           Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee note that raising funds through issuance of 54EC bonds is one of 
the cheapest sources of fund mobilization for IRFC. But due to limit imposed as per the 
provisions of Section 54EC of Income Tax Act, 1961, a maximum limit of Investment of 
only ₹50.00 lakh is allowed by a single investor, and enhancement in this limit will facilitate 
IRFC to raise low cost borrowing from the market. It has further been submitted that 
raising of funds through green borrowing (bonds/loans) has matured in the global market 
place and these green funds are raised at competitive rate. Whereas, the domestic 
market is yet to experience any significant growth and development of green funds which 
in turn restricts IRFC's options to raise domestic green borrowings. The Comm ittee, 
therefore, desire that IRFC, alongwith the Ministry of Railways (MoR), may take up with 
the Ministry of Finance and RBI the above issues of 54EC bonds and availability of 
domestic green funds, for exploring the possibility of enhancing the limit of investment by 
a single investor in 54EC bonds beyond ₹50.00 lakh and for taking necessary/suitable 
steps to make available sufficient domestic green funds, which are relatively cheaper 
sources of fund mobilization for IRFC. The Committee would like to be a pprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
54EC Bonds: 
The current yearly investment limit of ₹50 Lakhs, introduced in FY 2015 -16 
onwards, may no longer reflect the realities of today’s inflated real estate market. Given 
the rising costs of properties and inflation and the fact that the limit was fixed 10 years 
back, it is proposed to raise the limi t to ₹1 crore or more, which will offer greater 
investment opportunities for genuine investors. This increase will also encourage 
compliance with tax laws, reducing revenue leakage and promoting transparency in real 
estate transactions. Ultimately, this would also increase the availability of low cost funding 

24 
 
for infrastructure sector and improve viability of infrastructure project. IRFC is taking up 
with Ministry of Railways (MoR)/ Ministry of Finance (MoF) for enhancement of current 
limit of ₹50 Lakhs. 
   
Green Bonds: 
Raising of funds through green borrowing (bonds/loans) has matured in the global 
marketplace and these green funds are raised at competitive rate. As regards the 
domestic market, although green framework has been put in place for sovereign green 
bonds, cor porate green bond market is yet to experience any significant growth and 
development due to lack of dedicated green funds. Further, in order to encourage 
issuance of Green Bonds, certain large institutional investors like Pension 
Funds/Insurance Companies/Provident Funds should be mandated to invest upto to a 
certain percentage of their corpus in the green debt securities. Even if the initial mandated 
amount is small, it will go a long way in kick starting the issuance of these securities in 
the domestic debt market. 
 
IRFC is a dedicated borrowing arm of MoR and in line with the mission of the 
Indian Railways, to become Net Zero Carbon emission network by 2030 for which, IRFC 
has tapped international markets for green borrowing. These Green Bonds or Green 
Loans were used for financing of rolling stock assets (i.e. Electric Locos and Passenger 
Coaches for electrified Rail) and electrification of Railway lines. IRFC has raised green 
funds of USD 2,100 million amounting to 25% of its total foreign currency borrowing 
portfolio of USD 8,508 million. Out of this, green loans have been raised to the tune of 
USD 1,100 million while green bonds issuance totals USD 1,000 million. Company is 
examining the domestic green bond framework also and shall tap this market at 
opportune time. 
                       [Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

25 
 
Delay in Appointment of Regular CMD and Two Independent Directors 
Recommendation (SI No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that there is no regular CMD of the Company since 
15.10.2022. Moreover, out of the sanctioned four posts of non -official independent 
Directors, two posts are lying vacant as on 18.09.2024. Though the Committee 
understand that the Company  has no role to play in the appointment of CMD and the 
power to appoint functional/official part -time Directors/non -official part -time Directors 
(Independent Directors) vest with the Government of India. The Committee feel that these 
vacancies not only hamper the functioning of the Company, but also violate the principle 
of Corporate Governance. Therefore, the Committee urge upon the Government of India 
through MoR, being the administrative Ministry, to fill up the vacant posts of two 
Independent Directors and appoint a regular CMD without any further delay. Also, if the 
Company is discharging their functions with less number of Independent Directors, they 
may think of reducing the sanctioned posts of Directors in the organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Composition of Board of IRFC and actual strength as on 31.03.2025 is as under:  
Directors Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
Functional Director 2 2 
Government 
(Official) Directors 
2 2 
Non-official 
Independent Directors 
4 0 
 
Shri Manoj Kumar Dubey, Ex -Director (Finance), CONCOR has since been 
appointed to the post of CMD, IRFC on regular basis. Shri Dubey assumed the charge of 
the post of CMD/IRFC on 10.10.24 (AN) and his five -year tenure is till 10.10.29. The 

26 
 
appointment of four Non -Official Independent Directors is currently under consideration 
of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and is set to convene a meeting on the matter. 
                       [Ministry of Railways]   
(No. 2024-BC-COPU-XVIII/5th Report dated 20.05.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; BAIJAYANT PANDA 
08 August, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Sravana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
------------ 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, 08 August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in Room 
No.’147’, Samvidhan Sadan (Chairperson’s Office, CoPU). 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda         -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
7. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
8. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
9. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
11. Shri John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
  13. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
14. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

28 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members about the draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Indian 
Railway Finance Corporation Limited (IRFC)’ and Memorandum No. 2 reg. selection of 
additional subjects for examination by the Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26). 
The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Report with out any 
changes/modifications. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report on the basis 
of factual verification as suggested by the concerned CPSU and Ministry/Department and 
present the Report during the ongoing session of Parliament.  
 
4. The Committee then considered the Memorandum No. 2 and decided to select the 
following two additional subjects for examination during the current term of the 
Committee: 
(i)  Inventory Management in select CPSUs (for Horizontal examination); and 
(ii)  C&AG Report No. 10 of 2025 Performance Audit (Commercial) on Inventory 
Management in Steel Authority of India Limited (Audit-based examination).   
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
 
  

29 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (18TH LOK SABHA) ON INDIAN RAILWAY 
FINANCE CORPORATION LIMITED (IRFC) 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  06 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
SI. Nos Sl. Nos. 1, 4 & 6 
Percentage of total: 
  
03 
50.00% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
NIL 
Percentage of total: 
  
00 
00.00% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
Sl. No. 3 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
01 
16.67% 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are 
still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 2 & 5 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
02 
33.33 
 