  
7 
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE TOWARDS CONSTRUCTION OF 
COPPER ORE TAILINGS BENEFICIATION PLANT RELATING TO 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL)  
[BASED ON PARA NO. 6.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 14 OF 2021] 
 
 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


ii  
SEVENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE TOWARDS CONSTRUCTION OF 
COPPER ORE TAILINGS BENEFICIATION PLANT RELATING TO 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL)  
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 6.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 14 OF 2021] 
 
HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Audit Para No. 
6.1 of   C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 relating to HCL) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2024  
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 


iii  
CPU No. 1060 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (……. Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 
 

iv  
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER I REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
18 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government Replies 
31 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies  
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
32 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies 
35 
 APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 13.12.2024 
 
39 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the                             
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 22nd Report of 
Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) [Report Based 
on Audit Para 6.1 Of C&AG Report       No.14 of 2021 relating to 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL)] 
41 
 
 
 
 

v  
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
Shri Baijayant Panda - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
19. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 

vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report on ‘Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty 
Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘HCL [based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No.14 
of 2021]’. 
 
2. The Twenty Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08 February, 2024. The 
Action Taken Replies to all the 21 Recommendations contained in the Report were received 
from the HCL on 30 October, 2024.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 13th 
December, 2024. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix- I  
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee (17th Lok Sabha) 
is given in Appendix -II.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
13 December, 2024  
22 Agrahayana,1946(S) 
BAIJAYANT PANDA, 
   Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 

 
 
 
1 
 
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sec ond Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertaking on ‘ Unfruitful expenditure towards construction of 
Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation Plant' relating to Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL), 
based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No.14 of 2021 ; which was pr esented to 
Lok Sabha on 08.02.2024. It contained 21 observations/recommendations. 
2.  Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect the 19 
observations/recommendations of the Committee and since the recommendation serial 
number 1 and 2 were introductory, the Ministry did not offer comments on those. 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
Sl.Nos. 1,2,3,4,6,7,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 & 20 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 15) 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Nil… 
 
 
(Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration.    
Sl.Nos. 5, 8 & 9 
 
 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total:03) 
 
  (iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies and final replies are still 
awaited.                                                      
Sl.Nos. 18, 19 & 21  
(Chapter V) 
(Total:03) 
 
 
3. The Committee desires the Ministry of Mines to furnish final Action Taken 
Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I 
of the Report. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2 
 
 
WASTE TO WEALTH PROJECT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 and 4) 
5. The Committee in their Twenty Second Report, had recommended the following 
with regard to Waste to Wealth Project : 
 "The Committee note that the Waste to Wealth Project of HCL 
encompasses the  Company's efforts to effectively manage and recover 
value from its waste streams. But  the Committee find that in their Annual 
Reports, HCL have stated that they recycle less  than 5% of their 
internally generated waste. During  discussions with the Committee,  
representatives of HCL emphasized the prevalence of copper ore tailings 
in their  operations. The HCL's plan to install a plant to recover metals 
and minerals from copper  ore tailings, was a step towards utilizing COT 
and HCL should make efforts to  recycle/process the remaining with due 
diligence for extracting of valuable materials."  
 
6.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“In an effort towards waste utilization i.e. use of Copper Ore Tailings 
(COT), HCL has adopted Paste fill technology to recycle major part of the 
Copper Ore Tailings (COT) produced at MCP unit to fill the voids created 
in the underground mines. This will ensure stability of underground 
mining operations as well as increase the production/extraction of copper 
ore thus reducing the impact to the environment and ensuring 
sustainable operation. The Paste fill plant has been set up and will be 
commissioned shortly. 
HCL has entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of t he 
equipment installed in the COT plant. M/s MECON has submitted their 
report and they have inter -alia stated that “the major equipment has also 
got deteriorated and most of the process equipment installed in the said 
COT plant like spiral concentrator, Low intensity magnetic separator, etc., 
are not in a condition to work to meet the process requirement” and that 
“the existing COT plant as a whole can’t be useful to produce desired 
products by modifying or replacing the individual equipment as 
mentioned in  the present report.  However, as recommended, HCL will 
start a fresh due diligence (EOI, consultant, etc.) for possibility of 
economically extracting any valuable materials from COT. Company has 
started to carry out quarterly sample analysis of Copper Ore and in this 
regard an official communication has been sent to all mining Units of 
HCL.” 
 
7. The Committee in their subsequent recommendation serial number 4, had 
recommended the following: 
 " The Committee suggest that the Company should conduct a detailed  
waste audit to identify all types of waste generated across HCL's 

 
 
 
3 
 
operations to gain insights into waste composition, volume, and potential 
avenues for recovery. HCL should also focus towards developing a 
circular economy to focus on minimizing waste gene ration, maximizing 
recycling and reusing opportunities, and reducing dependence on landfill 
disposal. The Committee, therefore recommend the Company to 
judiciously invest in technology, innovation, upgradation and process 
optimization to enhance the recove ry rates of valuable metals and 
materials from waste streams which can lead to increased revenue 
generation from waste products. They should also make efforts for 
transfer of technology from appropriate quarters with foolproof 
mechanism..."  
 
8.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“As suggested, HCL proposes to conduct a detailed waste audit to 
identify all types of waste generated across HCL's operations to gain 
insights into waste composition, volume, and potential aven ues for 
recovery. As guided, HCL also proposes to focus towards developing a 
circular economy to focus on minimizing waste generation, maximizing 
recycling and reusing opportunities, and reducing dependence on landfill 
disposal, as applicable. In future, a fter due diligence and waste audit, 
Company will accordingly invest in technology, innovation, upgradation 
and process optimization to enhance the recovery rates of valuable 
metals and materials from waste streams which can lead to increased 
revenue genera tion from waste products.  HCL has put in place a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for adoption of new technology in 
the Company. Company has started to carry out quarterly sample 
analysis of Copper Ore and in this regard an official communication has 
been sent to all mining Units of HCL. In addition, Paste Fill Plant will be 
commissioned shortly for recycling of waste into the voids of 
underground mine for sustainable mining.” 
 
9. The Committee acknowledge the steps taken by Hindustan Copper Limited 
(HCL) under the Waste to Wealth initiative but emphasize the need for enhanced 
commitment to waste recycling and value extraction from copper ore tailings 
(COT). The Committee note that HCL has implemented Paste fill technology to 
recycle a substantial part of its tailings, using them to stabilize underground 
mines. However, while this is a positive step toward sustainable waste 
management, the Committee encourage HCL to go further in exploring 
economically viable methods for material recovery from COT, as this could yield 
environmental and financial benefits. 
The Committee also applaud HCL’s intent to conduct a comprehensive waste 
audit to better understand waste composition, volumes, and recovery potential 
across its operations. In line with this, HCL’s commitm ent to develop a circular 
economy model, focused on minimizing waste, maximizing recycling, and 
reducing landfill usage, aligns with the Committee’s vision for sustainable 
resource utilization. The Committee urge HCL to expedite the waste audit and 
invest in the required technological upgrades, innovation, and process 
optimization to enhance recovery rates of valuable metals from waste streams. 

 
 
 
4 
 
This approach could position HCL as a leader in sustainable mining practices. 
Lastly, the Committee reiterate the importance of establishing a strong, results -
driven framework within HCL’s Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to ensure 
these objectives are effectively met, yielding increased revenue from recycled 
waste and promoting responsible resource management across its operations. 
 
OTHER EXAMPLES OF SUCH PROJECTS IN INDIA OR GLOBALLY 
(Recommendation Serial No. 5) 
10. The Committee in their recommendation no.5 questioned HCL's reliance on 
unproven technology and lack of due diligence and recommended that: 
 " The Committee are not happy to note that HCL justified their decision to 
proceed with the unproven technology based on claims from a specific 
company at a mining exhibition. HCL explained that due to the 
uniqueness of the project and the lack of precedent,  a pilot plant was 
established for testing before considering full -scale implementation. HCL 
stated the absence of proven technology in this specific domain globally. 
However, the Company could not provide any information/record on the 
matter. The Committe e, therefore, feel that before implementing the 
project of recovering valuable metals from copper ore tailings, the 
Company could have conducted research and due diligence for available 
technology/process. The Committee is not convinced with the version of  
HCL that no such information/study/work is available in the country or 
abroad and therefore awarded the work to M/s STPL without exploring 
the availability of the required technology. The Company’s management, 
at any point of time did not consult the glob al copper mining leading 
companies. They also did not float Request for Proposal (RFP) for the 
purpose. It has come to the notice that certain copper mines in Mexico 
has conducted study for recovering the values in gold and silver out of 
copper tailings. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company 
should have explored global best practices, and Request for Proposal 
(RFP) for extracting gold and silver from copper tailings would have been 
floated after consulting such Companies. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons of such omissions."  
 
11.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee. 
From the scrutiny  of the records available, no reasons could be 
ascertained for such omission. However as  submitted earlier, HCL has 
put in place a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for adoption of new 
technology in the Company”.  
 
12. The Committee take note of the Government’s response regarding HCL’s 
oversight in exploring global best practices and proven technologies before 
adopting new technology for metal recovery from copper ore tailings. However, 
the Committee find this reply uns atisfactory, as it does not adequately address 

 
 
 
5 
 
the core issue: the lack of a thorough technology assessment prior to project 
approval. The Committee reiterate that selecting unverified or inadequately 
supported technologies without consulting international  benchmarks 
significantly increases the risks of technical and financial failure, as evidenced by 
HCL’s experience with this project.  While the recently implemented Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) now requires proven technology and a detailed 
feasibility analysis, the Committee advise that additional provisions be integrated 
into the SOP to enforce a mandatory global technology scan for projects 
involving untested methodologies. Specifically, HCL should conduct 
comprehensive research to identify successf ul, relevant technologies used by 
established global copper producers before finalizing its approach.  
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF PILOT PROJECT AT KHETRI 
(Recommendation Serial No. 6 & 7) 
13. The Committee had recommended the following with regard to establishment of 
pilot project at Khetri : 
" The Committee note that HCL initiated the project based on the 
potential identified through initial examination and analysis. The pilot 
plant was established at KCC in collaboration with M/s Star Trace Pvt. 
Ltd. (STPL), Chennai. This plant, with a cost of Rs. 5.9 crore along with a 
success fee of Rs. 1.5 crore, was based on technology provided by M/s 
STPL. The involvement of a single technology provider underscores the 
technical expertise required for successful tailings proce ssing. The 
timeline for the establishment and operation of the pilot plant is also 
crucial. The contract was signed on 01.01.2016, the plant was 
inaugurated on 01.04.2016, and it was commissioned on 24.06.2016. 
The Committee believe that these dates indica te a relatively hasty 
implementation process. The pilot plant was meant to evaluate the 
technical feasibility of the mineral extraction process. The findings of the 
Technical Feasibility Report were presented to the Board in the 367 th 
Board meeting on 16.01.2017. This finding would have eventually formed 
the basis of decision -making process for setting up the full scale COT 
plant at MCP which has not done by HCL. This Committee would like to 
be apprised of the circumstances and reasons which compelled HCL t o 
establish full-fledged plant without waiting for results of Pilot Project."  
 
14.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“It appears that the then Management took the decision based on the 
preliminary results of the Pilot Plant. Presently, HCL has put in place a Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company.”.  
15. The Committee in their subsequent recommendation no. 7, had recommended 
the following: 
 " The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should have conducted 
substantial comprehensive feasibility studies before initiating projects of 
such nature. A thorough assessment of technological viability, potential 
benefits, and alignment with the organizati on's goals should have also 

 
 
 
6 
 
been carried out by the Company. The Committee believe that while the 
Ministry of Mines might not have had a direct role in setting up the pilot 
project, but their oversight/activities could have played a crucial role in 
ensuring projects to align with national mineral resource strategies and 
regulations. The Committee therefore, stress upon that the Government 
through their representatives in the Board should have kept a close 
watch over activities of PSU since their input and s crutiny are vital in 
ensuring that various projects of PSUs under the Ministry of Mines are in 
line with rules, regulations and standard practices. Further, whenever 
Standard Operating Procedure(SOP) is not available, they should stress 
upon formulation of SOP in a time bound manner."  
 
16.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“Presently, HCL has put in place a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company which has 
been approved by the Board.” 
 
17. The Committee appreciate Hindustan Copper Limited’s (HCL) 
implementation of a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the adoption of new 
technology, especially in response to the concerns raised regarding the 
hastiness and limited feasibility a nalysis in past project decisions. This SOP is a 
step in the right direction to ensure a structured and transparent process for 
evaluating, approving, and implementing projects based on verified data and 
proven technology. The Committee acknowledge that th e SOP now mandates 
data-supported justification, comprehensive feasibility studies, and external 
financial appraisals, all of which address critical factors in assessing a project’s 
viability and alignment with HCL’s long -term goals.  However, the Committee  
advise that HCL apply these procedures rigorously, particularly with regard to the 
feasibility study requirements outlined in the SOP. Future projects should include 
detailed technical, environmental, and financial assessments, prepared in 
consultation wi th reputable external organizations, before they proceed to the 
approval stage. Furthermore, the Committee stress  on the need for HCL to adopt 
technologies with a proven track record, as outlined in the SOP, to avoid high -
risk investments and potential losses.  
 
GROUNDS FOR CHOOSING M/s STPL FOR KCC 
(Recommendations No 8 and 9) 
18. The Committee in their Twenty Second Report, had recommended the following 
on the grounds for choosing M/s STPL for KCC : 
 " From the information furnished to the Committee, it is clear that the 
decision to choose M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL) for the pilot project at 
Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) is  based on a series of considerations, 
including their claimed expertise, previous interactions, and self-claimed 
technology capabilities. The Committee find that M/s STPL claimed 
themselves to have the requisite technology for extracting minerals from  

 
 
 
7 
 
Copper Ore Tailings (COT), which was reportedly made during the 
INDABA Mining Conference and Exhibition at Cape town in South Africa 
and was never verified. The  claimed technology primarily involved 
Magnetic & Gravity separators with an emphasis on dry processes. The 
Committee note that no documentary supporting these claims were  
asked for/made available before awarding the pilot project. The 
Committee feel, that if  documents would have been shared with, the 
matter would have been resolved ab -initio which was not done by HCL. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that such issues in future be shared 
with Ministry in time for proper guidance/direction. The Committee take 
serious note on the fact that M/s STPL was chosen for the pilot project 
based on their  claimed expertise and awarding project without  
documentary evidence to  substantiate their claims raises concerns 
about the decision-making process. The Committee,  further feel that a 
more rigorous evaluation and due diligence process, along with 
transparent documentation, would have enhanced the credibility and 
success of such projects. The  Committee therefore, recommend that the 
selection of a company for a significant project  should be based on 
comprehensive documentation, sufficient past experience and evidence 
of their claimed capabilities. The use of verbal claims should always be 
supported by technical documentation and studies. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons of such omissions."  
 
19.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“It is submitted that following the advice of the Committee, for 
implementation of any new tec hnology-based project, HCL has 
already put in place a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
adoption of new technology in the Company. In addition, as 
advised, HCL will share the details of any such projects with 
Ministry in time for proper guidance/direction.” 
20. The Committee q uestioned overriding of SCoBD recommendations in KCC Pilot 
Plant Decision and recommended the following: 
 " Further, the choice of KCC as the site for the pilot project was 
influenced by various factors, including the lifting of 30,000 tonnes of 
COT from KCC by M/s STPL and the need for creating space at Khetri 
tailing pond. These considerations, along with th e potential for 
profitability, were likely played a role in choosing KCC as the project site. 
The Committee further note that the Sub Committee of Board of Directors 
(SCoBD) meetings provided recommendations for analyzing the 
business plan and credentials of the shortlisted qualified party, M/s 
STPL. The aim was to ensure a detailed evaluation before proceeding. 
However, the recommendations of SCoBD were not fully complied with, 
and instead, in the subsequent meeting held on 15.04.2016, SCoBD 
noted that the Company had signed a contract agreement with M/s. Star 
Trace Pvt Ltd, Chennai, for setting up of 200 tons per day pilot plant 
facility at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) for extracting minerals and 

 
 
 
8 
 
materials from copper ore tailings lying at Malanjkhand and K hetri. The 
Committee would like to know the reason of not considering the 
recommendations of SCOBD and desire that due weightage should be 
accorded to the recommendations of sub-committees of BOD in future.” 
 
 
 
19.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees to the observations of the Committee 
as above. In future, due weightage  would be given to the 
recommendations of SCoBD.” 
 
20. The Committee find the Government’s response to Recommendations 8 
and 9 inadequate, as it fails to address the critical issue of transparency and rigor 
in selecting technology providers for strategic projects. In light of the 
Committee’s finding, it is concerning that HCL awarded a pilot project contract 
based on verbal claims and without sufficient documentary support or a thorough 
vetting of M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd.’s (STPL) technical capabilities. The absence of 
essential documentation during the selection process, along with a disregard for 
the Sub -Committee of the Bo ard of Directors (SCoBD) recommendations, 
compromised the integrity of HCL’s decision -making process.  While the new 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) includes requirements for transparent, 
documented procedures, the Committee urge HCL to explicitly enforc e these 
standards by mandating detailed documentation and comprehensive technical 
credentials for all bidders. For any future projects, HCL must ensure that claims 
made by potential technology providers are verified through tangible evidence, 
including per formance data and independent references, before awarding 
contracts. Furthermore, the Committee recommend that due consideration be 
given to the recommendations of internal committees, such as the SCoBD, whose 
oversight is vital to safeguard against potent ial misjudgments. To prevent future 
oversights, the Committee suggest that HCL's SOP be strengthened with explicit 
steps for mandatory documentation and adherence to Board Committee 
recommendations.  
 
SETTING UP OF MALANJKHAND COPPER PROJECT (MCP) 
(Recommendation Serial No. 10,11,12,13 and 14) 
21. The Committee  questioned viability of project based on limited feasibility study 
and recommended the following with regard to setting up of Malanjkhand Copper 
Project (MCP): 
“Despite the initial assessment that showed promising results in terms of 
mineral content from tailings, in the firm opinion of the Committee, it is 
vital to acknowledge that  the project's viability and sustainability should 
be evaluated based on comprehensive data  and analysis. The use  of a 
three-day result of the feasibility study raises questions on  working of 

 
 
 
9 
 
BOD and their reliability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all 
future projects should undergo in -depth and required feasibility studies to 
ensure accurate  projections and risk assessments, with due diligence 
and ward off misuse of money.” 
 
 
 
22. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee 
that all future projects to undergo in-depth and required feasibility studies 
to ensure accurate projections and risk assessments, with due diligence. 
For the same, HCL has already  implemented a Board approved SOP for 
implementation/installation of new technology  Projects/Plants in future 
which will comply the recommendation of the Committee.” 
23.  The Committee  in their subsequent recommendation no. 11 suggested  
enhanced oversight for board-approved projects and recommended the following: 
“The Committee from the timeline  of events infer that  the decision to 
establish the MCP was taken through the 363 rd and 367 th Board 
meetings of HCL, with unanimous  approval from the Board members. 
However, the Committee note that the proposal was not sent to the 
Ministry of Mines for approval due to the empowered authority of the 
HCL Board to approve capital expenditures up to Rs.500 crore. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that a proper SOP should be framed with 
checks and balances of power of Board for project upto Rs.500 crores, 
too, and there should be  provision of proper  Governmental scrutiny  to 
prevent potential discrepancies.” 
24. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL has put in place a Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company which 
has been approved by the Board. The  approved SOP has been shared 
with Ministry of Mines. Additionally, for any new technology project, 
having value more than Rs.100 Crore, it will be submitted to Ministry  of 
Mines for consultation.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
10 
 
25. The Committee recommended the following wr.t. the technical scrutiny in internal 
Audits: 
“The Committee observe that HCL's Internal Audit Department, in the 
case of MCP,  focused primarily on  the document review, and technical 
issues were not thoroughly assessed rather ignored. This raises 
concerns about the effectiveness of internal audits in  identifying and 
mitigating potential technical risks. The Committee, therefore, desire that  
internal audit processes should include comprehensive te chnical issues 
too for addressing the issues/concerns in time.” 
26. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
In compliance to the recommended by the Committee, the Company has  
included the comprehensive technical assessment of n ew projects in the 
scope of the agency appointed as Internal Auditor of the company.” 
 
 
27. The Committee in recommendation No 13 warned against hasty decisions and 
recommended stricter oversight and recommended the following: 
“The Committee note that HCL's hastiness in seeking Board approval for 
the full -scale MCP plant before commissioning of the pilot plant is a 
critical concern. To prevent such  instances in the future, the Committee 
urge HCL that the Company should implement a  stringent decision -
making process with professional acumenship that requires thorough  
commissioning, testing, and validation of pilot projects before seeking 
approval for large - scale installations. Further, the Ministry of Mines 
should also play a more active role in  overseeing major projects initiated 
by HCL, especially when they involve significant investments and 
potential financial risks. Though the responsibility of accurate data and  
information lies with the HCL Board, yet the Ministry should actively 
scrutinize project  proposals and ensure that due diligence is conducted 
before giving approvals. Regular  monitoring and periodic reviews of 
projects at the level of the Ministry of Mines will  prevent any hasty 
decisions particularly for projects more than 100 crores.” 
 
28. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
It is submitted that as advised by Committee, for implementing a stringent 
decision- making process before seeking approval for large -scale 
installations, HCL has already  implemented a Boa rd approved SOP for 
implementation/installation of new technology Projects/Plants. 
The Ministry of Mines is regularly conducting periodic reviews of various 

 
 
 
11 
 
projects being  implemented in the Company. Additionally, for any new 
technology project having value more than Rs.100 Crore, it will be 
submitted to Ministry of Mines for consultation. 
 
 
29. The Committee questioned independence of financial appraisal by SBI-CAP and 
recommended the following: 
“The Committee believe that the decision to engage SBI Capital Markets 
Ltd. (SBI - CAP) for financial appraisal was a step in the right direction. 
However, it is important to  note that the scope of SBI-CAP's appraisal 
was based on inputs provided by HCL's Project and Technical teams. 
This indicates that SBI-CAP did not conduct an independent due 
diligence to verify the accuracy of the data. The Committee, would,  
therefore, like to be apprised as to why SBI -CAP did not undertake 
appraisal of project  independently and desire that financial appraisals 
should involve an independent assessment of financial projections, cost-
benefit analysis, and market trends to reach accurate financial 
conclusions and future projects undertaken by HCL and other similar  
organizations under the Ministry of Mines must be subjected to thorough 
scrutiny, transparent processes, and robust due diligence.” 
30. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that for future projects undertaken by HCL, in the scope of 
financial appraisals by external agencies, a clause would be included for 
an independent assessment of financial projections, cost-benefit 
analysis, and market trends to reach accurate financial conclusions  as 
applicable.” 
 
31. The Committee appreciate  the efforts taken by Hindustan Copper Limited 
(HCL) to strengthen its project planning and oversight mechanisms in alignment 
with the newly adopted Standard Operating Procedure (SOP). The SOP’s 
stipulations for pilot project validation and increased Minist ry oversight for high -
value projects also demonstrate HCL’s commitment to preventing hasty, large -
scale implementations without adequate testing and validation. The  Committee 
note positively that HCL has committed to conducting comprehensive feasibility 
studies, including technical, environmental, and financial analyses, for all future 
projects. The Committee also applaud HCL’s incorporation of an SOP for financial 
appraisals by external agencies, which will help provide unbiased evaluations of 
financial pr ojections, cost -benefit analysis, and risk assessment , which,  aligns 
well with the Committee’s recommendation for independent financial oversight, 
enhancing the integrity of financial decision-making. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
12 
 
Furthermore, HCL’s SOP now mandates regular internal  audits that include 
technical assessments, a crucial step in early risk identification and mitigation. 
The Committee advise HCL to rigorously apply these audit practices to ensure 
continuous monitoring and improvement in project performance.  
 
 
AWARDING THE PROJECT ON SINGLE TENDER BASIS 
(Recommendation Serial No.15, 16 and 17) 
32.  The Committee in their recommendation no 15 , highlighted the  conflict of 
interest and procedural lapses in HCL's COT Plant Tender  and recommended the 
following: 
“The Committee note that HCL received two bids for setting up of COT 
plant at MCP, one from M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL) and another from 
M/s Larsen & Toubro Limited (L&T). The Committee observe from the 
information furnished by the Company  that M/s L&T's bid contained 
substantial deviations from the terms and conditions of the  Request for 
Proposal (RFP) including a longer project execution timeline (16 months  
instead of the required 8 months), disagreement on the reclamation of 
old tailings from  the tailing da m, absence of a performance guarantee, 
and differing payment terms. These  deviations indicated that M/s L&T's 
bid did not fully align with the project's requirements. On the other 
hand, M/s STPL's bid adhered to all the terms and conditions of the 
RFP, indicating that they were willing to meet the project's specifications 
as outlined in the tender documents. The Committee further note that M/s 
L&T raised concerns about conflict of interest related to M/s STPL, the 
pilot plant operator, being one of the two bidders. M/s L&T also alleged 
that necessary data had not been shared by  M/s STPL with them, which 
could impact the fairness of the bidding process. The Committee are of 
the view that this conflict of interest potentially compromised the integrity 
of the process of tendering.” 
33. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee 
and the issue  pertaining to conflict  of interest has been included in  the 
SOP implemented with respect to new technology projects.” 
34. The Committee in recommendation no.16 e xpressed the concerns over lack of 
documentation in HCL’s Single Tender Process and gave the following 
recommendation: 
“The Committee note that the process in awarding contract was not 

 
 
 
13 
 
properly documented. The decision to award a project on a 'single tender 
basis' should be well - documented and based on provisions of General 
Financial Rules for maintaining transparency and economy. The 
Committee, therefore, stro ngly urge HCL to ensure that  the tendering 
process is conducted according to established guidelines, SOP, 
regulations and rules in future so that the same withstand the scrutiny of 
oversight agencies.” 
35. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee 
and is ensuring implementation of SOP, established guidelines, rules and 
regulations of tendering in Government portal like GeM and CPP Portal 
for maintaining transparency and economy.” 
36.  The Committee in recommendation no. 17 suggested the following  Procedural 
Improvements to HCL: 
“The Committee, further note that awarding the project to M/s STPL due 
to technical deviations in M/s L&T's bid was not proper. For this, Pre-bid 
Meeting(s) could have taken place and thereafter, a fresh tender could 
have been floated for maintaining transparency in accordance with 
established guidelines. The Committee, therefore, suggest the Ministry 
of Mines and the Company management to address irregularities,  
improve procurement processes, and ensure fair competition and 
maintaining public trust while undertaking public projects.” 
37. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee 
and will ensure  compliance of the directives. This is to submit that in 
general, HCL conducts pre -bid meetings in case of new/specialized and 
high value contracts.” 
 
38. The Committee recognize that HCL has now incorporated robust 
provisions within its SOP to address potential conflicts of interest, ensure 
comprehensive documentation, and maintain transparency in tender ing 
practices. The Committee also note HCL’s commitment to following the General 
Financial Rules (GFR) for single -tender contracts and to using government 
portals like GeM and CPP for public tenders. These measures are expected to 
uphold transparency and facilitate independent scrutiny of the tendering process, 
thereby enhancing trust and accountability. Additionally, HCL’s practice of 
holding pre -bid meetings for high -value or complex contracts aligns with the 
SOP’s emphasis on thorough, transparent intera ctions with potential bidders.  
While these SOP improvements represent significant progress, the Committee 

 
 
 
14 
 
advises HCL to ensure rigorous adherence to these guidelines in all future 
procurements.  
 
SALVAGE VALUE OF THE COT PLANT 
(Recommendation Serial No. 18 and 19) 
39. The Committee had given the following recommendation regarding the salvage 
value COT plant: 
 "The Committee note that the COT plant at MCP could not be 
commissioned and on termination of the contract, HCL had encashed the 
Bank Guarantee of Rs.8.49 crore on 28.09.2020 against Security Deposit 
of the contract and blacklisted M/s STPL which are positive steps indeed 
towards recovering costs associated with the  terminated contract.  The 
Committee also note that the Company had also filed a claim of 
Rs.235.17 crore  before the Resolution Process in the NCLT, Chennai 
against M/s STPL, however, NCLAT vide its order dated 07.10.2021 
ordered for stay on NCLT order dated 09.08.2021 for initiating 
Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). The Committee 
further note that the tendering action for appointment of an external 
agency to  assess the usefulness of COT plant  at MCP was under 
process and the due date of opening of the bid was 24.07.2023, and 
also acknowledge the fact that the entire case is under litigation under 
various forums for which prior permission are to be required from  
concerned agencies. The Committee desire that efforts should be made  
for vacation of  stay by NCLAT and necessary permission should be 
taken for further action in the  matter.” 
 
40.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have submitted the following:- 
“Stay by NCLAT was vacated by court order in the month of June 2023. 
However, INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD OF INDIA (IBBA) 
vide its order dated 19.06.2023 suspended the Resolution Professional 
(RP) appointed in the CIRP of M/s  STPL. HCL filed IA for appointment 
of new RP so that further CIRP proceedings could be started. NCLT 
vide order dated 06.11.2023 appointed new RP in the matter. New RP  
started claim verification of all the claimant and asked HCL to submit 
Form B in place of Form F. HCL submitted both the Forms on 30.01.2024 
along with supporting documents. After several mail communications, RP 
vide mail dated 04.03.2024 informed that HCL’s  claim is placed as “Non-
Acceptable”. On 06.04.2024 HCL has filed an application with  NCLT 
Chennai to direct the RP to accept the HCL’s claim.  
HCL has entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of the 
equipment installed in the COT plant at MCP (Work Order issued on 16 - 

 
 
 
15 
 
Oct-2023). M/s MECON has submitted their report and they have inter-
alia stated that “the major equipment has also  got deteriorated and most 
of the process equipment installed in the said COT plant like  spiral 
concentrator, low intensity magnetic separator, etc., are not in a condition 
to work to meet the process requirement” and that “the existing COT 
plant as a whole can’t be useful to produce desired products by 
modifying or replacing the individual equipment as  mentioned in the 
present report”. 
 
HCL has planned to dispose -off the COT  Plant in quick succession to 
maximize the salvage value of the unutilized assets. Therefore, HCL has 
requested CBI to give a No  Object Certificate vide letter dated 
06.09.2024.”.  
41. The Committee in their subsequent recommendation (19th recommendation), had 
recommended as follows: 
 " The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should continue its efforts to 
recover losses, make informed decisions about the plant's salvage value, 
prevent similar incidents  in the  future, and  maintain transparency and  
compliance throughout the process. The  Committee would also suggest 
the Company to continue to actively engage  in legal proceedings to 
recover the claimed amount and any additional costs incurred and 
believe that HCL's approach of filing complaints, FIRs, and involving law 
enforcement agencies  against M/s STPL Directors is necessary for 
holding parties accountable. The Committee  further opine that the 
valuation report prepared by a  Government approved valuers or  other 
accredited ones provide a credible and reliable estimation of the 
plant's value and this report should be utilized as a reference point for 
making informed decisions about the  plant's future. Further, the ongoing 
tendering action to appoint an external agency to assess the usefulness 
of the COT plant is a crucial step.” 
 
42.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
“Regarding Legal proceedings to recover the claimed amount, HCL has 
filed the mediation application at Calcutta High Court mediation centre 
which is a pre requisite as  per section 12A for filing a commercial 
(recovery) suit. In case directors of M/s STPL do  not turn up for 
mediation or mediation failed, Commercial Court will admit t he HCL’s  
Commercial/recovery suit. Directors of M/s STPL did not appear for 
mediation even after  three notices, this the Mediation failed vide 
Mediation Centre notice dated 10.07.2024.  HCL is  now in  process of 
filing the recovery suit. 

 
 
 
16 
 
Regarding filing com plaints, FIRs, and involving law enforcement 
agencies against M/s  STPL Directors, HCL had already lodged FIR on 
05.08.2022 at Karaya Police Station,  Kolkata. CBI is also enquiring the 
matter vide FIR dated 25.08.2022. 
CBI has requested HCL to transfer the FIR lodged at Karaya Police 
Station to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in the month of Nov 
2023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter was listed 
for hearing on 01.04.2024, however matter was not  heard. HCL is trying 
to expedite the matter for early hearing. HCL on several occasions has 
mentioned the matter before the court for early hearing. 
Regarding valuation report of the COT plant  by a Govt approved valuer, 
the Company  will take suitable  action in due course of time after 
deliberation on the report submitted by M/s MECON on the usefulness of 
the COT plant”.  
 
DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST ERRING OFFICIALS 
(Recommendation Serial No. 21) 
43. The Committee had given the following recommendations regarding the 
disciplinary action against the erring officials and the status of CBI cases: 
" The Committee note that the setting up of COT plant at MCP was a 
case of deliberate misrepresentation of gold content in tailings to the 
Board of HCL, leading to a significant financial loss for the 
Government. Though the involvement of high -ranking officials, both 
serving and retired, has been identified and disciplinary actions with a 
criminal investigation have been initiated, the Committee note that 
some officials are scot free due to retireme nt rules. The situation 
underscores the need for stronger internal controls, transparent 
investigations, and reforms to ensure accountability even post 
retirement. To address this issue, the Committee are of the view that 
it's crucial to ensure a thorough,  transparent, and timely investigation 
by the CBI while pursuing recovery of Government losses. Change in 
retirement rules, strengthening internal controls, promoting ethical 
behaviour, and enhancing oversight mechanisms are necessary. The 
Committee also f eel strongly that CPSUs cannot be left totally 
independent in making such an important decisions involving 
investments of large scale, otherwise such incidents would be coming 
again and again. At this stage, the role of the nodal Ministry becomes 
important to create fool proof ways and means to keep a watch over 
their activities and take necessary and timely intervention. Therefore, 
the Committee urge both the Ministry of Mines and HCL to ensure 
proactive policy reviews, and continuous monitoring of actions against 
wrongdoers which will prevent future incidents and uphold 
transparency and accountability. The Committee would also like to be 
appraised of the status of the CBI case(s) registered in the matter of 

 
 
 
17 
 
disciplinary action against the officers of HCL, particularly FIR No. 
RC2172022A0007 lodged on 31.08.2022 by CBI on the basis of its 
enquiry/investigation."  
 
44.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: - 
 
“The status of FIR lodged by CBI are as under: 
CBI has requested HCL to transfer the FIR lodged at Karaya Police 
Station to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in the month of 
Nov 2023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter 
was listed for hearing on 01.04.2024, however the matter was not 
heard. HCL is  trying to expedite the matter for early hearing. HCL 
on several occasions has mentioned the matter before the court for 
early hearing. 
CBI, New Delhi has initiated detailed investigation and collected 
documents in respect of the above mentioned FIR.” 
 
45. The Committee take note of the Ministry’s responses to recommendations 
18, 19, and 21, and acknowledge the ongoing efforts by HCL to address these 
critical issues involving recovery of losses, salvage of assets, and accountability 
in project management. T he Committee appreciate HCL's steps to recover dues 
through legal actions against M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL), including claims 
filed with the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the initiation of 
disciplinary measures. HCL’s attempts to maximize salvage value from the 
unutilized Copper Ore Tailings (COT) plant assets are also seen as positive 
moves towards mitigating the financial impacts of the project’s termination.  
However, the Committee emphasize that the ultimate effectiveness of these 
actions will depend on consistent follow -through and transparency in reporting 
outcomes. The Committee therefore urge HCL to expedite the legal and recovery 
processes and keep the Committee updated on case developments, including 
mediation and court proceedings.  In line with the new Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP), which mandates a structured approach to asset recovery and 
financial assessment, the Committee recommend that HCL engage an accredited 
valuation agency to assess the residual value of the COT plant and use these 
findings to inform its salvage strategy.  On the matter of accountability, the 
Committee stress the importance of prompt and thorough investigations, 
particularly in light of the criminal charges pending against certain individuals 
involved in the COT plant’s mismanagement. While the Committee appreciate that 
disciplinary actions have been initiated, it underscores the need for enhanced 
internal controls and proactive measures to ensure post -retirement 
accountability, as per the SOP’s recommend ations. The Committee expect 
regular updates on the status of CBI investigations and anticipates a final, 
comprehensive report from HCL once these processes conclude, ensuring that 
lessons learned are incorporated to strengthen future project governance an d 
prevent similar issues. 
 
 
 
   

 
 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
HCL - OVERVIEW 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1 & 2) 
1.  The present Audit Para 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021, examined by the 
Committee is related to imprudent decision of Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) to 
construct a full-scale Copper Ore Tailings (COT) beneficiation plant without adequately 
testing the pi lot plant and verifying its feasibility or success. This decision led to a 
wasteful expenditure of Rs.158.05 crore. HCL chose to utilize their by -product, Copper 
Ore Tailings (COT), by employing a beneficiation process to recover valuable materials 
like gold and silver. In January 2016, the Company awarded a contract worth Rs. 6.98 
crore to M/s Star Trace Private Limited (STPL) through a competitive bidding process. 
This contract involved the design, supply, civil work, installation, commissioning, and 
operation of a pilot plant at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC). The pilot plant was intended 
for Research and Development (R&D) purposes, with a capacity to process 200 tonnes 
of COT per day. The project was expected to be completed within 12 months from 
commissioning, aimed at assessing the technical and commercial viability for potential 
commercial installation based on the results.  
2. Following the trial run stage of the KCC pilot plant, in May 2016, HCL decided to 
proceed with the establishment of a full -scale plant at Malanjkhand Copper Project 
(MCP). The full-scale plant was planned to handle 10,000 MT of COT per day, based on 
preliminary findings from the KCC pilot plant. Subsequently, in January 2017, after 
evaluating the technical and commercial aspects of the project and receiving financial 
appraisal from SBICAP, HCL awarded M/s STPL a contract worth Rs. 280 crore 
(including Rs. 85 crore for a two-year operation and maintenance period) for setting of a 
3.29 million tonne per annum Copper Ore Tailings Benefi ciation Plant at MCP. This 
contract was awarded on a single tender basis. The project was scheduled to be 
completed by November 2017. The Committee, before finalizing their observations in 
their 27 report heard the views of the officers from C&AG who condu cted the Audit, and 
also the views of the representatives of HCL and Ministry of Mines. The evidence of the 
stakeholders, the information and clarifications submitted by them, and after internal 
deliberations led the Committee to arrive at the conclusions and make suggestions as 
mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
WASTE TO WEALTH PROJECT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
3. The Committee note that the Waste to Wealth Project of HCL encompasses the 
Company's efforts to effectively manage and recover value from  its waste streams. But 
the Committee find that in their Annual Reports, HCL have stated that they recycle less 
than 5% of their internally generated waste. During discussions with the Committee, 
representatives of HCL emphasized the prevalence of copper o re tailings in their 
operations. The HCL's plan to install a plant to recover metals and minerals from copper 
ore tailings, was a step towards utilizing COT and HCL should make efforts to 
recycle/process the remaining with due diligence for extracting of valuable materials. 

 
 
 
19 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
In an effort towards waste utilization i.e. use of Copper Ore Tailings (COT), HCL has 
adopted Paste fill technology to recycle major part of the Copper Ore Tailings (COT) 
produced at MCP unit to fill the voids created in the underground mines. This will ensure 
stability of underground mining operations as well as increase the production/extraction 
of copper ore thus reducing the impact to the environment and ensuring sustainable 
operation. The Paste fill plant has  been set up and will be commissioned shortly. HCL 
has entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of the equipment installed in the 
COT plant. M/s MECON has submitted their report and they have inter -alia stated that 
“the major equipment has also got d eteriorated and most of the process equipment 
installed in the said COT plant like spiral concentrator, Low intensity magnetic 
separator, etc., are not in a condition to work to meet the process requirement” and that 
“the existing COT plant as a whole can’ t be useful to produce desired products by 
modifying or replacing the individual equipment as mentioned in the present report”. 
However, as recommended, HCL will start a fresh due diligence (EOI, consultant, etc.) 
for possibility of economically extracting  any valuable materials from COT. Company 
has started to carry out quarterly sample analysis of Copper Ore and in this regard an 
official communication has been sent to all mining Units of HCL.  
  [Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
 
“No Comments.”. 
 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
4. The Committee suggest that the Company should conduct a detailed waste audit 
to identify all types of waste generated across HCL's operations to gain insights into 
waste composition, volume, and potential avenues for recovery. HCL should also focus 
towards developing a circular economy to focus on minimizing waste generation, 
maximizing recycling and reusing opportunities, and reducing dependence on landfill 
disposal. The Committee, therefore recommend the Company to judiciously invest in 
technology, innovation, upgradation and process optimization to enhance the recovery 
rates of valuable metals and materials from waste streams which can lead to increased 
revenue generation from waste products. They should also make efforts for transfer of 
technology from appropriate quarters with foolproof mechanism. 
 

 
 
 
20 
 
Reply of the Government 
In an effort towards waste utilization i.e. use of Copper Ore Tailings (COT), HCL has 
adopted Paste fill technology to recycle major part of the Copper Ore Tailings (COT) 
produced at MCP unit to fill the voids created in the underground mines. This will ensure 
stability of underground mining operations as well as increase the production/extraction 
of copper ore thus reducing the impact to the environment and ensuring sustainable 
operation. The Paste fill plant has been set up and will be commissioned shortly. HCL 
has entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of the equipment installed in the 
COT plant. M/s MECON has submitted their report and they have inter -alia stated that 
“the m ajor equipment has also got deteriorated and most of the process equipment 
installed in the said COT plant like spiral concentrator, Low intensity magnetic 
separator, 
etc., are not in a condition to work to meet the process requirement” and that “the 
existing COT plant as a whole can’t be useful to produce desired products by modifying 
or replacing the individual equipment as mentioned in the present report”. However, as 
recommended, HCL will start a fresh due diligence (EOI, consultant, etc.) for possibili ty 
of economically extracting any valuable materials from COT. Company has started to 
carry out quarterly sample analysis of Copper Ore and in this regard an official 
communication has been sent to all mining Units of HCL. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
 
“No Comments.” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF PILOT PROJECT AT KHETRI 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 6) 
5. The Committee note that HCL initiated the project based on the potential 
identified through initial examination and analysis. The pilot plant was established at 
KCC in collaboration w ith M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL), Chennai. This plant, with a 
cost of Rs. 5.9 crore along with a success fee of Rs. 1.5 crore, was based on 
technology provided by M/s STPL. The involvement of a single technology provider 
underscores the technical expert ise required for successful tailings processing. The 
timeline for the establishment and operation of the pilot plant is also crucial. The 
contract was signed on 01.01.2016, the plant was inaugurated on 01.04.2016, and it 
was commissioned on 24.06.2016. The  Committee believe that these dates indicate a 
relatively hasty implementation process. The pilot plant was meant to evaluate the 

 
 
 
21 
 
technical feasibility of the mineral extraction process. The findings of the Technical 
Feasibility Report were presented to th e Board in the 367th Board meeting on 
16.01.2017. This finding would have eventually formed the basis of decision -making 
process for setting up the full scale COT plant at MCP which has not done by HCL. This 
Committee would like to be apprised of the circu mstances and reasons which 
compelled HCL to establish full-fledged plant without waiting for results of Pilot Project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It appears that the then Management took the decision based on the preliminary results 
of the Pilot Plant. Presently, HCL has put in place a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company. 
   [Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Management did not furnish the justification behind hurried decision regarding the 
installation of COT plant.” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
6. The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should have conducted substantial 
comprehensive feasibility studies before initiating projects of such nature. A thorough 
assessment of technological viability, potential benefits, and  alignment with the 
organization's goals should have also been carried out by the Company. The 
Committee believe that while the Ministry of Mines might not have had a direct role in 
setting up the pilot project, but their oversight/activities could have pl ayed a crucial role 
in ensuring projects to align with national mineral resource strategies and regulations. 
The Committee therefore, stress upon that the Government through their 
representatives in the Board should have kept a close watch over activities of PSU 
since their input and scrutiny are vital in ensuring that various projects of PSUs under 
the Ministry of Mines are in line with rules, regulations and standard practices. Further, 
whenever Standard Operating Procedure(SOP) is not available, they sho uld stress 
upon formulation of SOP in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
Presently, HCL has put in place a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for adoption of 
new technology in the Company which has been approved by the Board. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 

 
 
 
22 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Management did not furnish the justification behind hurried decision regarding the 
installation of COT plant.” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
SETTING UP OF MALANJKHAND COPPER PROJECT (MCP) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
7. Despite the initial assessment that showed promising results in terms of mineral 
content from tailings, in the firm opinion of the Committee, it is vital to acknowledge that 
the project's viability and sustainability should be evaluated based on comprehensive 
data and analysis. The use of a three -day result of the feasibilit y study raises questions 
on working of BOD and their reliability. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all 
future projects should undergo in -depth and required feasibility studies to ensure 
accurate projections and risk assessments, with due diligence and ward off misuse of 
money. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee that all future 
projects to undergo in -depth and required feasibility studies to ensure accurate 
projections and risk assessments, w ith due diligence. For the same, HCL has already 
implemented a Board approved SOP for implementation/installation of new technology 
Projects/Plants in future which will comply the recommendation of the Committee. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
23 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
8 The Committee from the timeline of events infer that the decision to establish the 
MCP was taken through the 363rd and 367th Board meetings of HCL, with unanimous 
approval from the Board members. However, the Committee note that the proposal was 
not sent to the Ministry of Mines for approval due to the empowered authority of the 
HCL Board to approve capital expenditures up to Rs.500 crore. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that a proper SOP  should be framed with checks and balances of 
power of Board for project upto Rs.500 crores, too, and there should be provision of 
proper Governmental scrutiny to prevent potential discrepancies. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL has put in place a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
adoption of new technology in the Company which has been approved by the Board. 
The approved SOP has been shared with Ministry of Mines. Additionally, for any new 
technology project, having value more than Rs.100 Crore, it will be submitted to Ministry 
of Mines for consultation. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
9. The Committee observe that HCL's Internal Audit Department, in the case of 
MCP, focuse d primarily on the document review, and technical issues were not 
thoroughly assessed rather ignored. This raises concerns about the effectiveness of 
internal audits in identifying and mitigating potential technical risks. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that internal audit processes should include comprehensive technical 
issues too for addressing the issues/concerns in time. 
Reply of the Government 
In compliance to the recommended by the Committee, the Company has included the 
comprehensive technical assessment of new projects in the scope of the agency 
appointed as Internal Auditor of the company. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
24 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
10. The Committee note that HCL's hastiness in seeking Board approval for the full -
scale MCP plant before commissioning of the pilot plant is a critical concern. To prevent 
such instances in the future, the Committee urge HCL that the Company should 
implement a stringent decision -making process with professional acu menship that 
requires thorough commissioning, testing, and validation of pilot projects before seeking 
approval for large -scale installations. Further, the Ministry of Mines should also play a 
more active role in overseeing major projects initiated by HCL,  especially when they 
involve significant investments and potential financial risks. Though the responsibility of 
accurate data and information lies with the HCL Board, yet the Ministry should actively 
scrutinize project proposals and ensure that due dilig ence is conducted before giving 
approvals. Regular monitoring and periodic reviews of projects at the level of the 
Ministry of Mines will prevent any hasty decisions particularly for projects more than 100 
crores.. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that as advised by Committee, for implementing a stringent decision - 
making process before seeking approval for large -scale installations, HCL has already 
implemented a Board approved SOP for implementation/installation of new technology 
Projects/Plants. The Ministry of Mines is regularly conducting periodic reviews of 
various projects being implemented in the Company. Additionally, for any new 
technology project having value more than Rs.100 Crore, it will be submitted to Ministry 
of Mines for consultation. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  
  
 

 
 
 
25 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
11. The Committee believe that the decision to engage SBI Capital Markets Ltd. 
(SBI-CAP) for financial appraisal was a step in the right direction. However, it is 
important to note that the scope of SBI -CAP's appraisal was based on inputs provided 
by HCL's Project and Technical teams. This indicates that SBI -CAP did not conduct an 
independent due diligence to verify the accuracy of the data. The Commi ttee, would, 
therefore, like to be apprised 
as to why SBI-CAP did not undertake appraisal of project independently and desire that 
financial appraisals should involve an independent assessment of financial projections, 
cost-benefit analysis, and market tre nds to reach accurate financial conclusions and 
future projects undertaken by HCL and other similar organizations under the Ministry of 
Mines must be subjected to thorough scrutiny, transparent processes, and robust due 
diligence. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that for future projects undertaken by HCL, in the scope of financial 
appraisals by external agencies, a clause would be included for an independent 
assessment of financial projections, cost -benefit analysis, and market trends to reach 
accurate financial conclusions as applicable. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
AWARDING THE PROJECT ON SINGLE TENDER BASIS 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
12. The Committee note that HCL received two bids for setting up of COT plan t at 
MCP, one from M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL) and another from M/s Larsen & Toubro 
Limited (L&T). The Committee observe from the information furnished by the Company 
that M/s L&T's bid contained substantial deviations from the terms and conditions of the 
Request for Proposal (RFP) including a 33 longer project execution timeline (16 months 
instead of the required 8 months), disagreement on the reclamation of old tailings from 
the tailing dam, absence of a performance guarantee, and differing payment te rms. 
These deviations indicated that M/s L&T's bid did not fully align with the project's 
requirements. On the other hand, M/s STPL's bid adhered to all the terms and 
conditions of the RFP, indicating that they were willing to meet the project's 
specifications as outlined in the tender documents. The Committee further note that M/s 
L&T raised concerns about conflict of interest related to M/s STPL, the pilot plant 

 
 
 
26 
 
operator, being one of the two bidders. M/s L&T also alleged that necessary data had 
not been shared by M/s STPL with them, which could impact the fairness of the bidding 
process. The Committee are of the view that this conflict of interest potentially 
compromised the integrity of the process of tendering. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee and the issue 
pertaining to conflict of interest has been included in the SOP implemented with respect 
to new technology projects. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
13. The Committee note that the process in awarding contract was not properly 
documented. The decision to award a project on a 'single tender basis' should be well -
documented and based on provisions of General Financial Rules fo r maintaining 
transparency and economy. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge HCL to ensure 
that the tendering process is conducted according to established guidelines, SOP, 
regulations and rules in future so that the same withstand the scrutiny of overs ight 
agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee and is ensuring 
implementation of SOP, established guidelines, rules and regulations of tendering in 
Government portal like GeM and CPP Portal for maintaining transparency and 
economy. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
 

 
 
 
27 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
14. The Committee, further note that awarding the project to M/s STPL due to 
technical deviations in M/s L&T's bid was not proper. F or this, Pre-bid Meeting(s) could 
have taken place and thereafter, a fresh tender could have been floated for maintaining 
transparency in accordance with established guidelines. The Committee, therefore, 
suggest the Ministry of Mines and the Company manage ment to address irregularities, 
improve procurement processes, and ensure fair competition and maintaining public 
trust while undertaking public projects. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee and wil l ensure 
compliance of the directives. This is to submit that in general, HCL conducts pre -bid 
meetings in case of new/specialized and high value contracts. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 38 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
SALVAGE VALUE OF THE COT PLANT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
15. The Committee note that the COT plant at MCP could not be commissioned and 
on termination of the contract, HCL had encashed the Bank Guarantee of Rs.8.49 crore 
on 28.09.2020 against Security Deposit of the contract and black listed M/s STPL which 
are positive steps indeed towards recovering costs associated with the terminated 
contract. The Committee also note that the Company had also filed a claim of 
Rs.235.17 crore before the Resolution Process in the NCLT, Chennai against M/s 
STPL, however, NCLAT vide its order dated 07.10.2021 ordered for stay on NCLT order 
dated 09.08.2021 for initiating Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). The 
Committee further note that the tendering action for appointment of an external agen cy 
to assess the usefulness of COT plant at MCP was under process and the due date of 
opening of the bid was 24.07.2023, and also acknowledge the fact that the entire case 
is under litigation under various forums for which prior permission are to be requir ed 
from concerned agencies. The Committee desire that efforts should be made for 
vacation of stay by NCLAT and necessary permission should be taken for further action 
in the matter. 
 

 
 
 
28 
 
Reply of the Government 
Stay by NCLAT was vacated by court order in the m onth of June 2023. However, 
INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD OF INDIA (IBBA) vide its order dated 
19.06.2023 suspended the Resolution Professional (RP) appointed in the CIRP of M/s 
STPL. HCL filed IA for appointment of new RP so that further CIRP proceeding s could 
be started. NCLT vide order dated 06.11.2023 appointed new RP in the matter. New RP 
started claim verification of all the claimant and asked HCL to submit Form B in place of 
Form F. HCL submitted both the Forms on 30.01.2024 along with supporting 
documents. After several mail communications, RP vide mail dated 04.03.2024 
informed that HCL’s claim is placed as “Non -Acceptable”. On 06.04.2024 HCL has filed 
an application with NCLT Chennai to direct the RP to accept the HCL’s claim. HCL has 
entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of the equipment installed in the COT 
plant at MCP (Work Order issued on 16 - Oct-2023). M/s MECON has submitted their 
report and they have inter -alia stated that “the major equipment has also got 
deteriorated and most o f the process equipment installed in the said COT plant like 
spiral concentrator, low intensity magnetic separator, etc., are not in a condition to work 
to meet the process requirement” and that “the existing COT plant as a whole can’t 
beuseful to produce desired products by modifying or replacing the individual equipment 
as mentioned in the present report”. HCL has planned to dispose -off the COT Plant in 
quick succession to maximize the salvage value of the unutilized assets. Therefore, 
HCL has requested CBI to give a No Object Certificate vide letter dated 06.09.2024. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
16. The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should continue its efforts to recover 
losses, make informed decisions about the plant's salvage value, prevent similar 
incidents in the future, and maintain transparency and compliance throughout the 
process. The Committee would also suggest the Company to continue to actively 
engage in legal proceedings to recover the claimed amount and any additional costs 
incurred and believe that HCL's approach of filing complaints, FIRs, and involving law 
enforcement agencies against M/s STPL Directors is necessary for holding parties 
accountable. The Comm ittee further opine that the valuation report prepared by a 
Government- approved valuers or other accredited ones provide a credible and reliable 
estimation of the plant's value and this report should be utilized as a reference point for 
making informed de cisions about the plant's future. Further, the ongoing tendering 
action to appoint an external agency to assess the usefulness of the COT plant is a 
crucial step. 

 
 
 
29 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding Legal proceedings to recover the claimed amount, HCL has fi led the 
mediation application at Calcutta High Court mediation centre which is a pre requisite as 
per section 12A for filing a commercial (recovery) suit. In case directors of M/s STPL do 
not turn up for mediation or mediation failed, Commercial Court will  admit the HCL’s 
Commercial/recovery suit. Directors of M/s STPL did not appear for mediation even 
after three notices, this the Mediation failed vide Mediation Centre notice dated 
10.07.2024. HCL is now in process of filing the recovery suit. Regarding fi ling 
complaints, FIRs, and involving law enforcement agencies against M/s STPL Directors , 
HCL had already lodged FIR on 05.08.2022 at Karaya Police Station, Kolkata. CBI is 
also enquiring the matter vide FIR dated 25.08.2022. CBI has requested HCL to transfer 
the FIR lodged at Karaya Police Station to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in 
the month of Nov 2023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter was 
listed for hearing on 01.04.2024, however matter was not heard. HCL is trying to 
expedite the matter for early hearing. HCL on several occasions has mentioned the 
matter before the court for early hearing. Regarding valuation report of the COT plant by 
a Govt approved valuer, the Company will take suitable action in due course of time 
after deliberation on the report submitted by M/s MECON on the usefulness of the COT 
plant. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Disciplinary Action against erring Officials 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
17. The Committee note that the setting up of COT plant at MCP was a case of 
deliberate misrepresentation of gold content in tailings to the Board of HCL, leading to a 
significant financial loss for the Government. Though the involvement of high -ranking 
officials, both serving and retired, has been identified and disciplinary actions with a 
criminal investigation have been initiated, the Committee note that some officials are 
scot free due to retirement rules. The situation underscores the need for stronger 
internal controls, transparent investigations, and reforms to ensure accountability even 
post retirement. To address this issue, the Committee are of the view that it's crucial to 
ensure a thorough, transparent, and timely investigation by the CBI while pursu ing 
recovery of Government losses. Change in retirement rules, strengthening internal 
controls, promoting ethical behaviour, and enhancing oversight mechanisms are 
necessary. The Committee also feel strongly that CPSUs cannot be left totally 
independent in  making such an important decisions involving investments of large 
scale, otherwise such incidents would be coming again and again. At this stage, the role 

 
 
 
30 
 
of the nodal Ministry becomes important to create fool proof ways and means to keep a 
watch over the ir activities and take necessary and timely intervention. Therefore, the 
Committee urge both the Ministry of Mines and HCL to ensure proactive policy reviews, 
and continuous monitoring of actions against wrongdoers which will prevent future 
incidents and uphold transparency and accountability. The Committee would also like to 
be appraised of the status of the CBI case(s) registered in the matter of disciplinary 
action against the officers of HCL, particularly FIR No. RC2172022A0007 lodged on 
31.08.2022 by CBI on the basis of its enquiry/investigation.. 
Reply of the Government 
The status of FIR lodged by CBI are as under: CBI has requested HCL to transfer the 
FIR lodged at Karaya Police Station to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in the 
month of Nov 2 023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter was listed 
for hearing on 01.04.2024, however the matter was not heard. HCL is trying to expedite 
the matter for early hearing. HCL on several occasions has mentioned the matter before 
the court for early hearing. CBI, New Delhi has initiated detailed investigation and 
collected documents in respect of the above mentioned FIR. 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
 
31 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

 
 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
OTHER EXAMPLES OF SUCH PROJECTS IN INDIA OR GLOBALLY 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
1. The Committee are not happy to note that HCL justified their decision to proceed 
with the unproven technology based on claims from a specific company at a mining 
exhibition. H CL explained that due to the uniqueness of the project and the lack of 
precedent, a pilot plant was established for testing before considering full -scale 
implementation. HCL stated the absence of proven technology in this specific domain 
globally. However, the Company could not provide any information/record on the matter. 
The Committee, therefore, feel that before implementing the project of recovering 
valuable metals from copper ore tailings, the Company could have conducted research 
and due diligence for  available technology/process. The Committee is not convinced 
with the version of HCL that no such information/study/work is available in the country 
or abroad and therefore awarded the work to M/s STPL without exploring the availability 
of the required te chnology. The Company’s management, at any point of time did not 
consult the global copper mining leading companies. They also did not float Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for the purpose. It has come to the notice that certain copper mines in 
Mexico has condu cted study for recovering the values in gold and silver out of copper 
tailings. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company should have explored 
global best practices, and Request for Proposal (RFP) for extracting gold and silver 
from copper taili ngs would have been floated after consulting such Companies. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons of such omissions. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees with the observation of the Committee. From the 
scrutiny of the records available, no reasons could be ascertained for such omission. 
However as submitted earlier, HCL has put in place a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company.   
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
“Factually verified and no further comments.” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
 
33 
 
GROUNDS FOR CHOOSING M/s STPL FOR KCC  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
2. From the information furnished to the Committee, it is clear that the decision to 
choose M/s Star Trace Pvt. Ltd. (STPL) for the pilot project at Khetri Copper Complex 
(KCC) is based on a series of considerations, including their claimed expertise, previous 
interactions, and self -claimed 30 technology capabilities. The Committee find that M/s 
STPL claimed themselves to have the requisite technology for extracting minerals from 
Copper Ore Tailings (COT), which was reportedly made during the INDABA Mining 
Conference and Exhibition at Cape town in South Africa and was never verified. The 
claimed technology primarily involved Magnetic & Gravity separators with an emphasis 
on dry proce sses. The Committee note that no documentary supporting these claims 
were asked for/made available before awarding the pilot project. The Committee feel, 
that if documents would have been shared with, the matter would have been resolved 
ab-initio which was not done by HCL. The Committee, therefore, desire that such issues 
in future be shared with Ministry in time for proper guidance/direction. The Committee 
take serious note on the fact that M/s STPL was chosen for the pilot project based on 
their claimed e xpertise and awarding project without documentary evidence to 
substantiate their claims raises concerns about the decision - making process. The 
Committee, further feel that a more rigorous evaluation and due diligence process, 
along with transparent documentation, would have enhanced the credibility and success 
of such projects. The Committee therefore, recommend that the selection of a company 
for a significant project should be based on comprehensive documentation, sufficient 
past experience and evidence of their claimed capabilities. The use of verbal claims 
should always be supported by technical documentation and studies. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the reasons of such omissions. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that following the advice of the Committee, for implementation of any new 
technology based project, HCL has already put in place a Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for adoption of new technology in the Company. In addition, as 
advised, HCL will share the details of any such projects with Ministry in time for proper 
guidance/direction. 
 [Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“The reasons behind the omission of comprehensive documentation, sufficient past 
experience and evidence before selection of M/s STPL were not Stated by the 
Company as desired by the Committee.” 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
34 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
3. Further, the choice of KCC as the site for the pilot project was influenced by 
various factors, including the lifting of 30,000 tonnes of COT from KCC by M/s STPL 
and the need for creating space at Khe tri tailing pond. These considerations, along with 
the potential for profitability, were likely played a role in choosing KCC as the project 
site. The Committee further note that the Sub Committee of Board of Directors (SCoBD) 
meetings provided recommendations for analyzing the business plan and credentials of 
the short-listed qualified party, M/s STPL. The aim was to ensure a detailed evaluation 
before proceeding. However, the recommendations of SCoBD were not fully complied 
with, and instead, in the subsequent meeting held on 15.04.2016, SCoBD noted that the 
Company had signed a contract agreement with M/s.31 Star Trace Pvt Ltd, Chennai, for 
setting up of 200 tons per day pilot plant facility at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) for 
extracting minerals and mater ials from copper ore tailings lying at Malanjkhand and 
Khetri. The Committee would like to know the reason of not considering the 
recommendations of SCOBD and desire that due weightage should be accorded to the 
recommendations of sub-committees of BOD in future. 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that HCL agrees to the observations of the Committee as above. In 
future, due weightage would be given to the recommendations of SCoBD.  
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of the C&AG 
 
“The Company had not submitted any reasons of not considering the recommendations 
of creating space at Khetri tailing pond. These considerations, along with the potential 
for profitability, were likely played a role in ch oosing KCC as the project site. The 
Committee further note that the Sub Committee Board of Directors (SCoBD) meetings 
provided recommendations for analysing the business plan and credentials of the 
shortlisted qualified party, M/s STPL. The aim was to ensu re a detailed evaluation 
before proceeding. However, the recommendations of SCoBD were not fully complied 
with, and instead, in the subsequent meeting held on 15.04.2016, SCoBD noted that the 
Company had signed a contract agreement with M/s. Star Trace Pvt . Ltd., Chennai, for 
setting up of 200 tons per day pilot plant facility at Khetri Copper Complex (KCC) for 
extracting minerals and materials from copper ore tailings lying at Malanjkhand and 
Khetri. The Committee would like to know the reasons of not cons idering the 
recommendations of SCoBD and desire that due weightage should be accorded to the 
recommendations of sub-committees of BOD in future.” 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
  

 
 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
SALVAGE VALUE OF THE COT PLANT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
4. The Committee note that the COT plant at MCP could not be commissioned and 
on termination of the contract, HCL had encashed the Bank Guarantee of Rs.8.49 crore 
on 28.09.2020 against Security Deposit of the contract and blacklisted M/s STPL which 
are positive s teps indeed towards recovering costs associated with the terminated 
contract. The Committee also note that the Company had also filed a claim of 
Rs.235.17 crore before the Resolution Process in the NCLT, Chennai against M/s 
STPL, however, NCLAT vide its order dated 07.10.2021 ordered for stay on NCLT order 
dated 09.08.2021 for initiating Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). The 
Committee further note that the tendering action for appointment of an external agency 
to assess the usefulness of COT p lant at MCP was under process and the due date of 
opening of the bid was 24.07.2023, and also acknowledge the fact that the entire case 
is under litigation under various forums for which prior permission are to be required 
from concerned agencies. The Comm ittee desire that efforts should be made for 
vacation of stay by NCLAT and necessary permission should be taken for further action 
in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Stay by NCLAT was vacated by court order in the month of June 2023. However, 
INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY BOARD OF INDIA (IBBA) vide its order dated 
19.06.2023 suspended the Resolution Professional (RP) appointed in the CIRP of M/s 
STPL. HCL filed IA for appointment of new RP so that further CIRP proceedings could 
be started. NCLT vide order dated 06.11.2023 appointed new RP in the matter. New RP 
started claim verification of all the claimant and asked HCL to submit Form B in place of 
Form F. HCL submitted both the Forms on 30.01.2024 along with supporting 
documents. After several mail  communications, RP vide mail dated 04.03.2024 
informed that HCL’s claim is placed as “Non -Acceptable”. On 06.04.2024 HCL has filed 
an application with NCLT Chennai to direct the RP to accept the HCL’s claim. HCL has 
entrusted M/s MECON to evaluate the usefulness of the equipment installed in the COT 
plant at MCP (Work Order issued on 16 - Oct-2023). M/s MECON has submitted their 
report and they have inter -alia stated that “the major equipment has also got 
deteriorated and most of the process equipment inst alled in the said COT plant like 
spiral concentrator, low intensity magnetic separator, etc., are not in a condition to work 
to meet the process requirement” and that “the existing COT plant as a whole can’t be 
useful to produce desired products by modifyi ng or replacing the individual equipment 
as mentioned in the present report”. HCL has planned to dispose -off the COT Plant in 
quick succession to maximize the salvage value of the unutilized assets. Therefore, 
HCL has requested CBI to give a No Object Certificate vide letter dated 06.09.2024.  
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 

 
 
 
36 
 
 
Vetting Comments of the Office of C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
5. The Committee are of the opinion that HCL should continue its efforts to recover 
losses, make informed decisions about the plant' s salvage value, prevent similar 
incidents in the future, and maintain transparency and compliance throughout the 
process. The Committee would also suggest the Company to continue to actively 
engage in legal proceedings to recover the claimed amount and an y additional costs 
incurred and believe that HCL's approach of filing complaints, FIRs, and involving law 
enforcement agencies against M/s STPL Directors is necessary for holding parties 
accountable. The Committee further opine that the valuation report pr epared by a 
Government approved valuers or other accredited ones provide a credible and reliable 
estimation of the plant's value and this report should be utilized as a reference point for 
making informed decisions about the plant's future. Further, the on going tendering 
action to appoint an external agency to assess the usefulness of the COT plant is a 
crucial step. 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding Legal proceedings to recover the claimed amount, HCL has filed the 
mediation application at Calcutta High Court mediation centre which is a pre requisite as 
per section 12A for filing a commercial ( recovery) suit. In case directors of M/s STPL do 
not turn up for mediation or mediation failed, Commercial Court will admit the HCL’s 
Commercial/recovery suit. Directors of M/s STPL did not appear for mediation even 
after three notices, this the Mediation failed vide Mediation Centre notice dated 
10.07.2024. HCL is now in process of filing the recovery suit. Regarding filing 
complaints, FIRs, and involving law enforcement agencies against M/s STPL Directors , 
HCL had already lodged FIR on 05.08.2022 at Karaya Police Station, Kolkata. CBI is 
also enquiring the matter vide FIR dated 25.08.2022. CBI has requested HCL to transfer 
the FIR lodged at Karaya Police Statio n to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in 
the month of Nov 2023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter was 
listed for hearing on 01.04.2024, however matter was not heard. HCL is trying to 
expedite the matter for early hearing. HCL on several occasions has mentioned the 
matter before the court for early hearing. Regarding valuation report of the COT plant by 
a Govt approved valuer, the Company will take suitable action in due course of time 
after deliberation on the report submitted by M/s MECON on the usefulness of the COT 
plant.  
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 

 
 
 
37 
 
Vetting Comments of the Office of C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments” 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
6. The Committee note that the setting up of COT plant at MCP was a case of 
deliberate misrepresentation of gold content in tailings to the Board of HCL, leading to a 
significant financial loss for the Government. Though the involvement of high -ranking 
officials, both serving and retired, has been identified and disciplinary actions with a 
criminal investigation have been i nitiated, the Committee note that some officials are 
scot free due to retirement rules. The situation underscores the need for stronger 
internal controls, transparent investigations, and reforms to ensure accountability even 
post retirement. To address thi s issue, the Committee are of the view that it's crucial to 
ensure a thorough, transparent, and timely investigation by the CBI while pursuing 
recovery of Government losses. Change in retirement rules, strengthening internal 
controls, promoting ethical beh aviour, and enhancing oversight mechanisms are 
necessary. The Committee also feel strongly that CPSUs cannot be left totally 
independent in making such an important decisions involving investments of large 
scale, otherwise such incidents would be coming again and again. At this stage, the role 
of the nodal Ministry becomes important to create fool proof ways and means to keep a 
watch over their activities and take necessary and timely intervention. Therefore, the 
Committee urge both the Ministry of Mines an d HCL to ensure proactive policy reviews, 
and continuous monitoring of actions against  wrong doers which will prevent future 
incidents and uphold transparency and accountability. The Committee would also like to 
be appraised of the status of the CBI case(s ) registered in the matter of disciplinary 
action against the officers of HCL, particularly FIR No. RC2172022A0007 lodged on 
31.08.2022 by CBI on the basis of its enquiry/investigation. 
Reply of the Government 
The status of FIR lodged by CBI are as under: CBI has requested HCL to transfer the 
FIR lodged at Karaya Police Station to CBI, New Delhi. HCL has filed a petition in the 
month of Nov 2023 at H’ble Calcutta High Court for the same. Lastly matter was listed 
for hearing on 01.04.2024, however the matter  was not heard. HCL is trying to expedite 
the matter for early hearing. HCL on several occasions has mentioned the matter before 
the court for early hearing. CBI, New Delhi has initiated detailed investigation and 
collected documents in respect of the above mentioned FIR.  
[Ministry of Mines] 
(O.M. No. Met3-3/8/2023-METAL III dated) 
 
Vetting Comments of the Office of C&AG 
 
“Factually verified and no further comments.” 

 
 
 
38 
 
 
[Ministry of Mines] 
(No. 548/CA-III/DGA(Mines)/ATN/14 of 2021/18-2022 Dated 30.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 45 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   BAIJAYANT PANDA, 
13 December, 2024                   Chairperson,  
22 Agrahayana, 1946(S)         Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
    
 
  

 
 
 
39 
 
APPENDIX – I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 13th December, 2024 from 1030 hrs. to 1040 
hrs. in Room No. ‘147’ (Chairperson’s Chamber), Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda        -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2.  Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
3.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
4.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5.  Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6.  Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
  
Rajya Sabha 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
11.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
12.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the two draft Reports.  
The Committee then considered and adopted the following two draft report s, without any 
changes/modifications, on the following two selected subjects: - 
  

 
 
 
40 
 
i. ‘Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) (Comprehensive Examination); and 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on “ Unfruitful 
Expenditure Towards Construction of Copper Ore Tailings Beneficiation 
Plant relating to HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL)”  [Based on Audit 
Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 on]. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by C &AG and concerned Ministry/Department 
and presenting the Reports during the ongoing session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
41 
 
APPENDIX - II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (17th LS) on “UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE TOWARDS 
CONSTRUCTION OF COPPER ORE TAILINGS BENEFICIATION PLANT” RELATING 
TO HINDUSTAN COPPER LIMITED (HCL) 
(Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No.14 of 2021) 
I Total number of recommendations 21 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
[ vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
1,2,3,4,6,7,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 & 20] 
Total - 15 
 
 
 
 
Percentage-71.42% 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies. 
                         Nil 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage –0.00% 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration. 
[ vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5,8 & 9] 
Total -   03  
 
 
 
Percentage –14.29% 
V Observations/Recommendations to which the 
Government has furnished interim replies. 
[ vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 18,19 & 21] 
Total - 03 
 
 
Percentage –14.29% 
 
 
 