12 
    
 
 
IREL (INDIA) LIMITED 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii  
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
IREL (INDIA) LIMITED 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 March, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 March, 2025  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2025/ Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 


iii  
CPU No. 1065 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 
 
 
  

iv  
CONTENTS 
(i) COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) vi 
(iv) INTRODUCTION vii 
(v) ABBREVIATIONS viii 
 
PART – I  
  PAGE 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION  
Background 1 
Mandate and Vision 1 
Mission 1 
Quantum of Rare Earth Reserve in India 2 
Global Landscape for Rare Earths 2 
Business Overview 2 
Share Capital and Shareholding Pattern 3 
 Location of IREL’s different Facilities 4 
 CSR Activities 4 
 IREL-IDCOL Limited 6 
 Challenges and Risks 7 
 
CHAPTER II PERFORMANCE OF THE COMPANY  
Physical and Financial Performances of IREL 9 
IREL’s Operations at a Glance 9 
Product Profile 11 
Marketing and Export 12 
Strategic Application of IREL’s Products 14 
Introduction of New Products 15 
Contribution to India’s Nuclear Energy Programme 16 
Major Project Completed 16 
Major Projects Ongoing  17 
Investment Plan for the next 5 years 19 
Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat Initiatives 20 
IREL’s Main Competitors 21 
Competitive Advantage of IREL 22 
China’s Dominance in the Global RE Market 22 
Major Achievements 23 
Environmental Sustainability 24 
Research and Development (R&D) initiatives 26 
Long-term Goals 27 
 
CHAPTER III CORPORATE GOVERNANCE  
Board of Directors 28 
Human Resource 30 
Women Participation 31 
Employee Welfare and Capacity Building 31 
Risk Management and Compliances 33 
 
PART – II 
                              Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 38 

v  
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Commit tee on Public 
Undertakings (2024-25) held on 25.09.2024 
46 
II. Minutes of the 19 th Sitting of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2024-25)  held on 16.12.2024 
48 
III. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee  on Public 
Undertakings (2024-25)  held on 16.12.2024 
51 
IV. Minutes of the 32nd Sitting of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2024-25) held on 24.03.2025 
54 
 
  

vi  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
                                 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson 
                                          Members 
                                       LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.    Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
                     10.  Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
                                    RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.   Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh - Executive Officer 

vii  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024 -25), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  Twelfth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘IREL (India) Limited’. 
2.  The Commit tee on Public  Undertakings (2024 -25) selected the said subject for  
detailed examination. The Committee on Public Undertakings (202 4-25) was briefed 
about the subject by  the representatives of the IREL on 25 September, 202 4 and 
thereafter took their evidence on  16 December, 2024. The Committee also took oral 
evidence of the representatives of the  administrative Department, the Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) on 16 December, 2024. 
3.  The Committee (2024 -25) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting  
held on 24 March, 2025. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of IREL and 
DAE for tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information 
to them in connection with examination of the subject. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of the 
Report. 
 
 
New Delhi:   
24 March, 2025  
04 Chaitra, 1947(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA  
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

viii  
ABBREVIATIONS 
1. AMD - Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research 
2. BARC - Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
3. BSM - Beach Sand Minerals 
4. CAGR - Compounded Annual Growth Rate 
5. CAPEX - Capital Expenditure 
6. CERT-IN - Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
7. CEO - Chief Executive Officer 
8. CMD - Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
9. CPSU - Central Public Sector Undertaking 
10. CRO - Chief Risk Officer 
11. CRZ - Coastal Regulation Zone 
12. CSIR - Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
13. CSR - Corporate Social Responsibility 
14. DAE - Department of Atomic Energy 
15. DLP System - Data Loss Prevention System 
16. DMRL - Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory 
17. DPE - Department of Public Enterprises 
18. EC - Environmental Clearance 
19. EMS - Environmental Management System 
20. ERM - Enterprise Risk Management 
21. EVs - Electric Vehicles 
22. FAS - Financial Accounting Software  
23. FC - Forest Clearance 
24. GDP - Gross Domestic Product  
25. Ha - Hectare 
26. HAL - Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
27. HREE - Heavy Rare Earth Elements 
28. IDCOL - Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha Limited 
29. IDS/IPS - Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems 
30. IGCAR - Indira Gandhi Centre of Atomic Research 
31. IND-AS - Indian Accounting Standard 
32. IRELTDC - IREL Technology Development Council  
33. IITs - Indian Institutes of Technology 
34. ISO - International Organisation of Standardisation 

ix  
35. JV - Joint Venture 
36. JVA - Joint Venture Agreement 
37. KMML - Kerala Minerals and Metals Limited 
38. Ktpa - Thousand tonnes per annum 
39. LED - Light Emitting Diode 
40. LoI - Letter of Intent 
41. LREE - Light Rare Earth Elements 
42. MCA - Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
43. MDO - Mine Development Office 
44. MFA - Multi Factor Authentication 
45. MMDR Act - Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act 
46. MoU - Memorandum of Understanding 
47. MREC - Mixed Rare Earth Concentrate 
48. MRECL - Mixed Rare Earth Chloride 
49. MSE - Micro and Small Enterprises 
50. Nd-Pr - Neodymium-Praseodymium 
51. NFC - Nuclear Fuel Complex  
52. NGO - Non-Governmental Organisation  
53. NIC - National Informatics Centre 
54. NITs - National Institutes of Technology 
55. NUS - Non-Unionised Supervisors 
56. OSCOM - Odisha Sands Complex 
57. PAT - Profit After Tax 
58. RE - Rare Earth 
59. REE -  Rare Earth Elements 
60. REO - Rare Earth Oxide 
61. REPM - Rare Permanent Magnet 
62. RMC  - Risk Management Committee 
63. R&D - Research and Development 
64. SmCo5  / 
Sm2Co17 
- Samarium-Cobalt Magnets 
65. TAMIN - Tamil Nadu Minerals Limited 
66. TBC - Thermal Barrier Coating 
67. TiO2 - Titanium dioxide 
68. UKTMP JSC - Ust-Kamenogorsk Titanium & Magnesium Plant Joint 
Stock Company, Kazakhstan 

x  
69. USB - Universal Serial Bus 
 
 
 
 

1  
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Background 
1.1 Indian Rare Earths Limited,  whose current name is  IREL (India) Limited , was 
founded in the year 1950. It is a wholly owned Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) 
of the Government of India, under the administrative c ontrol of the Department of Atomic 
Energy (DAE ). It plays a vital role in India's atomic energy sector, particularly in the 
mining and processing of rare earth minerals and heavy minerals. The Company operates 
mining and mineral processing plants across Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Its activities 
align with national priorities, including self -reliance in critical  minerals, defenc e 
applications and nuclear energy. It  is a multi-unit-multi-product ‘Mini Ratna’ Category – I 
CPSU with “Excellent” MoU rating over the last six consecutive years. The Company’s  
key activities include Mining and Processing, Production, Research and Development, 
Thorium Extraction and Exports.  
Mandate and Vision 
1.2 IREL's mandate is to produce atomic minerals and rare earths, contributing  to 
India's strategic nuclear program and various commercial sectors. Its vision is to be a 
significant contributor to the global clean energy mission by providing high -quality 
materials in a responsible manner.  
 
Mission 
1.3 IREL’s mission statement is as under: 
 To maintain a global reputation and sustainably grow the core business of heavy 
minerals and rare earths by expanding mining, mineral processing, and rare earth 
refining asset base domestically and globally. 
 To adopt best in class sustainable and technologically advanced business 
processes and practices across the value chain. 
 To foster long term and credible relationships with customers by pursuing a 
customer first focus. 
 To cultivate a conducive environment for  continuous improvement, growth  and 
empowerment of current and prospective employees. 

2  
 To abide by and promote the highest standards of ethics, governance and integrity 
in executing responsibilities and managing relationships.   
Quantum of Rare Earths Reserves in India 
1.4 As furnished i n a written reply regarding quantum of rare earth reserves 
available for mining in India, the principal ore of rare earth (RE) in India is Mineral 
Sands, commonly known as BSM (Beach Sand Minerals) within which a prescribed 
substance Monazite occurs, which  is a phosphate compound of REs, Uranium and  
Thorium. In the said source, the availability of RE is reported to be 0.056 -0.058% in 
the form of RE oxide (REO). As per the geological information available, the reported 
RE resources in India is about 6.9 mill ion tons. Apart from low concentration of REO, 
mineability is further constrained due to CRZ (coastal regulation zone) regulations, 
mangroves, forest land and uncontrolled inhabitation.  
 
Global Landscape for Rare Earths  
1.5 As furnished by the Company, a s per the geological information available, India 
accounts for around 6% of RE reserves which amounts to around 6.9 million tons out of 
the total global reserves. India has fifth largest reserves of rare earth elements ( REEs). 
India is among three to four Countries globally having the capability to produce refined 
REEs, the other Countries being China and Malaysia . China has established a near -
monopoly in the global rare earth market, controlling approximately 60 -70% of global 
production and 85-90% of RE processing capacity.  
Business Overview 
1.6 IREL is involved in mining and processing of BSM which contain Ilmenite, Rutile, 
Zircon, M onazite, etc . These minerals are essential for various industries, including 
aerospace, ceramic s and nuclear power.  IREL mines and processes  these atomic 
minerals containing REEs which are often found together in their natural state . Atomic 
minerals are suite of seven minerals, details of which are as under: 
(i) llmenite, Rutile, Leucoxene - Titanium bearing minerals,  
(ii) Zircon - a Zirconium bearing mineral,  
(iii) Sillimanite - a silicate of Aluminium,  
(iv) Garnet - Iron-Aluminium silicate,  
(v) Monazite - phosphatic mineral of Rare Earths, Thorium and Uranium. 

3  
1.7 In India, these minerals are mined from raw beach sands  commonly known as 
Beach Sand Minerals (BSM) ore. Ilmenite, Silimanite and Garnet are produced in high 
quantity, but their prices are generally low in the market. On the other hand, volume of 
production of Monazite, Zircon and Rutile are lower, but they command high  prices in the 
market The total installed mineral production capacity is 750 K tons per annum (Ktpa). 
1.8 There are 17 REE s, out of which India produces about eight REE s that include  
Lanthanum, Cerium, Praseodymium, Neodymium, Gadolinium, Dysprosium and 
Samarium. While REEs are not truly rare in terms of abundance in the Earth’s crust, they 
are rarely found in concentrated and economically viable deposits. Additionally, the 
process of extracting and refining these elements is complex, requiring specialized 
technology and inf rastructure, so to obtain rare earths at usable purity requires 
processing enormous amounts of raw ore at great expense, thus the name "rare earths”.  
1.9 Moreover, REEs such as Thorium and Uranium which come from Monazite are 
radioactive and handling them  is a difficult task. In this context, representatives of  
Department of Atomic Energy (D AE), during  oral evidence before  the Committee , 
explained as under: 
“…I would just like to tell you what we mean by Ra re Earths… These are Cerium, 
Praseodymium, Neodymium, etc. They are called rare earth elements. These rare 
earth elements are very difficult to extract, partly because they come from a 
mineral called Monazite. Monazite, not only contains these elements, but also 
contains Thorium and Uran ium, which are radioactive. This mineral has certain 
radiation content and because of this, it has to be very carefully dealt with.”  
 
1.10 Due to their critical app lications in electronics, defenc e, and renewable energy, 
REEs have gained strategic importa nce globally. IREL caters to nuclear energy, defenc e 
and space sectors  by supplying critical rare earths to these industries. Over 90% of its 
customers in India are in MSE  (Micro and Small Enterprises)  category. Total revenue  
from exports of some of the non -strategic heavy minerals such as Ilmenite and Garnet 
consistently ranges from 40 to 50% of the sales . Revenue from operations has grown at 
CAGR of over 26%.  
Share Capital and Shareholding Pattern 
1.11 IREL is 100% owned by Government of India. The authorized share capital is 
₹1,000 crore ( 1,00,00,000 Equity shares of ₹ 1,000/- each) and the paid -up share capital 

4  
is ₹345.46 crore (34,54,600 Equity shares of ₹1,000/- each fully paid up).The Company is 
not listed on Stock Exchanges.  
Location of IREL’s different facilities 
1.12 Location of IREL’s Mineral production units are in Manavalakurichi (MK), 
Kanyakumari district, Tamil Nadu; Chavara, Kollam district, Kerala and Orissa Sands 
Complex (OSCOM), Ganjam di strict in Odisha. The Chemical units are the Rare Earth 
Extraction Plant located in OSCOM, Ganjam district in Odisha while the Rare Earth 
Refining Plant is located in Udyogmandal, Aluva, Kerala. The Corporate Research Centre 
is in Kollam, Kerala and the Re gistered Corporate Office in Mumbai.  As furnished by the 
Company, there are no offices/units abroad.  
1.13 All production units of the Company are certified by ISO: 9001:2015, 
ISO:14001:2015 and ISO:45001:2018. All the R&D centres are NABL accredited as per  
ISO/IEC 17025 standard. 
1.14 The following pictogram shows an overview of locations of IREL’s various facilities: 
  
 
CSR Activities  
1.15 Details of IREL’s CSR allocation and expenditure in the last 5 years are given in 
the Table below: 


5  
 
1.16 The following Table shows the amount and the areas where the above CSR funds 
have been utilized during each of the above-mentioned last five years, area-wise: 
                                                                                                    (Amount in ₹ Lakhs) 
Area/Intervention 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Preventive health, Water 
supply and sanitation 
65.47 130.57 482.32 611.70 824.86 
Education Empowerment 
enhancing skills 
21.44 47.15 58.93 194.32 319.69 
Environment Sustainability  19.93 11.79 40.97 24.73 
Protection of culture, 
heritage, etc. 
21.96 6.31 4.20 21.82 35.44 
Armed forces  2.00    
PM Cares  100.00    
Rural development project 146.10 116.18 200.98 139.71 217.20 
Promoting gender equality, 
old age homes 
  12.55 63.53 39.23 
Promotion of Sports 2.91     
Disaster Management 
including relief, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction activities 
13.92     
Development of Aspirational 
district 
     
Skill development     64.61 
Female child empowerment      
Administrative Overheads    27.15 76.26 
Total (Amount in ₹ Lakhs) 271.80 422.15 770.77 1099.20 1602.02 
FY Carry 
forward 
balance of 
previous 
year (if any) 
 
(₹ in Lakh) 
Budget 
Allocation 
of current 
year 
 
(₹ in Lakh) 
Total CSR 
allocation 
 
(₹ in Lakh) 
% of 
allocation of 
the average 
of PAT of 
last 3 years 
Total 
expenditure 
during the 
current year 
 
(₹ in Lakh) 
 
Balance 
2020-21 Nil 484.49  484.49  2 422.15  62.34 
2021-22 62.34 678.61  678.61 2 770.77  9.01 
2022-23 9.01 1053.17  1053.17 2 1099.20  Nil 
2023-24 Nil 1536.22 1536.22 2 1602.02 Nil 

6  
IREL-IDCOL Limited  
1.17 As furnished by IREL, IREL -IDCOL Limited is a Joint Venture  (JV) Company of 
IREL (India) Limited and Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha Limited (IDCOL) 
incorporated on 18.01.20 18 with IREL holding minimum 51% and IDCOL holding upto 
49% of the share capital of the JV Company.  
 
1.18 The objective of IREL-IDCOL Limited is given below: 
a) To mine and separate the minerals from beach sand and to market t hose 
minerals anywhere in the world. 
b) Enter into foreign collaboration agreement for value addition, as and when 
required. 
 
1.19 A CEO and a Project Co -Ordinator has been appointed for the JV Company. A 
mining Officer of IREL is assisting the Project Co -Ordinator in matters related to JV 
Company. Rest of the manpower support is occasional and being drawn from major 
partner of JV i.e., IREL As per Article of Association, the strength of Board members is 
15. At present total seven comprising four IREL Directors and three IDCOL Directors are 
in place.  
 
1.20 As submitted, As per MMDR Act and relevant statute, obtaining various statutory 
clearances is pre -requisite to mining operation. Pre -project activities of the JV Company 
are underway to secure statutory clearances for obtaining mining lease. Post receipt of 
statutory clearances mining lease deed would be executed with State Government of 
Odisha. Thereafter the project would be operational.  
 
1.21 Commenting on the genesis of IREL -IDCOL and the delay in the starting of the 
operation, the representatives of IREL in the Committee sitting held on 25.09.2024 has 
submitted as under: 
“…यह  जेवी  हमने  18 जनवरी , 2018 में फॉमम किया था। इसिा प्रमुख उद्देश्य यह  था कि हमने  एि 
रेयर  अथम प्रोडक्शन िे लिए 11 हजार  टन  िा पिाांट एस्टैब्लिश किया था, िकिन  उसिे लिए हमारे  
पास  लसफम 40 परसेंट िच्चा माि एविेबि  था। इसलिए, हमें एडडशनि  माइननांग िीजेज चाहहए  थी। 
उसिे प्रोसेस में हमने  यह  जेवी  बनािर  माइननांग िीज िेने  िी िोलशश िी। स्टेट गवनममेंट से इसलिए 
जेवी  बनाया , ताकि हमें क्िीयरेंस जल्दी लमि जाएां। िेकिन , वैसा  नहीां हो  पाया।  इसिे बारे  में मैं 
आपिो  आगे बताऊ ां गा। इसमें जो िीज िेने  िा प्रोसेस है , इसमें सबसे  पहिे  एि गवनममेंट एजेंसी 

7  
एएमडी  है , जो एक्सपिोरेशन ररपोटम सबलमट  िरती  है।  हमने  हिाांकि वर्म 2015 में अपना  ररक्वेस्ट 
डािा  था, िेकिन  वह  एक्सपिोरेशन ररपोटम अप्रैि, 2019 में आई थी। उसिे बाद  स्टेट गवनममेंट िो 
िोऑडडमनेट्स डेविप  िरने  होते  हैं, ब्जसमें िैंड ररिॉडम िी उपिलधता  आती है।  िैंड फॉरेस्ट िैंड है  या 
रेव ेन्यु िैंड, प्राइवेट िैंड है  या गवनममेंट िैंड है , सव े नम्बसम क्या है , ये सारे  प्रोसेस छ: महीने  में पूरे होने  
थे, िेकिन  इसमें डेढ़  साि िा समय िग गया। वह  िगभग अक्टूब र , 2020 में आया। उसिे बाद  
डडपाटममेंट ऑफ एटॉलमि एनजी  प्रॉस्पेब्क्टव िेसी िो नॉलमनेट  िरता  है।  वह  जनवरी , 2021 में हो  
गया था। उसिे बाद  स्टेट गवनममेंट िो लमननस्री ऑफ माइन्स से अप्रूव ि िेना  होता  है , फाइव  वन  
सेक्शन ऑफ एमएमडीआर  एक्ट। उसिे लिए एि महीने  िा समय ननधामररत है।  िेकिन , वह  हमें एि 
साि तीन  महीने  में लमिा था। उसिो िेने  िे बाद  स्टेट गवनममेंट ने  एि िेटर  ऑफ इांटेंट हदया। िेटर  
ऑफ इांटेट लमिने  िे बाद  ही  इसमें आईआरईएि  जेवव  िा रोि  शुरू  होता  है  कि हमें स्टैचुटोरी 
क्िीयरेंस िेना  है।  स्टैचुटोरी क्िीयरेंस में एनवायरमेंट क्िीयरेंस होता  है , सीआरजेड  होता  है  और  
फॉरेस्ट क्िीयरेंस होता  है।  सीआरजेड  और  ईसी में तो हमने  डाटा  ििेक्ट िर  लिया है।  िेकिन , जैसा 
आपिो  फॉरेस्ट क्िीयरेंस िे बारे  में बताया  है , उसिी वजह  से उसमें डडिे  हो  रहा  है।  इस पिाांट िी 
िैपेलसटी  3 िाख टन  होगी।  िगभग 1150 िरोड़  िे आसपास  इसिा आउटिे है।  पे  बैि  पीररयड  छ: 
साि है  और  इांटनमि रेट  ऑफ ररटमन 13.85 परसेंट है। ”  
 
1.22 On being asked about the timeline for starting operation of IREL-IDCOL, IREL has 
stated as under: 
 “Company is under the process of obtaining mining lease for which the 
process of statutory clearances such as EC, FC, CRZ etc. have been taken 
up. Tentatively the operations will start within two to three years from the date 
of getting the mining lease deed executed.”  
 
Challenges and Risks   
1.23 As furnished in a written reply, t he major challenges faced by the Company are as 
under: 
 The RE market is dominated by China. China controls the market in term of price, 
supply and demand. The Company, therefore , has to make its market strategy 
keeping this aspect in mind. 
 Over supply and reduced demand impacting price realization and sales. 
 End of the value chain product of most of IREL’s products are lifestyle products     
viz. TiO2 pigment, Aircraft, etc. Adverse impact on GDP growth affects the 
Company’s sales. 

8  
 Non-availability of proper land records with revenue/ forest departments in the  
state. 
 Environmental and regulatory compliance requirement are time consuming and 
costly. 
 High CAPEX towards forest diversion and long gestation period. 
 Dense inhabitation in coastal areas. Encroachments leading to sterilization of Land 
(e.g. 1144.0618 Ha , only 834 Ha is available for mining, the balance area is 
occupied by settlements, public buildings, roads, etc.) 
 Change of land use and converting the monazite bearing areas into Forest / Eco -
sensitive zones.  In all BSM deposit where G -2/G-3 level explor ation already 
completed by AMD or any State Agency, identified area and its land use pattern 
should not be changed for any developmental program before completion of 
mining and with due concurrence of DAE.  
 Request to nominate state government owned corpor ations as prospective lessee. 
No experience in handling radioactive minerals.  
 Projects related to Atomic Minerals considered akin to bulk minerals. Exemption 
from Public Hearing. 
 Conducting GRAM SABHA under Forest Conservation Act 1980 for diversion of 
forest land within ML area for Atomic Minerals may be exempted. 
 Lobby of illegal miners developed during opening of the sector creates hindrances 
at every step including award of contract. 
 Undue protests from NGOs instigating locals misrepresenting factual information.  
1.24 IREL (India) Limited plays a pivotal role in India’s nuclear and strategic material 
supply chain. In view of  China’s near-monopoly in the global  supply and pricing of REs 
and the imperative need for  India’s self-sufficiency in RE production and supply  to meet 
its domestic requirement and to assess India’s preparedness to face any global geo -
political challenges in terms of RE value chain , the Committee  selected IREL (India ) 
Limited for comprehensive examination . In the succeeding Chapters of the Report, the 
Committee have discussed the main issues pertaining to the Company and in Part -II of 
this Report, the Committee have given their Observations/Recommendations. 

9  
CHAPTER – II 
 
PERFORMANCE OF THE COMPANY 
 
Physical and Financial Performances of IREL 
2.1 The Physical and Financial Performances of IREL for last five years  are 
enumerated in the Table below: 
Particulars 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Production of Minerals 
(Ktpa) 
445 460 494 514 532 
Production of MRCL (tpa) 5034 4433 5578 5581 5872 
Revenue from 
Operations (₹ in Crore) 
1038.74 974.13 1480.00 1897.51 2104.45 
Profit/ (Loss)  
Before Tax (₹ in Crore) 
402.94 415.11 746.68 1144.37 1344.84 
Profit After Tax (PAT) (₹ in 
Crore) 
291.76 315.69 555.57 808.13 1012.22 
 
2.2 As can be seen from the above data, IREL’s production of minerals has been 
increasing in the last 5 years, from 445 Ktpa in 2019 -20 to 532 Ktpa in 2023 -24. The 
same trend can be seen for Chemicals production too, though in a lesser degree, from 
5034 tpa in 2019 -20 to 5872 tpa in 2023 -24. The Company’s Profit After Tax (PAT) has 
also increased significantly in the last 5 years, from ₹291.76 crore in 2019 -20 to ₹1012.22 
crore in 2023-24. There is tremendous increase in PAT in the last 5 years, even thou gh 
the production of Minerals and Chemicals has not increased so much during the same 
time period.  Regarding the Company’s sudden  increase in revenue which is not 
commensurate with that of production, representatives of IREL , during the sitting of the 
Committee, explained as under: 
“… रेव ेन्यू बढ़ा  है , िेकिेन  प्रोडक्शन नहीां बढ़ा , उसिा िारण  यह  है  कि वपछिे  8 सािों में हमने  व ैल्यू 
ऐडेड  प्रॉडक्ट्स इसमें ऐड  किए हैं। अत: इसमें रेयर  अथम व ैल्यू ऐडेड  प्रॉडक्ट्स हैं, ररफाइन्ड रेयर  अथम 
व ैल्यू ऐडेड  प्रॉडक्ट्स हैं, डडस्प्रोब्जयम, ननयोडीलमयम , समेररयम  सारे  व ैल्यू ऐडेड  प्रॉडक्ट्स हैं। अत: 
व ैल्यू ऐडेड  प्रॉडक्ट्स बढ़ने  िे िारण  इसिे रेव ेन्यू और  प्रॉकफट अच्छे आए हैं।  
 
 
IREL’s Operations at a Glance 
2.3 The following pictogram shows an overall view of IREL’s operations:  

10  
 
 
2.4 The Rare Earth Extraction plant has an installed capacity of producing about 
11,200 tpa of mixed Rare Earth concentrate (MREC) and 13,500 tpa of tri -sodium 
phosphate. The plant also produces strategic materials which are supplied to DAE. 
Thorium oxalat e generated  during the process is stored in engineered trenches for 
future use in the 3 rd stage nuclear power programme of the Country.  Rare Earth 
Concentrate produced from the Rare Earth Extraction Plant is further refined to produce 
separated High Pure Rare Earth in its Plant located in Aluva, Kerala.  
 
2.5 The following diagrams show the flow s heet of the entire RE m ining to refining 
process:   
 


11  
 
2.6 As can be seen from the above pictograms, Beach Sand Minerals (BSM) Ore are 
used a raw/source material and after due processing and refining, seven minerals are 
extracted, namely Rutile, Leucoxene, Ilmenite, Garnet, Silimanite, Zircon and Monazite. 
From Mo nazite, rare earths such as Lanthanum, Cerium, Neodymium, Pras eodymium, 
Dysprosium, Gadolinium, along with Uranium and Thorium are extracted, which are used 
in nuclear energy and other fields of strategic importance.  
Product Profile 
2.7 Details of entire range of products of IREL in the Rare Earth, Chemicals and 
Minerals segments are given diagram below: 
                                                     IREL (India) Limited 
 
 
 
Rare Earth Products Chemical Products Mineral Products 
 RECL Flakes  Tri-Sodium Phosphate  Monazite 
 RECL Solution     Thorium Nitrate  Zircon 
 Lanthanum Carbonate/ 
Oxide 
 Thorium Oxalate  Ilmenite 
 Cerrous Carbonate/ Oxide    Rutile 
 Neodymium-Praseodymium 
Oxalate/ Oxide   
  Leucoxene 
 
 Samarium Oxide     Garnet Coarse/ Normal 
 Gadolinium Nitrate     Garnet Fine/ Ultrafine 


12  
 Dysprosium Oxide   Sillimanite 
 Lanthanum Metal   
 Cerium Metal   
 SmCo5 Magnet   
 Sm2Co17 Magnet   
 
 
2.8 It has been submitted that m ineral products such as Ilmenite, Silimanite and 
Garnet are produced in high volume, but they command low price in the market. 
Whereas, Monazite, Zircon and Rutile are produced in lower volume, but they command 
very high price in the market.  
 
Marketing and Export 
 
2.9 As furnished by the Company, Ilmenite, Rutile and Zircon are major minerals being 
sold commercially by IREL in  India. While Ilmenite is available in bulk in the resources 
being exploited by IREL, the resources  are lean in terms of Rutile and Zircon. Hence, 
though the market share for Ilmenite is estimated to be in the range of 70 to 80%,  that for 
Rutile and Zircon is estimated to b e of the order of about 25 -30% an d 10 -15% 
respectively.  It has also been furnished that b eing a Government of India Undertaking, 
IREL caters to the demand of domestic industries and exports only the surplus 
material.  As such, surplus Ilmenite and Garnet are mostly exported.  
 
2.10 It has also been submitted that IREL has consistently been able to garner 
substantial sales revenue from exports due to the consistent quality of products 
exported and timely delivery, meeting global standards.  The total exports revenue has 
been consistently ranging from 40 to 50% of the sales meeting the MoU targets set 
which stands as testimony to IREL’s commitment to earn valuable forex for the Country 
while meeting the core strategic objectives for which IREL was incorporated. The revenue 
from operations have been constantly  increasing at a CAGR of about 22% over the last 
five years.  Regarding e xport, representatives of IREL , during oral evidence before  the 
Committee, stated as under: 
“… we are exporting our products to Asian Countries excluding China. Value -wise 
it is at 39 percent. So, 39 percent we are exporting excluding China, and for Middle 
East, it is around 11 percent. I am talking about value -wise. It is 11 percent for 
Middle East and around 12 percent for Europe and two  per cent for U.S and to 
other Countries, we are exporting 0.3 per cent.”  
 

13  
2.11 Regarding Monazite and other strategic rare earths, it has been submitted that 
Monazite, being associated with radioactivity is not exported for extraction of rare earths 
and other associated materia ls and t he same is proce ssed in -house for production of 
Rare Earths Compounds and strategic materials required by the Department of Atomic 
Energy. However, i ndividual RE Compounds are free from radioactivity and can be 
exported. Among the lighter rare earths that are available in the resources exploited by 
IREL, NdPr (Neodymium-Praseodymium) Oxide has good demand for production of Rare 
Earth Permanent Magnets. However, IREL does not encourage export of this product 
keeping in mind the future requirements for magnet production (as and when the industry 
is set up in India) for Electric Vehicles, etc.  
 
2.12 In a written submission, it has been stated that o ver 90% of IREL customers in 
India are in MSE category. Continuous efforts to reduce the cycle time for servicing these 
customers are made. For export of surplus material,  newer methods of logistics are 
explored for e.g. break bulk shipment of small consignments, in-house stuffing of 
containers. Multimodal transportation adopted for domestic sales of slow -moving lean 
grade Ilmenite from Odisha for boosting sales of this product to customers in Southern 
India owing to reduced logistics cost. For domestic supplies, OTP based  dispatches are 
implemented to make the system foolproof. Despite the Company under entity list of the 
USA, Customer Relationship Management software in open source  is implemented for 
customers to place orders online and get real time information on their orders. 
 
2.13 Explaining how MSMEs work in the minerals value chain, representatives of IREL 
stated, during oral evidence before the Committee, as under: 
“एमएसएमई ज्यादा बड़ी  िांपननयों िे लिए एनलसलिअरी  िा िाम िरती  हैं। जैसे डडफ ें स इांडस्री है  
और  डडफ ें स िे लिए एि क्वालिटेहटव वेब्ल्डांग इिेक्रोड िी जरूरत  पड़ती  है।  हमारा  मेटेररयि  
एमएसएमई में जाता है  और  वह  वेब्ल्डांग इिेक्रोड बनाते  हैं और  वेब्ल्डांग इिेक्रोड लशप  बबब्ल्डांग में 
यूज़ होते  हैं।”   
 
2.14 IREL has also submitted that under the new product development initiative, 
development of high purity dysprosium oxide and gadolinium nitrate hexahydrate has 
been undertaken with close interaction with end-users. Producing these products required 
for strategic nuclear applications from indige nously mined ore insulates  the Country from 
geo-political risk of non-supply from the major supplying Country in India’s neighborhood.  

14  
 
Strategic Application of IREL’s Products  
 
2.15 REEs and their associated minerals play a crucial r ole in modern technology, 
defence, energy, and industrial applications due to their unique magnetic, luminescent, 
and electrochemical properties. The processed mineral products find application in 
number of commercial sectors such as aerospace industry, infrastructure development, 
ceramics, foundries, oil industries etc., while REs are used in niche applications such as 
renewable energy, EVs, space, defence, consumer electronics, etc. IREL contributes to 
the atomic energy programme by way of supplying strategic material to DAE. IREL 
also has excellent contribution for sustenance of more than 2000 industries operating 
in the value chain of its mineral & Rare Earth products.  IREL is significant contributor to 
the global green energy mission by providing high quali ty performance -enhancing 
materials and operating in socially responsible manner.  
 
2.16 The pictograms below show the various applications of REEs and their associated 
minerals:   

15  
 
  
 
 
Introduction of New Products  
2.17 Regarding the new products or technologies the  Company has introduced in the 
last 5 years, the Company has furnished that new technologies have been introduced in 
the field of rare earths applications. Rare Earth Permanent Magnet (REPM) facility at 
BARC Campus, Visakhapatnam has been established to produce Rare Ea rth 
Permanent Magnets (Samarium Cobalt) to meet the requirement of Defence and 
Atomic Energy sectors. The Rare Earth and Titanium Theme Park is established at 
Bhopal to produce RE metals, recovery of REE from end -of-life cycle magnets, 
production of LED/ L amp phosphors, etc. All the above are new products being 
produced in the Country for the first time.  Further, facilities  have also been 
established for extraction of Dysprosium and Gadolinium for strategic applications, 
which are Heavy REE available in Indian resources in traces to the tune of 1 and 7 
ppm only. 
2.18 Besides the above , it has also been furnished that IREL has also developed 
thermal ba rrier coating (TBC) material such as yttrium stabilized zirconia and 
lanthanum zirconate which has application in defence and strategic sectors.  
 
 
 


16  
Contribution to India’s Nuclear Energy Sector  
2.19 The following chart shows the relationship between IRE L and India’s Nuclear 
Programme:  
 
2.20 As furnished by the Company, t he contributions of IREL to India’s nuclear energy 
sector are as under: 
 Supply of Zircon to NFC for production of zirconium alloy to house nuclear fuel.  
 Supply of critical Rare Earths i.e. Gadolinium and Dysprosium to DAE. 
 Supply of Rare Earth Permanent Magnets (Samarium-Cobalt) magnets to DAE. 
The facility for production of Rare Earth Permanent Magnet for use in Atomic 
Energy and Space sectors has been set up at Vizag  which was dedicated to 
the nation by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 11th May 2023.  
 Stockpiling of Thorium for use in 3rd stage atomic power programme. 
 
Major Projects Completed 
 
2.21 Some of the major projects completed by the Company are given below: 
 
a) Rare Earth Permanent Magnet Plant, Vizag, Andhra Pradesh  
 
  IREL has established a Rare Earth Permanent Magnet (REPM) Plant in BARC 
campus at Vizag, Andhra Pradesh for producing Samarium -Cobalt magnets for use in 
strategic sectors of such as Defence and Atomic Energy. IREL has  integrated and 
upscaled the laboratory scale technologies developed by BARC/ DMRL  to industrial 
scale. The facility was dedicated to the nation by Hon’ble  Prime Minister on the occasion 
of “25th Anniversary of the National Technology Day”.  Magnets of designed grades have 
been supplied to BARC and DMRL for testing in end use applications. 

17  
b) Rare Earth Metal Production Facility, Bhopal, MP: 
IREL has established a Rare Earth Metal producing facility at Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh by carrying out indu strial engineering and upscaling the scientific principles 
developed by BARC in laboratory scale. Production of Cerium and Lanthanum metals 
have been operationalized and the metals so produced have been supplied to leading 
R&D institutions and industry to develop specialty steels. 
 
c) Capacity Expansion of OSCOM Plant in Ganjam District of Odisha. 
IREL has undertaken Capacity Expansion of OSCOM Plant in Ganjam District of 
Odisha with an objective to increase the mineral production capacity from 2.84 lakh tons  
per annum (tpa) to 6.35 lakh tpa. The project has been commissioned. 
 
d) Desalination Plant: 
5 million liters per day (MLD) sea water desalination plant  at OSCOM Plant at 
Ganjam, Odisha has been established based on indigenous technology developed by 
BARC. The plant was dedicated to the Nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India on 5 th 
March 2024. Part of the water produced from the plant will be distributed to nearby 
villages under the company’s CSR policy to relief the local inhabitants from the water 
scarcity in the region.  
 
Major Projects Ongoing 
2.22 Some of IREL’s major ongoing projects are given below: 
a) Rare Earth & Titanium Theme Park, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 
IREL is setting up a Rare Earth and Titanium Theme Park at Acharpura industrial 
facility in Bho pal by carrying out industrial engineering and upscaling the scientific 
principles developed by BARC in laboratory scale. The facility is developed at pilot scale 
to demonstrate industry scale technology  to entrepreneurs to have hands on 
experience and motivate them to set up commercial plants. The facility also aims to 
develop skilled manpower through skill development in operating the commercial plants. 
The pilot facility for production of Metals ha s been completed. Further, the facility 
for recovery of Rare Earths from end of life magnets aiming towards circular economy has 
been operationalized. Facilities for production of LED lamp/ phosphor, N eodymium metal 
and titanium sponge are under various stages of procurement and installation.  

18  
 
b) Titanium Slag 
IREL is in the process of setting up a Joint Venture Company with UKTMP JSC, 
Kazakhstan for setting up a titanium slag plant based on Ilmenite produced from eastern 
mines. The draft Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) has been recently approved by the 
Government of India. After the same is signed between both the parties and company 
incorporated, pre -project activities such as preparing feasibility report, obtaining  
statutory clearances, detailed engineering and construction activities will be taken up. 
 
c) Technology Demonstration Plant: 
IREL is establishing a Technology Demonstration Plant for the production of 4N 
pure nano -titania and nano -zirconium oxychloride based on in -house technology. The 
products find applications in paint industry and the high purity zirconium oxychloride can 
be a feed stock for production of Nuclear grade zirconium oxide. 
 
d) IREL-IDCOL Limited: 
IREL has formed its first subsidiary along with Industrial Development Corporation 
of Odisha Limited (IREL -IDCOL Limited) for harnessing the ato mic mineral deposits in  
the state of Odisha. Letter of Intent (LoI) over an extent of 852 Ha. has been 
received. Pre-project activities for obtaining EC, CRZ clearance, Forest clearance & NOC 
from Chief Wildlife Warden, etc. have been initiated for obtaining mining lease prior to 
taking up construction activities. 
 
e) Bramhagiri Mineral Sand Deposits: 
IREL has received LoI over an extent of 1487 Ha for the above deposit in the state 
of Odisha. Activities for selection of Mine Development Office (MDO) has been 
undertaken and the agency so selected will obtain all the statutory clearances like 
EC, CRZ, Forest etc., develop mining plan and other related activities prior to undertaking 
mining operations. Evaluation of offer received for appointment of an M DO is under 
progress. 
f) Inayam-Midalam Mineral Sand Deposits: 
IREL has received LoI over an extent of 1144 Ha for the above deposit in the state 
of Tamil  Nadu. Activities for obtaining EC, CRZ recommendations, forest clearance, 
etc. have been initiated for obtaining mining lease. The deposit will be for sustaining 
existing operations of MK unit in Tamil Nadu. 

19  
 
g) Joint Venture with Tamil Nadu Minerals Limited (TAMIN): 
Joint Venture Company by the name IREL TAMIN Limited has been incorporated 
on 28th June 2024. The company is approaching DAE to advise the State Government to 
identify the precise area so that the prospective lessee can be nominated by DAE. 
 
Investment Plans for the next 5 years  
2.23 The following Table enumerates the Company’s key investment plans for the next 
5 Years:  
Sl. No. Project Details Estimated Investment 
(a) Bramhagiri 
Deposit, Odisha 
(1487 Ha.)* 
A Mining and Mineral 
Separation Plant would 
be established for 
production of 5 lakh tons 
per annum (tpa) of 
processed minerals. 
₹2800.00 Crore. The 
investment will be met from 
internal accruals. 
(b) Inayam-Midalam 
deposit in Tamil 
Nadu (1144 
Ha.)* 
Excavation of around 15 
Lakh MT Mineral sands 
per year from the mines 
for sustenance of IREL ’s 
Plant in Manavalakurichi.  
₹7.00 Crore. 
The inves tment will be met 
from its internal accruals. 
(c ) IREL-IDCOL 
Limited (852 
Ha.)* 
IREL-IDCOL Limited is a 
subsidiary of IREL, 
established to harness 
the mineral sands 
deposit in Hrushikulya -
Bajrakot-Brahmapur 
Deposit in Odisha. 
₹1133.50 Crore. 
IREL’s equity participation 
in the subsidiary will be 
around ₹173.50 Crore, 
which will be met from its 
internal accruals. 
(d) IREL UKTMP 
Limited # 
Joint Venture Agreement 
has been signed with 
UKTMP JSC, 
Kazakhstan in 
November 2024 to set 
up a facility for  
production of Titanium 
Slag, an intermediate 
product in the value 
chain of Titanium. 
Formation of the 
Company is under 
progress. 
₹730.00 Crore.  
IREL’s equity participation 
in the subsidiary will be 
around ₹111.69 Crore, 
which will be met from its 
internal accruals. 
 
(e) IREL-TAMIN 
Limited * 
IREL-TAMIN Limited is a 
Joint Venture Company 
of IREL, established to 
harness the mineral 
sands deposit in 
The capital investment is 
estimated to the tune of 
₹3630 Crore. IREL ’s equity 
participation in the Joint 
Venture Company will be 

20  
Kudiraimozhi and 
Santakulam deposits in 
Tamil Nadu. 
around ₹544.50 Crore, 
which will be met from its 
internal accruals. 
*: Pre-project activities such as obtaining statutory clearances are in progress. 
#: Incorporation of the Company is in process.  
2.24 It has also been submitted that other than the above, modernization and 
improvement schemes to the tune of around ₹850.00 crore has been planned in the 
next five years to infuse state -of-the-art equipment for improving performance of the 
plant. 
 
Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat  initiatives 
2.25 On being asked about  IREL’s contribution  to India's Make in India and 
Atmanirbhar Bharat initiatives, IREL, in a written submission, has furnished as under:  
“IREL aligns its activities with ‘Atm anirbhar Bharat’ initiatives related  to self - 
reliance in mineral resources and energy security. Some of the notable 
initiatives in this direction are as under: 
 The processed minerals and chemicals produced by IREL are supplied 
to about 2000 industries (mostly MSEs) operating in the downstream sector 
resulting in import substitution  and promote the Make in India initiative of the 
Government of India.   
 Rare Earth Elements available in trace in Indian resources is extracted 
and supplied to BARC for strategic uses. 
 Further, a “Rare Earth Permanent Magnet” (REPM) facility at BARC 
Campus, Visakhapatnam has been established to produce Rare Earth 
Permanent Magnets (Samarium Cobalt) from indigenous source material 
(Samarium oxide produced by IREL) to meet the requirement of Defence, 
Space and Atomic Energy sectors. 
 In pursuit of self -reliance in products using Rare Earths, a Rare Earth 
and Titanium Theme Park is established at Bhopal. In the said facility, mini -
plants have been established to produce R are Earth metals, recover Rare 
Earth Elements from end-of-life magnets, production of LED/ Lamp phosphors, 
etc. 
 Joint Venture Agreement has been signed with UKTMP JSC, 
Kazakhstan to set up a facility for producing Titanium Slag, an intermediate 
product in the value chain of Titanium, which is expected to catalyze the 
growth of Titanium sector in the Country.”  
 
2.26 On being asked i n what respect IREL is able to make India self -sufficient in rare 
earths or any imports being made, IREL has submitted as under:  

21  
“…India is not reliant on any C ountry for accessing rare earths. Though Indian 
resource is significantly less w.r.t grade and it is tied with radioactivity making the 
extraction long, complex and expensive . T he LREE produced within the Country 
are in surplus  and HREE is predominately not available in Indian resource . The 
import is in miniscule quantities comprising of certain other element along with RE 
for specialized applications mostly in the form of proprietary compounds. HREE is 
imported for applications in laboratory scale. Hence, dependence on China is only 
for HREE in miniscule quantities for laboratory applications. 
 
IREL’s Main Competitors  
2.27 When asked about IREL’s main competitors, both do mestically and internationally 
and its position in the global market for rare earth minerals and heavy minerals, IREL has, 
in a written submission, stated as under:  
“Ilmenite, zircon and rutile are major heavy minerals produced across the globe.  
While major producing Countries are Australia, South Africa and China, the names 
of major players in this field are given below: 
 
(i) Iluka Resources, Australia  
(ii) Eramet, Senegal  
(iii) Rio Tinto, South Africa 
(iv) Tronox Mineral Sands, South Africa 
(v) Kenmare Resources, Mozambique 
(vi) Bemax Resources, Australia  
(vii) Sierra Rutile Ltd, South Africa 
As regards Rare Earths, major producers are based in China. The names of major 
players in the field are given below: 
(i) China Northern Rare Earth, China 
(ii) China Southern Rare Earth, China 
(iii) Lynas Rare Earths Ltd, Australia/Malaysia 
(iv) China Min Metal Rare Earths, China 
(v) Guangdong Rare Earth, China 
(vi) Arafura Resources, Australia 
(vii) Molycorp/MP Materials, USA 
Domestically, Kerala Minerals and Metals Limited (KMML), a State -owned PSE is 
involved in the production to Titanium Dioxid e from mineral sands, competing 
indirectly in the mineral processing space.  
 
As regards global position, IREL contributes to about 5% of the global market in 
heavy minerals and 3% in case of Rare Earths.” 
 
 
 
 

22  
Competitive Advantage of IREL 
2.28 As per the Company, the top three competitive advantages in the market are 
as under:  
(i) Consistent product quality makes IREL a preferred supplier. 
(ii) Despite large product portfolio, the company is price competitive across the  
product range. 
(iii) Flexibility to deliver small and large volume of material with about 96% of customer 
base being MSME industries. 
 
China’s Dominance in the Global RE Market 
2.29 As submitted by IREL, it is a known fact that China is taking control of many 
sources of Rare Earths from around the world. As per the U.S. Geological Survey, 
Mineral Commodities Summary, China have around 44 million tons of Rare Earth 
reserves which is th e highest in the world and is around 6.4 times higher than India. 
Further, the grade of Rare Earths in their resource is 100 times richer than that of India 
resource.  
 
2.30 Commenting on how China is able to play monolopy game in the global RE 
market, representatives of IREL, during oral evidence before the Committee, stated as 
under: 
“… िेकिन  रेयर  अथम िा इिो लसस्टम िाफी िांबा है  और  यह  दस से बारह  सेगमेंट िा होता  है।  किसी 
भी िांरी िो आगे बढ़ने  िे लिए इसिा पूरी तरह  से इस्तेमाि िरने  िे लिए जब  ति वह  पूरे 12 
सेगमेंट नहीां आएांगे, उसिा िाभ नहीां लमि पाता  है।  चाइना  ने  जो मोनोपॉिी  स्थावपत िी है , वह  इस 
तरह  से ही  िी है  कि उन्होंने पूरा िा पूरा सेगमेंट अपना  इस्टेब्लिश किया है।  इसिे लिए उन्होंने 
इांटरनेशनि इांवेस्टमेंट िो रेड  िापेट वेििम  किया और  उसमें उनिी  िोई िांडडशन नहीां थी। उनिे  
हहसाब  से जब  पाांच साि ति इांटरनेशनि इांवेस्टसम ने  उनिी  िांरी में िाम किया तो िेबर  फोसम इसिे 
लिए एक्वायर िर  लिया और  उन्होंने अपना  इांडस्री खोि िी। हमारे  यहाां यह  इिो लसस्टम डेविप  
नहीां हुआ और  इस वजह  से चाइनीज़  मोनोपॉिी  इसमें इस्टेब्लिश हो  गयी।”  
 
2.31 Further commenting on how China created RE ecosystem and their superior 
quality and quantity of RE  content in their ores and very low price of their products, 
representatives of IREL stated as under: 

23  
“Initially, China was getting all the material from America. Since they were highly 
polluting, they wanted everything to be shifted to China. So, China started 
producing everything and they developed the skilled manpower. The ecosystem 
was getting developed as a result of that. Thereafter, when they st arted their own 
production, they had adequate skilled manpower. The process was established. 
So, the ecosystem was entirely developed … 
The second one is the RE content is 0.056 per cent to 0.058 per cent and there is 
the mineability constraint… The main point is that the RE content is in miniscule in 
the mother earth. Our monazite content is 0.10 per cent of the HM c ontent. From 
there it will be 56 per cent. You can think of the entire volume of material, we have 
to handle to get this much of quantity of t he rare earth material. The RE content in 
our Country at 0.056 to 0.058 per cent whereas in China, which is found at 6 per 
cent REO content. In our material, we will get Neodymium at the rate of 0.0112 per 
cent and praseodymium will be 0.0035 per cent. Similarly, the content of Samarium 
is 0.0017 per cent and Dysprosium is 1.3 ppm only. 
In that case, if you see, at the China level, it will be too high. On top of that, our 
material is radioactive. Further, the process is very difficult… 
“… This market is dominated by China. China is producing at a very low price. That 
is why they are able to dump its products at very low price”.  
 
Major Achievements 
 
2.32 Some of the major achievements listed by the Company are as under: 
 
(i) First time production of Rare Earth Permanent Magnets in the Nation, Rare Earth 
Permanent Magnet Plant dedicated to the Nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister on the 
occasion of 25 th anniversary of National Technology Day. 1 st lot submitted to BARC for 
field trials. 
 
(ii) First time production of Rare Earth Metals in the Nation in the Rare Earth & Titanium 
Theme Park established in Madhya Pradesh. Samples provided to RRCAT and BARC for 
developing special alloy steels. 
 
(iii) One of the three to four C ountries globally producing Rare Earths by setting up a  
11000 RE Plant based on 10,000 tons per annum (tpa) Monazite feed in its unit at 
OSCOM, Ganjam, Odisha. The Plant was commissioned in the year 2015 for producing 
Mixed Rare Earth Chloride (MRECL).  
(iv) Commissioned the first of its kind refinery plant for pro duction of High Pure Rare 
Earths in its unit at RED, Aluva, Kerela based on in -house R&D. One of the three to four 
Countries globally producing refined Rare Earths. 
 

24  
(v) Established the capacity to produce Dysprosium and Gadolinium, scarce HREE 
available in trace quantity in Indian deposit.  
 
(vi) During the last five years, the revenue from operations, profit before tax and net 
worth grew by around 2.1, 3.4 and 3.0 times respectively.  
 
(vii) Highest ever atomic mineral production achieved in the year 2023-24. 
 
(viii) Highest ever production of Mixed Rare Earth Concentrate achieved in the year 
2023-24. 
 
(ix) Issued 200% equity bonus shares to the Government of India thereby raising the 
paid-up equity capital to ₹345.46 Crore from ₹86.37 Crores. 
 
(x) Dividend of around ₹304 Crore declared in the year 2023-24 and the total dividend 
paid over the last 10 years surpasses the initial infused equity by more than 14 times.  
 
(xi) Stemming from its in -house R&D, IREL has developed Thermal Barrier Coatings 
from its mineral & Rare Earth products to resist oxidation for aero engine parts, gas 
turbines, components for space, etc. being used in HAL. 
 
(xii) Established facilities for production of 6N Neodymium oxide (super purity) used in hi-
tech LASER Glass technology. 
 
2.33 It has also been submitted that an  MoU was entered with Ministry of Energy & 
Minerals in the Sultanate of Oman in  the field of mining, particularly for rare minerals and 
preliminary exploration activities are going on, but reserves of REE are yet to be 
established. It has also been submitt ed that except UKTMP JSC of Kazakhstan and 
Oman, no MoUs have been signed with other foreign Countries or planned to sign as yet. 
 
Environmental Sustainability 
2.34 The Company has an Environmental Management System (EMS) in place, and 
all its plants are certified for ISO 14001:2015. When asked about steps the Company 
has taken to reduce its environmental footprint and to achieve net zero targets, IREL 
has furnished as under: 

25  
“To reduce the carbon footprint, the following activities are taken up: 
 No us e of chemicals in the mining and mineral processing activities. IREL 
uses physical separation process to extract the minerals. 
 
 Systematic plantation of native species is carried out over the mined -out 
area. 
 
 IREL has installed solar power plants to the tune of 1588 kWp. 
 
 LPG has been used as a replacement for coal in boilers and furnace oil in 
dryers.”   
 
2.35 Moreover, commenting on the steps taken to achieve net zero emission target set 
by the Government, representatives of IREL , during oral evidence before the Committee, 
stated the following: 
 “... हमारा  50 परसेंट रेव ेन्यु एक्सपोटम माकिमट से आता है और ज्यादातर मेटेररयि जापान , 
िोररया, व ेस्टन मयूरोप , जममनी, यूिे , यूएस और  गल्फ िांरीज़ िो एक्सपोटम होता  है  और  धीरे -धीरे  हम  
िैहटन  अमेररिा  में भी एांरी िर  रहे  हैं। ज्यादा इन  िांरीज िा ररक्वायरमेंट यह  होता  है  कि वे  हमसे  
अांडरटेकिांग्स िेते हैं कि आपिी  प्रोसैस नेट  जीरो  स्पोहटिंग है  या नहीां। 
उसमें उनिे  स्िोप-1, स्िोप-2 और  स्िोप-3 िे मानि  स्थावपत हैं। हमें उसे ग्रेजुअिी क्वालिफाई 
िरना  होता  है  और  उस प्रोसेस में ईएसजी से ररिेटेड  िाम हम  ने  िाफी पहिे  शुरू  िर  हदया था। हमने  
एि 10 पॉइांट िा फॉमेट बनाया  हुआ है , ब्जसमें हम  अपनी  प्रोडक्शन प्रोसेस िो उससे िांपिाय िरने  
िे लिए इांलसस्ट िरते  हैं। इस 10 पॉइांट फॉमेट में ग्रीन बेल्ट है।  इसमें वाटर  ररसाइब्क्िांग और  एयर  
पयूररकफिेशन  है।  ये सारी  प्रोसेस इसमें इांक्िूडेड  हैं। हम  इसे िाफी क्िोजिी मॉननटर  िरते  हैं।”  
 
2.36 Regarding the steps taken to contain radioactivity in the mining sites and to protect 
the local people from exposure to radioactivity,  representatives of IREL , during oral 
evidence before the Committee, stated the following: 
“...आस-पास  िे वविेजेस  में जो एनवायनममेंटि इश्यूज़ हैं तो हमारे  एांपिॉयज़ िे लिए एि रेडडयो  
एब्क्टववटी मेजरमेंट िा लसस्टम है  कि जब  एांपिॉय पिाांट िे अांदर जाता है  तो हम  उसिो एि टैग देते 
हैं। वह  कितनी  रेडडयो  एब्क्टववटी एलजॉबम किया, उसे मेजर  िरता  है।  जब  वह  वहाां से बाहर  ननििता  है  
तो कफर  दोबारा  मेजर  किया जाता है  कि यह  एलजॉबमि नम्बर हैं या उससे ज्यादा हैं। यहद ज्यादा होते  हैं 
तो कफर  जो ररक्वायर रीटमेंट है , वह  उसिो हदया जाता है।  साथ ही  इनिा  रोटेशन  होता  रहता  है  जैसे 
रेडडयो  एब्क्टव ऑपरेशन  में िगातार  लशफ्टट्स में िोगों िो नहीां रखा  जाता है।  हम  उनिो  रोटेट  िरते  
रहते  हैं।  

26  
… जहाां ति आस-पास  िे गाांवों िी बात  है  तो हमारे  पिाांट िे अांदर एि स्पेशि यूनन ट है , ब्जसे हम  
हेल्थ कफब्जक्स यूनन ट िहते  हैं। वहाां उनिे  पास  वल्डम क्िास इब्क्वपमेंट्स हैं। उनिे  पास  वल्डम क्िास 
साइांहटस्ट्स होते  हैं तो वे  आस-पास  िे गाांवों में जािर , पिाांट िे अांदर जािर  रेडडयो  एब्क्टववटी िेवि  
क्या है , उसे िगातार  मेजर  िरते  हैं। यह  भी मेजर  िरते  हैं कि पानी  में किसी तरह  िा रेडडयो  
एब्क्टववटी िेवि  बढ़ा  या नहीां, एयर  में बढ़ा  या नहीां, इन  सबिो  मेजर  किया जाता है  और  इन  सबिी  
डायरेक्ट ररपोटम बीएआरसी  में होती  है।  उसमें हमारा  िोई िांरोि नहीां होता  है।  एि एटॉलमि एनजी  
रेगुिेटरी बोडम है , वहाां ररपोहटिंग होती  है  और  बीएआरसी  में ररपोहटिंग होती  है।  िभी ऐसी िोई िमी पाई  
जाती है  तो पहिा  आदेश वहाां से आता है  कि आप  अपना  ऑपरेशन  बांद िीब्जए। हमें उसिो ध्यान में 
रखना  होता  है। ”  
 
Research and Development (R&D) initiatives:  
 
2.37 As per the Company, IREL Technology Development Council (IRELTDC) has been 
formed for promoting application -oriented R&D that would be beneficial to the overall 
programme of DAE in both strategic and non-strategic fields utilizing products of IREL. 
The council invites project proposals from laboratories and institutes of eminence such as 
CSIR, IIT, NIT, etc. for funding and monitors the R&D schemes. 
 
2.38 In line with the directives of Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) on Corporate  
R&D policy, IREL has well defined R&D policy, approved by the Board of Directors. All in-
house R&D progr ammes of the company as well as sponsored projects concerning 
development of processes for production of products in the value chain  and development 
of existing products through participative programmes undertaken by Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR) laboratories, Indian Institute of Technologies (IITs) and 
other government R&D institutions are scrutinized, approved and monitored regularly for 
time bound implementation by IREL Technology Development Council (IRELTDC) 
constituted by Secretary, DAE and comprises members who are eminent scientists 
working in relevant fields in various CSIR  laboratories, IITs, and R&D Laboratories of 
national importance such as Indira Gandhi Centre of Atomic Research (IGCAR), etc . 
along with Independent Directors of the Company’s Board and all Functional Directors of 
the company including CMD. 
 
2.39 Given below are the focus areas of IRELTDC: 
 Value addition and product/Process up-gradation. 
 New product/process development. 

27  
 Development of auxiliary industries based on IREL’s products. 
 Database creation for benchmarking of processes, equipment’s, etc. 
 Setting up of Pilot Plant facilities as demonstration plants. 
 
2.40 The Company has also submitted some  of the notable projects which have been 
taken up by based on the above R&D, which are as under: 
 Extraction of Neodymium metal by Molten Salt Electrolytic Process. 
 Development of flow sheet for production of 99.99% Gadolinium oxide and 
99.99% Europium oxide from Gadolinium concentrate. 
 Development of self-cleaning coatings on glass using TiO2 Nano -particles 
developed at IREL. 
 Eco-friendly Natural Dyeing of Cotton and Silk using Rare Earths Metal Salts 
as Mordants. 
 Process development for the production of Nano Titania from Ilmenite by 
sulphuric acid. 
 
 
Long-Term Goals 
2.41 Given below are some of the some of the company’s long-term goals (5 -10 
years): 
 
i. Scale-up production of Rare Earth Concentrate and Refined RE. 
ii. Horizontal expansion to increase resource availability of RE bearing mineral. 
iii. Identify the strategic resources for HREE and other critical minerals (Li, Nb, Ta). 
iv. Retain leadership in mineral sands and RE market. 
v. Execute and commission urban mining project. 
vi. Exploring avenues of REE resources abroad, basically HREE and magnetic RE. 
vii. Improving plant processes and efficiencies and establish improved technology for 
REE extraction and refining, etc.   
 
 
 
 
 

28  
CHAPTER III 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
 
A. Board of Directors  
 
3.1 Given below is the organogram of IR EL management as submitted by the 
Company: 
 
 
3.2 The current Composition of Board an d actual strength of IREL as on February, 
2025 as under:  
Directors Sanctioned 
Strength 
Actual 
Strength 
Functional Director 4 3 
Government (Official) Directors 4 4 
Non-official (Independent) 4 NIL 
Total 12 7 
 
3.3 The Committee were informed during the sitting of the Committee  that the officer 
holding the post of CMD, IREL superannuated on 30 November, 2024 and since then the 


29  
Director (Finance) had been holding the additional charge of CMD. As per IREL’s latest 
submission (the Table above), the CMD’s position is has still not been filled. Moreover, as 
can be seen from the above Table, all the four (04) posts of Non -official Independent 
Directors are vacant  and consequently, the Board strength has be en reduced to half of 
the total sanctioned strength of 12. Regarding the vacant positions, IREL has submitted 
that the matter has already been taken up with the appropriate authority and their 
response is awaited. 
3.4 When asked to elaborate how IREL ensur es a balance mix of executive and non -
executive Director, IREL stated as under: 
“The Company complies DPE guidelines on Corporate Governance and in  no 
case, the number of Functional Directors exceed 50% of the actual  strength of the 
Board... Non-executive directors consist  of independent directors and part time 
nominated directors from Administrative Department and other Gov ernment 
departments”.  
 
3.5 On being asked to s tate as to how IREL ensure s independence of non -executive 
Directors, IREL, in a written reply, has furnished the following: 
“Non-Executive Directors of IREL consists of nominated officers by Department of 
Atomic Energy and Independent Directors appointed by Government of India.  The 
Company doesn’t pay any remuneration or sitting fees to its nominated Directors. 
Independent Directors are only paid sitting fees. All the Directors are required to 
disclose their directorship and office or place of profit occupied by them in any 
other company on their appointment and on annual basis and as and whe n any 
change take place in their directorship. It is ensured that there is no conflict of 
interest that could impact their ability to act independently. Further their pecuniary 
relationship is disclosed in the annual report of the Company. Independent 
Directors abstain from discussion on agenda item pertaining to approval of sitting 
fees payable to them”. 
 
3.6 Regarding the question of ensuring  diversity in the IREL  Board of Director s in 
terms of skills, experience and demographics, IREL has stated as under: 
“IREL being a CPSE, selection of Functional Directors is done by Public Enterprise 
Selection Board (PESB) by inviting application on all India basis and selection is 
based on their qualification and experience in the relevant field. Further nominated 
Directors consists of officers of the Administrative D epartment (i.e. DAE) and the 
Ex-Officio  appointments”.   
 
 

30  
B. Human Resource 
3.7 The details of the workforce of each of the last 5 years as on 31st March of each 
year, as furnished by the Company, are given below: 
 
3.8 On being asked whether the Company is able to meet its mandate fu lly with the 
present workforce, IREL replied in the affirmative.  
3.9 The category-wise break -up of SC, ST, OBC and other category employees 
with sanctioned vis -à-vis actual strength of the Company, including backlog of posts 
in each of the categories, has also been furnished, the details of which are as under: 
The category-wise break-up of IREL employees as on 31.03.2024 
*IREL being a CPSE, categorization of Group - A, B and C is not applicable. Data pertaining to A,  
B and C Group covers the following respectively: 
 
A- Executives; B- NUS (non-unionized supervisors); C- Workmen 
Sr. 
No. 
Category 
of Post 
Sanctioned 
Post 
Total No of 
employees 
Total No. of 
ST 
employees 
Total No. of 
SC 
employees 
Total No. of 
OBC 
employees 
1 2 3 7 4 5 6 
1 A* 304 250 33 156 294 
2 B* 230 57 
3 C* 546 490 
 
3.10 It has also been stated that no backlogs of SC/ ST posts are there, only one 
backlog vacancy is there for OBC category as on 31.03.2024.  
 
 
Year Total No. of 
Employees 
Total No. of  
SC Employees 
Total No. of  
ST Employees 
Total No. of  
OBC Employees 
No. of Women 
Employees 
2020 1222 232 37 367 82 
2021 1096 213 36 144 76 
2022 952 197 32 152 73 
2023 818 163 24 168 65 
2024 797 156 33 294 65 

31  
Women Participation in the IREL Workforce  
3.11 The Table below shows the number of  sanctioned and existing number of 
women employees in executive and non -executive categories  as on 01.11.2024, as 
furnished by the Company: 
Women 
Employees 
Total Sanctioned 
Strength 
Existing Number of women 
employees 
Executive 304 22 
NUS 230 11 
Non-Executive 546 31 
 
3.12 It has also been submitted that w omen candidates applying for a post in IREL 
are exempted from paying the application fees and equal w ork with equal pay is 
extended to them without any disparity. Moreover, a ll kind of opportunit ies and 
resources are accessible to them regardless of gender.  
3.13 Commenting on the state of women representation in the IREL workforce and the 
general difficulty in deploying women employees at plant sites, representatives of IREL , 
during oral evidence before the Committee, stated the following: 
“ववमन  ररप्रजांटेशन … इसमें हमें िाफी समस्या आयी क्योंकि हमारे  पिाांट्स ररमोट  एररया  में हैं। जब  
हमने  शुरु आत िी थी तो उस समय ब्स्थनत डडफरेंट थी, अब  थोड़ा डेविपमेंट हुआ है।  हम  हेड  ऑकफस 
में ज्यादा से ज्याद िम्पनसेट िरने  िे लिए व ूमन  इम्पिॉयी िेने  िी िोलशश िरते  हैं। इस प्रोसैस में 
हेड  ऑकफस में हमने  60:40 िे आस-पास रेश्यो रखा  हुआ है।  So, women employees are more 
than male employees. ओविऑि  हम  कफर  भी ब हुत अच्छा रेश्यो नहीां रख  पाए।  यह  सात परसेंट 
िे आस-पास  आता है।  ररमोट  एररया  मेनन फेक्चुररांग यूनन ट में व ूमन  इम्पिॉयी ब हुत इांटरेस्ट भी नहीां 
िेती हैं, क्योंकि वहाां लशफ्टट ऑपरेशन  होता  है।  यह  एि नेगेहटव  आसपेक्ट है।  सेक्रेटेररयि स्टाफ में 
हम  ज्यादा से ज्यादा रखने  िी िोलशश िरते  हैं।” 
 
 
Employee Welfare and Capacity Building  
3.14 The Committee were informed that the following welfare/social security schemes 
have been introduced by the Company for its employees: 
 Maternity Benefit: To support employees who are temporarily unable to work 
due to childbirth or the need to care for a newborn or newly adopted child.  

32  
 Gratuity Benefit: By offering gratuity, employers ensure that employees are 
rewarded for their long -term service and are financially supported when they 
exit the organization.  
 Provident Fund: To ensure a financial safety net for retirement and 
emergencies. 
 Group Medical Policy/ Group Term Life Insurance scheme: To provide 
financial assistance to the family members or dependents of an individual 
who has passed away, typically the primary wage earner. 
 Post Retirement Medical Scheme: To ensure that individuals have access to 
necessary healthcare services, especially in times of illness, injury, or old age.  
 Superannuation scheme: Provides financial security after superannuation.   
 
3.15 Regarding various steps taken by the Company for capacity building and employee 
welfare, the Company has stated that to enhance the skills, capabilities and knowledge of 
employees, trainings are provided to the employees at various levels, some of which ar e listed 
below:  
 Onboarding/ Orientation training programme (New Joiners) 
 Technical Skills Training (For all employees) 
 Project Management (Senior Level) 
 Leadership & Management Training Programme (Middle level/Senior Level) 
 Capacity Building Programme (All levels) 
 Compliance and Legal Training (All level) 
 DPE Sponsored training programme etc. (All level)  
  
3.16 The Committee observed from the Company’s reply that the Company various 
motivational programmes/schemes/plans in place. It has also an integrated IT system for 
centralised and integrated employee management covering all the facets of Human 
Resource Management. Grievance Redressal Committees for employees are  already in 
place in the Company’s various units. For lodging grievances, an online portal as a part of 
integrated IT system is under development. It has also been observed that during the last 
5 years, the number of grievances received and disposed of is 13.  

33  
C. Risk Management and Compliances 
3.17 The Committee observed from the written submission that the Company is 
obtaining a certificate from Practicing Company  Secretary on annual basis for 
Compliance of the conditions of Corporate  Governance as stipulated under DPE 
Guidelines on Corporate Governance,  2010. There are no legal or regulatory disputes 
involving the Company.  
  
3.18 On being asked w hat measures are being adopted to ensure effectiveness of the 
key Committees like Audit, Compensation, nomination/governa nce and the impact of 
such measures over a period of last five years, IREL has stated as under: 
“IREL has formulated various statutory and non -statutory committees whic h 
together consist  of Board level committees of Audit, CSR, NRC and Risk  
management committee. To ensure effectiveness of these committees,  
Independent Directors have been made the Chairman of these committees and the 
majority of the members of these committees consist of Independent Directors”.   
 
3.19 Regarding the whistleblower protection policy to encourage reporting of unethical 
behavior, IREL has submitted that t he existing whistleblower policy provides a 
mechanism to employee or a group of employees who wish to report on unethical or 
improper practices to have easy access to the appropriate authority. The purpose of this 
policy is to provide a framework to promote responsible, safe and secure whistle blowing, 
with an aim to curb and stop all activities, which are against organizational interests. This 
policy shall also protect emp loyees wishing to raise a concern about serious irregularities 
within the organization and to provide assurances that any and all suspected activity will 
be fully investigated. This neither releases employees from their duty of confidentiality in 
the course of their work nor can it be used as a route for raising malicious or unfounded 
allegations against people in authority and/or colleagues in general.   
3.20 On being asked as to h ow does IREL ensure transparency and accuracy in 
disclosing financial statement, IREL has stated as under: 
“Ensuring accuracy and transparency in financial reporting is critical for any 
business looking to maintain stakeholder trust, comply with regulations, and make 
informed decisions.  
For ensuring transparency and accuracy in f inancial reporting, the methodologies 
of IREL are as under: 

34  
 IREL has adopted the IND -AS as notified by MCA. Ind AS provides the 
guideline on how financial transactions should be recorded and reported. IREL 
is following the same in true spirit. The concerne d officers are regularly 
updating the evolving standards through training and otherwise to avoid errors 
and inconsistencies in financial reports. 
 IREL has implemented strong internal controls by segregation of duties. The 
responsibilities among different employees are distributed in the manner so that 
no single individual controls all aspects of a financial transaction. In addition, 
there is full-fledged delegation of powers for approving the financial transaction. 
 Chartered Accountants Firms are being appo inted by IREL as Internal Auditors 
to conduct the thorough examination of books of accounts and records of the 
Company. They are submitting monthly reports which in turn submitted to Audit 
committee. Their suggestions and observations are reviewed, and cor rective 
action is taken to avoid errors and inconsistencies in financial reports. In 
addition, CAG appointed statutory auditor is also verifying the records and 
giving its report to the members of the company. They examine financial 
records, transactions, statements, and reports of IREL, and provide an opinion 
on whether they are fair, accurate, and complete. They also identify any 
material errors, misstatements, fraud, or non -compliance issues, and 
recommend corrective actions. 
 IREL has detailed accounting  policies/manuals duly approved by the Board 
clearly defining the methods, assumptions, and practices which IREL uses to 
prepare its financial statements. By documenting these policies, IREL creates a 
reference point that ensures consistency over time and across various financial 
reports, reducing the risk of errors or discrepancies. These accounting policies 
are regularly reviewed and updated. 
 IREL uses the accounting software “FAS” for recording the financial 
transactions and Trial Balance is automatically coming from the software.  
 IREL is regularly making account reconciliation which involves comparing 
internal financial records against external statements (like bank statements, 
statement of debtors/creditors) to identify and rectify discrepancies. This routine 
check ensures that IREL's financial information is accurate and reliable, helping 
to prevent errors and fraud.  
 IREL adopted comprehensive disclosure in its annual report ensuring that all 
relevant financial information is openly shared with stakeh olders. This includes 
not just the mandatory financial statements but also notes on accounting 
policies, decisions, and any risks the company faces”. 
 
3.21 Regarding internal control mechanisms for financial reporting, IREL has submitted 
the following: 
 IREL has adopted the IND -AS as notified by MCA and financial transactions 
are recorded as per principles mentioned in Ind AS. For recording the 

35  
transaction there is maker & checker concept i.e. vouchers are approved by the 
officers other than maker. 
 IREL u ses the accounting software “FAS” for recording the financial 
transactions and Trial Balance is automatically coming from the software.  The 
transactions are being recorded in software only after approval of the vouchers 
by the concerned officials. 
 IREL has duly approved following documents for its operations: 
 Purchase procedures 
 HR manuals 
 Internal financial control (IFC) documents 
 Delegation of powers etc. 
 Internal Audit is being carried out by the chartered accountants’ firms to verify 
whether all the tra nsactions are being carried out in line with the policies and 
procedures of IREL or not. They submit monthly report. 
 The scope of internal audit is covering all the areas of operations including 
physical verification of fixed assets, stores, finished goods  and accordingly 
reports are being submitted to the management for review. 
 Internal Audit reports is being submitted to Audit committee. 
 IREL has an internal financial control framework, which is approved by the 
Board. This ensures that there is internal c ontrol mechanism over financial 
reporting is operating effectively . This document is a base for the internal 
auditor to conduct audit. 
 
3.22 On being asked about the mechanisms available to mitigate  operational and 
financial risk, IREL has furnished as under: 
“IREL has in place a robust “Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)” policy and in line 
with the ERM policy, the Risk Officers at Unit level identify various risks in 
consultation with each functional  department and suggest mitigation measures for 
each identified risk. After reviewing the applicable risks and mitigation measures 
suggested by Risk Officer along with action taken reports, Head of the Unit submits 
the Quarterly Risk Reports to Chief Risk Officer (CRO) at Corporate Office.  CRO 
evaluates these risks and categorizes these risks into High /Medium/Low intensity 
risks based on their potential impact on the Organization and submits the 
consolidated report to Risk Management Committee (RMC) for Re view at 
Corporate Office for further direction towards mitigation. The RMC reviews various 
risks identified by t he Units on half -yearly basis. The observation and 
recommendations of RMC on the potential risks are reported to Units and Business 

36  
Heads (Conce rned Director) for necessary action.  Further, t he Board level 
committee on risk management reviews the high and medium intensity risks of the 
Units along with action taken reports  for the corresponding period.   A list of high 
intensity risks so identified along with action taken reports are submitted to  Board 
for information. 
Considering the source of Operational and financial risks are varied, possible risk 
areas of IREL are: 
Operational:  
 Economic risks, including interest rate and foreign exchange fluctuations, 
market conditions, and cost of doing business internationally. 
 Technology risks 
 Engineering or operational risks pertaining to the Company’s products and 
manufacturing processes as well as business process failures. 
 Counterparty risk 
 Market risk 
 Regulation and Compliance risks 
 Business continuity risks, including planning for cyclones, fire and other 
events that require disaster management. 
 Human resource risks, including succession planning, recruitment, 
compensation, and retention issues. 
 
Financial:  
 Liquidity or credit risk, including funding and cash requirements of the 
Company. Specifically, access to debt and equity resources necessary to operate 
and expand the company’s business and compliance with financier’s required 
covenants (if any) 
 Accounting and financial control risk.” 
 
3.23 When asked about the measures taken/to be taken for protecting sensitive  
information and cyber security, IREL has furnished as under: 
“Following are the measures IREL has taken to protect sensitive information and 
ensure robust cyber security:  
(i) Multilayered Cyber Security at Gateway Level: 
IREL has implemented a comprehensive multilayered cyber security framework at 
the gateway level.  This includes advanced firewalls, intrusion detection and 
prevention systems (IDS/IPS), and other security measures to defend against 
cyber threats from external and internal sources. 
(ii) Honeypot Installation as per CERT-In Directive: 
As per the directi ves issued by CERT -In (Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team), IREL has deployed Honeypot systems to proactively assess cyber threats. 
This helps in identifying potential attack patterns and vulnerabilities, allowing us to 
take necessary precautions and enhance overall security. 

37  
(ii) Sharing Cyber Threat Information from CERT-IN and DAE: 
IREL actively shares all relevant cyber threat information received from CERT -In 
and the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) with our units. This ensures that each 
unit is informed about the latest cyber threats and can configure their respective 
gateway security measures accordingly. This collaborative approach strengthens 
the overall security framework across the organization. 
(iii) Centralized Antivirus with USB Blocking and Malware Protection: 
IREL has implemented a centralized, managed antivirus solution across all 
systems, providing protection against malware, spyware, ransomware, and other 
malicious software. Additionally, USB ports are blocked on all devices to preven t 
unauthorized access and the introduction of potential security risks. 
(iv) Data Loss Prevention (DLP) System in Units: 
To safeguard sensitive information, IREL has implemented a Data Loss Prevention 
(DLP) system across all units. This system ensures that  critical data cannot be 
transferred or exposed without proper authorization, mitigating the risk of data 
leaks or unauthorized dissemination. 
(v) NIC Email Services with Multifactor Authentication (MFA): 
IREL uses the National Informatics Centre (NIC) ema il services, which are 
equipped with Multifactor Authentication (MFA). This adds an extra layer of 
security to email communications, ensuring that only authorized personnel can 
access sensitive emails and related attachments. 
(vi) Separation of Finance Server from Other Networks: 
In order to protect sensitive financial data, IREL has separated its finance server 
from the rest of the network. This segmentation ensures that access to financial 
information is tightly controlled and isolated from other systems,  minimizing the 
risk of unauthorized access or data breaches. 
These measures, along with our ongoing commitment to improving cyber security, 
ensure the protection of sensitive information and the resilience of our systems 
against evolving cyber threats.” 

38 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
A. Overview 
1. The Committee note that IREL (India) Limited is a key contributor to India’s 
strategic mineral supply chain. It was founded in 1950 as Indian Rare Earths 
Limited, IREL (India) Limited (Company’s current name) is a wholly owned 
Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) of the Government of India, under 
the administrative control of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). It is 
100% owned by Government of India. It plays a v ital role in India's atomic 
energy sector, particularly in the mining and processing of rare earth 
minerals and heavy minerals. The Company operates mining and mineral 
processing plants across Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Its activities align 
with nation al priorities, including self -reliance in critical minerals, defen ce 
applications and nuclear energy. It  is a ‘Mini Ratna’ Category – I CPSU with 
“Excellent” MoU rating over the last six consecutive years.  
The Committee were f urther informed that IREL's m andate is to produce 
atomic minerals and rare earths, contributing to India's strategic nuclear 
program and various commercial sectors. Its vision is to be a significant 
contributor to the global clean energy mission by providing high -quality 
materials in a responsible manner.  
 
It has also been noted that as per the geological information available, 
the reported rare earth (RE) resources in India is about 6.9 million tons, 
which accounts for around 6% of total global RE reserves . India has fifth 
largest re serves of rare earth elements (REEs). Apart from low 
concentration of RE oxide of India, mineability is further constrained 
due to CRZ (coastal regulation zone) regulations, mangroves, forest 
land and uncontrolled inhabitation. 
The Committee further note that India is among three to four countries 
globally having the capability to produce refined REEs, the other Countries 

39 
 
being China and Malaysia. China has established a near -monopoly in the 
global rare earth market, controlling approximately 60 -70% of global 
production and 85-90% of RE processing capacity.   
The Committee were informed that d ue to their critical applications in 
electronics, defense, and renewable energy, REEs have gained strategic 
importance globally. IREL caters  to nuclear energy, defense and space 
sectors by supplying critical rare earths to these industries. Over 90% of its 
customers in India are in MSE (Micro and Small Enterprises) category. Total 
revenue from exports of some of the non -strategic heavy mineral s such as 
Ilmenite, Zircon and Rutile consistently ranges from 40 to 50% of the sales. 
Revenue from operations has grown at CAGR of over 26%.  
The Committee have also learned that IREL faces some challenges such as 
dominance of China in rare earth markets,  controlling global supply and 
pricing; stringent environmental and land acquisition regulations; long 
gestation periods for mining approvals; lobbying and illegal mining activities 
impacting operations; and low -grade Indian rare earth deposits compared to  
global standards. 
IREL (India) Limited plays a pivotal role in India’s nuclear and strategic 
material supply chain. In view of China’s near -monopoly in the global supply 
and pricing of REs and the imperative need for India’s self -sufficiency in RE 
production and supply to meet its domestic requirement and to assess 
India’s preparedness to face any global geo -political challenges in terms of 
RE value chain, the Committee have put forth their Observations/  
Recommendations in the subsequent paras  after having heard the views of 
IREL and Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). The Committee hope that the 
Company would make earnest efforts for impl ementation of the 
Observations/Recommendations in this Report to augment their overall 
performance. 
 
 

40 
 
 
B. Vacant Positions of Regular CMD and Four Independent Directors 
2. The Committee note that there is no regular CMD since the superannuation 
of the officer hold the post of CMD on 30 November, 2024 and since then the 
Director (Finance) has been holding the additional charge of CMD. Moreover, 
all the four (04) posts of Non -official Independent Directors are vacant and 
consequently, the Board strength has been reduced to half of the total 
sanctioned strength of 12. Though the Committee learned that IREL has 
already taken up the matter with the appropriate authority and their response 
is awaited, t he Committee feel that these vacancies not only hamper the 
functioning of the Company, but also violate the principle of Corporate 
Governance. Therefore, the Committee urge upon the Gov ernment of India 
through DAE, being the administrative Ministry, to fill up the vacant posts of 
four Independent Directors and appoint a regular CMD without any further 
delay. Also, if the Company is discharging their functions effectively with 
less number  of Independent Directors, they may think of reducing the 
sanctioned posts of Directors in the organization in future. 
 
C. Exploring ways to establish RE Ecosystem in India 
3. The Committee note that creating an ecosystem of REs is very long drawn 
process and  it consists of ten to twe lve segments and unless all the  
segments are developed, any country cannot benefit from the ecosystem in 
order to move ahead. The Committee also learned that the monopoly that 
China has established is such that it has established the entire segments 
and for th at to happen , it gave a red carpet welcome to international 
investments with no conditions. So, international investors worked in China   
for 5 years and during this period the Chinese developed the required skilled 
manpower and consequently they were able to establish their own RE 
industry of the entire value chain. This kind of ecosystem has been 
developed there and due to this, the Chinese monopoly got established in 
the global RE market.  

41 
 
The Committee are  happy to note that India has also gained the requisite 
expertise over the years in the mining and processing of REs, which in 
India’s case is radioactive  too. IREL also has the capability to extract REs 
out of the far inferior and very less concentrated Indian RE ores, India’s RE 
content being 0.056 to 0.058% whereas that of China is 6%. It is also learned 
that over 90% of IREL customers in India are in MSE  (Micro and Small 
Enterprises) category. The processed minerals and chemicals produced 
by IREL are supplied to about 2000 industries (mostly MSEs) operating in 
the downstream sector. They make ancillary products for bigger 
companies, resulting in import substitution and promote the Make in 
India initiative of the Government of India.   
  
The Committee fee l that IREL and DAE may consider exploring ways  for 
bringing skilled manpower and required expertise to further/fully develop the 
entire RE ecosystem to cater to the entire rare earth value chain in order to 
be able to counter to a certain extent China’s monopoly in the global RE 
market. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
D. Delay in starting operation of IREL-IDCOL Limited 
4. The Committee note that IREL has formed a Joint Venture (JV) Company 
called IREL -IDCOL Limited  in collaboration with Industrial Development 
Corporation of Odisha Limited (IDCOL). The JV Company was incorporated 
on 18.01.2018 with IREL holding minimum 51% and IDCOL holding upto 49% 
of the share capital. A CEO and a Project Co -Ordinator have been appointed 
for the JV Company. A mining Officer of IREL is assisting the Project Co -
Ordinator in mat ters related to the JV Company and r est of the manpower 
support is occasional and are being drawn from IREL.  
 
The Committee further note that IREL -IDCOL is und er the process of 
obtaining mining lease for which the process of statutory clearances such 
as Environmental Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), Coastal 

42 
 
Regulation Zone (CRZ), etc. have been taken up. Because of not getting 
timely clearances of the abov e statutory clearances , starting of operation of 
the Company is getting delayed. The Committee recommend that the issues 
pertaining to granting of clearances of the above statutory clearances may 
be taken up at the level of the Department so that the process may be 
expedited and IREL-IDCOL may start operation without any further delay.  
 
E. Importance of early and timely completion of ongoing Projects 
5. The Committee note that IREL has about seven major ongoing projects 
which are at different stages of implementation. Rare Earth and Titanium 
Theme Park is being set up in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh for motivating and 
training entrepreneurs to set up plants using rare earth products at 
commercial scale. A Joint Venture Company with UKTMP JSC, Kazakhstan is 
also being established for setting up a titanium slag plant and a Technology 
Demonstration Plant for the production of 4N pure nano -titania and nano -
zirconium oxychloride based on in -house technology is also being 
established. Moreover, mining plants are b eing developed at Bramhagiri  
Mineral Sand Deposits in the state of Odisha and Inayam -Midalam Mineral 
Sand Deposits in the state of Tamil  Nadu. Another domestic Joint Venture 
Company by the name of IREL-TAMIN Limited has also been incorporated, to 
carry out  rare earth mining in the state of Tamil Nadu, in addition to the 
already incorporated IREL-IDCOL Limited.  
While expressing their happiness at IREL’s scale and scope of the ongoing 
projects, which if developed fully, will significantly improve the Country’s 
capability in establishing the entire value chain in rare earth from mining to 
processing to commercialization in collaboration with private entrepreneurs, 
the Committee are of the strong view that timely completion of these projects 
is of utmost importance to make the projects cost -effective and achieve their 
purposes for which they have been established and  start working for the 
nation sooner in a strategic sector as RE in today’s uncertain geopolitical 
scenario. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all these projects be 

43 
 
completed within their stipulated time of completion and would like to be 
apprised of the status within six months. 
 
F. Exploring ways for Collaboration with other Foreign Companies 
6. The Committee have learned that the main competitors of IREL for rare earth 
minerals and heavy minerals in the international market are mainly based out 
of in  China, Australia, South Africa, Senegal, Mozambique, etc. and China 
has monopolized the International RE market because of the sheer scale and 
size of its  well developed  RE industry ecosystem and globally diversified 
source of RE ores. The Committee stron gly feel that in today’s 
interconnected global ec onomy, collaboration with like -minded foreign 
companies may give an edge for long -term success and growth. Partnering 
with International Companies provides businesses with access to new 
markets, advanced tec hnologies, diverse expertise, and expanded networks 
that drive innovation and competitiveness. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that IREL should explore the avenues to collaborate with foreign companies 
of Australia, South Africa, Senegal, Mozambique , etc.  through mutual 
understanding for technology transfer, sharing of skilled manpower, 
knowhow and expertise to grow together in  the international market on 
mutual benefit or win-win condition. 
 
G. Environmental impact of Rare Earth (RE) mining 
 
7. The Committee learn that Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential for 
modern technologies, including electronics, renewable energy systems, and 
defence applications. However, the long -term extraction and utilization of 
these materials pose significant environmental and health risks that must be 
addressed through responsible policies and sustainable practices. 
Moreover, RE mining is highly disruptive to ecosystems and the extraction 
process generates large amounts of toxic waste, including radioactive 
materials such as thorium and uranium, which can contaminate soil and 
water sources. Additionally, open -pit mining and chemical processing lead 

44 
 
to deforestation, habitat destruction, and increased greenhouse gas 
emissions. Over time, these impacts contribute to biodiversity loss and 
environmental degradation. 
The Committee have also learned that communities near rare earth mining 
sites face serious health concerns. Exposure to heavy metals and 
radioactive by-products can lead to respiratory diseases, organ damage , and 
increased cancer risks. Workers in the industry are particularly vulnerable to 
occupational hazards, including exposure to toxic dust and chemicals. 
The Committee also acknowledge that IREL has taken steps to reduce its 
environmental footprint and to  achieve net zero targets by putting in 
place mandatory Environmental Management System (EMS) and 
adopting practices such as not using chemicals in the mining and 
mineral processing activities and using physical separation process to 
extract the minerals; systematic plantation of native species over the 
mined-out area; installation of solar power plants to the tune of 1588 kWp 
for its use and for local consumption; use of LPG as a replacement for 
coal in boilers and furnace oil in dryers and so on.  
While ap preciating the fact that IREL has been doing everything in its 
capacity to reduce its operations’ impact and harm on environment  and, the 
Committee strongly desire that t o mitigate these risks, IREL should n ever let 
its guards down and adopt stricter environmental regulations, invest in 
cleaner extraction technologies, and promote recycling of rare earth 
elements from electronic waste. The Company should also collaborate with 
industries to develop sustainable alte rnatives and improve waste 
management practices.  
The Committee feel that by implementing responsible mining practices and 
prioritizing environmental and public health safeguards, we can balance the 
demand for rare earth elements with the need for a sustai nable and healthy 
future. 

45 
 
H. Addressing Illegal Mining and Social Resistance 
8. The Committee have learned that among the many challenges faced by IREL 
during its mining operations, lobby of illegal miners during opening of the 
sector creating hindrances at e very step including award of contract and 
undue protests from NGOs instigating locals misrepresenting factual 
information about its mines/plants. The Committee recommend that IREL 
should w ork with local governments and law enforcement agencies to 
prevent i llegal operations and strengthen security and legal measures to 
counter unauthorized mining activities. The Company should also implement 
transparent community engagement program mes with NGOs and local 
people to counter misinformation and gain local support.  The C ompany 
should also implement projects that help in local employment generation 
and support local economy and create awareness regarding the benefits of 
establishing the mines/plants in their area. 
 
 
 
New Delhi:   
25 March, 2025  
04  Chaitra, 1947(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA  
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

46 
 
APPENDIX – I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-2025) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, 25 September, 2024 from 1415 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
               Shri Baijayant Panda    - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
    11.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
    12.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
    13.  Shri Arun Singh 
             
SECRETARIAT 
       1. Shri Neeraj Semwal          -      Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  -      Director 
       3. Smt. Mriganka Achal         -     Deputy Secretary 
   
                         REPRESENTATIVES OF IREL (INDIAN) LIMITED & IREL-IDCOL LIMITED 
 
  Name Designation 
1. Dr. Deependra Singh       - CMD, IREL 
2. Shri S.B. Mohanty            - Director (Finance)  
3. Shri Anuttam Mishra        - Director (Technical)  
4. Shri Rupender Dhiman    - Company Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee at the sitting 
convened to have a briefing by the representatives of the IREL (India) Limited and IREL -IDCOL 

47 
 
Limited in connection with comprehensive examination of both the subjects. The  Committee 
Secretariat, then, made a Power Point Presentation explaining major issues relating to the 
subject. 
[The witnesses were, then, called in] 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of IREL and IREL -IDCOL to the sitting of 
the Committee and put forth the major points the Committee desired to discuss relating to the 
subjects. He, then, drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directio ns by the Speaker' 
regarding maintaining confidentiality of the discussion held before the Parliamentary Committee.  
4. Thereafter, the representatives of IREL made a Power Point Presentation highlighting 
IREL’s relationship with India’s atomic energy programme, location of its plants, its product profile, 
global scenario of rare earth deposits, physical and financial performance, major completed and 
ongoing projects, major achievements, details of its Joint Ventures, future expansion plan, etc. 
The presentation also touched upon the genesis of IREL-IDCOL Limited and its current status.  
5. The Members, then, sought clarifications from the representatives of IREL on various 
issues related to the subject viz., livelihood and rehabilitation of project/mine aff ected people, 
delay in getting statutory clearances to start mining operation, long process of getting lease 
agreement to start mining, share of women employees in the Company, steps taken to achieve 
net zero target by 2070 and monopoly of China in rare ea rth material supply. The queries of the 
Members also related to India’s lack of ecosystem of industries utilizing rare earth material, 
reason why China had already developed the rare earth ecosystem in the last 20 -30 years, 
countries who are buying rare earth material from India and so on. The Committee also discussed 
the other issues such as CSR activities of the Company, the steps taken to contain radioactivity in 
the mining sites, the steps taken to protect the local people from exposure to radioactivity , current 
status of IREL-IDCOL Limited, etc. 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of IREL responded on majority of the issues raised by the 
Members. In the end, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of IREL and IREL -IDCOL and 
directed that in respect o f points for which information was not readily available or if more 
information were required to be furnished, written replies thereon may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.  
----- 

48 
 
APPENDIX – II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-2025) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 16 December, 2024 from 1530 hrs. to  1700 hrs. in 
Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                              Shri Tariq  Anwar    - Convenor  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
7. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
8. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
    9.   Shri Neraj Dangi 
                                               10.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
    11.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
             
SECRETARIAT 
       1. Shri Neeraj Semwal           -    Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha   -    Director 
       3. Smt. Mriganka Achal          -      Deputy Secretary 
   
 
PART A 
2. *** *** *** *** *** 
3. *** *** *** *** *** 

49 
 
PART B 
REPRESENTATIVES OF IREL (INDIA) LIMITED & IREL-IDCOL LIMITED 
 
  Name Designation 
1. Shri S.B. Mohanty            - CMD (in-charge) & Director (Finance)  
2. Shri R.A. Khale                - Director (Marketing) 
3. Shri Anuttam Mishra        - Director (Technical)  
4. Shri Rupender Dhiman    - Company Secretary  
 
4. At the outset, the C onvenor briefed the Members about the agenda of the sitting. 
i.e. to take evidence of the representatives of the IREL (India) Limited and IREL -IDCOL 
Limited in connection with comprehensive examination of both the subjects. The 
Committee Secretariat, then, made a Power Point Presentation explaining major issues 
relating to the subject. 
[The witnesses were, then, called in] 
5. The C onvenor welcomed the representatives of IREL and IREL -IDCOL to the 
sitting of the Committee and put forth the major points the Committee desired to discuss 
relating to the subjects. He, then, drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions 
by the Speak er' regarding maintaining confidentiality of the discussion held before the 
Parliamentary Committee.    
6. Thereafter, the representatives of IREL made a Power Point Presentation 
highlighting IREL’s contribution in India’s atomic energy programme, location  of IREL’s  
plants, its product profile, physical and financial performance,  major completed and 
ongoing projects, details of its Joint Ventures. The presentation also touched upon IREL’s 
Make in India initiatives, operations & resource management, business  strategy & market 
performance, corporate governance, human resources, environmental sustainability, 
CSR, future plan and expansion and so on.  
7. The Members, then, sought clarifications from the representatives of IREL on 
various issues related to the su bject viz., quality and quantity of our rare earths in 
comparison with that of other countries, such as China, mechanism and strategy to 
develop entire rare earth ecosystem in India, need for private investment in industries 
which use rare earths as raw ma terial, lack of ample market/demand commensurate with 

50 
 
India’s production capacity, prospect of titanium value chain, domestic and international 
competitors, China’s dominance in International rare earth market, India’s position in the 
International rare ea rths market, quantum of India’s export, contribution of rare earths to 
global green energy missions, etc. The Committee also discussed other issues such as 
how rare earth mining makes an area become more fertile, details of CSR activities, 
ongoing Governme nt’s effort for exploring and sourcing of rare earths in friendly 
countries, women participation in the IREL workforce, concerns and protest/resistance 
from local people/NGOs at mining/project sites regarding fear of radioactivity, issues 
regarding compens ation, rehabilitation and employment of mine/project affected people 
and so on. 
8. Thereafter, the representatives of IREL responded on majority of the issues raised 
by the Members. In the end, the Convenor thanked the representatives of IREL and IREL-
IDCOL and directed that in respect of points for which information was not readily 
available or if more information were required to be furnished, written replies thereon may 
be furnished to the Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.  
----- 
  

51 
 
APPENDIX – III 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-2025) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 16 December, 2024 from 1700 hrs. to 1750 hrs. in 
Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                    Shri Tariq  Anwar    - Convenor 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
7. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
8. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
    9.   Shri Neeraj Dangi 
                                             10.   Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
             11.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
             
SECRETARIAT 
       1. Shri Neeraj Semwal          -     Joint Secretary 
       2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  -     Director 
       3. Smt. Mriganka Achal         -        Deputy Secretary 
   
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY (DAE) 
 
 
 
 
 
  Name Designation 
1. Dr. Ajit Kumar Mohanty     - Secretary, DAE  
2. Shri A.R. Sule                    - Additional Secretary  
3. Smt. Anjali Sinha               - Joint Secretary  

52 
 
   [As per the schedule of the sitting, the witnesses were then, called in.] 
2. The C onvenor welcomed the representatives of DAE to the sitting of the 
Committee and put forth the major points the Committee desired to discuss relating to the 
subjects. He, then, drew t heir attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the 
Speaker' regarding maintaining confidentiality of the discussion held before the 
Parliamentary Committee.    
3. Thereafter, the representatives of DAE made a Power Point Presentation 
highlighting DAE’s various Units and Organisations, the three sectors of the programmes 
of DAE, details of seven important beach sand minerals and their end -use application, 
flow-sheet of DAE’s operations, relationship between Atomic Energy Programme and 
IREL, various stages of India’s Nuclear power programme, details of operating nuclear 
power plants in India and their performances, scenario of atomic minerals including rare 
earths mining in India, details of various types of nuclear reactors, various applications of 
radiation/radio isotopes in healthcare, agriculture, food processing and preservation, etc. 
4. The Members, then, sought clarifications from the representatives of DAE on 
various issues related to the subject viz., role of IREL in supplying and stocking of thorium 
for India’s third stage of nuclear power programme, India’s indigenous nuclear reactors in 
line with Atmanirbhar Bharat mission, India’s self -sufficiency in producing heavy water for 
nuclear power plants, comparative costs of nuclear, solar and hyd ro power generation, 
need for private investments, ppp model and joint ventures in civil nuclear power industry, 
etc. The Committee also discussed the other issues such measures taken to achieve net 
zero emissions target by 2070, idea of small modular reac tors such as Bharat  Small 
Reactors and Bharat Small Modular Reactors which can be used by industries to meet 
their power requirement, how barren lands become green in and around sites of nuclear 
plants by taking up greening activities by the Company , gene ral paranoia regarding 
nuclear plants which leads to resistance/protest by locals in and around existing o r 
proposed sites and  how NGOs are helping in such protests, prevalence of illegal mining 
of beach sands which are radioactive which can put people in danger if not dealt with 
properly and so on. 

53 
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of DAE responded on majority of the issues raised 
by the Members. In the end, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of DAE and 
directed that in respect of points for which information was not readily available or if more 
information were required to be furnished, written replies thereon may be furnished to the 
Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.  
----- 
  

54 
 
APPENDIX – IV  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-2025) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 24 March, 2025  from 1530  hrs. to 1705  hrs. in 
Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                              Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri C.P. Joshi 
3. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
4. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
5. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
    8.    Shri Neeraj Dangi 
                                               9.    Shri Milind Murli Deora 
    10.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
    11.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
    12.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
    13.  Dr. Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
        1. Shri Anjani Kumar         -    Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha    -    Director 
        2. Smt. Mriganka Achal          -      Deputy Secretary 
   
  

55 
 
PART – A: 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and  
briefly apprised the Members about the following draft Reports to be considered: 
(i)  *** *** *** ***;  
(ii)  *** *** *** ***;  
(iii)  *** *** *** ; and  
(iv)  IREL (India) Limited.  
 
3 The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Reports, without any 
changes/modifications.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft 
Reports on the basis of factual verification as suggested by the conce rned 
Ministries/Departments and C&AG and present the Reports during the ongoing session of 
Parliament.   
 
PART – B: 
 
4. *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.  
----- 
 
 