 
 
24 
      
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LIMITED  
 
UNDUE ENRICHMENT THROUGH RECOVERY OF 
TURNOVER TAX FROM CONSUMER 
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 2.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 14 OF 2021]  
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2025-26) 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LIMITED 
 
UNDUE ENRICHMENT THROUGH RECOVERY OF 
TURNOVER TAX FROM CONSUMER 
 
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 2.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 14 OF 2021]  
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings on Para No. 
2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 relating to IOCL] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on11 December, 2025 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947(Saka)  
 


iii 
 
CPU No.1080 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs……. 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha 
Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 
---------- 
  

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
   Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  v 
 INTRODUCTION  vi 
CHAPTER - I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER - II Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 11 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies 
 18 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 19 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government has furnished interim replies and 
final replies are still awaited 
 24 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 05.12.2025  25 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report of Committee on Public Undertakings on 
“Undue Enrichment through Recovery of Turnover 
Tax from Consumer” relating to Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL), based on Para No. 2.1 
of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 
 27 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
15. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director  
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Chandan Kumar - Assistant Executive Officer 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Twenty-Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Undue enrichment through Recovery of 
Turnover Tax from consumer’ relating to Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) 
[Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of Report No.14 of 2021]. 
 
2. The Third Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 
2024. The Action taken Replies to all the 10 recommendations contained in the Report 
were received from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on 20 August 2025. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting 
held on 05th December 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee (18th Lok Sabha) 
is given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observation/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on “Undue Enrichment through 
Recovery of Turnover Tax from Consumer” relating to Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL), based on Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 which was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2024.  It contained Ten 
observations/recommendations.  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the Ten observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:  
SI. Nos.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 
 
(Total: 7) 
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Sl. Nos. Nil. 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:  
Sl. No. 3,4 and 10.  
 
 
 
(Total: 03) 
(Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies 
are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
(Chapter V) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to 
furnish final Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report.   
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 

2 
 
 
VIOLATION OF THE ANDHRA PRADESH GENERAL SALES TAX ACT, 1957 
Recommendation (SI. No. 3 and 4) 
5. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to Violation of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957:  
“The Committee note that the C&AG highlighted a contradiction in the 
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, which states that no dealer, 
including Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), is allowed to collect Turnover 
Tax (TOT) from consumers, and doing so would result in a penalty. 
However, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) argued that while they did 
not directly collect TOT from consumers, they had historically included the 
cost of irrecoverable state taxes in their pricing through a "State 
Surcharge" due to the administrative pricing mechanism in place before 
2002.The MoP&NG issued guidelines allowing OMCs to recover such 
costs through retail prices, a practice continued after the dismantling of the 
Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM). The Irrecoverable Taxes 
Compensation Scheme, 2002, introduced by the Government of India, 
provided compensation for irrecoverable state taxes, including Andhra 
Pradesh Turnover Tax, by incorporating these costs into the state 
surcharge. MoP&NG further clarified that no compensation for TOT was to 
be paid beyond March 31, 2002, and that adjustments to retail prices were 
to cover these costs post-APM. The Committee further note that the 
MoP&NG’s approach to handling the issue of irrecoverable taxes involved 
inter-ministerial consultations and legal advisories. The Ministry's 
adherence to guidelines and schemes post-APM reflects a structured 
process aimed at managing state tax impacts. However, the lack of direct 
consultation with the Andhra Pradesh government on these issues 
highlights a potential oversight in aligning federal tax compensation 
strategies with state-specific tax policies. In view of this, the Committee 
recommend that to address the discrepancies between the Andhra 
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, and OMC practices, a thorough 
review of tax collection policies be conducted. The Government should 
ensure that OMCs adhere strictly to statutory requirements, avoiding 
indirect tax recoveries through mechanisms like the State Surcharge, this 
will not only help in aligning practices with legal mandates but also will 
prevent potential penalties or disputes in future.”  
6. The Committee in their subsequent recommendation serial No.4, had 
recommended the following:  
“The Committee would further stress on the fact that to improve the 
handling of irrecoverable state taxes and ensure fair compensation for Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs), the Government should establish a more 
transparent and direct compensation mechanism rather than incorporating 
these costs into retail prices. This approach could involve providing direct 

3 
 
financial reimbursements or any other such arrangements to offset 
irrecoverable state taxes, thereby reducing the burden on consumers. 
Additionally, enhanced coordination between the Central and State 
governments is essential. Therefore, the MoP&NG should engage in 
regular consultations with State governments to align State tax policies.” 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“Various indirect taxes are levied by Central and State governments on 
manufacture or sale of products. By nature, these indirect taxes are cost 
to the manufacturer or seller, and are added to the cost of the product for 
the purpose of taking commercial decisions by such entities. 
OMCs are also subjected to indirect taxes, viz. Custom Duty, Central 
Excise, VAT, GST etc. on import, manufacture and sale/ purchase of 
petroleum products. 
Unlike VAT/ GST, which is levied on sale/ supply of products and can be 
separately recovered on invoices, Custom / Excise Duty are levied on 
import/ manufacture of products and are added to cost of the product 
while finalizing the pricing of the product. Thus, some indirect taxes can be 
recovered on invoice in terms of the provisions of statutes they are 
governed with while in other cases, these taxes are added to the 'price' 
At present, only the State of West Bengal & Bihar levy irrecoverable taxes 
in the name & style as Additional Tax and Surcharge respectively. The levy 
being indirect tax and take form of distribution cost of the product, is 
recovered through product pricing as State Specific cost (SSC) in line with 
MoP&NG Letter ref no. P-20023/2/2012-PP dt 2407.2012. 
Forming SSC as a part of cost prevailed since APM period. Eliminating 
SSC from price build up will need to be compensated to sustain viability of 
marketing operations of oil companies in such States. Such cash 
compensation to oil companies will be huge financial burden on the 
exchequer. 
Requests are regularly being made to respective State Governments to 
subsume irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through 
levy. Latest communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West 
Bengal and Bihar are enclosed for reference.”  
8. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid replies of the 
Government are as follows: 
“The Committee have recommended that apart from carrying out a 
thorough review of tax collection policies, the Government should ensure 
strict adherence to statutory requirements, avoiding indirect tax recoveries 
through mechanisms like the State Surcharge. This will not only help in 
aligning practices with legal mandates but also will prevent potential 
penalties or disputes in future. 


4 
 
However, the Ministry has replied that Additional Tax and Surcharge being 
levied in the State of West Bengal and Bihar, being indirect tax in the form 
of distribution cost of the product, is recovered by the OMCs through 
product pricing as State Specific cost. Therefore, it appears that the 
OMCs/ Ministry has not ensured compliance of the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding non-recovery of indirect taxes through State 
Surcharge. 
It is pertinent to mention that similar recovery was being made by IOCL in 
Andhra Pradesh where it recovered Turnover Tax by way of including the 
same in the Retail Selling Prices (RSP) which was in violation of AP GST 
Act as brought out in the para.” 
 
9. The Committee in their earlier recommendations stated that the 
Government should ensure that OMCs adhere strictly to statutory 
requirements, avoiding indirect tax recoveries through mechanisms like 
the State Surcharge, this will not only help in aligning practices with legal 
mandates but also will prevent potential penalties or disputes in future. The 
Committee had further recommended that to improve the handling of 
irrecoverable state taxes and ensure fair compensation for Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs), the Government should establish a more transparent 
and direct compensation mechanism rather than incorporating these costs 
into retail prices. The vetting comment of C&AG in line with Committee 
recommendations also states that apart from carrying out a thorough 
review of tax collection policies, the Government should ensure adherence 
to statutory requirements. The Committee while taking cognizance of the 
Ministry’s reply that certain irrecoverable State levies, such as the 
Additional Tax and Surcharge etc. are treated as part of distribution costs 
incorporated into product pricing, are of the view, that such an approach 
does not address the core issue of statutory adherence and fiscal 
transparency. Also, with regard to the Ministry’s contention that direct 
compensation may lead to financial strain, the Committee are of the view 
that the principle of legal compliance and consumer protection should take 
precedence, and desire that sustainable solutions must be found through 
policy reforms. The Committee therefore, reiterate that the Government 
may undertake a comprehensive review of tax recovery mechanisms and 
try to establish a uniform, transparent and legally compliant framework for 

5 
 
handling irrecoverable State taxes including structured consultations with 
State Governments and the Ministry of Finance to design a direct 
reimbursement and fiscal adjustment mechanism. The Committee feel that 
these kind of mechanism will ensure adherence to legal mandates, prevent 
future disputes and promote fairness and accountability in petroleum 
product pricing. The Committee hope that Ministry will take action in this 
regard to improve for the better. 
 
UNDUE ENRICHMENT TO IOCL 
Recommendation (SI. No. 5) 
10. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to Undue Enrichment to IOCL:  
“While deliberating on the subject, MoP&NG and IOCL submitted before 
the Committee that while Company’s actions might have breached legal 
provisions, there was no financial enrichment to the Company as asserted 
in the C&AG report. The MoP&NG argued that any amounts collected 
through surcharges or penalties were ultimately paid to state 
governments, with no extra benefit accruing to IOCL. The Ministry further 
emphasized that the Company’s financial losses were addressed through 
compensatory mechanisms and not through direct enrichment. The 
Committee observed that all appellate authorities concurred on the 
violation of the Act, though not in its entirety. However, the Committee 
remained concerned about the implications of such violations on the 
overall regulatory framework and the precedent it might set for future 
cases, stressing the need for stricter compliance and clearer guidelines to 
prevent any potential misuse of legal provisions. The Committee note that 
the extra amounts collected were deposited to the States, and any 
additional penalties paid reflect compliance efforts rather than financial 
gain. Given the evidence, the Committee note that IOCL’s actions appear 
to have been a response to managing financial losses due to irrecoverable 
taxes rather than an attempt to unjustly enrich themselves. The 
Company’s practice of including TOT-related costs in their pricing 
structure, while legally contentious, was countered by compensatory 
measures and penalties rather than resulting in direct financial benefit. 
Thus, the Committee feel that it is more accurate to view the situation as a 
complex financial management issue rather than clear undue enrichment. 
However, the Committee recommend that ‘in future’ any such financial 
mismanagement or additional burden arising out of such complex financial 
situations should not be imposed on the common man, instead, it should 
be resolved through the adjustments in profit margins or under-recoveries 
of the respective Company’s balance sheet.” 

6 
 
11. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“During the committee meeting, it was informed that there was no undue 
enrichment since the sum collected as a State specific surcharge was paid 
as Andhra Pradesh turnover tax and OMCs did not retain it. 
As stated above, indirect taxes are integral part of the cost of product. 
Such taxes may be made irrecoverable and thereby putting embargo on 
their recovery as tax on the face of invoice, however, there can't be any 
restriction on recovery of cost of product. 
Requests are regularly made to respective State Governments to 
subsume irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through 
levy. Latest communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West 
Bengal and Bihar are enclosed for reference.” 
12. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid replies of the 
Government are as follows: 
As per AP GST Act, the Turnover Tax was not to be recovered from the 
customers and hence it was not supposed to be a component of the cost 
of product. Accordingly, the para had highlighted undue enrichment on the 
basis of the fact that it was IOCL, and not the consumers, which were 
recovered to bear the burden of Turnover Tax as per contention of the AP 
GST Act which is corroborated by the award by both Appellate Authority 
and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal in the case. 
However, reply is silent about the recommendation of the Committee that 
in future, additional burden arising out of such complex financial situations 
should not be imposed on the common man, rather, it should be resolved 
through adjustments in profit margins or under-recoveries. 
 
13. The Committee had noted in its original recommendation that the issue 
of undue enrichment by Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) under the 
Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act (APGST), 1957, necessitates careful 
consideration of legal compliance, financial management and consumer 
protection. While the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) and 
IOCL have maintained that no undue enrichment occurred since the State 
Surcharge collected was remitted to the State Government, the Committee had 
observed that this explanation does not fully address the concern raised by 
the Committee and Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG). The Committee 
therefore recognized that such issues emerged from the complexities of the 
Administered Pricing Mechanism and State-level taxation frameworks. 
However, continued reliance on cost recovery point of view cannot validate 

7 
 
deviation from statutory requirements. The Ministry has yet to engage with the 
Committee’s concern that financial pressures stemming from these disputes 
ought not to affect the everyday citizen. In view of this, the Committee desire 
that in future, any similar financial implications or tax-related discrepancies 
should be managed through internal mechanisms, such as adjustments in 
profit margins, operational efficiencies and under-recoveries, rather than 
through price adjustments. The MoP&NG should also establish clear, 
transparent and legally compliant guidelines to ensure accountability, protect 
consumer interests and prevent recurrence of such issues. 
 
IMPOSITION OF PENALTY ON IOCL 
Recommendation (SI. No. 6) 
14. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to Imposition of Penalty on IOCL:  
“The Committee note that the Andhra Pradesh Government imposed a 
penalty on Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) for allegedly violating 
Section 5A (1-C) of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax (APGST) Act, 
1957. This section prohibits the collection of Turnover Tax (TOT) from 
consumers. The penalty of ₹262 crore was levied based on the price hike 
observed in Andhra Pradesh, which was perceived to be influenced by the 
imposition of a state surcharge. Despite IOCL’s assertion that TOT was 
not collected as a separate charge but included in state-specific costs, the 
assessment led to substantial financial repercussions for the Company. 
The Committee observe that the stand of the Commercial Tax Department 
of the Government of Andhra Pradesh was that TOT was collected from 
consumers through the increase RSP though TOT was not reflected or 
mentioned in the Bill/Invoice.  In this regard, the Committee strongly feel 
that all OMCs including IOCL must display clear cut price list including 
taxes, surcharges, etc. at an appropriate place in their outlets for the 
information of their consumers and also must be provided the detailed 
(original price of petrol/diesel, Central tax, State tax, etc.) and clear 
Bill/Invoice to every consumer in printed or electronically form via. 
email/sms/POS receipt. The Committee would like to recommend that a 
regular audit and compliance reviews should be conducted to ensure that 
oil marketing Companies adhere to legal requirements regarding tax 
collections and surcharges. These reviews can help to identify and 
address any discrepancies early, and thereby preventing large-scale 
penalties and disputes in the matters.” 
 
 

8 
 
15. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“Currently, the RSP of MS and HSD are displayed at the retail outlets of 
the OMCs. The taxes applicable on sale of product from IOCL to dealer 
are also shown in the invoice raised to dealer. Further, bill/ invoice is 
provided to the customers at retail outlets reflecting the price per litre. 
This Ministry has advised OMCs to display clear cut price list including 
taxes at their retail outlets. 
OMCs books of accounts are already being reviewed by statutory 
auditors, CAG, Sales tax/ VAT authorities, excise authorities, independent 
auditors, etc.” 
16. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid replies of the 
Government are as follows: 
“Details of the compliance action taken by the Ministry and OMCs as 
regards display of clearcut price list including taxes at Retail Outlets as per 
the recommendation may be provided.” 
 
17. The Committee note that the imposition of penalty on Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL) by the Andhra Pradesh Government under Section 
5A (1-C) of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, highlights the 
importance of transparency in the pricing and tax disclosure practices of Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs). The Committee while noting the replies of IOCL 
and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) stating that the 
Retail Selling Prices (RSPs) are displayed at the retail outlets and tax details 
are provided to dealers and consumers through invoices, are of the opinion 
that the current measures fall short of adequately addressing concerns related 
to the indirect recovery of Turnover Tax (TOT), particularly the lack of 
transparency for end consumers. Since, the issues that led to the penalty, 
including perceived hidden tax elements within pricing structures, underscore 
the need for enhanced transparency and proactive compliance. The 
Committee, are of the view that simply displaying RSPs and providing invoices 
does not adequately ensure that consumers are aware of the detailed price 
build-up, including base price, central taxes, state taxes, surcharges, 
transportation cost and dealer commission. Although the Ministry has 
encouraged OMCs to ensure transparent price displays, the reply lacks details 
regarding implementation measures, timelines, compliance oversight, and 
consistency in display formats at retail outlets. Further, the Committee note 
that although statutory and external audits are undertaken, these actions fall 

9 
 
short of explicitly verifying retail-level price transparency and display 
compliance. In conclusion, the Committee going with the C&AG observations, 
desire that the Ministry ensure prominently displayed price boards at all retail 
outlets reflecting a complete price break-up along with OMCs providing 
consumers with itemized digital or printed invoices showing all cost 
components. Further, there is a need for a structured audit mechanism 
focused specifically on price transparency compliance with periodic reporting 
to the Ministry. These steps will ensure legal compliance; protect consumer 
rights along with preventing recurrence of disputes and penalties in future. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Recommendation (SI. No. 10) 
18. The Committee in their Third Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to conclusion: 
“The Committee find that had the Company not collected the amount from 
the consumers, it would have to pay the entire amount of Rs.262.60 crore 
of TOT from its own coffer as stipulated in Sub-section 5A(1B) of the 
APGST Act, 1957. Thus, the Company saved Rs.196.95 crore out of the 
total amount of penalty after paying only Rs.65.65 crore. The Committee 
show their concern that now at this stage it is too difficult to identify and 
refund the money to the actual consumers who paid TOT on purchase of 
petroleum product at that time. Therefore, the Committee would suggest 
that the OMCs including IOCL and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas should find a reasonable way out to compensate consumers in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh/Telangana in the form of a suitable welfare 
schemes under their CSR activities which may include establishment of 
charitable clinics, hospitals, educational institutions, skill training centres, 
etc., especially in remote and under developed areas of these States.” 
19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“IOCL has submitted that the amount collected from customers through 
pricing had been paid by IOCL to State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
and no amount has been withheld by IOCL. Moreover, in order to avoid 
the unnecessary and prolonged litigation and considering commercial 
prudence, IOCL further paid an additional 25% to Andhra Pradesh 
Government based on opinion of the Solicitor General without admitting 
the demand on merits. 
Committee also acknowledged IOCL's actions that it appear to have been 
a response to managing financial losses due to irrecoverable taxes rather 
than an attempt to unjustly enrich themselves. 

10 
 
The entire amount of taxes was paid to the State which becomes part of 
Consolidated fund of the State. Said money is used by the State for the 
benefit of residents of the State on deemed appropriate by authorities.” 
20. The vetting comments of the Office of C&AG on the aforesaid replies of the 
Government are as follows: 
“As per AP GST Act, the Turnover Tax was not to be recovered from the 
customers and hence it was not supposed to be a component of the cost 
of product. Accordingly, the para had highlighted undue enrichment on the 
basis of the fact that it was IOCL, and not the consumers, which were 
recovered to bear the burden of Turnover Tax as per contention of the AP 
GST Act which is corroborated by the award by both Appellate Authority 
and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal in the case. 
Hence, the recommendation of the Committee regarding CSR activities, 
upto the amount of ₹196.95 crore saved by the Company, may be 
complied with.” 
 
21. The Committee note, while the Ministry and IOCL have stated that the 
collected surcharge was remitted to the State Government and that no 
financial gain was retained, the findings of the C&AG and the decisions of 
appellate authorities indicate that the burden of TOT was ultimately borne by 
consumers, contrary to the statutory mandate. In view of this, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the appropriate corrective action 
should focus on indirect restitution to the people/consumers.  Although, the 
Ministry has stated that the funds deposited with the State have already 
entered the Consolidated Fund and been utilized for public expenditure but at 
the same time, this does not negate the responsibility of IOCL to address the 
benefit retained due to the partial waiver of the penalty. The Committee feel 
that equitable redress must balance commercial viability, legal finality and 
social responsibility. Therefore, in line with C&AG vetting remarks, the 
Committee desire that IOCL, in consultation with MoP&NG, design and 
implement targeted Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) initiatives in the 
States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana equivalent, as recommended earlier, 
in value to the amount retained under initiatives, which may include 
establishing or supporting healthcare facilities, skill development centres, 
educational scholarships and livelihood enhancement programmes, 
particularly in underserved and remote regions.  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (SI. No.1 to 2) 
 Indian Oil Corporation Limited is India’s leading Company in oil, gas, 
petrochemicals and alternative energy sources.  The Company has a refinery 
capacity of 70.05 million metric tons per annum and around 1789 operational CNG 
stations.   The Company reported a profit after tax of Rs. 39,619 core in 2023-24. 
The present Audit para 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021, examined by the 
Committee pertains to “undue enrichment through recovery of turnover tax from 
consumer relating to IOCL”. The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) imposed 
Turnover Tax through new sub-sections 5-A (1-A) to (1-C) under the Andhra Pradesh 
General Sales Tax Act, 1957 (APGST Act) w.e.f. 30 November, 2001.   This sub-
section mandated that every dealer would in addition to tax payable under section 5, 
5-AA and 5-C, pay TOT @ 2 paise on every rupee inter alia in respect of petrol and 
diesel oil in the State. No dealer would be entitled to collect TOT from consumers. 
Any amount collection of TOT from consumers would attract equivalent amount 
penalty. On the issue, Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) approached Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, and the Ministry on 29 August, 2002 clarified that OMCs 
might recover the additional costs by appropriately revising the Retail Selling Prices 
(RSP) in Andhra Pradesh. Hence, IOCL and other OMCs during the next price 
revision included the impact of TOT w.e.f. 01.09.2002.  The Committee note that the 
Commercial Tax Department of the Government of Andhra Pradesh imposed penalty 
on IOCL under sub-section 5-A (1-C) of the Act for recovering TOT from consumers 
in contravention to the Sub- section 5A (1-B) of the APGST Act, 1957 and raised the 
demands for the years 2002-03 (Rs.52.18 crore), 2003-04 (Rs.93.43 crore), 2003-04 
(Rs.21.54 crore for erstwhile IBP) and 2004-05 (Rs.95.45 crore) in 31st March 2006, 
31st March, 2007, 28th March, 2007 and 31st March 2008, respectively, aggregating a 
total amount of Rs.262.60 crore by imposing penalty.  However, the collection of TOT 
was not reflected in the Bills of OMCs and TOT was abolished from w.e.f. 01.04.2005 
with implementation of Value Added Tax (VAT).  Thus, the provision of the APGST 
Act, 1957 for imposition and collection of TOT prevailed for the period between 
30.11.2001 to 01.04.2005. 
and 
2. The Committee further observed IOCL appealed in various judicial platforms 
(i.e. State Tax Tribunal Appellate (STAT), Hyderabad High Court and Hon’ble 
Supreme Court) against the imposition of penalty by the Commercial Tax 
Department of Government of Andhra Pradesh.   The Hyderabad High Court granted 
conditional stay on the payment of 10 per cent of penalty in August, 2014.  This case 
remained pending till 2020.  After the introduction of Goods and Service Tax (GST), 
the Government of Telangana (after the Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014 
came into existence) offered an out of court settlement and IOCL paid 25 per cent 

12 
 
(Rs.65.65 crore) including 10 per cent (Rs. 24.11 crore) already paid to the State 
Government. Thus, IOCL settled the case to pay only 25 per cent of the penalty and 
withdrew all appeals pending before various judicial forums.   However, C&AG in 
their Audit Para objected that unlawful collection of TOT and through the out of court 
settlement, IOCL got undue enrichment of Rs.196.95 crore (Rs.262.60 crore minus 
Rs.65.65 crore. Before finalizing their observations and recommendations, the 
Committee reviewed the input from the C&AG, IOCL, and MoPN&G. Committee 
carefully considered the evidence provided by all stakeholders, including the 
information and clarifications submitted. Following thorough internal deliberation, the 
Committee reached their conclusions and formulated the suggestions detailed in the 
following paragraphs.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the Committee and suggested measures thereon have 
been duly noted and have also been communicated across the decision makers 
within the organization for implementation.  
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
UNDUE ENRICHMENT TO IOCL 
Recommendation (SI. No.5) 
 
3. While deliberating on the subject, MoP&NG and IOCL submitted before the 
Committee that while Company’s actions might have breached legal provisions, 
there was no financial enrichment to the Company as asserted in the C&AG report. 
The MoP&NG argued that any amounts collected through surcharges or penalties 
were ultimately paid to state governments, with no extra benefit accruing to IOCL. 
The Ministry further emphasized that the Company’s financial losses were 
addressed through compensatory mechanisms and not through direct enrichment. 
The Committee observed that all appellate authorities concurred on the violation of 
the Act, though not in its entirety. However, the Committee remained concerned 
about the implications of such violations on the overall regulatory framework and the 
precedent it might set for future cases, stressing the need for stricter compliance and 
clearer guidelines to prevent any potential misuse of legal provisions. The 
Committee note that the extra amounts collected were deposited to the States, and 
any additional penalties paid reflect compliance efforts rather than financial gain. 
Given the evidence, the Committee note that IOCL’s actions appear to have been a 
response to managing financial losses due to irrecoverable taxes rather than an 
attempt to unjustly enrich themselves. The Company’s practice of including TOT-
related costs in their pricing structure, while legally contentious, was countered by 
compensatory measures and penalties rather than resulting in direct financial 
benefit. Thus, the Committee feel that it is more accurate to view the situation as a 
complex financial management issue rather than clear undue enrichment. However, 
the Committee recommend that ‘in future’ any such financial mismanagement or 
additional burden arising out of such complex financial situations should not be 

13 
 
imposed on the common man, instead, it should be resolved through the 
adjustments in profit margins or under-recoveries of the respective Company’s 
balance sheet.  
 
Reply of the Government 
During the committee meeting, it was informed that there was no undue enrichment 
since the sum collected as a State specific surcharge was paid as Andhra Pradesh 
turnover tax and OMCs did not retain it. 
 
As stated above, indirect taxes are integral part of the cost of product. Such taxes 
may be made irrecoverable and thereby putting embargo on their recovery as tax on 
the face of invoice, however, there can't be any restriction on recovery of cost of 
product. 
 
Requests are regularly made to respective State Governments to subsume 
irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through levy. Latest 
communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West Bengal and Bihar are 
enclosed for reference. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
As per AP GST Act, the Turnover Tax was not to be recovered from the customers 
and hence it was not supposed to be a component of the cost of product. 
Accordingly, the para had highlighted undue enrichment on the basis of the fact that 
it was IOCL, and not the consumers, which were recovered to bear the burden of 
Turnover Tax as per contention of the AP GST Act which is corroborated by the 
award by both Appellate Authority and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal in the case. 
However, reply is silent about the recommendation of the Committee that in future, 
additional burden arising out of such complex financial situations should not be 
imposed on the common man, rather, it should be resolved through adjustments in 
profit margins or under-recoveries. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
  

14 
 
IMPOSITION OF PENALTY ON IOCL 
Recommendation (SI. No.6) 
 
4. The Committee note that the Andhra Pradesh Government imposed a penalty 
on Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) for allegedly violating Section 5A (1-C) of 
the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax (APGST) Act, 1957. This section prohibits 
the collection of Turnover Tax (TOT) from consumers. The penalty of ₹262 crore was 
levied based on the price hike observed in Andhra Pradesh, which was perceived to 
be influenced by the imposition of a state surcharge. Despite IOCL’s assertion that 
TOT was not collected as a separate charge but included in state-specific costs, the 
assessment led to substantial financial repercussions for the Company. The 
Committee observe that the stand of the Commercial Tax Department of the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh was that TOT was collected from consumers 
through the increase RSP though TOT was not reflected or mentioned in the 
Bill/Invoice.  In this regard, the Committee strongly feel that all OMCs including IOCL 
must display clear cut price list including taxes, surcharges, etc. at an appropriate 
place in their outlets for the information of their consumers and also must be 
provided the detailed (original price of petrol/diesel, Central tax, State tax, etc.) and 
clear Bill/Invoice to every consumer in printed or electronically form via. 
email/sms/POS receipt. The Committee would like to recommend that a regular audit 
and compliance reviews should be conducted to ensure that oil marketing 
Companies adhere to legal requirements regarding tax collections and surcharges. 
These reviews can help to identify and address any discrepancies early, and thereby 
preventing large-scale penalties and disputes in the matters. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Currently, the RSP of MS and HSD are displayed at the retail outlets of the OMCs. 
The taxes applicable on sale of product from IOCL to dealer are also shown in the 
invoice raised to dealer. Further, bill/ invoice is provided to the customers at retail 
outlets reflecting the price per litre. 
This Ministry has advised OMCs to display clear cut price list including taxes at their 
retail outlets. 
 
OMCs books of accounts are already being reviewed by statutory auditors, CAG, 
Sales tax/ VAT authorities, excise authorities, independent auditors, etc. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
Details of the compliance action taken by the Ministry and OMCs as regards display 
of clear cut price list including taxes at Retail Outlets as per the recommendation 
may be provided. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

15 
 
JUDICIAL IMPASSE AND AMICABLE RESOLUTION 
Recommendation (SI. No.7) 
 
5. The Committee note that after the introduction of Goods and Services Tax 
(GST), all the OMCs settled the penalties throughout of court settlement which were 
offered/initiated by the Government of Telangana (carved out of erstwhile Andhra 
Pradesh in 2013 under the Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014) after many 
long pending cases in various judicial platforms. Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL) ultimately paid a penalty of ₹65.65 crores, as part of an out-of-court 
settlement to resolve the dispute regarding the collection of Turnover Tax (TOT) and 
related issues. The Committee find that this process was avoidable and led to 
wastage of public money, resources and valuable time of the stakeholders including 
IOCL, MoPNG and Courts. Therefore, to address delays in judicial proceedings 
which has an adverse impact on the functioning of various Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs), the Committee would like to recommend for establishment of 
a specialized fast-track courts for CPSU-related cases, which would expedite cases 
involving large financial stakes and complex regulatory issues, thereby reducing the 
time and costs associated with prolonged litigation. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the MoP&NG in this regard if any. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. However, it is stated that commercial taxes are being governed by State 
Governments in accordance with the provisions under the respective Acts and vary 
from state to state and states have adequate existing forums for handling of 
disputes. 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
Details of the steps taken by the MoP&NG as regards recommendation of the 
Committee for establishment of specialized fast-track courts for CPSU-related cases, 
to expedite the cases involving large financial stakes and complex regulatory issues, 
has not been provided. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
 
  

16 
 
TAX STRUCTURES IN OTHER STATES AND UTS 
Recommendation (SI. No.8) 
 
6. The Committee note that there were irrecoverable taxes levied by various 
State Governments during the period under review. The Irrecoverable Taxes 
Compensation Scheme of 2002, detailed in the Gazette Notification No/18/2001 
dated January 16, 2003, outlines various taxes imposed by states on OMCs. These 
include turnover taxes, surcharges, and additional taxes varying significantly across 
regions. For example, Andhra Pradesh imposes a 2% turnover tax on MS/HSD, 
while Tamil Nadu levies an 18% entry tax on HSD and a 3% additional tax on 
SKO/LPG. Goa imposes a steep 25% additional tax on sales. IOCL's approach to 
these taxes involved adjusting retail selling prices (RSP) to recover costs, a practice 
adopted by all major OMCs, including BPCL and HPCL. Efforts by the MoPNG to 
persuade State governments to remove these taxes, yielded no results. The 
Government of Gujarat similarly imposed a Turnover Tax (TOT) but permitted Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) to collect the tax from consumers without imposing 
any penalties. Conversely, the Andhra Pradesh government remained unyielding 
despite requests from OMCs and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to allow 
the recovery of TOT from consumers due to their inability to absorb the cost. The 
Committee feel that both IOCL and the Ministry could have been more active in 
persuading Andhra Pradesh to withdraw the TOT, which persisted for three years. 
Action was only taken after Andhra Pradesh's Commercial Tax Department imposed 
a penalty of Rs. 262.60 crore. The Committee believes that the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas should have initiated more proactive engagement and 
communication with OMCs, state governments, and other stakeholders to resolve 
such issues more effectively. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas should establish a more efficient dialogue process to 
address and resolve conflicts between OMCs and State governments, thereby 
saving time and resources for all parties involved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoP&NG regularly engages with respective states based on the issue involved. 
 
Recently also requests have been made to some State Governments to subsume 
irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through levy. Latest 
communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West Bengal and Bihar are 
enclosed for reference. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
Audit has no comments  
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
  

17 
 
GOODS AND SERVICE TAX ON PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 
Recommendation (SI. No.9) 
 
7. The Committee observe that the taxation for Petroleum and Natural Gas in 
the Country has been marked by significant variations in tax rates across different 
States/UTs. This persisted even after the introduction of the Value Added Tax (VAT) 
on April 1, 2005. Consequently, the prices of Petroleum and Natural Gas exhibit 
differences from one States/UTs to another.  Despite the implementation of the 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) from July 1, 2017, certain key petroleum items 
including Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Petrol, Diesel, and Aviation Turbine Fuel remained 
outside the ambit of GST. As a result, the Petroleum and Natural Gas sector 
continues to contend with a complex tax regime characterized by a mix of excise 
duty, State sales tax for non-GST items, and GST for the remaining products. The 
Committee opine that by having a uniform GST rate, the variability in fuel prices due 
to State-specific levies would be minimized. The Committee find that the disparity in 
tax rates across the Country has resulted in significant challenges like contravention 
of APGST Act. This move would enhance price transparency and reduce the 
financial burden on consumers However, this transition requires the consensus of 
the GST Council and careful consideration of fiscal impacts on both the Central and 
State governments. Therefore, the Committee feel that the GST Council should 
address this issue (disparity in tax rates across the Country) and speed up the 
process to bring the Petroleum and Natural Gas under the GST. This step is 
essential to ensure consistency in the pricing of Petroleum and Natural Gas products 
across all States/UTs. Such a move would not only streamline taxation but also 
promote equitable pricing and facilitate smoother operations within the sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Article 279 A (5) of the Constitution prescribes that the Goods and Service Tax 
Council shall recommend the date on which the goods and services tax be levied on 
High Speed Diesel, Motor Spirit (Petrol). Also, as per the section 9(2) of the CGST 
Act, inclusion of these products in GST will require recommendation of the GST 
Council. So far, the GST Council, in which all the states are represented, has not 
made any recommendation for inclusion of these goods under GST. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
The recommendation pertains to GST Council. Hence, no comment to offer on ATR 
on this recommendation.  
 
However, the Ministry may consider taking up the matter with GST Council in line 
with the recommendation of the Committee. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL  - 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAD NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Violation of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 
Recommendation (SI. No.3) 
 
 The Committee note that the C&AG highlighted a contradiction in the Andhra 
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, which states that no dealer, including Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs), is allowed to collect Turnover Tax (TOT) from 
consumers, and doing so would result in a penalty. However, Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL) argued that while they did not directly collect TOT from consumers, 
they had historically included the cost of irrecoverable state taxes in their pricing 
through a "State Surcharge" due to the administrative pricing mechanism in place 
before 2002.The MoP&NG issued guidelines allowing OMCs to recover such costs 
through retail prices, a practice continued after the dismantling of the Administered 
Pricing Mechanism (APM). The Irrecoverable Taxes Compensation Scheme, 2002, 
introduced by the Government of India, provided compensation for irrecoverable 
state taxes, including Andhra Pradesh Turnover Tax, by incorporating these costs 
into the state surcharge. MoP&NG further clarified that no compensation for TOT 
was to be paid beyond March 31, 2002, and that adjustments to retail prices were to 
cover these costs post-APM. The Committee further note that the MoP&NG’s 
approach to handling the issue of irrecoverable taxes involved inter-ministerial 
consultations and legal advisories. The Ministry's adherence to guidelines and 
schemes post-APM reflects a structured process aimed at managing state tax 
impacts. However, the lack of direct consultation with the Andhra Pradesh 
government on these issues highlights a potential oversight in aligning federal tax 
compensation strategies with state-specific tax policies. In view of this, the 
Committee recommend that to address the discrepancies between the Andhra 
Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, and OMC practices, a thorough review of tax 
collection policies be conducted. The Government should ensure that OMCs adhere 
strictly to statutory requirements, avoiding indirect tax recoveries through 
mechanisms like the State Surcharge, this will not only help in aligning practices with 
legal mandates but also will prevent potential penalties or disputes in future.  
Reply of the Government 
Various indirect taxes are levied by Central and State governments on manufacture 
or sale of products. By nature, these indirect taxes are cost to the manufacturer or 
seller, and are added to the cost of the product for the purpose of taking commercial 
decisions by such entities. 
 
OMCs are also subjected to indirect taxes, viz. Custom Duty, Central Excise, VAT, 
GST etc. on import, manufacture and sale / purchase of petroleum products. 
 
Unlike VAT/ GST, which is levied on sale/ supply of products and can be separately 
recovered on invoices, Custom / Excise Duty are levied on import/ manufacture of 

20 
 
products and are added to cost of the product while finalizing the pricing of the 
product. Thus, some indirect taxes can be recovered on invoice in terms of the 
provisions of statutes they are governed with while in other cases, these taxes are 
added to the 'price' 
 
At present, only the State of West Bengal & Bihar levy irrecoverable taxes in the 
name & style as Additional Tax and Surcharge respectively. The levy being indirect 
tax and take form of distribution cost of the product, is recovered through product 
pricing as State Specific cost (SSC) in line with MoP&NG Letter ref no. P-
20023/2/2012-PP dt 24.07.2012. 
 
Forming SSC as a part of cost prevailed since APM period. Eliminating SSC from 
price build up will need to be compensated to sustain viability of marketing 
operations of oil companies in such States. Such cash compensation to oil 
companies will be huge financial burden on the exchequer. 
 
Requests are regularly being made to respective State Governments to subsume 
irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through levy. Latest 
communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West Bengal and Bihar are 
enclosed for reference. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
The Committee have recommended that apart from carrying out a thorough review of 
tax collection policies, the Government should ensure strict adherence to statutory 
requirements, avoiding indirect tax recoveries through mechanisms like the State 
Surcharge. This will not only help in aligning practices with legal mandates but also 
will prevent potential penalties or disputes in future. 
 
However, the Ministry has replied that Additional Tax and Surcharge being levied in 
the State of West Bengal and Bihar, being indirect tax in the form of distribution cost 
of the product, is recovered by the OMCs through product pricing as State Specific 
cost. Therefore, it appears that the OMCs/ Ministry has not ensured compliance of 
the recommendation of the Committee regarding non-recovery of indirect taxes 
through State Surcharge. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that similar recovery was being made by IOCL in Andhra 
Pradesh where it recovered Turnover Tax by way of including the same in the Retail 
Selling Prices (RSP) which was in violation of AP GST Act as brought out in the para. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 


21 
 
Recommendation (SI. No.4) 
2. The Committee would further stress on the fact that to improve the handling of 
irrecoverable state taxes and ensure fair compensation for Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs), the Government should establish a more transparent and direct 
compensation mechanism rather than incorporating these costs into retail prices. 
This approach could involve providing direct financial reimbursements or any other 
such arrangements to offset irrecoverable state taxes, thereby reducing the burden 
on consumers. Additionally, enhanced coordination between the Central and State 
governments is essential. Therefore, the MoP&NG should engage in regular 
consultations with State governments to align State tax policies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Various indirect taxes are levied by Central and State governments on manufacture 
or sale of products. By nature, these indirect taxes are cost to the manufacturer or 
seller, and are added to the cost of the product for the purpose of taking commercial 
decisions by such entities. 
 
OMCs are also subjected to indirect taxes, viz. Custom Duty, Central Excise, VAT, 
GST etc. on import, manufacture and sale/ purchase of petroleum products. 
 
Unlike VAT/ GST, which is levied on sale/ supply of products and can be separately 
recovered on invoices, Custom / Excise Duty are levied on import/ manufacture of 
products and are added to cost of the product while finalizing the pricing of the 
product. Thus, some indirect taxes can be recovered on invoice in terms of the 
provisions of statutes they are governed with while in other cases, these taxes are 
added to the 'price' 
 
At present, only the State of West Bengal & Bihar levy irrecoverable taxes in the 
name & style as Additional Tax and Surcharge respectively. The levy being indirect 
tax and take form of distribution cost of the product, is recovered through product 
pricing as State Specific cost (SSC) in line with MoP&NG Letter ref no. P-
20023/2/2012-PP dt 2407.2012. 
 
Forming SSC as a part of cost prevailed since APM period. Eliminating SSC from 
price build up will need to be compensated to sustain viability of marketing 
operations of oil companies in such States. Such cash compensation to oil 
companies will be huge financial burden on the exchequer. 
 
Requests are regularly being made to respective State Governments to subsume 
irrecoverable taxes into VAT or restructure them as pass-through levy. Latest 
communication sent to Chief Secretaries, States of West Bengal and Bihar are 
enclosed for reference. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 


22 
 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
The Committee have recommended that apart from carrying out a thorough review of 
tax collection policies, the Government should ensure strict adherence to statutory 
requirements, avoiding indirect tax recoveries through mechanisms like the State 
Surcharge. This will not only help in aligning practices with legal mandates but also 
will prevent potential penalties or disputes in future. 
However, the Ministry has replied that Additional Tax and Surcharge being levied in 
the State of West Bengal and Bihar, being indirect tax in the form of distribution cost 
of the product, is recovered by the OMCs through product pricing as State Specific 
cost. Therefore, it appears that the OMCs/ Ministry has not ensured compliance of 
the recommendation of the Committee regarding non-recovery of indirect taxes 
through State Surcharge. 
 
It is pertinent to mention that similar recovery was being made by IOCL in Andhra 
Pradesh where it recovered Turnover Tax by way of including the same in the Retail 
Selling Prices (RSP) which was in violation of AP GST Act as brought out in the para. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
Recommendation (SI. No.10) 
3. The Committee find that had the Company not collected the amount from the 
consumers, it would have to pay the entire amount of Rs.262.60 crore of TOT from 
its own coffer as stipulated in Sub-section 5A(1B) of the APGST Act, 1957. Thus, the 
Company saved Rs.196.95 crore out of the total amount of penalty after paying only 
Rs.65.65 crore. The Committee show their concern that now at this stage it is too 
difficult to identify and refund the money to the actual consumers who paid TOT on 
purchase of petroleum product at that time. Therefore, the Committee would suggest 
that the OMCs including IOCL and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should 
find a reasonable way out to compensate consumers in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh/Telangana in the form of a suitable welfare schemes under their CSR 
activities which may include establishment of charitable clinics, hospitals, 
educational institutions, skill training centres, etc., especially in remote and under 
developed areas of these States.  
Reply of the Government 
IOCL has submitted that the amount collected from customers through pricing had 
been paid by IOCL to State Government of Andhra Pradesh and no amount has 
been withheld by IOCL. Moreover, in order to avoid the unnecessary and prolonged 
litigation and considering commercial prudence, IOCL further paid an additional 25% 

23 
 
to Andhra Pradesh Government based on opinion of the Solicitor General without 
admitting the demand on merits. 
 
Committee also acknowledged IOCL's actions that it appear to have been a 
response to managing financial losses due to irrecoverable taxes rather than an 
attempt to unjustly enrich themselves. 
 
The entire amount of taxes was paid to the State which becomes part of 
Consolidated fund of the State. Said money is used by the State for the benefit of 
residents of the State on deemed appropriate by authorities. 
[Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas O.M. No. P-
11020(29)/7/2021-PP-Part(1) dated 20.08.2025] 
 
Vetting Remarks of the Office of C&AG 
As per AP GST Act, the Turnover Tax was not to be recovered from the customers 
and hence it was not supposed to be a component of the cost of product. 
Accordingly, the para had highlighted undue enrichment on the basis of the fact that 
it was IOCL, and not the consumers, which were recovered to bear the burden of 
Turnover Tax as per contention of the AP GST Act which is corroborated by the 
award by both Appellate Authority and Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal in the case. 
 
Hence, the recommendation of the Committee regarding CSR activities, upto the 
amount of ₹196.95 crore saved by the Company, may be complied with. 
[The Controller & Auditor General of India Letter No.437/CA-III/C&AG 
(Energy)/COPUATR/IOCL/127-2024 dated 26.09.2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 21 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
GOVERNMENT HAS FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND FINAL REPLIES ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL   - 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

25 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 2025 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft 
Reports. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft reports, 
without any changes/modifications: - 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited (SFCL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  

26 
 
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs 
(Horizontal Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to 
flaring of High-pressure gas’ relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation 
(ONGC) Limited. (Audit Based Examination); 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Procurement of 
hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)” 
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Undue enrichment 
through recovery of turnover tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report 
No. 14 of 2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Design and 
Development (D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)” [Based on 
Chapter-II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Reviewing timely 
submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the current 
session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 
 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT OF 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON UNDUE ENRICHMENT 
THROUGH RECOVERY OF TURNOVER TAX FROM CONSUMER” RELATING TO 
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LIMITED (IOCL) 
 
(Based on Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021) 
I. Total number of recommendations  10  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
SI. Nos Percentage of total: 
 07  
 
70% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
00 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
Sl. No. 3,4 and 10 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
 
30% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies 
are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. Nil 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
 
00 
 
 