i 
 
11 
    
 
 
REVIEWING TIMELY SUBMISSION OF  
ACTION TAKEN NOTES (ATNs)  
ON C&AG PARAS/REPORTS (COMMERCIAL)  
BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS  
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
REVIEWING TIMELY SUBMISSION OF  
ACTION TAKEN NOTES (ATNs)  
ON C&AG PARAS/REPORTS (COMMERCIAL)  
BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27 March, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  27 March, 2025  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2025/ Chaitra, 1947(Saka) 


iii 
 
CPU No. 1064 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth Edition) 
and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 
 
 
  

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) v 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) vi 
INTRODUCTION vii 
ACRONYMS viii 
REPORT 
PART I 
 Overview 1 
I.  Audit Reports of C&AG and Committee on Public Undertakings 2 
II.  Procedure to deal with Audit Reports 2 
III. Action on Paras of Audit Reports - Provisions 2 
IV. Settlement of Audit Reports/Paras 4 
V.  Previous Reports of Committee on Public Undertakings 4 
VI.  Re-emergence of the issue on non-submission/delayed submission of ATNs by 
the Ministries/Departments 
6 
VII. Status on pending Audit Paras 8 
VIII. Role of Monitoring Cell, Controller General of Accounts of Dept. of Expenditure 18 
IX.   Recent Developments 19 
PART II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 20 
ANNEXURES 
I.       Extract of the Previous Reports of Committee on Public Undertakings 30 
II.  Minutes of the Inter -Departmental Meeting with the officials of Monitoring Cell, 
O/o Controller General Of Accounts, Dept. of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
33 
III.  Status of settlement of the C&AG Audit Reports/Paras laid in Parliament since 
2010-11 to 2021-22 
35 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting  of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2023-24) held on 05.02.2024 
108 
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(2024-25) held on 24.3.2025 
111 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.    Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.   Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal      -         Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha      -         Director  
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal            -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Smita Khade                -           Executive Officer 

vi 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar - Chairperson 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3. Shri Anil Firojiya* 
4. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6. Smt. K. Kanimozhi  
7. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
10. Shri Janardan Mishra 
11. Shri Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
12. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
13. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
15. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
17. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
18. Dr. Anil Jain 
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
21. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
22. Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
 
________________________ 
*Elected as a Member of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2023-24) for the un-expired portion of 
the term of the Committee vide Bulletin Part-II Para No. 7765 dated 19.12.2023 vice Shri Uday Pratap 
Singh resigned as Member of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 06.12.2023. 
 
 

vii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report                    
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Reviewing timely submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG 
Paras/Reports (Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments’. 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2023 -24) (17 th Lok Sabha) had selected the 
said subject for detailed examination. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive 
during the previous Committee term, the present Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25)                     
(18th Lok Sabha) decided to carry forward the subject so as to complete the unfinished task.  
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2023 -24) were initially briefed by the 
representatives of C&AG about the status of ATNs on pending Audit Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) and thereafter heard the representatives of Department of Public Enterprises, 
Ministry of Finance and Monitoring Cell, O/o Controller General of Accounts, Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on 5th February, 2024.  
 
4. The Committee (2024-25) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting hel d    
on 24 March, 2025. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Department of 
Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance and Monitoring Cell, O/o Controller General of Accounts, 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance f or tendering evidence before the Committee 
and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
7. The Committee wish to express their sincere thanks to the predecessor Committee for 
their valuable contribution in examination of the subject.  
 
8. For facility of reference and conve nience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi:   
  25 March, 2025  
 04 Chaitra, 1947(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
---------- 

viii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
1.  APMS Audit Para Monitoring System 
2.  ATNs Action Taken Notes 
3.  CoPU Committee on Public Undertakings 
4.  C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
5.  CAA Chief Accounting Authority 
6.  CGA Controller General of Accounts (CGA) 
7.  CMC Centralised Monitoring Cell 
8.  CoS Committee of Secretaries 
9.  CPSUs Central Public Sector Undertakings 
10.  DAC Departmental Audit Committee 
11.  DoE Department of Expenditure 
12.  DPE Department of Public Enterprises 
13.  FAs Financial Advisors 
14.  PAC Public Accounts Committee 
15.  MC Monitoring Cell 
 
  

1 
 
PART I 
I.  OVERVIEW 
 
The Committee on Public Undertakings under Rule 312A of Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha has been mandated to undertake examination of 
the working of the public undertakings specified in the Fourth Schedule.  The functions 
inter-alia includes examination of  the reports, if any, of the Comptroller and Auditor -
General (C&AG) on the public undertakings.   
2. Every year, the Committee at the beginning of the term, select subjects under three 
categories viz. Comprehensive, Horizontal and Audit based for in-depth study and Report.  
The subjects selected for examination  are a mixed bag of the above -mentioned three 
categories and are selected in suc h a manner that the Committee are  able to deliberate 
on maximum subjects within the limited time available and present Reports on these 
subjects.  
         
3. As regards Audit Reports taken -up by the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(CoPU), the C&AG assists the Committee in pursuing such matters as have been raised 
in the Audit Reports (Commercial) or in the Audit Reports pertaining to the Government 
Companies or Statutory Corporations which have been taken up for examination. 
 
I. Audit Reports of C&AG and Committee on Public Undertakings  
4. The C&AG undertakes audit of the Government Companies and Corporation under 
Section 19 of C&AG’s DPC Act , 1971 .  The audit of the accounts of Government 
companies are performed and exercised in accordance with the provisions of Section 
143(6) of the Companies Act, 2013 (previously section 619 of Companies Act, 1956) and 
corporations established by or under law made by Parliament.  
5. The Reports in relation to the accounts of a Government Company or Corporation 
are submitted to the Government by the C&AG under the provisions of Section 19 -A of 
the C&AG’s  (DPC Service) Act, 1971, as amended in 1984 .  T hereafter, the Central 
Government lay these Reports before each House of Parliament. 
 

2 
 
 
II. Procedure to deal with Audit Reports 
6. The Government lays number of Audit Reports in each House of Parliament.  After 
this, as per laid down procedure, irrespective of the Audit Report/Para been/non -been 
selected by the Committee for examination, the CPSU through the administrative 
Ministry/Department is mandated  to submit Action Taken Note s (ATNs) on the Audit 
Report/Para to the C&AG .  The concerned Department/Ministry is required to submit 
follow-up ATNs duly vetted by the Audit , in respect of all Reports /Paras of C&AG 
(Commercial) presented to Parliament and furnish them to the Committee within 6 months 
of the presentation of the relevant Audit Report. 
7. The Committee on Public Undertakings, due to paucity of time, selects few of the 
Audit Reports/Paras from the C&AG Reports for examination and report to Parliament 
during the term of the Committee.  While examining the Audit Report/Para, the Committee 
deals each observation made by the Audit in detail in their Report and also review the 
ATNs submitted by the Ministry. 
 
III. Action on Paras of Audit Reports - Provisions 
8. As per Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020, Regulation 149 and 150, the 
Secretary to Government of the concerned department prepares the self -explanatory 
Action Taken Note(s) (ATNs) o n the audit paragraph(s) relating to the department, that 
are included in the Audit Report (Commercial), for submission to the Committee on Public 
Undertakings.  The Secretary shall send the requisite number of copies of the vetted note, 
as prescribed by t he Committee on Public Undertakings, to the secretariat of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings in accordance with the time schedule prescribed and 
also forward a copy each to Ministry of Finance or Finance Department as the case may 
be, and the Accountant General (Audit).   
9. Further, as per Regulation 151 it shall be the duty of the Government to establish 
and enforce adequate and reliable systems and procedures to ensure that the Action 
Taken Notes are sent within the prescribed time limit.  Further, pr ovision of Reporting of 
cases of delay to the Government has also been made under Regulation 152 wherein the 
Audit has to report cases of delay to the Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance.  

3 
 
PROCEDURE FOR ATNs ON AUDIT REPORTS/PARAS 
(COMMERCIAL) 
 
AUDIT REPORT 
(Laid in Parliament) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
     
     
 
 
             If journeys ≥ 3 
 
IV. Settlement of Audit Reports/Pa 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit Report/ 
Para selected for 
examination by 
CoPU 
Audit Report/ Para not 
selected for examination 
by CoPU 
Report 
Presented to 
Parliament 
Ministry to submit ATNs/ 
Further ATNs 
Vetting Comments by Audit 
Not Settled 
 Settled 
Audit request the Ministry to 
submit the ATNs to CoPU with 
audit remarks for final 
decision 
Sent to CoPU for deletion 
from list of pending 
Reports/Paras 

4 
 
IV.  Settlement of Audit Reports/Paras 
10. As per practice, after the Audit Report is laid in Parliament, for settlement of 
observations contained in the Audit Report/Para, the Ministry is required to submit Action 
Taken Notes that are required to be vetted by the Audit. The submiss ion of ATNs and 
vetting remarks by the Audit are repeated till the Audit Para is not settled.  
11. On agreement of the matter between the Ministry and the Audit, the Audit while 
giving final vetting remarks in the ATNs to the concerned Department/Ministry makes a 
request to submit the final vetted ATN to CoPU and thereafter the Audit Report/Para is 
considered as settled.  ATNs containing reply of the Ministry which have not been finally 
accepted by the Audit are considered as unsettled Audit Report/Para and the unsettled 
observations contained in the Audit Report/Para are referred to the Committee for fi nal 
decision.  
12. As regards the settled Audit Para/Report, the Department/Ministry of the 
concerned CPSU is advised to forward requisite number of hard copies of final ATNs to 
CoPU Secretariat for deletion from the list of Pending Audit Paras/Reports. Th e 
Secretariat, for last couple of years, on its receipt makes manual entry of the same in their 
system keeping a copy of final ATNs and discarding the remaining, leading to wastage of 
paper. Also, since the process involves manual movement of communication  at each 
stage, right from laying of C&AG Report to Parliament to correspondence on furnishing 
of ATNs by the Department/Ministry and vetting remarks by the Audit till receipt of final 
request by the Department/Ministry for final settlement and deletion/dr opping of Audit 
Para/Report from the list of pending Paras/Reports to CoPU making tracking of timelines 
challenging.  The entire process involves snow -ball effect resulting in delay for final 
settlement of Audit Para/Reports, sometimes spanning in years as  also making physical 
tracing of each ATNs record a tough task.  
 
V. Previous Reports of Committee on Public Undertakings 
13. In the past, the Committee on Public Undertakings, in their Reports, had dealt with 
non-submission/delay in submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) by the Ministries on 
the Reports of C&AG of India which are presented to Parliament every year viz.  
i. 7th Lok Sabha – Forty-Ninth Report (1981-82);  
ii. 12th Lok Sabha- Second Report (Original) (1998-99)  

5 
 
(Recommendation Nos. 22 and 23);  
iii. 13th Lok Sabha – First Report (ATR) (1999-2000)  
(Recommendation Nos. 7 and 8); and  
iv. 13th Lok Sabha - Action Taken Statement on the First Report (ATR) laid on 
22 August, 2000. 
Relevant extract of detailed observations/recommendations from the above -
mentioned Reports are attached at Annexure I (Page No. 30) 
14.  The Committee in their Second Report of 12 th LS had recommended the then 
Ministry of Industry (Department of Public Enterprises) to:- 
i. Take specific and immediate steps for setting-up Monitoring Cell 
in each Ministry to monitor the submission of the follow up action on Audit 
Reports (Commercial) on individual Undertakings; and 
ii. In case of Reports containing Paras relating to a number of 
Undertakings (under different Ministries), a Monitoring Cell should also be 
set-up in the Department of Public Enterprises  to monitor the follow-up 
action on such Reports. 
 
15. The above recommendations made by the Committee were eventually accepted 
and following actions were taken by the then Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises):- 
i. advised the Secretaries of all the administrative 
Ministries/Departments to set-up a Monitoring Cell in each Ministry  to 
ensure the timely submission of follow-up action taken details in respect of 
the Public Undertakings that come under the purview of that Ministry (First 
Report of 13th LS); and  
ii. setting-up of a centralized Monitoring Cell in the Dept . of Public 
Enterprises to keep an account of the extent of compliance by various 
Ministries in respect of number of observations for which the follow -up 
ATNs have been sent by the Ministries/Departments and also to keep a 
statistical count of the cases settled by them.  The same was approved 
by the then Minister (Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) (Action Taken 
Statement of 13th LS). ” 
 

6 
 
VI. Re-emergence of the issue on non-submission/delayed submission of ATNs 
by the Ministries/Departments 
 
16. Even after addressing the issue at length, subsequently during the Committee 
sittings where the Committee took up Audit based subject for examination, CAG had time 
and again brought to the notice of the Committee issue of  non-submission/delayed 
submission of ATNs by the Department/Ministries.   
17. While dealing with examination of Audit Para/Report of the concerned CPSU , 
instances on non-submission/delay in submission of ATNs by the Departments/Ministries 
on the Paras/Reports of C&AG (Commercial) have been observed in numerous cases.  
As brought out by the officials of the C&AG during meetings, only few 
Departments/Ministries comply on prompt submission of ATNs unless selected by CoPU 
for examination.   
18. In the sitting of the Committee held on 30 May, 2016, C&AG officials inter-alia 
brought to the notice of the Committee that some Ministries/PSUs are not regular in 
furnishing Action Taken Notes on Audit Reports/Paras (Commercial) which have not been 
reported upon by the Committee on Public Undertakings. As a result, audit scrutiny 
remains ineffective and inconclusive on a range of important issues concerning the 
functioning of CPSUs. The then Committee  deliberated on the issue and felt the need for 
evolving a mechanism to ensure that Action Taken Notes (ATNs) are regularly furnished 
by the concerned Ministry/CPSU irrespective of the Audit Paras/Reports taken up/not 
taken up by the Committee with the objective of ensuring effective Parliamentary 
oversight mechanism on the lines being followed by the Public Accounts Committee. In 
this connection, the Committee decided, at the first instance, to invite relevant information 
regarding pendency of Action Taken Notes from concerned Ministries/Departments/PSUs 
on Audit Paras pertaining to C&AG Reports (Commercial) laid in Parliament since 2010-
11 onwards, so as to initiate follow up of pendency position by them. 
 
19. Meanwhile obs erving status-quo in submission of ATNs by the 
Ministries/Departments, the Committee Secretariat held an Inter -Departmental Meeting 
(IDM) with the officials of Monitoring Cell, O/o Controller General of Accounts, Department 
of Expenditure on 6 December, 2022 to explore the modalities on setting-up of exclusive 
Audit Para Monitoring System Portal for the Audit Paras/Reports pertaining to 

7 
 
Commercial Reports of C&AG for the CPSUs under the purview of Committee on Public 
Undertakings.  Minutes of the IDM are attached at Annexure II (Page 33) 
20. Initially the O/o C&AG on 29 December, 2022 were requested to furnish status on 
settlement of the C&AG Audit Reports/Paras laid in Parliament from 2010-11 to 2021-22 
relating to each CPSUs (Ministry -wise) viz.(i) Number of Audit Paras - Ministry & CPSU 
wise; and (ii) Details of pending Audit Reports/Paras.  Analysis of the data furnished by 
the O/o C&AG (as on 31st December, 2022) are as under:-  
A.  Number of Audit Paras – Ministry & CPSU wise 
 
Name of Ministry/Department (all CPSUs) Total No. of 
Audit 
Reports/Paras 
No. of settled 
Audit 
Reports/Paras 
No. of unsettled 
Audit 
Reports/Paras 
Department of Atomic Energy 8 3 5 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 3 1 2 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 44 18 26 
Ministry of Coal 51 36 15 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 18 15 03 
Ministry of Communications 48 38 10 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
122 107 15 
Ministry of Defence 61 33 28 
Ministry of Development of the North Eastern 
Region 
01 00 01 
Ministry of Education 01 01 00 
Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology 
03 00 03 
Ministry of Finance/Department of Financial 
Services 
77 41 36 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 37 26 11 
Ministry of Home Affairs 04 03 01 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 07 03 04 
Ministry of Mines 12 04 08 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 01 00 01 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 02 00 02 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 182 129 53 
Ministry of Power 156 137 19 
Ministry of Railways 09 05 04 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 37 19 18 
Ministry of Science and Technology 04 01 03 
Ministry of Shipping Ports,  and Waterways 19 11 08 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 01 00 01 
Ministry of Steel 94 59 35 
Ministry of Textiles 07 01 06 
Ministry of Tribal affairs 01 00 01 
Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
02 01 01 
Total  1002 692 310 

8 
 
 
# Remarks on the above information, as stated by C&AG - As per the 2nd Report of COPU (1998-
99) 12th Lok Sabha, period of six months from the presentation of the report in Parliament was given to 
Ministries/Departments to submit the duly vetted ATN to COPU. However, ATNs were vetted beyond the 
given timeline for want of ATNs from the concerned Ministries. 
 
B.  Analysis of Data on Details of Pending Paras 
 
Sl.No. Status of ATNs Total 
1. First ATNs sent by the Ministry to O/o C&AG within 6 
months 
 50 
1. ATNs not sent by the Ministry to the O/o C&AG within 
the stipulated time period of 6 months  
 
166 
2. First ATNs yet to be received to the O/o C&AG 
(As on 31 December, 2022) 
 
70 
3. Date of first reply by the Ministry to O/o C&AG not 
mentioned/quoted 
37 
TOTAL 323 
 
 
21. Thereafter, taking into account the information furnished by C&AG as the basis of 
going further in the matter , the Department of Public Enterprises in June, 2023 was 
requested to furnish the updated status of settlement of the C&AG’s Audit Reports/Paras 
(as on 31st March, 2023) laid in Parliament from 2010-11 to 2021-22.  In response, DPE 
(in their communication dated 28 August, 2023) stated as under:- 
“Each of the Administrative Ministry/Department is already required to have a 
mechanism for regular monitoring for the settlement of the C&AG Audit 
Reports/Paras alongwith their compliance, observations and settlement.  DPE will 
reiterate the above and make the Financial Advisers (FA) of the concerned 
Ministry/Department the Nodal Officer for collation of all data”.   
 
VII. Status on pending Audit Paras 
22. The Committee  in their sitting held on 5 February, 2024 selected the subject 
“Reviewing timely submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on CAG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/ Departments” for examination and Report.  The officials 

9 
 
of C&AG thereafter made a Power Point Presentation on Status of ATNs on pending Audit 
Paras/Reports related to Commercial Reports presented to Parliament by C&AG.   
23. As per information made available to the Committee, the following is the gist of 
details provided by C&AG w.r.to the pendency of Audit Reports/Paras:- 
A. Details of pendency of Audit Reports/Paras 
Period of pendency:  2010-11 to 2021-22 
Ministries involved: 28 
CPSE’s involved 141 
Total Reports/Paras 967 
Reports/Paras finally vetted 654 
Reports/Paras pending 313 
 
Out of 313 pending Audit Reports/Paras, in case of 76 paras – First ATN were 
awaited and in case of 237 paras – Revised ATN were awaited. 
 
B. Summary of Ministry-wise pending Audit Reports/Paras 
SI 
No. 
Name of Ministry Number 
of 
CPSEs 
Total 
Paras/ 
Reports 
Number of 
pending 
Paras/Reports 
Status of 
ATNs 
awaited  
1.  Petroleum and Natural 
Gas 
15 182 53 First- 15 
Revised-38 
2. Finance/Department of 
Financial Services 
17 77 36 First- 15 
Revised-38 
3. Steel 10 94 35 First- 15 
Revised-38 
4. Defence 10 61 28 First- 15 
Revised-38 
5. Civil Aviation 4 44 26 First- 15 
Revised-38 
6. Power 18 159 22 First- 15 
Revised-38 
7. Road Transport & 
Highways 
1 37 18 First- 15 
Revised-38 
8. Coal 11 51 15 First- 15 
Revised-38 
9. Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution 
1 122 15 First- 15 
Revised-38 
10. Heavy Industries 7 37 11 First- 15 
Revised-38 

10 
 
11. Mines 3 12 8 First- 15 
Revised-38 
12. Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways 
5 19 8 First- 15 
Revised-38 
13. Textiles 4 7 6 First- 15 
Revised-38 
14. Atomic Energy 3 8 5 First- 15 
Revised-38 
15. Housing & Urban Affairs  5 7 4 First- 15 
Revised-38 
16. Railways 5 9 4 First- 15 
Revised-38 
17. Commerce and Industry 6 18 3 First- 15 
Revised-38 
18. Electronics and 
Information Technology 
1 3 3 First- 15 
Revised-38 
19. Science and Technology 2 4 3 First- 15 
Revised-38 
20. Chemicals and Fertilizers 3 3 2 First- 15 
Revised-38 
21. New and Renewable 
Energy 
1 2 2 First- 15 
Revised-38 
22. Development of the North 
Eastern Region 
1 1 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
23. Home Affairs 3 4 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
24. Minority Affairs 1 1 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
25. Social Justice & 
Empowerment  
1 1 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
26. Tribal affairs 1 1 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
27. Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation 
1 2 1 First- 15 
Revised-38 
28. Education 1 1 0 First- 15 
Revised-38 
 
24. In continuation of the information sought by the Committee Secretariat in June, 
2023, DPE (in their communication dated 2 February, 2024) furnished the updated status 
of settlement of the  C&AG’s Audit Reports/Paras (as on 31 st March, 2023) laid in 
Parliament from 2010-11 to 2021-22 relating to each CPSUs (Ministry -wise) including 7 
Public Sector Insurance Companies (Life Insurance Corporation of India, General 
Insurance Corporation of Indi a, National Insurance Co. Ltd., New India Assurance Co. 
Ltd., Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Agriculture 

11 
 
Insurance Co. of India Ltd.)  and Public Undertakings established by Central Acts 
(Damodar Valley Corporation, Central  Warehousing Corporation, Food Corporation of 
India, Airports Authority of India and National Highways Authority of India) that are under 
the purview of  the Committee.  
A.  Status on Details of List of Department/Ministries  furnishing ATN  
on C&AG Paras/Reports 
 
 
Name of 
Departments/Ministries 
that have  furnished 
FULL information on 
CPSUs under  their 
administrative control 
Name of 
Departments/Ministries  that 
have furnished PARTIAL 
information on CPSUs under 
their administrative control 
Name of 
Departments/Ministries 
that have not  furnished 
information on CPSUs 
under their administrative 
control 
 
_ 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation
 
. 
Department of Atomic Energy 
Ministry of Coal Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers 
Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Communication Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Consumer, Food and 
Public Distribution 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Ministry of Development of the 
North Eastern Region 
Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology 
Ministry of Minorties Affairs 
Ministry of Heavy Industries Ministry of Railways 
Ministry of Mines Ministry of Water & 
Resources River 
Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
 
Ministry of Power  
Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
 
Ministry of Science and 
Technology 
 
Ministry of Steel  
Ministry of Port, Shipping and 
Waterways 
 
Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment 
 

12 
 
Ministry of Textiles  
Ministry of Tribal Affairs  
 
 
B. Summary of status of ATNs replies regarding pending paras of CPSUs 
(As per DPE OM dt. 21.02.2025 ) 
 
Status as on 9th June 2023 Remarks of DPE Monitoring Cell as on 21.02.2025 
Total 
No. of 
Audit 
Reports/ 
Paras 
No. of 
settled 
Audit 
Reports/ 
Paras 
No. of 
unsettled 
Audit 
Reports/ 
Paras 
Number of 
Paras on which 
ATN has been 
sent to 
CoPU/C&AG # 
(out of Col.3) 
Number of Paras 
on which reply is 
awaited from 
Ministry/ 
Department 
(Out of Col.3) 
Number of 
Paras Reported 
by Ministry/ 
Department as 
settled # 
(out of Col.3)  
Col (1) Col (2) Col (3) Col (4) Col (5) Col (6) 
 
1015 
 
692 
 
323 
 
195 
 
87 
 
41 
 
# as per replies submitted by Ministries/Departments. 
 
C. Status of settlement of the C&AG Audit Reports/Paras laid in Parliament since 
2010-11 to 2021-22 (Number of Audit Paras- Ministry wise) 
(As per DPE OM dt. 21.02.2025 ) 
 
 Status as on 9th June, 
2023 
Remarks of DPE Monitoring Cell 
Name of Ministry/ 
Department 
Total 
no. of 
Audit 
Report
s/ 
Paras 
No. of 
settled 
Audit 
Report
s/ 
Paras 
No. of 
unsettle
d Audit 
Reports
/ Paras 
Number of 
Para on which 
ATN/Revised 
ATN has been 
sent to COPU/  
C&AG (as per 
replies 
submitted by 
Ministries/ 
Department)* 
 
Number of 
Para on 
which reply 
is awaited 
from 
Ministry/ 
Department 
 
Number of 
Para 
Reported by 
Ministry/ 
Department 
as settled* 
 
Department of 
Atomic Energy  8 3 5 0 5 0 
Ministry of 
Chemicals and 
Fertilizers 
3 1 2 0 2 0 
Ministry of Civil 
Aviation 44 18 26 26 0 0 
Ministry of Coal 51 36 15 13 2 0 
Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry 
18 15 3 0 3 0 

13 
 
Ministry of 
Communications 48 38 10 0 10 0 
Ministry of 
Consumer 
Affairs, Food and 
Public 
Distribution 
122 107 15 15 0 0 
Ministry of 
Defence 61 33 28 9 19 0 
Ministry of 
Development of 
the North Eastern 
Region  
1 0 1 1 0 0 
Ministry of 
Education 1 1 0 0 0 0 
Ministry of 
Electronics and 
Information 
Technology 
3 0 3 3 0 0 
Ministry of 
Finance/Departm
ent of Financial 
Services 
77 41 36 27 9 0 
Ministry of Heavy 
Industries 37 26 11 4 6 1 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 4 3 1 0 1 0 
Ministry of 
Housing & Urban 
Affairs 
7 3 4 1 3 0 
Ministry of Mines 12 4 8 8 0 0 
Ministry of 
Minority Affairs 1 0 1   1   
Ministry of New 
and Renewable 
Energy 
2 0 2   2   
Ministry of 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
182 129 53 40 12 1 
Ministry of Power 159 137 22 7 1 14 
Ministry of 
Railways 9 5 4     4 
Ministry of Road 
Transport & 
Highways 
37 19 
18 
 
 
6 7 5 
Ministry of 
Science and 
Technology 
4 1 3 2   1 
Ministry of 
Shipping Ports,  
and Waterways 
19 11 8 8 0 0 
Ministry of Social 
Justice & 
Empowerment 
1 0 1 1 0 0 

14 
 
Ministry of Steel 94 59 35 20   15 
Ministry of 
Textiles 7 1 6 4 2 0 
Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs 1 0 1 0 1 0 
Ministry of Water 
Resources, River 
Development & 
Ganga 
Rejuvenation 
2 1 1 0 1 0 
Total 1015 692 323 195 87 41 
 
 The details of CPSU-wise pending paras is reproduced at Annexure III (Page 35) 
25. DPE while submitting the above information further submitted that:- 
“  Despite best efforts of DPE, the complete information is still not available.  In this 
regard, it is advisable that, in addition to the DPE, the representative of selected 
Ministries/Department which have large number of important audit paras viz.  
Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution and Ministry of Communications, are also called in the sitting of the 
CoPU, so that audit scrutiny becomes effective and conclusive”. 
 
26. The Committee  heard the representatives of Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) and Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Department of Expenditure on the 
subject and took note of the non-submission/delayed submission of Action Taken Notes 
by the Ministri es/Departments.  At the sitting,  information was sought  from DPE on 
effective steps taken in setting -up of centralized Monitoring Cell by them to keep an 
account of the extent of compliance by various Ministries on follow up action on Audit 
Paras/Reports of individual CPSU and also to keep a statistical count of the cases settled. 
27. The representatives of CGA also briefly apprised the Com mittee on the existing 
Audit Para Monitoring System that has been made operational by them for monitoring of 
Audit Paras/Reports (Civil) pertaining to Public Accounts Committee and briefly apprised 
the Committee on role of Monitoring Cell as coordinator to collect the ATNs from various 
Ministries/Department and making the information available on APMS Portal at each 
stage of movement for those Audit Reports/Paras.  
 

15 
 
28. At being pointed out to make the system more efficacious and also in view that all 
the financial implications related proposals of the CPSUs, through the administrative 
Ministry, will go to the Department of Expenditure, the Dept. of Public Enterprises in their 
reply stated as under:- 
 “  The representatives of selected Ministries which have  large number of 
pending paragraphs for CPSEs may be called in the sitting of CoPU.  The names 
of these Ministries have been mentioned in our submission dated 02.02.2024”. 
 Further, while deliberating the Secretary, DPE submitted the following 
information with respect to overall picture on unsettled Audit Paras :- 
 “ Sir, the figures have been given.  Out of 1000 Paras, 692 Paras have been 
settled.  About 300 Paras are unsettled.  This is the overall picture.” 
  
29. On the issue of monitoring of the ATNs wi th the intention to improve the working 
of PSUs, the Secretary, DPE made following submission :- 
 “  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
We can also adopt this (APMS) for better monitoring.  There are  two kinds 
of paras.  One is related to the operation of CPSEs.  The  second is related to 
financial irregularities or violations of DPE guidelines.  
Now, they have a system in which the Dept. of Expenditure can also give 
its comments” 
 
30. In view of the statement made by DPE, the Committee during 17th Lok Sabha had 
selected ‘Review of Administrative Mechanism for resolution of CPSUs disputes’. For 
cases involving cases of commercial disputes,  DPE has established ‘Administrative 
Mechanism for Resolution of CPSUs Disputes (AMRCD)’ on 22 May, 2018 and fur ther 
widened its mandate on 20 February, 2020 to enable the AMRCD to resolve all disputes 
(except those relating to taxation matters) among CPSUs and also between CPSU and 
the Government.  The AMRCD has 2 Level (Tier)  mechanism to resolve commercial 
disputes First Level (Tier) – Committee of Secretaries (CoS) (In case of dispute remaining 
unresolved, it is referred to Second Level) and Second Level (Tier) – Cabinet Secretary 
(CS) (The decision will be final and binding on all concerned). 
 

16 
 
 
31. On being asked, whether all Department/Ministries complied to DPE’s advise for 
setting up of Monitoring Cell in their concerned Departments and if they were not set -up 
in time by them, did DPE came back to the Committee on this issue, DPE furnished the 
following information:- 
“DPE vide OM dated 19 August 1999 had requested all Administrative 
Ministries/Departments to take immediate steps for setting up Monitoring Cell for 
PSUs under their Administrative control.  DPE vide same OM had also requested 
all Administrative Ministries/Departments to ensure timely submission of ATN on 
all pending CAG paras, duly vetted by the audit to the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (CoPU)” 
From the above reply it can be inferred that DPE is silent on timeline by which 
each Administrative Ministry/Department had actually set -up Monitoring Cell for 
PSUs under them and lack of proactive monitoring mechanism for the same. 
 
32. On being further asked, when did DPE set -up and made operational their 
Centralised Monitoring Cell to k eep a check on compliance by Ministries/Departments, 
DPE submitted as under:- 
“DPE in their statement dated 19 May 2000 in action taken on the 
recommendations on the First Report of CoPU (13th Lok Sabha) has stated about 
setting-up of a Monitoring Cell in the Dept. of Public Enterprises, (then under 
Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises) to keep an account of the extent 
of compliance by various Ministries and keep a statistical count of the cases settled 
by them. 
DPE under Ministry of Finance is  presently monitoring the C&AG paras of 
CPSE through correspondence with concerned Ministries/Departments. 
We can adopt the online tracking system used by CGA in the Department 
of Expenditure for better monitoring with suitable modifications.  Through the online 
system, the status and delay in submission of the ATN of pending paragraphs can 
be monitored.”   
 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
33. On being further asked about how did DPE kept statistical count of settled cases, 
the following information has been submitted :- 
 “ This office, after receipt of the list of pending ATN on C&AG Audit Para of 
the CPSEs vide letter dated 9 June 2023, forwarded the same to the concerned 
Ministries/Departments.  The relevant comments received from the different 
Ministries have been incorporated  in the Remarks’ column of the Table B 
submitted for sitting of CoPU vide F.No. DPE/4(02)/2023 -Survey dt. 02.02.2024.  
The number of the C&AG Paras has been counted accordingly from the data 
provided vide letter dated 9 June, 2023” 
 From the above submissi ons it can be gathered that the DPE has been 
evasive in giving clear information sought and seems had only taken half-hearted 
efforts for establishment of  effective system for monitoring of timely submission 
and statistical count of ATNs by CPSUs under various Ministries/Departments until 
the same was taken-up by the Committee. 
 
34. On being asked about DPE’s role as the first administrative department who is 
supposed to monitor the status of ATN submission by the Ministries/Department for the 
PSUs under them, the DPE made the following submission on the matter :- 
“  DPE is presently monitoring C&AG paras of CPSE through correspondence with 
concerned Ministries/Departments.  We can adopt the online tracking system used 
by CGA in the Department of e xpenditure for better monitoring, with suitable 
modifications.  Through the online system, the status a nd delay in submission of 
the ATN of pending paragraphs can be monitored.” 
 
35. Further, on need to have robust audit system for CPSUs, DPE made following 
submission:- 
“  The system being used by CGA is effective and after adopting the same suitably, 
a better control is expected” 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
VIII. Role of Monitoring Cell, Controller General of Accounts of Dept. of 
Expenditure  
36. The Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on Internal Affairs in its meeting held on 25th 
June, 1976 decided to set up Monitoring Cell (MC) in the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to 
coordinate and watch the progress on submission of Action Taken Replies (ATRs) on  
PAC reports.   
 
37. The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India relating to the 
accounts of the Union are required to be submitted in terms of Article 151 to the President 
who causes them to be laid in Parliament are referred to the Public Accounts Committee 
for their scrutiny.  
 
 
38. Till 1981, there was no practice of ascertaining the action taken by the 
Ministries/Departments on the audit paragraphs not selected by the Committee for 
detailed examination. However, with a view to ensure accountability of the Executive in 
respect of all the issues dealt with in various Audit Reports, the Public Accounts 
Committee decided in 1982 that the Audit Reports from the year 1980 -81 onwards be 
referred to the Ministries/Departments concerned for furnishing notes duly vetted by Audit 
showing remedial/corrective action taken on all the paragraphs contained therein. 
 
39. Taking note of the inordinate delays and persistent failures on the part of a large 
number of Ministries in reporting to the Committee the corrective action taken by them on 
audit paragraphs, the Committee recommended that the Action Taken Notes on all the  
paragraphs of the Report of Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India may be 
furnished to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 
within a period of 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the 
House and that the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure may develop and 
operationalise the Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) Portal for real time monitoring 
of the same. At present, due to the persistent efforts of the Committee, the entire process 
of Audit Para settlement is online. As a result of the initiatives taken by the Public 
Accounts Committee, the respective Ministries/Departments have toned up their 

19 
 
administrative machinery for timely submission of the Remedial Action Taken Notes and 
the Action Taken Replies on the recommendations made by the Committee, pendency 
figures have drastically come down, and the Committee is aiming to achieve zero 
pendency. 
 
IX. Recent Developments 
40. After the sitting of the Committee,  keeping in mind the urgency  of issue and 
streamlining timely submission of ATNs, DPE and CGA have been holding meetings for 
initiating the process and deciding  modalities for online real -time submission and 
monitoring of ATNs.  Also activity-wise timelines for ATNs of C&AG Paras of CPSUs for 
incorporation in Module for CPSEs in APMS have been chalked out that shall be made 
operational on directions of CoPU. 
 
------- 
  

20 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Overview 
The Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU) under Rule 312A of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is entrusted to 
examine the functioning of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and scrutinize 
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) rega rding their 
performance. The C&AG, under Sections 19 of C&AG’s (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 audits Government Companies and 
Corporations in accordance with the provisions of Section 143(6) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 and the Audit re ports thereon are subsequently 
presented to Parliament. 
The administrative Ministries/Departments of the Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) are required to submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 
audit observations within six months of the presentation  of C&AG Reports 
(Commercial) in Parliament in accordance with Section 19 -A of C&AG’s 
(DPC) Act, 1971. However, widespread delays and non -compliance by 
Ministries/Departments have rendered audit scrutiny ineffective, leading to 
unresolved governance and ac countability issues in CPSUs.  Failure to 
comply also results in a backlog of unsettled audit paras, delaying 
parliamentary oversight and remedial actions thereon. 
As per the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2020, Secretaries of 
concerned Ministries/Departments are responsible for timely submission of 
ATNs, duly vetted by the Audit before the settled Audit Para/Report is finally 

21 
 
sent to the Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU). Despite clear 
regulations, the Committee have repeatedly observed non -submission or 
delayed submission of ATNs, with some cases spanning multiple years. An 
analysis of details of pendency of Audit Reports/Paras revealed that from the 
967 Reports/Paras involving 141 CPSUs across 28 Ministries, 
313Reports/Paras remained pending wit h 76 Reports/Paras awaiting first 
ATNs and 237 Reports/Paras requiring revised ATNs. Ministries such as 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Finance (Dept. of Financial Services), Steel, 
Defence, Civil Aviation, Power and Road Transport & Highways have the 
highest number of pending audit paras, reflecting a significant compliance 
gap. 
The Committee observe that a major challenge contributing to this 
issue is the lack of a centralized monitoring system for tracking ATN 
submissions related to CPSUs. Unlike the Public Acc ounts Committee 
(PAC), which benefits from the Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS), 
similar platform for CoPU is yet to be made functional for monitoring CPSUs 
related Audit Paras, resulting in inefficient manual tracking and difficulty in 
record-keeping.  
Further, past recommendations (including those in 49 th Report of 
7thLok Sabha, 2nd Report of 12thLok Sabha and 1 st Report of 13thLok Sabha) 
had emphasized the need for Monitoring Cells (MCs) in Ministries and a 
Centralised Monitoring Cell (CMC) in the Dep artment of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) to oversee timely compliance with ATN submission. However, these 
measures did not seem to have yielded the desired improvements and as 
stated by C&AG and DPE officials, several Ministries have failed to establish 
robust internal tracking systems for compliance. 
The delayed or non-submission of ATNs is a major hurdle in ensuring 
effective parliamentary oversight, transparency and financial discipline in 

22 
 
CPSUs.  Given the magnitude of the issue and to address this systemic issue 
at its root cause, the Committee strongly feel a dire need for urgent reforms, 
including the development of an APMS -like digital platform under the 
Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Department of Expenditure, for real -
time tracking of ATNs. Further, prompt action and setting of strict deadlines 
have to be enforced for non -compliant CPSUs and reviewing them through 
their administrative Ministry/Department. Also regular inter -ministerial 
coordination meetings should be convened between C&AG &CPSUs 
Administrative Ministries/Departments; Department of Public Enterprises; 
and Department of Expenditure to monitor progress.  Since Government 
holds majority share in these CPSUs, to enhance governance, ensure strict 
enforcement mechanism and accountability across all Ministries and 
CPSUs, the Committee desire that a structured system of reporting delayed 
submissions may be brought forth periodically, on annual basis by the 
Department of Public Enterprises and Department of Expenditure (DoE) 
before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) headed by Cabinet Secretary so 
that the seriousness of the matter can be impressed upon the concerned 
Secretaries. Details of streamlining the procedure for submission of ATNs 
and working towards achievement of zero pendency has be en illustrated in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
2. Delayed Submission of ATNs beyond the stipulated six-months period 
The Committee note that despite clear guidelines under Regulations on 
Audit and Accounts, 2020, several Ministries and Departments have failed to 
submit ATNs within the stipulated six months from the date of the 
presentation of the Audit Report to Parliament. As per data provided by 
C&AG as of December 31, 2022, reveal that out of 313 pending Audit Paras, 
76 first ATNs were awaited, while 237 revised ATNs were yet to be submitted. 

23 
 
The delay in ATN submission results in prolonged audit scrutiny and 
ineffective corrective action, ultimately undermining financial accountability. 
The information furnished by C&AG has highlighted that many 
Ministries do not submit ATNs unless the concerned Audit Paras are 
selected for examination by the CoPU. This results in large -scale pendency 
and failure to implement corrective actions.  The DPE while acknowledging 
the issue has stated that despite regular reminders, s everal 
Ministries/Departments have either submitted incomplete information or 
have not responded at all.  To this, Controller General of Accounts (CGA) 
has suggested that an automated tracking system for ATNs (Audit Para 
Monitoring System - APMS) may be im plemented to ensure real -time 
monitoring of submission timelines. 
 The Committee while dealing with the issue in detail find that 
mandatory compliance with ATNs submission deadlines is need of the hour 
and every administrative Ministry/Department of the CP SUs should have 
been adhered to promptly long back.  (i) Henceforth, with no exception, 
complete action on furnishing of ATNs, with number of journeys not 
exceeding two between the concerned Ministry/Department followed by 
vetting comments of Audit, must b e adhered to within six months of the 
presentation of the Audit Report to Parliament; (ii)  Any Ministry/Department 
failing to comply should be required to submit an explanation within 30 days 
after the six -month deadline to the DPE and DoE for placing it before the 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS).  In this regard, DPE may prepare the list of 
non-compliant Ministries/Department annually (as on 31 st December) for 
placing before CoS.  While placing the compliance data before CoS, DPE may 
classify the Ministrie s/Departments under three categories viz., Low 
pendency, Medium pendency and High pendency depending on the 
pendency percentage of ATNs as more than 0-25 %, 25-50 % and more than 

24 
 
50% respectively.  The final compliance on progress made after placing the 
data before CoS may be sent by DPE to the Committee Secretariat for perusal 
of the Committee along with the annual information sought with regard to 
various CPSUs for being considered by the Committee at their first sitting 
held for Selection of Subjects for  examination; and (iii)  The Financial 
Advisors (FAs) of concerned Ministry/Department, made as Nodal Officer for 
collation of all data must submit quarterly reports on ATN status to DPE; and 
(iv) In addition to this, the accountability of Secretary of the  
Ministry/Department, who also acts as Chief Accounting Authority (CAA), 
should be upheld in case of recurring non-compliance with ATN submission 
timelines, as well. 
3. Lack of a Centralized Monitoring System for ATN Submission 
The Committee find that the existing process for ATN submission is 
largely manual, leading to delays, inefficiencies and difficulty in tracking 
pending ATNs. The absence of a centralized monitoring system has resulted 
in a lack of real -time data on ATN submission across 
Ministries/Departments. The DPE and the Committee Secretariat manually 
tracks the status of pending ATNs, leading to difficulties in tracing records 
and updating the status of settlement. 
The C&AG during deliberation on various occasions have expressed 
concerns over th e absence of a dedicated digital system to track ATNs, 
leading to ineffective follow-ups. The DPE has also affirmatively agreed with 
the need for an integrated digital monitoring system and suggested that ATN 
compliance be monitored in coordination with CGA under DoE and finally to 
CoPU.  The CGA supporting the proposal has shown their preparedness to 
immediately make provisions for operationalization of the Audit Para 
Monitoring System (APMS), on the directions of the Committee, which would 

25 
 
allow Ministrie s/Departments, C&AG, DPE, DoE and CoPU to track ATN 
submission status in real time. 
 To give effect to this, the Committee desire (i)  Immediate action on 
implementation and operationalization of the APMS Portal by CGA within 
next six months, in consultation with the stakeholders viz., CPSUs through 
their concerned Ministry/Department, C&AG and DPE to make audit system 
for CPSUs more efficacious.  The CGA should develop a customized APMS 
Portal involving the stakeholders and maintain the same under the 
Department of Expenditure.  The portal should invariably include real -time 
tracking, automated alerts and a dashboard to display ATN submission 
status across all Ministries/Department.  The portal should also generate 
automatic reminders for pending ATNs to the concerned Ministries and their 
Secretaries, in case of breach of any submission timeline; and (ii) The Portal 
should invariably have mandatory digital submission of ATNs by the 
Ministries/Departments and vetting remarks by C&AG through the APMS to 
eliminate inefficiencies in manual record -keeping.  Hard copy submissions 
should immediately be discontinued and a digital acknowledgment receipt 
may be generated for tracking purposes. 
4. High Pendency in Specific Ministries with Large Number of Audit Paras 
The Committee note that certain key Ministries, including Ministries 
such as Petroleum & Natural Gas, Finance (Dept. of Financial Services), 
Steel, Defence, Civil Aviation, Power and Road Transport & Highways, have 
disproportionately high numbers of pending ATNs. Ministries fail to submit 
ATNs even after multiple reminders, delaying corrective actions and 
undermining financial discipline.  Further, as submitted by DPE before the 
Committee, two kinds of paras, one is related to the operation of CPSUs and  
the second related to financial irregularities or violations of DPE guidelines 
are the majority where timely settlement of ATNs could not be achieved. 

26 
 
The Committee note that those Ministries that have a history of non -
compliance in ATN submission, urge stricter monitoring mechanisms.  The 
DPE has stated that while reminders were issued, Ministries often cite 
resource constraints or pending legal proceedings as reasons for delays.  
To arrive at amicable resolution of the matter, the Committee find that it 
would be a wise step to have accountability of the Financial Advisors (FAs) 
of high-pendency Ministries under the ambit and supervision of the DPE and 
DoE. 
To meet the intended objective, the Committee find that time has come 
where (i) Priority on monitoring of high-pendency Ministries should be taken-
up by DPE where Ministries with over 20 pending ATNs should be placed 
under stricter scrutiny and their Financial Advisors (FAs) should present a 
compliance action plan, detailing steps taken to clear the backlog; ( ii) 
Escalation mechanism for long -pending ATNs be made functional if ATNs 
remain pending beyond one year and the matter should be escalated to the 
Cabinet Secretariat through CoS; (iii)  The cases involving unsettled Audit 
Paras may be classified under the  sub-heads - DPE Guidelines, AMRCD, 
Court/Arbitration, Systemic and Other categories; (iv) For such cases where 
Ministries/Departments have cited ongoing legal proceedings as a reason 
for delayed ATNs, the Committee recommend the establishment of a legal 
advisory panel in consultation with Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of 
Law to review such cases and recommend appropriate legal reforms, if 
necessary; and (v) Further, non -compliant Ministries should be required to 
submit a written explanation on the APMS Portal for being viewed by the 
Secretaries of DPE and DoE with final responsibility to CoPU. 
5. Number of Journeys and turnaround time for finalization of ATNs  
The Committee note inconsistent time taken and coordination issues 
between the Ministries/Departments and C&AG in furnishing the ATNs and 

27 
 
vetting remarks respectively.  There are hardly any cases where the timeline 
of six months has been adhered to for sending the final ATNs to CoPU for 
settlement/dropping of Audit para in view of no further co mments by the 
Audit. Many Ministries/Departments delay final ATN submission due to long 
turnaround times in the vetting process. In several instances, ATNs were 
returned by CAG with comments, but Ministries failed to provide revised 
ATNs in a timely manner .  The C&AG time and again have also brought to 
the notice of Committee that some Ministries take excessive time to resubmit 
revised ATNs after receiving initial audit observations.  It has been found 
that the overall process sometimes takes years with sev eral rounds of 
journey between the Ministry/Department and C&AG before reaching 
settlement on the matter.   
The Committee are of the view that regular inter-departmental meetings 
should be held to streamline the vetting process.  To streamlining the vetting 
process, the Ministry and C&AG each should set a maximum timeline of 30 
days for reviewing and providing ATNs and vetting comments on them. 
To give effect to this, (i) the Ministries/Departments may establish 
Internal Monitoring Committees to oversee the  timely preparation and 
submission of ATNs. These Committees can meet at regular intervals, 
chaired by senior officials such as the Additional Secretary or Financial 
Advisor;  (ii) The Ministry/Department should also have Departmental Audit 
Committee (DAC), chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry/Department that 
may hold review meetings to expedite the processing and finalization of 
ATNs before submission to C&AG for vetting; and (iii) Finally, structured 
workflow and timeline for the ATN submission proces s alongwith regular 
follow-ups and joint meetings between the Ministry's Audit Wing and the 
C&AG Office may also take place to facilitate vetting and resolve queries at 

28 
 
an early stage.  Such meetings should help to reduce delays due to repeated 
revisions of ATNs. 
The measures suggested above and reducing number of journeys to 
two between the Ministries/Departments should be able to meet the intended 
purpose of completion of action on ATNs submission within six months 
timeline. 
6. Need for a Stronger Enforcement Mechanism 
The Committee observed that existing mechanisms lack strict 
penalties for non -compliance with ATN submission deadlines. 
Ministries/Departments often delay ATNs without facing any consequences, 
leading to continued inefficiency. 
The C&AG, als o in agreement that Ministries failing to submit ATNs 
should be subject to stricter Parliamentary scrutiny, the Committee are of 
the view that (i) ATN compliance may be included as part of Performance 
Appraisal (PA) system of the Financial Advisors of the Ministry/Department, 
being the Nodal Officer nominated by DPE in this regard.  Further, each 
CPSU while bringing their Annual Report should include information on data 
pertaining to settled and pending ATNs that should help bring enhanced 
transparency and compliance in public domain; (ii) The Committee further 
desire for layers of answerability at first level, to DPE and DoE and second 
level of CoS should act as deterrence for the non -compliant 
Ministries/Departments before being brought finally to CoPU.  Failure at first 
and second level, the Secretaries of flagged non-compliant Ministries should 
be required to appear before CoPU for an explanation.  Further, Annual 
Performance Reviews of Secretaries should include ATN compliance as a 
metric. 
 

29 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
The issue of delayed and non -submission of ATNs is a critical gap in 
the parliamentary oversight of CPSUs. Without timely submission, key audit 
observations remain unresolved, affecting the transparency, financial 
discipline, and governance of CPSUs. The  Committee strongly recommend 
immediate implementation of a centralized digital monitoring system 
[APMS(CoPU)] and strict compliance measures to ensure effective oversight 
and accountability in Central Public Sector Undertakings. 
 
 
New Delhi:   
  25 March, 2025  
 04 Chaitra, 1947(S)                                                                        
BAIJAYANT PANDA  
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
Annexure I 
 
Extract of the Previous Reports of Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
7th Lok Sabha – Forty-Ninth Report (1981-82) 
 
The Committee on Public Undertakings (1981-82) in their 49th Report (7th LS) 
inter-alia observed that there was no system in the Ministries to monitor the follow-
up action by public undertakings on the conventional Audit Reports of C&AG 
although the comments of C&AG incorporated in the Annual Report of public 
undertakings were taken note of by the Ministries.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that there should be some automatic follow-up action on the reports 
of C&AG by the Ministries. 
------- 
12th Lok Sabha- Second Report (Original) (1998-99)  
(Recommendation Nos. 22 and 23) 
 
22. The Committee on Public Undertakings in their 49 th Report (7th Lok Sabha) 
inter-alia had recommended that there should be some automatic follow up action 
on the reports of CAG (Commercial) presented to Parliament by Ministries. This 
recommendation was accepted by Government. Subsequently, In June, 1985 and 
February, 1992 all the Ministries/Departments were asked to furnish brief notes on 
the review of the follow up action taken on each of the C&AG reports (Commercial) 
presented to the Parliament after 1985. The Committee are deeply perturbed to note 
that even after ac cepting the recommendation of the Committee, the 
Ministries/Departments have not implemented it in right earnest. Follow up section 
on the reports of C&AG presented to the Parliament even as far back as 1993 are 
also pending. In fact there was no system of  monitoring at the Government level 
for follow up action on the reports of C&AG (Commercial). As a result, the follow 
up action taken notes have not been received regularly and in time. As per 
information furnished by Audit, out of the 57 Reports of C&AG ( Commercial) 
presented to the Parliament from March 1993 to July 1998, Action Taken Notes in 
respect of as many as 865 paragraphs of various reports pertaining to 39 
Ministries/Departments were pending as on 16 th December,1998. In addition, such 
action taken notes in respect of comprehensive appraisal conducted by audit on 
11 undertakings have also not been received.  
23. The Committee took serious view of the casual attitude shown by the 
Ministries/Departments in finalizing the Action -taken notes on the Rep orts of the 
C&AG of India (Commercial). The Committee, therefore, called for evidence the 
representatives of Ministries/Department of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals), Civil Aviation, Coal, Communications 

31 
 
(Department of Telecommunications), Finance (Insurance Division), Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Railways, Steel and Textiles, in whose case action 
taken note on a large number audit paras were pending for a long time. Almost of 
all of them have admitted that the re was no strong and effective mechanism 
available in the Ministries/Departments for coordinating and monitoring the 
submission of follow up action on the Reports of C&AG (Commercial) which 
resulted in the huge pendency in their Ministries/Departments. It was only after the 
matter was taken up for examination by this Committee that some of them have set 
up monitoring mechanism for streamlining the existing system. Keeping in view 
the huge pendency of follow up on Audit paragraphs, this Committee would 
emphasize the need for evolving an effective monitoring mechanism in each 
Ministry to ensure timely submission of the action taken notes on each report of 
C&AG presented to Parliament. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that specific and immediate ste ps be taken by the Government for setting up 
monitoring cell in each Ministry to monitor the submission of the follow up action 
on Audit Reports (Commercial) on individual undertakings. Besides, in case of 
reports containing paras relating to a number of u ndertakings, (under different 
Ministries) a monitoring cell should also be set up in the Department of Public 
Enterprises to monitor the follow-up action on such reports. Thereafter, the follow 
up action taken notes duly vetted by audit in respect of all r eports of C&AG 
(Commercial) presented to Parliament should be furnished to the Committee within 
six months from the date of presentation of the relevant audit reports.  
------- 
13th Lok Sabha – First Report (ATR) (1999-2000) 
 (Recommendation Nos. 7 and 8) 
 
7. The Committee note the steps taken by the Department of Public Enterprises 
to bring the Observations and recommendations of the Committee regarding the 
undue delay in furnishing details of follow -up action taken on the Audit 
Observations contained in t he Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (Commercial) to the pointed attention of the Secretaries of all the 
administrative Ministries/Departments and to advise them to set up a Monitoring 
Cell in each Ministry to ensure the timely submiss ion of follow -up action taken 
details in respect  of the Public Undertakings that come under the purview of that 
Ministry. The Committee, however regret to note that the Department of Public 
Enterprises has taken an unduly long period of four months after date of 
presentation of their Report to simply pass on the recommendation of the 
Committee to the Ministries to set up a Monitoring Cell in each 
Ministry/Department. The Committee do not appreciate the inordinate delay on the 
part of the Department of Public Enterprises in processing the recommendation of 
the Committee which involved only a Post Office job. The Committee, however, 
expect that individual Ministries/Departments would have promptly acted upon the 
recommendation of the Committee to set up a Monitoring Cell in this regard. They 
desire that the details of the name of Ministries/Departments which have set up the 
Monitoring Cells so far and the dates on which these Monitoring Cells actually 

32 
 
started working should be submitted to the Committee for their information within 
a month from the date of presentation of this Report. Name of 
Ministries/Departments who have not set up the Monitoring Cell so far should be 
submitted to the Committee within one month.  
8. The Committee regret to note that the Department of Public Enterprises have 
not accepted the recommendations of the Committee to set up a separate 
Monitoring Cell in the Department of Public Enterprises itself to monitor the follow-
up action by various Ministries/Departments on the observations co ntained in the 
Audit Reports (Commercial) on individual undertakings. The Committee do not 
agree with the reason given by the Department that the setting up of a Monitoring 
Cell in the Department of Public Enterprises will duplicate the efforts of collecti ng 
and collating enormous data/information already being collected by the 
administrative Ministries/Departments for finalizing the follow -up action taken 
notes on various Reports of the C&AG (Commercial). The Committee feel that the 
original recommendation  of the Committee has not been viewed in the proper 
perspective by the Department as the Committee intended that the Monitoring Cell 
in the Department of Public Enterprises would only keep an exclusive watch over 
this particular aspect by merely keeping an account of the extent of compliance by 
various Ministries in respect of the number of observations for which the follow up 
Action Taken Notes have been sent by the Ministry/Department. The Committee 
feel that such a centralized monitoring mechanism which only keeps a mere 
statistical count of the cases settled is necessary in the Department of Public 
Enterprises, as after a lapse of certain time, the Monitoring Cells in individual 
Ministries/Departments would become either dysfunctional or slack in their w ork 
as in the past and under those circumstances there should be a centralized cell 
which should keep reminding them of their duties which have to be performed well 
in time. Therefore, the Committee urge upon the Department of Public Enterprises 
to consider the recommendation of the Committee in its proper perspective and 
take constructive action to ensure a permanent centralized monitoring 
arrangement for this much neglected activity, as the Committee do not want the 
Government to repeat its poor performan ce of 1985 and 1992 once again on this 
count.  
------- 
Action Taken Statement on First Report laid on 22 August, 2000 
(Reply of the Government on Recommendation Para Sl. No. 8 above) 
 
As per the recommendation of the Committee, a Monitoring Cell in the 
Department of Public Enterprises has been set up to keep an account of the extent 
of compliance by various Ministries in respect of number of observations for which 
the follow up action take notes have been sent by Ministries/Departments and keep 
a statistical count of the cases settled by them. 
2.  This has the approval of the Minister (Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises). 
---------  

33 
 
Annexure - II 
PU BRANCH 
 
MINUTES OF THE INTER-DEPARTMENTAL MEETING WITH THE OFFICIALS OF 
MONITORING CELL, O/o CONTROLLER GENERAL OF ACCOUNTS,  
DEPT. OF EXPENDITURE, MINISTRY OF FINANCE. 
 
 
 The meeting held on Tuesday, the 6 th December, 2022 from 1530 hrs. to  
1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Santosh Kumar         -        Director 
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal                  -        Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal             -        Deputy Secretary  
 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF MONITORING CELL, O/o CONTROLLER GENERAL OF 
ACCOUNTS, DEPT. OF EXPENDITURE, MINISTRY OF FINANCE. 
 
1. Shri Vishwa Nath Dwivedi - Under Secretary 
2. Shri S.N. Mandal - AAO 
2.  At the outset, the officials of Department of Expenditure were welcomed to the 
Inter-Departmental meeting and requested them to make a brief on background and 
conceptualization of the present system at the behest of Public Accounts Committee for 
monitoring of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the Audit Reports/Paras on real -time 
submission and monitoring of Action Taken Notes in respect of non -selected Audit 
Reports/Paras.  
3. Thereafter, the representatives of Monitoring Cell, O/o Controller General of 
Accounts, Dept. of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance made power point presentation 
highlighting different features of Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) Portal. They 
stated that adequate provisions have been made for all stages involved in 
Monitoring/Settlement of Audit Para/Report right from entry in Portal by officials of CAG 

34 
 
from sending of settled report by Monitoring Cell in a time -bound manner to making 
provisions for alerts/notifications for concerned Ministry.  Provisions have also been made 
for submission of Revised ATN in case of disagreement till settlement and the system is 
secured through Login and Password for each user.  The main highlights of the 
presentation are as under:- 
i. Mechanism and steps followed on APMS Portal after an Audit Reports/Para is 
laid in Parliament viz.  
a) C&AG uploading Audit Report/Para on the Portal for submission of ATNs 
by concerned Ministry; 
b) Thereafter the concerned Ministry(ies) uploading the Draft ATNs on the 
Portal with the concerned JS level approval;  
c) Vetting Remarks of the C&AG on the Draft Reply submitted by the 
Ministry(ies); and 
d) Repetition of steps (b) and (c) till the settlement of raised Audit objection 
by the Ministry; 
ii. Nomination of Nodal Officers in every Ministry to deal with Audit Report/Para; 
iii. Oversight role of PAC in monitoring of Audit Reports/Paras under them. 
 4. The representatives of Monitoring Cell further added that they have made provision 
of a Tab in the existing APMS Portal for Audit Reports/Paras that may deal with 
Commercial Reports relating to the CPSUs on similar line of PAC. However, the exercise 
to prepare and operate on the line of PAC would be possible only after having 
recommendation from the Committee on Public Undertakings to undertake development 
of APMS Module for Audit Reports/Paras for CPSUs.  The representatives of Monitoring 
Cell were informed that the decision would be communicated after placing the matter 
before the Committee.   
The meeting, then, adjourned. 
********* 
  

35 
 
Annexure - III 
 
Status of settlement of the C&AG Audit Reports/Paras laid in Parliament since  
2010-11 to 2021-22 
(Status as on 9 June 2023) 
 
(A) Number of Audit Paras- Ministry & CPSU wise 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
CPSU 
Total 
no. of 
Audit 
Report
s/Paras 
No. of 
settled 
Audit 
Report
s/Paras 
No. of 
unsettle
d Audit 
Reports/
Paras 
Remarks  of DPE Monitoring Cell  
 
Number 
of Para 
on which 
ATN/Revi
sed ATN 
has been 
sent to 
COPU/  
C&AG (as 
per 
replies 
submitted 
by 
Ministries
/Departm
ent)* 
Number 
of Para 
on 
which 
reply is 
awaited 
from 
Ministry
/ 
Departm
ent 
Number 
of Para 
Reported 
by 
Ministry/D
epartment 
as 
settled* 
Department of Atomic Energy 
1. 
Nuclear 
Power Corp. 
of India Ltd. 
5 1 4 0 4 0 
2. 
Uranium 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited 
2 2 0 0 0 0 
3. 
Bharatiya 
Nabhikiya 
Vidyut 
Nigam 
Limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
 Total 8 3 5 0 5 0 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
1 
National 
Fertilizers 
Limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
2 Hindustan 
Organic 
1 1 0 0 0 0 

36 
 
Chemicals 
Limited 
3 
Rashtriya 
Chemicals & 
Fertilizers 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
 Total 3 1 2 0 2 0 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1 
Airports 
Authority of 
India  
38 16 22 22 0 0 
2 
Air India 
Charter 
Limited  
1 1 0 0 0 0 
3 
Alliance Air 
Services 
Limited  
2 0 2 2 0 0 
4 Pawan Hans 
Limited  
3 1 2 2 0 0 
 Total 44 18 26 26 0 0 
Ministry of Coal 
1 
Bharat 
Coking Coal 
Limited 
6 5 1 1 0 0 
2 
Central 
Coalfields 
Limited, 
6 5 1 1 0 0 
3 
Coal India 
Limited & its 
subsidiaries 
10 9 1 1 0 0 
4 
Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
5 5 0 0 0 0 
5 
Mahanadi 
Coalfields 
Limited 
2 2 0 0 0 0 
6 
Neyveli Uttar 
Pradesh 
Power 
Limited 
1 0 1 1 0 0 
7 NLC India 
Limited 
11 2 9 8 1 0 
8 
NLC Tamil 
Nadu Power 
Limited 
2 0 2 1 1 0 
9 
Northern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
2 2 0 0 0   

37 
 
10 
South 
Eastern 
Coalfields 
Limited 
3 3 0 0 0 0 
11 
Western 
Coalfields 
Limited 
3 3 0 0 0 0 
 Total 51 36 15 13 2 0 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
1 
Export 
Credit 
Guarantee 
Corporation 
of India  
2 1 1 0 1 0 
2 
Government 
e-
Marketplace 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
3 
Metals and 
Minerals 
Trading 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited  
3 2 1 0 1 0 
4 
Neelachal 
Ispat Nigam 
Limited  
1 1 0 0 0 0 
5 
The Project 
and 
Equipment 
Corporation 
of India Ltd  
3 3 0 0 0 0 
6 
The State 
Trading 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited  
8 8 0 0 0 0 
 Total 18 15 3 0 3 0 
Ministry of Communications 
1 
Bharat 
Sanchar 
Nigam Ltd. 
43 34 9 0 9 0 
2 
Mahanagar 
Telephone 
Nigam Ltd. 
4 4 0 0 0 0 
3 ITI Limited 1 0 1 0 1 0 
 Total 48 38 10 0 10 0 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 

38 
 
1. 
Food 
Corporation 
of India 
122 107 15 15 0 0 
Ministry of Defence  
1 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
18 8 10 0 10 0 
2 
Bharat Earth 
Movers 
Limited 
15 11 4 0 4 0 
3 
 Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
16 7 9 9 0 0 
4 
Mazagoan 
Dock 
Shipyard 
Limited 
2 2 0 0 0 0 
5 
 Bharat 
Dynamics 
Limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
6 
Garden 
Reach 
Shipbuilders 
and 
Engineers 
Limited 
3 2 1 0 1 0 
7 
Goa 
Shipyard 
Limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
8 
Hindustan 
Shipyard 
Limited 
2 1 1 0 1 0 
9 
 Mishra 
Dhatu 
Nigam 
Limited 
2 1 1 0 1 0 
10 
 Vignyan 
Industries 
Limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
 Total  61 33 28 9 19 0 

39 
 
Ministry of Development of the North Eastern Region  
1. 
North 
Eastern 
Regional 
Agricultural 
Marketing 
Corporation 
Limited. 
1 0 1 1 0 0 
Ministry of Education  
1 
Educational 
Consultants 
India Limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
1. 
National 
Informatics 
Centre 
Services Inc. 
3 0 3 3 0 0 
TOTAL  3 0 3 3 0 0 
Ministry of Finance/Department of Financial Services 
1. 
Canbank 
factors 
limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
    2 
Cent Bank 
Home 
Finance 
Limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
3 
General 
Insurance 
Corporation 
of India  
7 5 2 2 0 0 
4 IFCI Factors 
Limited 
3 2 1 1 0 0 
5 
IFCI 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
6 IFCI Limited 1 0 1 0 1 0 
7 
IFCI Venture 
Capital Fund 
Limited 
2 1 1 0 1 0 
8 
India 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Company 
Limited  
6 2 4 4 0 0 
9 Metropolitan 
Stock 
1 1 0 0 0 0 

40 
 
Exchange of 
India Limited 
10 Nabfins 
limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
11 
National 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited  
14 10 4 4 0 0 
12 
New India 
Assurance 
Company 
Limited  
14 8 6 5 1 0 
13 
SBI Cards 
and Payment 
Services 
Limited 
2 0 2 0 2 0 
14 
SBI Global 
Factors 
Limited  
1 0 1 0 1 0 
15 STCI Finance 
Limited  
1 0 1 0 1 0 
16 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
14 6 8 8 0 0 
17 
United India 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
7 4 3 3 0 0 
 Total  77 41 36 27 9 0 
Ministry of Heavy Industries  
1 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals 
Limited 
28 23 5 0 5 0 
2 
Cement 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 
3 
Heavy 
Engineering 
Corporation 
Limited 
3 0 3 3 0 0 
4 
Hindustan 
Paper 
Corporation 
Limited 
2 1 1 0 0 1 
5 
HMT 
machine 
tools limited 
1 1 0 0 0 0 

41 
 
6 Sambhar 
Salts Limited 
1 0 1 1 0 0 
7 
Tungbhadra 
steel 
products 
limited 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
 Total 37 26 11 4 6 1 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
1 
Chandigarh 
Industrial and 
Tourism 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2 2 0 0     
2 
Omnibus 
Industrial 
Development 
Corporation 
of Daman, 
Diu & Dadra 
and Nagar 
Haveli 
Limited 
1 1 0       
3 
DNH Power 
Distribution 
Corporation 
Limited 
1 0 1   1   
 Total 4 3 1 0 1 0 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs  
1 
Chennai 
Metro Rail 
Limited 
2 1 1   1   
2 
Delhi Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
2 1 1   1   
3 National 
Building 
1 0 1 1     

42 
 
construction 
Corporation  
4 
Maharashtra 
Metro Rail 
Corporation  
Limited 
1 0 1   1   
5 
The Housing 
and Urban 
Development 
Corporation 
1 1 0       
 Total 7 3 4 1 3 0 
Ministry of Mines 
1 
Bharat Gold 
Mines 
Limited 
1 0 1 1     
2 
Hindustan 
Copper 
Limited 
6 4 2 2     
3 
National 
Aluminum 
Company 
Limited 
5 0 5 5     
 Total 12 4 8 8 0 0 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
1 
National 
Minority 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation 
1 0 1   1   
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
1. 
Karnataka 
Solar Power 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
2 0 2   2   
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
1 
Balmer 
Lawrie Co. 
Ltd. 
3 2 1 1     
2 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
12 5 7 2 5   
3 
Brahmaputra 
Cracker 
&Polymer  
Limited 
1 0 1   1   

43 
 
4 
Chennai 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
2 1 1   1   
5 Engineers 
India Limited 
3 3 0       
6 GAIL Gas 
Limited 
1 1 0       
7 GAIL (India) 
Limited 
19 18 1   1   
8 
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
17 9 8 4 3 1 
9 
HPCL 
Biofuels 
Limited  
1 0 1 1     
10 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
50 41 9 9     
11 
Manglore 
Refinery and 
Petrochemica
ls Limited 
3 1 2 2     
12 
Numaligarh 
Refinery 
Limited 
2 0 2 2     
13 Oil India 
Limited 
6 3 3 3     
14 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
56 41 15 14 1   
15 ONGCVidesh 
Limited 
6 4 2 2     
 Total 182 129 53 40 12 1 
Ministry of Power 
1 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
18 10 8 1   7 
2 
Kanti Bijlee 
Utpadam 
Nigam 
Limited 
1 0 1     1 
3 
Nabinagar 
Power 
Generating 
Company 
Limited 
1 0 1 1     

44 
 
4 
National High 
Power Test 
Laboratory 
Pvt Limited 
1 1 0       
5 
Narmada 
Hydroelectric 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
10 10 0       
6 
National 
Thermal 
Power 
Corporation 
Limited 
23 23 0       
7 
North 
Eastern 
Electric 
Power 
Corporation 
Limited  
1 1 0       
8 NHPC 
Limited 
18 15 3   1 2 
9 
NTPC-SAIL 
Power 
Company 
Limited 
4 1 3 1   2 
10 
NTPCVidyut
Vyapar 
Nigam 
Limited 
3 3 0       
11 
 Power 
Finance 
Corporation 
Limited 
15 14 1 1     
12 
 PFC 
Consulting 
Ltd 
1 1 0       
13 
 Power Grid 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited 
18 16 2 1   1 
14 
 Ratnagiri 
Gas and 
Power 
Private 
Limited 
3 3 0       
15  REC Limited 16 15 1 1     
16 REC Power 
Development 
3 3 0       

45 
 
and 
Consultancy 
Limited 
17  SJVN 
Limited 
14 14 0       
18  THDC India 
Limited 
9 7 2 1   1 
 Total  159 137 22 7 1 14 
Ministry of Railways 
1. 
Pipavav 
Railway 
Corporation 
of India Ltd. 
2 2 Nil       
2. Rail Vikas 
Nigam Ltd. 
3 2 1     1 
3. 
Container 
Corporation 
of India Ltd. 
2 0 2     2 
4. 
Railtel 
Corporation 
of India Ltd. 
1 1 Nil       
5. RITES Ltd. 1 0 1     1 
 Total 9 5 4     4 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
1 
National High
ways 
Authority of I
ndia 
37 19 
18 
 
 
6 7 5 
Ministry of Science and Technology  
1. 
National 
Research 
Development 
Corp. 
1 1 0       

46 
 
2. 
Central 
Electronics 
Limited 
3 0 3 2   1 
 Total 4 1 3 2   1 
Ministry of Shipping Ports,  and Waterways  
1 
Cochin 
Shipyard 
Limited 
1 0 1 1     
2 
Dredging 
corporation of 
India limited 
8 6 2 2     
3 
Inland 
Waterways 
Authority of 
India 
1 0 1 1     
4 
Sethusamudr
am 
Corporation 
Limited 
1 0 1 1     
5 
The Shipping 
Corporation 
of India 
Limited 
8 5 3 3     
 Total 19 11 8 8 0 0 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment  
1 
National 
Backward 
Caste 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation 
1 0 1 1 0 0 
Ministry of Steel  

47 
 
1 
Bisra Stone 
Lime 
Company 
Limited  
2 0 2 2     
2 
Hindustan 
Steelworks 
Construction 
Limited  
1 1 0       
3 
Kudremukh 
Iron Ore 
Company 
Limited  
4 4 0       
4 MECON 
Limited 
2 2 0       
5 
Metal Scrap 
Trade 
Corporation 
Limited 
(MSTC) 
8 3 5 5     
6 
MOIL Limited 
(Manganese 
Ore (India) 
Limited 
9 9 0       
7 
National 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
7 3 4     4 
8 
Orissa 
Minerals 
Development 
Company 
Limited  
2 0 2 2     
9 
RashtriyaIspa
t Nigam 
Limited 
13 8 5 5     
10 
Steel 
Authority of 
India Limited  
46 29 17 6   11 
 Total 94 59 35 20   15 
Ministry of Textiles  
1 
British India 
Corporation 
Limited 
1 0 1   1   
2 
India United 
Textile Mills 
Limited 
1 0 1 1     
3 National 
Handloom 
1 0 1   1   

48 
 
Development 
Corporation 
4 
National 
Textile 
Corporation 
4 1 3 3     
 Total 7 1 6 4 2 0 
Ministry of Tribal affairs  
1 
National 
Scheduled 
Tribe 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation 
1 0 1 0 1 0 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation  
1. 
National 
Project & 
Constructions 
Corp. 
2 1 1 0 1 0 
 Grand Total 1015 692 323 195 87 41 
 
 
  

49 
 
Status of settlement of the C&AG Audit Reports/Paras laid in Parliament since 2010 -11 to 2021-22  
Statement B 
 
(B) Details of pending paras: - 
 
Name of CPSU 
with their Ministry 
Audit 
Report/Par
a No. and 
Subject 
Laid in 
Parliament 
(Date) 
Date 
of 
submi
ssion 
of 
ATN 
Date of first 
Reply by 
Ministry and 
CPSU to 
C&AG 
Status 
as on 
20.02.20
25 
Remarks 
Department of Atomic Energy 
2010-11 to 2014-15 -NIL 
2015-16 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
Para no.1.3 of 
Report no.21 of 
2015- 
Procurement 
contracts.  
31.07.2015 30.01.2016 07.04.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
ATNs reply 
awaited 
Bharatiya 
Nabhikiya 
Vidyut Nigam 
Limited  
Para no. 1.1 of 
Report no21 of 
2015-Procuemnt 
Contracts.  
31.07.2015 30.01.2016 01.08.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
ATNs reply 
awaited 
 
 
 
2016-17 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
Para no.1.1 of 
Report no 15 of 
2016- Payment of 
City/ Site 
Conveyance 
Allowance of 
officials provided 
with Transport 
facility.  
08.08.2016 07.02.2017 19.04.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
ATNs reply 
awaited 
2017-18 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
Para no.1.1 of 
Report no 9 of 
2017- Extra 
expenditure on 
purchase of power 
from external 
source due to 
delay in 
completion of 
power supply 
system.  
05.04.2017 04.10.2017 18.09.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
ATNs reply 
awaited 

50 
 
2018-19 to 2019-20 -NIL 
2021-22 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of 
India Ltd., 
Para no 4.5 of 
Report no. 2 of 
2021 - Payment of 
inadmissible 
Family Planning 
Allowance to 
employees. 
24.03.2021 23.09.2021 FirstATN 
yet to be 
received  
First ATN 
yet to be 
received  
ATNs reply 
awaited 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
                                                                                                        2010-11- NIL 
                                                                                                         2011-12 
National 
Fertilizers 
Limited 
Report No. 3 of 
2011/ Para 8.1 
Marketing of 
products 
 
 
25.07.2011 24.01.2012 4-2-2013 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs reply 
awaited 
                                                                                                    2012-13 to 2016-17 -NIL 
                                                                                                              2017-18 
 
Rashtriya 
Chemicals & 
Fertilizers 
Report No. 9 of 
2017/ Para 6.1 
Failure of 
safeguard the 
interest of 
Rashtriya 
Chemicals & 
Fertilizers 
05.04.2017 04.10.2017 - Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs reply 
awaited 
                                                                                                   2017-18 to 2021-22 -NIL 
                                                                                                 Ministry of Civil Aviation 
                                                                                                             2010-11- Nil 
                                                                                                              2011-12 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 3 of 
2011/ Para 2.4  
Injudicious 
investment on 
development of 
airport at 
Coochbehar 
25.08.2011 24.02.2012  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
06/10/2016 
CAG Reply 
awaited  
                                                                                                               2012-13 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/ Para 2.4  
Irregular 
Appointment of 
Consultants 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013  Reply sent 
to CoPU on 
23/04/2014 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/Para 2.5 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013 08.12.2013 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
CAG Reply 
awaited 

51 
 
Favour to a 
contractor by 
awarding a 
construction 
contract against 
unacceptable offer 
and allotment of 
land free of charge 
on 
10/07/2017 
Alliance Air 
Services 
Limited 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/Para 2.3  
Review of 
Operations of 
AASL 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013  Second 
reply send 
to CoPU on 
07/04/2021 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
                                                                                                        2013-14 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2013/Para 3.1  
Land Management 
in AAI 
08.08.2013 07.02.2014 25.03.2019 replies sent 
to C&AG 
and CoPU 
on 
28/06/2023 
CAG & 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
                                                                                                   2014-15-Nil 
                                                                                                       2015-16  
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 21 of 
2015(Vol. I) / Para 
8.1  
Irregular payment 
of allowances and 
perks beyond 
admissible ceiling 
31.07.2015 30.01.2016  Remarks 
received on 
06/07/2023 
from CAG 
to review 
ATN 
 
                                                                                                      2016-17 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.1 
Potential loss of 
revenue to AAI 
resulting from 
flaw in agreement 
between MIAL 
and Private 
developer HDIL 
for removal of 
encroachments 
from Airport Land 
05.08.2016 04.02.2017 01.03.2017 ATN 
submitted 
to CoPU on 
30/09/2022 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.2  
Short realization 
of Annual fee 
from MIAL 
resulting in loss of 
revenue to MIAL 
05.08.2016 04.02.2017 07.09.2017 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
19/04/2021 
CAG Reply 
awaited 

52 
 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.3 
Non-realisation of 
revenue share as 
per provisions of 
agreement 
08.08.2016 07.02.2017  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
24/03/2021 
CAG Reply 
awaited 
 Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.4 
Irregular 
payments towards 
encashment of 
half-pay leave 
08.08.2016 07.02.2017  ATN send 
to CoPU on 
26/09/2022 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/Para 2.5   
Poor utilization of 
infrastructure 
developed with 
Govt. funds at 
Birsi airport, 
Gondia resulting 
in recurring losses 
for its 
maintenance 
05.08.2016 04.02.2017 31.01.2017 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
05/06/2017 
CAG Reply 
awaited 
                                                                                               2017-18-Nil 
                                                                                                  2018-19 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 2.2 
Review of 
execution of 
contracts for 
construction of 
runway, buildings 
and other 
structures at 
airports in 
Northern Region 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 14.01.2019 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
25/03/2021 
CAG Reply 
awaited 
 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 2.4 
Undue favor to the 
contractor 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 30.10.2018 Reply sent 
to CoPU on 
30/08/2022 
CoPU Reply 
awaited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 2.5 
Levy of liquidated 
damages – AAI 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 03.10.2019 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
30/10/2019 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/Para 2.1   
07.08.2018 06.02.2019  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
C&AG reply 
awaited 

53 
 
Review of 
operation of 
AASL 
on 
07/01/2022 
Alliance Air 
Services 
Limited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/Para 2.1 
Review of 
operation of 
AASL 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
                                                                                                       2019-20 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 1.1 
Review of revenue 
generation and its 
realization 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
18/08/2023  
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 1.2 
Review of security 
at airports 
operated by 
Airports Authority 
of India 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 22.09.2022 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
26/08/2022 
 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 1.3 
Information 
Technology Audit 
of SAP ERP 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 07.10.2022  Reply sent to 
C&AG on 
08/09/2022 
and the reply 
of same has 
been 
Received on 
23/08/2023 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 1.4 
Loss of revenue 
crore due to 
allotment of 
hanger space at 
lower rate of 
license fee 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
27/02/2023 
revised 
ATN 
 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Pawan Hans 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 1.8 
Improper 
management of 
rescue operation 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
22/04/2022 
and 
Request has 
sent  to 
drop para 
on 
25/08/2023 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 1.9 
Payment of the 
executives, pilots 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
09/09/2020 
C&AG reply 
awaited 

54 
 
and aircraft 
maintenance 
engineers 
and 
Request has 
sent  to 
drop para 
                                                                                                          2020-21 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 2.1 
Payment of 
Performance 
Related Pay due to 
non-adherence of 
conditions of ‘Bell 
Curve Approach 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021  Reply send 
to C&AG 
on 
28/09/2022 
and the 
same is still 
awaited 
from AAI 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 2.2 
Short recovery of 
liquidated 
damages from a 
contractor 
09.02.2021 09.08.2021 17-11-2021 Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
24/05/2023 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
                                                                                                         2021-22 
Airports 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 9.1 
Loss of revenue 
due to inadequate 
assessment of 
electricity load 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
18/07/2023 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report. No. 14 of 
2021/Para 9.2 
Non-
reimbursement of 
electricity charges 
due to lack of 
proper follow -up 
and pursuance 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 First ATN 
Awaited 
IFD 
returned 
file with 
observation 
on 
08/06/2023 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 9.3 
Avoidable extra 
expenditure due to 
unilateral increase 
of royalty 
21.12.2021 19.06.2021  Reply sent 
to C&AG 
on 
08/05/2023 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
 
 
Ministry of Coal 
2010-11 to 2012-13 - NIL 
2013-14 
Central 
Coalfields 
Limited 
Report  No 13 of 
2013/ Para 4.1 
Non-revision of 
beneficiation 
08.08.2013 08.02.2014 02.07.2016 Reply Sent 
to CAG on 
08-01-2017 
 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
 

55 
 
charges Rs.73.63 
crore. 
2014-15- NIL 
2015-16 
NLC India 
Limited 
15 of 2016/ Para 
3.2 
Avoidable 
expenditure – 
NLC 
08-08-2016 08-02-2017   Reply Sent 
to CAG on 
8/11/2017 
through 
email 
C&AG reply 
awaited 
2017-18 
Coal India 
Limited and its 
subsidiaries 
Report  No. 9 of 
2017/ Para 3.2 
Loss due to 
incorrect fixation 
of reserve price of 
coal under e -
auction sale 
05.04.2017 05.10.2017 11.05.2018 Reply Sent 
to CAG on 
25/06/2019 
sent to 
CoPU on 
17/09/2019 
 reply 
awaited from 
CAG and 
COPU 
NLC India 
Limited 
9 of 2017/ Para 3.5 
Operational 
Performance of 
Power Plants 
05-04-2017 05-10-2017 August-
2017 
Reply Sent 
COPU 
9/2/2021. 
Reply 
awaited from 
COPU 
9 of 2017/ Para 
18.1 
Excess payment of 
performance 
related pay to the 
employees  
05-04-2017 05-10-2017 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Informed 
awaited 
PSU/concern
ed  
2018-19 
Bharat Coking 
Coal Limited 
Report  No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 3.1 
Blending of 
precious steel 
grade coal with 
inferior washery 
grade coal 
07.08.2018 07.02.2019 04.02.2020 Reply Sent 
to CAG                               
on 
20/04/2023 
Reply 
awaited from 
CAG 
NLC India 
Limited 
11 of 2018/ Para 
3.4 
Excess payment of 
perks and 
allowances 
07-08-2018 
 
07-02-2019  Reply Sent 
to COPU on 
12/04/2023 
Reply 
awaited from 
COPU 
2019-20 
NLC India 
Limited 
13 of 2019/ Para 
2.2 
25-11-2019 25-05-2020 23-04-2020 Request to 
settle/  drop 
para om 
Reply 
awaited 

56 
 
Irregular payment 
of ex -gratia, 
honorarium, 
rewards etc. in 
violation to DPE 
guidelines resulted 
in avoidable 
expenditure of 
Rs.26.83 crore -
NLC 
23.06.2023 
to audit 
concern  
13 of 2019/  Para 
2.3 Loss of 
revenue due to 
non-observance of 
CERC Guidelines 
- Graded Rebate - 
Rs. 21.70 
25-11-2019 25-05-2020 23-04-2020 Audit 
remark 
sent to 
CoPU on 
15/6/2023 
Reply 
awaited from 
COPU 
2020-21 
NLC India 
Limited 
18 of 2020/ Para 
3.2
  
Avoidable 
expenditure on 
excavation 
outsourcing in 
South West Area 
of Mine II  
07-02-2021 07-08-2021 28-09-2021 Sent to 
CAG on 
29.9.2021  
Reply 
awaited from 
CAG 
NLC Tamil 
nadu Power 
Limited 
 
18 of 2020/ Para 
3.3 
Avoidable 
payment of 
demurrage 
charges of Rs. 
9.45 crore to M/s 
SICAL in 
contravention of 
the agreement  
07-02-2021 07-08-2021 December -
2021 
As 
suggested 
by CAG 
Audit 
remarks 
has been 
sent to 
CoPU on  
15.6.2023 
Reply 
awaited from 
COPU 
2021-22 
Neyveli Uttar 
Pradesh Power 
Limited 
Report 14 of 
2021/Para 1.3 
Violation of CVC 
guidelines resulted 
in undue benefit to 
private contractors 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 26.07.2022 Reply Sent 
to CAG 
10.08.2022  
Reply 
awaited from 
CAG 
NLC Tamil 
nadu Power 
Limited 
 
14 of 2021/ Para 
1.4 
Avoidable 
payment of 
21-12-2021 21-06-2022 First ATN  
Awaited 
First ATN  
Awaited 
Pending with 
PSU 

57 
 
compensation 
charges due to 
defective 
agreement clause. 
2022-23(upto December 2022) 
NLC India 
Limited 
33 of 2022/ Para 
1.1 
Payment of 
allowances in 
contravention of 
DPE guidelines -
Rs. 27.79 crore 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 18.8.2023 Sent to 
CAG on 
18.8.2023  
Remark 
from audit 
awaited 
33 of 2022/ Para 
1.2 
Payment of 
Performance 
Related Pay in 
contravention of 
DPE guidelines 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 18.8.2023 Sent to 
CAG on 
18.8.2023  
Remark 
from audit 
awaited 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
2010-11 and 2011-12 – NIL 
2012-13 
Export Credit 
Guarantee 
Corporation of 
India 
Report No.12 of 
2012  
PA on Operational 
Performance of 
ECGC and its role 
in export 
promotion of the 
country 
12.05.2012 11.11.2012 14.06.2013   
2013-14 
Metals and 
Minerals 
Trading 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
(MMTC 
Limited) 
Report No. 13 of 
2013/ Para 5.1 
Non-recovery of 
dues due to lapses 
in bullion 
transaction and 
camouflaged 
accounting 
08.08.2013 08.02.2014 18.07.2014 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Audit has no 
further 
comments 
the issue can 
be treated as 
settled. 
treated as 
settled 
2014-15 to 2019-20- NIL 
2020-21 
Government e-
Marketplace 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 4.1 
Information 
Systems Audit of 
09.02.2021 09.08.2021 21.10.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 

58 
 
Government E -
Marketplace  
2021-22-NIL 
Ministry of Communications 
2010-11 -NIL- 
2011-12 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
03 of 2011 -12/ 
Para 5.1  
Basic telephone 
services in BSNL 
25.08.2011 24.02.2012 11.03.2012 Para is 
partly 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry. 
 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
03 of 2011 -12/ 
Para 5.3  
Leased Circuits in 
Bharat Sanchar 
Nigam Ltd. 
25.08.2011 24.02.2012 20.04.2012 -do-  
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
03 of 2011 -12/ 
Para 5.6  
Blocking of funds 
due to non -
commissioning of 
optical fibre 
routes 
25.08.2011 24.02.2012 13.07.2014 -do-  
2012-13 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
08 of 2012 -13/ 
Para 5.2 
Inefficient 
management of 
procurement of 
costly microwave 
equipment)  
04.09.2012 03.03.2013 05.02.2013 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since 
September 
2015 
 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd.  
08 of 2012-13/ 
Para 5.4 Avoidable 
payment of 
interest on 
delayed payment 
for BWA spectrum 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013 11.06.2013 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since 
 

59 
 
December 
2013. 
2013-14 and 2014-15 –NIL 
2015-16 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
20 of 2015/ Para 
5.9 Non auto -
disconnection of 
services by the 
billing system due 
to non -payment 
resulted in 
accumulation of 
dues from 
subscribers 
08.05.2015 07.11.2015 09.06.2016 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since May 
2018. 
 
2016-17 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
29 of 2016/ Para 
5.3  
Delay in billing of 
Multi Protocol 
Label Switching 
(MPLS) link 
22.11.2016 21.05.2017 20.03.2017 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since April 
2017. 
 
2018-19 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
21 of 2018/ Para 
4.1  
Telecom services 
provided by 
Bharat Sanchar 
Nigam Limited in 
North Eastern 
Region of India 
08.01.2019 07.07.2019 22.04.2019 Para is 
partly 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry in 
respect of 
para 4.1.4.2 
and 4.1.5 
 
2019-20 and 2020-21 – NIL 
2021-22 
Bharat 
Sanchar Nigam 
Ltd. 
03 of 2021/ Para 
5.2 BSNL’s failure 
to invoke terms of 
Interconnect 
Agreements in 
time exposed it to 
29.11.2021 28.05.2022 08.06.2022 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry. 
 

60 
 
risk of loss of 
revenue 
ITI Limited 03 of 2021/ Para 
5.1  
Management of 
Land and Estate at 
Bengaluru by ITI 
Limited 
29.11.2021 28.05.2022 05.12.2022 Under 
examinatio
n at O/o 
PDA F & C 
1st Journey of 
the ATN. 
ITI reply to 
DoT 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution  
2010-11 –NIL 
2011-12 
Food 
Corporation of 
India 
Report No. of  3 
of  2011/Para 6.2 
Import of Food 
grains by FCI 
  04.10.2011 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry                        
ATNs Reply   
provided 15-
05-2014    by 
Department 
of Food & 
Public 
Distribution 
2012-13 to 2014-15 
2015-16 
Food 
Corporation of 
India 
 
Report No. 21 of 
2015/Para 
5.3.FCI made 
excess payment of 
Rs. 16.96 core to 
the Govt. of Uttar 
Pradesh and its 
agencies during 
the Year 2010 and 
2011-12 due to 
reimbursement of 
inadmissible 
element as part of 
Mandi labour 
charges on 
procurement of 
wheat. 
31.07.2015 30.01.2016 6.03.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 01-
01-2018    by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No. 21 of 
2015/Para 5.5 
Avoidable 
payment of 
terminal charges 
of Rs.5.01 crore 
31.07.2015 30.01.2016 20.01.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided July-
2018    by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No. 31 of 
2015/ PA on 
Procurement and 
Milling of Paddy 
for the Central 
Pool 
08.08.2015 07.02.2015 08.02.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution in 
stages. 
                                                                                                        2016-17 

61 
 
Food 
Corporation of 
India  
 Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 5.1 
Export of Wheat  
08.07.2016 07.01.2016 06.03.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
22/11/2019    
by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/Para 5.2 IT 
Audit on 
implementation of 
Financial 
Accounting 
Package.  
08.07.2016 07.01.2016 11.02.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
27/09/2022 & 
in stages   by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
 Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 5.5 
Extra expenditure 
transportation 
food grains 
08.07.2016 07.01.2016 20.01.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
02/11/2023 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
                                                                                                       2017-18 
Food 
Corporation of 
India 
 
Report No.18 of 
2017/ CA on 
Compliance Audit 
Report on Food 
Corporation of 
India 
 
04.08.2017 03.02.2018  Reply 
awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
31/01/2020 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
                                                                                                      2018-19 
Food 
Corporation of 
India 
Report No. 4 of 
2018/ Para No. 
5.1 Management 
of gunnies in 
Punjab region 
03.04.2018 02.10.2018 19-6-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
 
Report No. 4 of 
2018/ Para No. 
5.2 
 Management of 
road transport 
contract Assam 
&Shillong region  
03.04.2018 02.10.2018 15-8-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
28/11/2023 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No. 4 of 
2018/ Para No. 
5.3Excess 
payment of mandi 
labour charges 
03.04.2018 02.10.2018 6-1-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
12/03/2021 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
 
Report No. 4 of 
2018/ Para No. 
5.4 Irregular 
payment of 
guarantee fee 
charges 
03.04.2018 02.10.2018 5-7-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
09/01/2024 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No. 4 of 
2018/ Para 5.6 
Irregular payment 
of custody & 
03.04.2018 02.10.2018 17-7-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
03/07/2024 & 
in stages by 

62 
 
Maintenance 
charges 
from 
Ministry 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
                                                                                                         2019-20 – NIL 
                                                                                                            2020-21 
Food 
Corporation of 
India 
Report No.2 of 
2021/ Para 
4.1Non -
availments of 
concessional 
Railway freight 
24.03.2021 23.09.2021 28.10.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
27/08/2024 by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
Report No.2 of 
2021/ Para 4.2 “ 
Avoidable 
expenditure due to 
inordinate delay 
in finalization and 
transport Contract 
24.03.2021 23.09.2021 02.08.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs Reply   
provided 
27/12/2024 
without 
Departmental 
approval by 
Department of 
Food & Public 
Distribution 
                                                                                                     2021-22 –NIL 
Ministry of Defence 
 Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No 10 of 
2010-/Chapter III 
Production and 
supply of 
Advanced Light 
Helicopter- HAL 
05.08.2010 04.02.2011  18.01.2011 Pending 
with 
Ministry 
 
 
                                                                                                          2011-12 – NIL 
                                                                                                            2012-13 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No. 8 of  
2012 / 7.2 Excess 
payment of 
Performance 
Related Pay 
04.09.2012 03.03.2012 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
awaited  
 
                                                                                                           2013-14 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No.13 of 
201/3 Para 7.9 
Loss in sale of 
Advanced Light 
Helicopters  
08.08.2013 07.02.2014 25.02.2014 Pending 
with 
Ministry 
 
Bharat 
Dynamics 
Limited 
Report No 13 of 
2013/ Para 7.3 
Procurement, 
Production and 
Supply of Konkurs 
M Missile 
08.08.2013 07.02.2014 03.10.17. Pending 
with 
Ministry 
 
                                                                                                                  2014-15 

63 
 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No 13 of 
2014/ Para 7.1 
Irregular 
encashment of 
casual leave 
01.08.2014 31.01.2015  20.12.2022 Pending with 
Ministry 
 
Bharat Earth 
Movers 
Limited 
Report No. 35 of 
2014/ Para 9.2 
Loss due to non 
utilization of 
power for captive 
consumption 
19.12.2014 18.06.2015 11.05.2015 Outcome of 
the Appeal 
against 
order of 
KERC 
awaited. 
 
 
                                                                                                              2015-16 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No.38 of 
2015/ Para 4.3) 
Acceptance of 
contract for 
DARIN-III with 
fixed delivery 
schedule led to 
liquidated 
damages 
18.12.2015 
 
17.06.2016 28.12.2017. Revised ATN 
awaited  
 
                                                                                                              2016-17 
 Mishra Dhatu 
Nigam Limited 
Report No.19 of 
2016/ Para 8.2 
Avoidable loss 
due to non 
availing of custom 
duty exemption 
26.07.2016  
25.01.2017 
First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
                                                                                                            2017-18 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No.19 of 
2017/ Para 3.1 
Licence 
Production and 
Supply of Hawk 
Mk 132 AJT 
aircraft  
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 19.07.2022 First ATN 
not received 
 
 Garden Reach 
Shipbuilders 
and Engineers 
Limited  
Report No.19 of 
2017/ Chapter II 
Performance 
Audit on 
Construction and 
Delivery of Anti 
Submarine 
Warfare (ASW) 
Corvettes – GRSE  
21.07.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 

64 
 
 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 19 of  
2017/ Para 
3.2Injudicious 
decision of the 
company resulted 
in loss of Rs. 36.84 
crore 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
ATNs reply 
received vide 
DDP-
25/5/2016-
D(BEL) Dt. 
27.06.2016 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 19 of 
2017 Para 3.3 
Development of 
Bharani Mark II in 
L-Band without 
customer 
requirement 
resulted in 
expenditure of Rs. 
11.45 crore being 
rendered futile 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
ATNs reply 
received vide 
DDP-
E0033/5/2023
-D(BEL) Dt. 
04.07.2024 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 19 of 
2017/ Para 3.4 
Delay in supply of 
Low Intensity 
Conflict Electronic 
Warfare System 
resulted in loss of 
Rs. 47.46 crore 
besides levy of 
liquidated 
damages of Rs. 
8.97 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
ATNs reply 
received vide 
DDP-
E0033/1/2017
-D(BEL) Dt. 
24.06.2024 
Bharat Earth 
Movers 
Limited 
Report No 19 of 
2017/ Para 3.5 
Avoidable loss of 
Rs. 9.56 crore due 
to delay in 
erection and 
commissioning of 
Walking Dragline 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
Bharat Earth 
Movers 
Limited 
Report No 19 of 
2017/ Para 3.6 
Idle investment 
due to 
procurement of 
machine wihokukt 
ensuring requires 
infrastructure 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 

65 
 
Vignyan 
Industries 
Limited 
Report No 19 of 
2017/ Para 3.8 
Avoidable loss due 
to abnormal 
rejection of steel 
casting 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
                                                                                                      2018-19 
 Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No.7 of 
2018 /Para 2.1  
Production and 
Supply of 159 
Advanced Light 
Helicopter to 
Army and Indian 
Air Force by HAL 
07.08.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06.02.2019 09.09.22 Information 
called from 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited still 
awaited. 
 
Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No 7 of 
2018/ Para 2.2 
Loss of `33.67 
crore due to non -
sustenance of 
TPE331 
Manufacturing 
Centre 
 
07.08.2018 
 
06.02.2019 11.08.22 
Revised ATN 
awaited  
 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 7 of 
2018/ Para 2.3 
Audit of 
Implementation 
of Electronic 
Warfare projects 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 7 of 
2018/ Para 2.4 
Inadequate 
assessment of 
scope of work for 
Command 
Management 
System (CMS) 
leading to a loss of 
Rs. 48.23 crore 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No  7 of 
2018/ Para 2.5 
Expansion of solar 
plant at a cost of 
Rs. 12 crore 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
ATNs reply 
received vide 
DDP-
E0033/6/2023

66 
 
despite existing 
capacity being un-
utilized 
-D(BEL) Dt. 
11.07.2024 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 7 of 
2018/ Para 2.6 
Loss in 
upgradation of 
CCTV system at 
Parliament House 
and acceptance of 
irregular contract 
clause on 
Liquidated 
damages 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 22.06.2020. Revised ATN 
awaited  
 
                                                                                                                     2019-20 –NIL 
                                                                                                                       2020-21 
 Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
Report No 12 of 
2020 / Para 2.6  
Fixation of new 
revised pay 
without 
confirming to DPE 
guidelines 
resulted in excess 
payment of 
Rs.34.58 crore   
23.09.2020 22.03.2021 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
                                                                                                                   2021-22 
 Hindustan 
Aeronautics 
Limited 
 Report No. 25 of 
2021/ Para 4.3 
Infructuous 
expenditure on 
design and 
Development of 
Mini Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles 
06.04.2022 05.10.2022 20.12.22 Pending with 
Ministry 
 
 
 Hindustan 
Shipyard 
Limited 
Report No.25 of 
2021/ Para No.4.2 
Construction of 
five Inshore Patrol 
Vessels for Indian 
Coast Guard led to 
a loss of Rs. 
200.43 crore- HSL, 
Vishakhapatnam 
06.04.2022 05.10.2022 
 
First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No.25 of 
2021/ Para 4.4 
Failure to timely 
06.04.2022 05.10.2022 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
ATNs reply 
received vide 
DDP-

67 
 
upgrade ABC 
Tanks resulted in 
extra expenditure 
to the Company 
E0033/8/2023
-D(BEL) Dt. 
25.06.2024 
Bharat 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report No 25 of 
2021/ Para 4.5 
Blocking of funds 
due to non -
receipt of full 
initial advance 
from the 
customer  
06.04.2022 05.10.2022 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
Bharat Earth 
Movers 
Limited 
Report No 25 of 
2021/ Para 4.6 
Avoidable 
expenditure of Rs. 
10.01 crore on 
supply of 41 
Surface Mine 
Clearing Systems 
to Indian Army 
 
06.04.2022 05.10.2022 First ATN 
not received 
First ATN 
not received 
 
2022-23 –NIL 
Ministry of Development of the North Eastern Region 
2010-11 to 2014-15- NIL 
                                                                                                    2015-16 
North Eastern 
Regional 
Agricultural 
Marketing 
Corporation 
Limited.  
Report No.21 of 
2015/ Para 6.1 
Misappropriation 
of cash 
31-07-2015 30.01.2016 05-05-2016 Notice sent 
for 
disclosure of 
Assets by 
Judgement 
Debtor (JD) 
next hearing 
on 
4.11.2023   
ATNs reply 
received vide 
NEC/6/2022-
O/o US 
(NEC) Dt. 
22.09.2023 
2016-17 to 2021-22 –NIL 
Ministry of Education 
-  -  - - - 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
2010-11 to 2014-15 – NIL 
2015-16 
National 
Informatics 
55 of 2015/ Para 
5.6 Irregular 
Payment of 
11.03.2016 10.09.2016 29.08.2016 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
Provisional 
ATNs reply 
received 

68 
 
Centre Service 
Inc. (NICSI) 
Project Incentive, 
Transport 
Allowance, House 
Rent Allowance 
and LTC by 
National 
Informatics 
Centre Services 
Inc to its staff 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since June 
2018. 
from CGM 
&FA 
(NICSI) Dt. 
24.10.2024 
2016-17- NIL 
2017-18 
National 
Informatics 
Centre Service 
Inc. (NICSI) 
21 of 2017/ Para 
4.4 Unfruitful 
expenditure of C 
15.54 crore on 
hiring of b uilding 
and interior fit -
outs –National 
Informatics 
Centre Services 
Inc. 
21.07.2017 20.01.2018 11.10.2017 Para is 
pending for 
want of 
further 
information 
from the 
Ministry 
since May 
2018. 
Provisional 
ATNs reply 
received 
from CGM 
&FA 
(NICSI) Dt. 
24.10.2024 
2018-19 to 2020-21 – NIL 
2021-22 
National 
Informatics 
Centre Service 
Inc. (NICSI) 
03 of 2021/ Para 
6.1 Procurement 
of hardware/ 
software items to 
the tune of ` 
890.34 crore 
through Strategic 
Alliance 
29.11.2021 28.05.2022 --  Provisional 
ATNs reply 
received 
from CGM 
&FA 
(NICSI) Dt. 
24.10.2024 
 
 
Two COPU 
meeting have 
taken place 
during 2022 
on the topic.  
COPU hearing 
was also held 
on 11.10.2022 
 
 
Ministry of Finance/Department of Financial Services 
2010-11 

69 
 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 9 of 
2009/ Para 9.3.1 
Short Collection 
of Premium in 
violation of 
IRDAI 
instructions 
05.08.2010 05.02.2011  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
“Record is 
not 
available” as 
reported. 
Report No. 10 of 
2010/Chapter 5 
Health Service 
Insurance 
05.08.2010 05.02.2011 . Details are 
being 
collected 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
19.09.2023 
2011-12 
General 
Insurance 
Corporation of 
India 
Report No. 3 of 
2011/Para No. 9.1 
IT Audit “SAP 
Reinsurance 
Module  
25.08.2011 24.02.2012 22.03.2013 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
23.11.2023 
2012-13 
New India 
Assurance 
Company 
Limited 
 Report No. 8 of 
2012/Para No. 8.4 
Investment in 
Equities 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013 16.09.2014 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
09.08.2018 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/ Para 8.5 
Undue favor 
extended to M/s. 
Paramount 
Airways Private 
Limited in 
underwriting of 
credit insurance 
policies 
04.09.2012 04.03.2013 February 
2013 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
23.11.2023 
2013-14 
SBI Cards and 
Payment 
Services 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2013/Para 9.5 
Avoidable loss 
due to short 
payment of 
Service Taxes 
08.08.2013 08.02.2014 . Details are 
being 
collected 
 
 Report No. 13 of 
2013/ Para 9.6 
Avoidable 
expenditure on 
expired cards 
08.08.2013 08.02.2014  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Report No. 13 of 
2013/Para 9.2  
Avoidable loss in 
08.08.2013 08.02.2014  Details are 
being 
collected 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 

70 
 
Company 
Limited 
Group Health 
Insurance Scheme 
on 
22.05.2018 
2014-15 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2014/ Para 9.1 IT 
Audit of 
Integrated Non -
Life Insurance 
Application 
Software 
01.08.2014 02.02.2015  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
17.12.2024 
2015-16 
India 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 21 of 
2015/Para 7.1 
Fund Management 
and Financing 
31.07.2015 31.01.2016 19.04.2016. Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN 
submitted to 
CoPU 
08.05.2018 
(Annexure I.) 
2016-17 
STCI Finance 
Limited 
Report No. 15 of 
2016 (Vol.I)/Para 
7.3 Blocking of 
funds in bad loans 
08.08.2016 07.02.2017 07.04.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 
2017-18 
Canbank 
factors limited 
 Report. No. 9 of 
2017/ Para 7.1 
Thematic Para on 
“Non-Performing 
Assets 
05/04/2017 04/06/2017 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
 
IFCI Limited Report No. 16 of 
2017-18 Credit  
Risk Management 
in IFCI Limited 
21.07.2017 21.01.2018 13.04.2022 
 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Pending. 
MoCA has 
been 
requested to 
furnish 
finally 
composite 
investigation 
report to 
DFS 
2018-19 
Cent Bank 
Home Finance 
Limited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 5.1 
Non-adherence to 
Credit Policy 
07.08.2018 07.02.2019 08.04.2022 
 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 
India 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/Para 5.3 
Doubtful recovery 
of dues 
07.08.2018 07.02.2019 Details not 
available 
Details are 
being 
collected 
ATN 
submitted to 
CoPU 
25.10.2024 

71 
 
Company 
Limited 
(Annexure 
II.) 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/Para 5.4 
Inconsistency in 
credit appraisal 
and non-
compliance with 
RBI guidelines 
07.08.2018 07.02.2019  Details are 
being 
collected 
ATN 
submitted to 
CoPU 
20.01.2021 
(Annexure 
III.) 
2019-20 
New India 
Assurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 18 of 
2019/ 
Para No. 8.10.2 
Non-achievement 
of MPS norms in 
listed CPSEs 
10.12.2019 09.06.2020 21.09.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Letter sent to 
CAG on 
06.09.2023 
for dropping 
the para. 
Vetting 
comments 
received 
from C&AG 
on 26.10.2023 
wherein 
C&AG has 
stated that 
para may be 
retained for 
further 
progress 
made by 
NIACL, in 
the 
compliance 
of MPS 
norms. 
2020-21 
IFCI Factors 
Limited 
R
e
p
o
r
t 
N
o
. 
1
8 
o
f 
2
0
2
0
/ 
P
a
09.02.2021 09.08.2021 18.05.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
ATN 
submitted to 
CoPU 
21.03.2024 
(Annexure 
IV.) 

72 
 
r
a 
5
.
1
0  
Factoring and 
Loan Services 
National 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 5.6  
Failure to collect 
motor insurance 
premium from 
discontinued 
dealer outlets 
resulted in loss of 
Rs. 16.58 crore 
09.02.2021 09.08.2021 03.11.2021 Revised 
ATNAwaite
d  
Revised ATN 
sent to CAG 
on 
12.12.2024 
 
 
 
United India 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
R
e
p
o
r
t 
N
o
. 
1
8 
o
f 
2
0
2
0
/ 
P
a
r
a 
5
.
9 
L
o
s
s 
d
u
e 
t
o 
l
e
s
s 
c
h
a
09.02.2021 09.08.2021 04.08.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
26.07.2023 

73 
 
r
g
i
n
g 
o
f 
p
r
e
m
i
u
m 
SBI Global 
Factors Ltd 
Report no.18 of 
2020/ Para No. 5.8
  Non-
liquidation of 
factoring facility 
to a client despite 
clear signs of 
incipient sickness 
leading to non -
recovery 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 18.07.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 
2021-22 
IFCI Venture 
Capital Funds 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 4.2 
Non-recovery of 
dues from 
borrowers 
21.12.2021 21.06.2022 15.09.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Pending. 
IFCI vide 
email dated 
29.08.2024 
has provided 
partial 
response.  
India 
Infrastructure 
Finance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 4.1 
Doubtful recovery 
of loan and 
interest 
21.12.2021 21.06.2022 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
ATN 
submitted to 
CoPU 
07.06.2024 
(Annexure 
V.) 
New India 
Assurance 
Company 
Limited 
 
Audit Report 14 of 
2021/Para No. 4.4 
Failure to obtain 
stop loss insurance 
cover resulted in 
loss of Rs.63.76 
crore 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 04.10.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
19.02.2024 
14 of 2021/ Para 
4.5 Short 
collection of 
premium – Rs. 
14.61 crore 
21.12.2021 21.06.2022 07.10.2022 Revised 
ATN 
awaited. 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
12.07.2023 
National 
Insurance 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 4.3  
Non-recovery of 
21.12.2021 21.06.2022 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 

74 
 
Company 
Limited 
service tax from 
other insurers 
under reinsurance 
acceptances 
on 
05.06.2023 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 4.6 
Short-collection of 
insurance 
premium 
21.12.2021 
 
21.06.2022 19.10.2022 
 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
14.02.2024 
2022-23 (upto December 2022) 
General 
Insurance 
Corporation 
Limited  
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 4.1 
Erosion of 
investments due to 
non-adherence to 
stop loss limit  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
ATN was 
sent to CAG 
on 
09.07.2024. 
Further 
inputs have 
been sought 
from GIC for 
preparing 
revised ATN. 
National 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 01 of 
2022 
Compliance Audit 
of Third -party 
administrators in 
health insurance 
business of Public 
Sector Insurance 
Companies. 
05.08.2022 04.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
was sent to 
CAG on 
08.12.2023. 
Further 
inputs have 
been sought 
from PSGICs 
for preparing 
revised ATN. 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 4.2 
Loss of input tax 
credit against 
Goods and 
Service Tax 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
02.04.2024 
New India 
Assurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 4.3 
Short charging of 
motor insurance 
premium  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Revised ATN 
sent to CAG 
on 
04.11.2024 
Report No. 01 of 
2022 
Compliance Audit 
of Third -party 
administrators in 
health insurance 
business of Public 
Sector Insurance 
Companies. 
05.08.2022 04.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 

75 
 
The Oriental 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 4.3 
Short charging of 
motor insurance 
premium  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 
Report No. 01 of 
2022 Compliance 
Audit of Third 
party 
administrators in 
health insurance 
business of Public 
Sector Insurance 
Companies. 
05.08.2022 04.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 
United India 
Insurance 
Company 
Limited 
33 of 2022/ Para 
4.4 Avoidable loss 
due to failure to 
exit from equity 
shares as per 
Investment Policy  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Vetted ATN 
sent to CoPU 
on 
07.05.2024 
Report No. 01 of 
2022 Compliance 
Audit of Third -
party 
administrators in 
health insurance 
business of Public 
Sector Insurance 
Companies. 
05.08.2022 04.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries 
2010-11 to 2014-15 –NIL 
2015-16 
Hindustan 
Paper 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report 
No.21/2015 / 
(Vol-II)Para 1.7 
Idle investment  
 
31.07.2015 27.06.2016 23.06.2016 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
dropped as 
informed by 
OM dated 
24.08.2023  
Sambhar Salts 
Limited 
Report No. 21 of 
2015 (Vol. 
II)/Para 1.8 
Unfruitful 
investment in salt 
refinery 
31.07.2015 31.01.2016 23.05.2016 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN reply 
on 
08.08.2024 as 
Annexure I 
provided 
2016-17-NIL 
2017-18 

76 
 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals 
Limited 
PA Report 29 of 
2017-18 
Competitiveness 
of BHEL in 
Emerging Market 
08.08.2017 04.02.2018 15.06.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
2018-19- NIL 
2019-20 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals 
Limited 
Report  No. 13 of 
2019/Para 4.1 
Undue benefit to 
employees 
towards Late 
Night Snacks 
Allowance 
25/11/2019 24/05/2020 08/06/2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
2020-21 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals 
Limited 
Report 18 of 2020 
/Para 6.1 
Compliance on 
loss due to non -
performance 
under a contract 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 30.03.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
Heavy 
Engineering 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para No.6.3 
Land and 
Township 
Management 
(HEC) 
09-02-2021 09/08/2021 13-09-2022 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
presently sub 
judiciary, 
High Court of 
Jharkhand  
Tungbhadra 
steel products 
limited 
Report. No. 18 of 
2020/Para.6.4 
Avoidable 
payment of 
income tax 
09/02/2021 08/08/2021 28/02/2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
2021-22 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals 
Limited 
Report 14 of 2021/ 
Para 5.1 
Avoidable loss of 
Rs.13.69 crore due 
to laxities in 
supply of 
ACEMU Traction 
Electrics Multiple 
Unit  
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 31.05.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 5.2 
Non-safeguarding 
of financial 
interest resulted in 
21/12/2021 20/06/2022 17/01/2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 

77 
 
additional burden 
towards payment 
of safeguard duty 
Heavy 
Engineering 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 5.3 
Loss due to failure 
of Heavy 
Engineering 
Corporation 
Limited to ensure 
guaranteed 
availability of 
draglines14 
21-12-2021 21/6/2022 13-09-2022 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN reply 
on 
20.10.2023 as 
Annexure I 
provided  
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 5.4 
Infructuous 
expenditure on 
technical audit -
HEC 
21-12-2021 21/6/2022 13-09-2022 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN reply 
on 
20.10.2023 as 
Annexure I 
provided 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
2018-19 
DNH Power 
Distribution 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No.3 of 
2018/ Para.4.1 
Purchase and Sale 
of Power by DNH 
Power 
Distribution 
Corporation 
Limited.  
05.04.2018 04.10.2018 26.10.2018 Vetting 
comments 
on the 
Managemen
t’s ATN 
dated 
27.11.2019 
were sent to 
MAB-IV’s  
Mumbai 
branch 
office. 
Further 
action on the 
ATN is not 
traceable 
due to non -
availability 
of records.  
ATN reply 
awaited   
                                                                                        Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
                                                                                                      2010-11 to 2019-20 – NIL 
                                                                                                                       2020-21 
National 
Building 
construction 
Corporation 
Report no. 18 of 
2020/ Para 7.1 
Unauthorised 
payment to 
employees 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 02.08.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Provisional 
ATN reply 
from CPSE 
received 
15.05.2024  
                                                                                                                      2021-22 
Delhi Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
Report No. 11 of 
2021 Performance 
Audit on 
“Implementation 
02.12.2021 01.06.2022 First ATN 
Awaited  
First ATN 
Awaited  
 

78 
 
of Phase-III, Delhi 
Mass Rapid 
Transit System” 
                                                                                                        2022-23 (Upto December 2022) 
Chennai Metro 
Rail Limited 
33 of 2022/ Para 
6.1 
Avoidable 
payment of 
compensation 
charges - Chennai 
Metro Rail 
Limited 
21-12-2022 20-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 
Maharashtra 
Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 34 of 
2022 Performance 
Audit on 
implementation of 
Nagpur metro rail 
project by 
Maharashtra 
Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Limited 
21.12.2022 20.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited  
First ATN 
Awaited  
 
Ministry of Mines 
2010-11 
Bharat Gold 
Mines Limited 
 Report. No. 9 of 
2009/Para 12.1 
Inept handling of 
estate 
05/08/2010 04/02/2010 01/04/2014 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN reply 
vetted by 
C&AG and 
observations 
incorporated 
in ATN   
2011-12- NIL 
2012-13 
National 
Aluminium 
Company 
Limited 
 
Report No.8 of 
2012/ Para 10.2 
Avoidable loss 
due to 
continuation of 
uneconomical 
operation of 
Special Grade 
Alumina plant 
04.08.2012 03.03.2013 04.08.2013 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
avoidable 
loss due to 
continuation   
Report No.8 of 
2012/Para 10.1 
Second Phase 
Capacity 
Expansion 
04.09.2012 03.03.2013 08.04.2013 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
 
2013-14- NIL 

79 
 
2014-15 
National 
Aluminium 
Company 
Limited 
Report No.13 of 
2013/ Para 13.1 
Irregular payment 
towards 
encashment of 
Half Pay 
Leave/Sick 
Leave/Earned 
Leave as well as 
employers share of 
EPF contribution 
on leave. 
01.08.2014 28.01.2015 13.07.2018 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
on irregular 
payment  
2015-16 to 2017-18 – NIL 
2018-19 
Hindustan 
Copper 
Limited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 8.1 
Avoidable 
expenditure due to 
deficient contract 
clause 
07.08.2018 03.02.2019 15.03.2019 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN reply 
vetted by 
C&AG and 
observations 
incorporated 
in ATN   
2019-20 
National 
Aluminum 
Company 
Limited 
Report No.6 of 
2019   PA on 
Operational 
Performance and 
Productivity of the 
Refinery and 
Smelter Plants of 
NALCO 
17.07.2019 13.01.2020 18.09.2020 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Action taken 
by the 
management  
2020-21- NIL 
2021-22 
Hindustan 
Copper 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 6.1 
Unfruitful 
expenditure 
towards 
construction of 
Copper Ore 
Tailings 
Beneficiation 
Plant 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 
 First ATN 
Awaited 
 ATN sent to 
CAG on 
14.07.2023  
with a 
request to 
drop the 
audit para. 
Reply 
awaited from 
CAG 
National 
Aluminium 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 6.2 
Avoidable 
expenditure 
towards stamp 
duty and 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 
 First ATN 
Awaited 
 First ATN 
Awaited 
Action taken 
by NALCO  

80 
 
registration fee for 
Mining Lease. 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
2010-11 to 2011-12 –NIL 
2012-13 
National 
Minority 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/ Para 9.4 
Fund management 
in Government 
Companies 
incorporated U/s  
25 of Companies 
Act ,1956 
04-09-2012 03.03.2012 20-05-2014 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Provisional 
ATN reply 
from CPSE 
received 
16.05.2024 
2013-14 to 2021-22 –NIL 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
2010-11 to 2019-20 –NIL 
2020-21 
Karnataka 
Solar Power 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited  
Report No. 6 of 
2020/ Para 13.1  
Non availing of 
CENVAT credit in 
time on 
inputs/capital 
goods procured 
23.09.2020 22.03.2021 First ATN 
yet to be 
received  
Reply sent 
to CAG on 
04.06.2021 
With a 
Request of 
deletion of 
Para from 
account of 
MNRE as 
KSPDCL is 
joint venture 
formed by 
KREDL 
working 
under 
Energy 
Department 
of Karnataka 
Govt. 
Report No. 6 of 
2020/Para 13.2 - 
Payment of tax 
deducted at source 
(TDS) on behalf of 
land owners. 
23.09.2020 
 
22.03.2021 First ATN 
yet to be 
received  
Reply sent 
to CAG on 
15.06.2021 
With a 
Request of 
deletion of 
Para from 
account of 
MNRE as 
KSPDCL is 
joint venture 
formed by 
KREDL 
working 
under 
Energy 
Department 

81 
 
of Karnataka 
Govt. 
2021-22- NIL 
 
 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
2010-11 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No 3 of 
2010/ Para 14.1 
Payment of 
perquisite tax for 
providing housing 
accommodations 
to the employees’ 
ultra-virus the 
power of the 
Board-HPCL & 
ONGC 
23.08.2011 
 
22.02.2012 13.04.2012 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
No Para in 
Report No 03 
of 2010  
2011-12 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report 
No.3/2011/Para 
12.4 
Early payment of 
Running Account 
bills before due 
date – Loss of 
interest/IOCL, by 
releasing ‘On 
account’ payments 
earlier than the 
due date to the 
contractors of 
lumpsum turnkey 
contracts, incurred 
a loss of Rs. 5.37 
crore 
23.08.2011 22.02.2012 Not received ATN 
Awaited 
 
Oil India 
Limited 
Report No 3 of 
2011/ Para 14.1  
Non-recovery of 
perquisite tax (Oil 
India Limited 
(OIL) -Rs. 29.11 
crore) 
25.08.2011 25.02.2012 15.05.2012 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
1st ATN -
13.04.2012 
2nd ATN-
27.08.2012 
3rd ATN -
19.01.2017 
2012-13- NIL 
2013-14 

82 
 
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report  No. 13 of 
2013/ Para 
12.1Irregular 
payment towards 
encashment Half 
Pay Leave and 
Sick Leave  
08/08/2013 07/02/2014 01/03/2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
27.01.2017. 
C&AG 
returned the 
ATN for 
compliance. 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 
Mangalore 
Refinery and 
Petrochemical
s Limited 
13 of 2013 -14/ 
Para 12.1Irregular 
payment towards 
encashment of 
HPL and sick 
leave 
08-08-2013 08-02-2014 27.05.2014 Revised 
ATN 
awaited. 
Last ATN 
sent to 
C&AG on 
29/08/20218 
reply from 
C&AG is 
pending. 
Pending with 
C&AG 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No 3 of 
2012/ Para 10.8 
Loss due to award 
of contract to an 
incompetent party 
based on forged 
documents- 
 
08.08.2013 07.02.2014 13.11.2014 Remarks 
sent to 
Ministry on 
01.07.19. 
Case is sub 
judice 
1st ATN sent 
to C&AG on 
18.01.2012. 
Matter is sub 
judice 
Report No 3 of 
2012/ Para 10.9 
Non receipt of 
credit and loss of 
interest due to 
delay in 
installation of 
interest due to 
delay in 
installation of 
ABT meters  
08.08.2013 07.02.2012 18.01.2014 Remarks 
sent to 
Ministry on 
17.09.20. 
Case is sub 
judice 
1st ATN sent 
to C&AG on 
19.01.2012. 
Matter is sub 
judice  
2014-15 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No.21of  
2015/ Para 8.1 
Irregular payment 
towards 
encashment of 
Half Pay 
Leave/Earned 
Leave/Sick Leave 
as well as 
employer’s share 
of EPF 
30.07.2015 
 
01.01.2016 14.02.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
C&AG 
returned the 
ATN fo r 
compliance. 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 

83 
 
contribution on 
leave encashment 
2015-16 
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No.21 of 
2015/Para 8.1 
Irregular payment 
towards 
encashment of 
Half Pay 
Leave/Earned 
Leave/Sick Leave 
as well as 
employer’s share 
of EPF 
contribution on 
leave encashment 
30.07.2015 
 
01.01.2016 14.02.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
C&AG 
returned the 
ATN for 
compliance. 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 
Oil India 
Limited 
PA Report No. 42 
of 2015 
Performance 
Audit on 
Hydrocarbon 
Exploration 
Efforts of Oil 
India Limited, 
Union 
Government, 
Ministry of 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
09.12.2015 09.06.2015 03.03.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Last ATN on 
vetting 
remarks of 
C&AG dated 
17.06.2022 
sent to 
C&AG on 
06.06.2023. 
No further 
remarks 
received 
from C&AG. 
Pending with 
C&AG. 
2016-17 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No. 15 of 
2016 (Vol -II)/ 
Para 1.1 Extension 
of credit facility to 
a defaulter 
company without 
security led to 
non-recovery of 
sales revenues 
amounting to Rs. 
23.50 crore 
   Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
sent on 
04.09.2019 
which was 
returned by 
C&AG 
matter is sub 
judice. 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No.15 of 
2016 (Vol II)/Para 
1.6 Undue benefit 
extended to the 
executives in the 
form of shift 
allowance 
08.08.2016 04.02.2017  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
C&AG 
returned the 
ATN for 
compliance. 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 

84 
 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 1.7 
Delay in appraisal 
and non -
monetization of 
the discoveries in 
KG DWN 98/2 
block  
05.08.2016 
 
04.02.2014  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
31.12.2020 
vetting 
remarks is 
awaited from 
C&AG. 
Pending with 
C&AG 
Report No15 of 
2016 Para 1.8 
Non-achievement 
of objective of 
enquiring Coal 
Bed Methane 
Blocks 
05.08.2016 
 
04.02.2017 08.05.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
18.02.2020 
vetting 
remarks is 
awaited from 
C&AG. 
Pending with 
C&AG 
2017-18 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report 
No9/2017/Para 
18.2 Undue 
benefit extended 
to the executives 
in the form of shift 
allowance           
05.04.2017 04.10.2017  
25.09.2017 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
1st ATN sent 
to C&AG 
vide letter 
dated 
18.09.2017. 
BPCL kept 
payment of 
shift 
allowance on 
hold 
w.e.f.01.12.20
18. Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN 
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No.9 of 
2017/Para 10.3 
Additional burden 
on RGGLV 
consumers due to 
incorrect 
declaration of 
Retail Selling 
Price of LPG 
05.04.2017 02.10.2017 28.12.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Vetting 
remarks 
received 
from C&AG 
vide letter 
dated 
18.02.2021. 
Para has 
been settled.  
Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para18.2 
Undue benefit 
extended to the 
executives in the 
form of shift 
allowance           
05.04.2017 04.10.2017  
25.09.2017 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
1st ATN sent 
to C&AG 
vide letter 
dated 
18.09.2017. 
HPCL has 
kept 
payment of 

85 
 
shift 
allowance on 
hold 
w.e.f.01.12.20
18. Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 
Mangalore 
Refinery and 
Petrochemical
s Limited 
PA Report No. 33 
of 2017 
Performance 
Audit on 
Implementation of 
Phase 3 project in 
MRPL 
02-08-2017 
 
02-02-2018 
 
02.11.2018 Revised 
ATN 
awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
02.11.2018 
vetting 
remarks is 
awaited from 
C&AG. 
Pending with 
C&AG 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No 9 of 
2017/ Para 10.7 
Supply of gas 
without security 
deposit resulted in 
non-recovery from 
customers 
 
05.04.2017 04.10.2017  Revised 
ATN 
awaited 
5 ATN -
27.01.2020 
vetting 
remark 
received 
from C&AG. 
Matter is 
under 
examination. 
Para 
Unsettled   
Report No.15 of 
2017/ Para 10.9 
Failure to obtain 
the share of cost of 
Immediate 
Support Vessels 
purchased by 
ONGC for 
security of 
offshore assets 
from private 
Exploration & 
Production 
05.04.2017 04.10.2017  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
Unsettled. 
Reply 
received 
from ONGC 
on 11.02.2022 
is under 
examination  
2018-19 
Balmer Lawrie 
Co. Ltd 
Report 
No.11of2018 
/Para.9.1 
Inadequate due 
diligence resulting 
in non-recovery of 
dues 
07.08.2018 03.02.2019  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
1st ATN -
12.12.2018  
2nd ATN -
25.06.2019 
Matter is sub 
judice Para 
Unsettled  

86 
 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No 11 of 
2018/Para 9.2 
Irregular payment 
to employees in 
contravention of 
DPE Guidelines 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 21.01.2019 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Received 
ATN sent on 
05.01.2022 
vetting 
remark is 
awaited from 
C&AG  
 
 
 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No.11 of 
2018-19/Para 9.8 
Irregular payment 
to theexecutives in 
the form ofProject 
Allowance 
07.08.2018 03.02.2019  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN. 
Para 
Unsettled. 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No.11 of 
2018/ Para 9.11 
Failure to recover 
the pending cash 
calls and loss of 
interest thereon    
 
07.08.2018 06.02.2019 14.12.2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
27.01.2020 
vetting 
remarks is 
awaited from 
C&AG. Para 
Unsettled  
2019-20 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No 13 of 
2019/Para 6.1 
Irregular 
expenditure on 
employees under 
long service award 
scheme in 
contravention of 
Ministry’s 
guidelines 
25.11.2019 24.05.2020 16.12.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN 
Para 
Unsettled  
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 6.3 
Additional 
expenditure due to 
non-utilisation of 
pipeline in 
economical 
manner 
25/11/2019 24/05/2020 15/05/2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN was 
sent to 
C&AG is still 
awaited Para 
Unsettled  
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No 13 of 
2019/Para 6.1 
Irregular 
expenditure on 
employees under 
long service award 
25.11.2019 24.05.2020 16.12.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
revised ATN 

87 
 
scheme in 
contravention of 
Ministry’s 
guidelines 
Para 
Unsettled 
Report No.13 of 
2019/Para 6.5 
Unjust burden of 
avoidable entry 
tax on the 
consumer 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 22.09.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
No 
corresponden
ce received 
from C&AG 
on 31/03/2023 
Numaligarh 
Refinery 
Limited 
 
Report No.13 of 
2019 /Para 6.8 
Undue benefit to 
the executive in 
the form of 
running and 
maintenance  
expenses of 
vehicles 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 18.06.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Vetting 
remarks is 
awaited from 
C&AG. Para 
Unsettled  
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No.7 of 
2019 PA on 
Marine Logistics 
Operations 
 
17.07.2019 16.01.2020 09.10.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
Dropped. 
Finaly copy’s 
sent to CoPU 
on 11.08.2023 
Report No.13 of 
2019/ Para 6.10 
Avoidable 
payment of 
equipment 
standby rental  
 
25.11.2019 24.05.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
20.03.2020. 
Vetting 
remark is 
awaited. 
Para 
Unsettled   
2020-21 
Brahmaputra 
Cracker & 
Polymer 
Limited 
Report No.18 of 
2020 /Para 9.1 
Irregular payment 
of Performance 
Related Pay 
 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 28.11.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
1st ATN -
14.11.2021  
2nd ATN -
28.06.2023 
File is 
current 
under 
examination. 
 Para 
Unsettled 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No.13 of 
2021/ Para 9.2 
Follow up IT 
Audit of the 
Financial and 
Controlling 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Vetting 
remark 
awaited from 
C&AG Para 
Unsettled  

88 
 
(FICO) modules -
ONGC 
 
2021-22 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No.14 of 
2021/Para 2.2 
Non-adherence to 
statutory 
requirement of 
pollution 
clearance resulted 
in infructuous 
expenditure 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 21.11.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
File is under 
approval for 
fresh ATN to 
C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled  
Numaligarh 
Refinery 
Limited 
 
Report No.14 of 
2021/Para 2.3 Idle 
investment 
towards 
installation of 
Napth Splitter 
Unit 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 14.06.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Vetting 
remarks 
received 
from C&AG 
vide letter Dt. 
21.06.2023. 
Reply from 
NRL 
awaited. 
Para 
Unsettled  
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No.14 of 
2021/ Para 2.6 
Avoidable extra 
expenditure of Rs. 
21.56 crore due to 
delay in 
procurement of 
casing pipes 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 23.08.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
Dropped. 
Final copies 
sent to CoPU 
on 
25.08.2023.  
Report No.14 of 
2021/ Para 2.4 
Loss due to flaring 
of high -pressure 
gas 
 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 17.10.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
1st ATN -
17.10.2022  
2nd ATN -
29.03.2023 
Vetting 
remarks 
received 
from C&AG 
and 
forwarded to 
ONGC. 
 
ONGCVidesh 
Limited 
Report 14 of 2021 
/Para 2.10 
Undue benefit 
extended to 
private parties by 
awarding work in 
violation of CVC 
guidelines 
21-12-2021 19-06-2022 15-11-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited   
1st ATN -
15.11.2022  
2nd ATN -
27.06.2023 
Vetting 
remarks 
awaited from 
C&AG. 
2022-23 (upto December 2022) 

89 
 
Bharat 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 2.1 
Avoidable 
expenditure of Rs. 
16.93 crore due to 
delay in renewal 
of lease 
21.12.2022 19.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
 para 
Unsettled  
Report No. 13 of 
2022 PA on 
supply logistics 
operations of MS, 
HSD & LPG in oil 
marketing 
companies  
. 
22.12.2022 21.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
para 
Unsettled 
Chennai 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No.33 of 
2022/ Para 2.2 
Irregular payment 
to employees in 
contravention of 
DPE guidelines  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
para 
Unsettled 
GAIL (India) 
Limited 
Report No.  33 of 
2022/ Para 2.3 
Undue benefit to 
the executives in 
the form of 
payment of 
running and 
maintenance 
expenses of 
vehicles 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
para 
Unsettled 
Hindustan 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2022 PA on 
supply logistics 
operations of MS, 
HSD & LPG in oil 
marketing 
companies  
22.12.2022 21.06.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
ATN 
Awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
para 
Unsettled 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.5  
Infructuous 
expenditure on 
creation of 
propylene 
handling facilities  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Pending for 
submission of 
ATN to 
C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled  
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.6 
Opportunity 
forgone to 
conserve energy  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
para 
Unsettled 
HPCL Bio 
fuels limited 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.4 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
1st ATN -
14.07.2023 

90 
 
Loss due to non -
realisation of 
export subsidy 
vetting 
remarks 
from C&AG 
awaited.  
Para 
Unsettled 
 
Oil India 
Limited 
 Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.9 
Imprudent 
decision making in 
finalisation of 
tender for sale of 
condensate 
resulted in short 
realisation of 
revenue 
21.12.2022 21.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
1st ATN -
19.04.2023 
vetting 
remarks 
received 
from C&AG   
The same 
forwarded to 
OIL for 
comments.  
 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
 
Report No. 13 of 
2022 PA on 
supply logistics 
operations of MS, 
HSD & LPG in oil 
marketing 
companies. 
22.12.2022 21.06.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Pending for 
submission of 
ATN to 
C&AG. 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.3 
Undue benefit to 
the executives in 
the form of 
payment of 
running and 
maintenance 
expenses of 
vehicles 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN.  
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.7 
Infructuous 
expenditure of Rs. 
145 crore due to 
participation  in a 
low hydrocarbon 
and risky 
exploration & 
production  block 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Matter is 
under 
examination 
for sending 
ATN. 
Oil and 
Natural Gas 
Corporation 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.3 
Undue benefit to 
the executives in 
the form of 
payment of 
running and 
maintenance 
expenses of 
vehicles 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
New para 
received on 
09.02.2023 
file is 
submitted for 
approval of 
competent 
authority.    

91 
 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.8 
Avoidable 
expenditure on 
unviable NELP 
blocks after their 
relinquishment   
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
New para 
received on 
09.02.2023 
file is 
submitted for 
approval of 
competent 
authority.    
ONGC Videsh 
Limited  
Report No. 33 of 
2022/ Para 2.3 
Undue benefit to 
the executives in 
the form of 
payment of 
running and 
maintenance 
expenses of 
vehicles 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
ATN sent to 
C&AG on 
28.06.2023. 
pending with 
C&AG. 
Ministry of Power 
2010-11 to 2013-14-NIL 
2014-15 
THDC India 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2014/ Para 13.1 
Irregular payment 
towards 
employer's share 
of EPF 
Contribution on 
leave encashment   
01.08.2014 28.01.2015 10.11.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Settled on 
07.02.2023 
Para Settled 
2015-16 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
Report No. 
22/2015 PA 
Capacity 
expansion in 
respect of Power 
Generation in 
DVC 
06.08.2015 02.02.2016 05.08.2016 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para Settled 
2016-17- NIL 
2017-18 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para 11.3 
Water Resource 
Management 
05.04.2017 02.10.2017 27.09.2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para Settled 
 
 
 
2018-19 

92 
 
NTPC-SAIL 
Power 
Company 
Limited  
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 10.2  
Extra expenditure 
on water by 
NSPCL, Bhilai 
07-08-2018 07/02/2019 14-08-2019 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Settled on 
16.04.2024 
Para Settled 
2019-20 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
Report No.13 of 
2019/ Para 7.2 
Imprudent 
decision to 
implement RTPS -
II 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020 03.11.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
11.04.2022 
Para Settled 
Report No.13 of 
2019/ Para 7.3 
Avoidable loss  
due to non -
recovery of fixed 
charges 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020 03.08.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
26.10.2022 
Para Settled 
Report No.13 of 
2019/ Para 7.4 
Imprudent 
decision to 
relocate Research 
and Development 
Centre led to 
idling of high end 
equipment 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020 03.08.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
30.05.2023 
Para Settled 
Report No.13 of 
2019/ Para 7.1 
Marketing of 
Power 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020 08.03.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
26.10.2022 
Para Settled 
NTPC-SAIL 
Power 
Company 
Limited 
(NSPCL) 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 7.6 
Irregular payment 
to executives in 
contravention of 
DPE guidelines 
25-11-2019 25/05/2020 07-04-2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Para 
Unsettled 
Power Finance 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report 13 of 2019/ 
Para 7.8 
Irregular payment 
of the allowances 
and perks beyond 
admissible ceiling 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 15.03.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Para 
Unsettled 
REC Limited Report 13 of 
2019/Para 7.8 
Irregular payment 
of the allowances 
25.11.2019 23.05.2019 26.08.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Para 
Unsettled 
 
 

93 
 
and perks beyond 
admissible ceiling 
 
 
 
THDC India 
Limited 
Report 13 of 2019/ 
Para 7.9 
Irregular Payment 
of Pre requisites 
beyond the ceiling 
limit fixed by the 
DPE  
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 23.12.2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Para 
Unsettled 
2020-21 
NTPC-SAIL 
Power 
Company 
Limited 
(NSPCL) 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 10.2 
Undue favour by 
NSPCL in award 
of contracts on 
nomination basis 
09-02-2021 09/08/2021 24-11-2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Settled on 
17.11.2023  
Para Settled 
Power Grid 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
PA Report 9 of 
2020  
Performance 
Audit on Planning 
and 
Implementation of 
Transmission 
projects by Power 
Grid Corporation 
of India Limited    
18.09.2020 17.03.2021 08.03.2021 Ministry of 
Power 
comment - 
Agreed with 
Reply –  
With 
Request that 
Para may be 
dropped/sett
le sent to 
CAG on 
09.05.2023 
Para Settled 
2021-22 
NHPC 
Limited 
Report 14 of 2021/ 
Para 3.1  Undue 
benefit to the 
contractor - NHPC 
Limited 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022 02.09.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Settled on 
29.02.2024  
Para Settled 
2022-23 (Upto December 2022) 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
Report No.33 of 
2022/Para 3.1 
Loss due to non -
compliance to 
statutory 
requirement 
22.12.2022 19.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
16.01.2024  
Para Settled 
Report No.9 of 
2022/ Para 2.1 
Fuel Management 
in DVC 
2.08.2022 1.02.2022 02.09.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
Unsettled 

94 
 
Kanti Bijlee 
Utpadam 
Nigam 
Limited  
Report No. 9 of 
2022/ Para 1.1 
Operational 
performance of 
Kanti Bijlee 
Utpadam Nigam  
Limited 
2.08.2022 1.02.2022 07.09.2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
16.01.2024  
Para Settled 
Nabinagar 
Power 
Generating 
Company 
Limited 
Report No.33 of 
2022/Para 3.2 
Avoidable 
expenditure of Rs. 
85.35 crore 
 
22.12.2022 19.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Para 
Unsettled 
Power Grid 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
CA Report 9 of 
2022 Srinagar Leh 
Transmission 
Limited  
2.08.2022 1.02.2022 28.10.2022 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
30.05.2023 
to settle of 
Audit para 
 Para 
Unsettled  
NHPC 
Limited 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 3.3 
Loss of Rs.13.09 
crore by NHPC 
22.12.2022 19.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Settled on 
29.01.2024  
Para Settled 
Report No. 33 of 
2022/Para 3.4 
Infructous 
expenditure on gas 
conversion  
22.12.2022 19.06.2023 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
 
Ministry of Railways 
2022-23 
Container 
Corporation of 
India Ltd. 
Report No. 22 of 
2021/ Para 3.18 
Imprudent 
decision of opting 
for Freight 
Advance Scheme 
resulted into loss 
of interest 
5-4-2022 04.10.2022 13-7-2022 Further 
Audit 
Comment 
on  sent on 
02/11/22 
Finalised on 
25.08.2023. 
Para Settled 
Report No. 22 of 
2021/ Para 3.19 
Unauthorised 
payment of 
additional 
increments to 
employees 
5-4-2022 04.10.2022 Not received Not received 
from 
Ministry Finalised on 
24.08.2023. 
Para Settled 
Rail Vikas 
Nigam Ltd. 
Report No. 22 of 
2021/ Para 3.20 
Avoidable 
expenditure in 
violation of 
Department of 
Public Enterprises 
guidelines 
5-4-2022 04.10.2022 Not  
received 
Not received 
from 
Ministry Finalised on 
28.06.2023. 
Para Settled 

95 
 
RITES Ltd. Report No. 22 of 
2021/Para 3.22 
Irregular payment 
of allowances 
5-4-2022 04.10.2022 3-8-2022 Pending 
with Zonal 
Railway 
Audit Office 
Finalised on 
23.02.2023. 
Para Settled 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
2010-11 to 2015-16 –NIL 
2016-17 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.1 
Undue benefit to 
the concessionaire 
(PIU-Begusarari) 
08-08-2016 08/02/2017 21-11-2017 
Action 
Pending 
with NHAI 
(Arbitration 
case) 
Action 
Pending with 
NHAI 
(Arbitration 
case) 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 2.2 
Undue benefit of 
Rs.47.05 crore 
extended by NHAI 
to the 
concessionaire 
relating to 
Hazaribagh-
Ranchi section of 
NH 33 
08-08-2016 08/02/2017 08-08-2017 
Dropped on 
6.10.2017 
no action 
required 
Dropped 
Report No. 15 of 
2016 / Para 2.3 
Undue benefit to 
the concessionaire 
(PIU-Darbhanga) 
08-08-2016 08/02/2017 19-12-2017 
Dropped on 
31.10.2022 
no action 
required 
Dropped 
2017-18 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
 Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para 12.1 
Undue benefit to 
the concessionaire 
resulted in 
accumulation of 
dues 
05/04/2017 04/06/2017 27/12/2017 Action 
pending 
with NHAI 
Action 
pending with 
NHAI 
2018-19 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
ReportNo.11/2018
/Para 11.4 Excess 
payment of bonus 
to Concessionaire 
07.08.2018 03.02.2019 21.03.2022 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
18.06.2023 
CAG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/Para 11.5 
Loss of interest on 
toll revenue due to 
delay in delinking 
of road stretch 
07/08/2018 06/02/2019 19/10/2020 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
03.02.2022 
CAG reply 
awaited 

96 
 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 11.6 
Non recovery of 
damage claims of 
Rs.24.74 crore 
from the 
concessionaire of 
Patna-Bakhtiyar 
BOT (Toll) 
Project 
07-08-2018 07/02/2019 30-11-2021 
Dropped on 
17.03.22 
Dropped 
2019-20 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 8.1 
Extending undue 
benefit to the 
concessionaire in 
fixing the 
appointed date 
resulted in a loss 
of Rs. 93.78 crore 
to NHAI for 
Jammu-
Udhampur 
Project. 
25.11.2019 23.05.2020 24.05.2021 Dropped on 
27.06.2023 
Dropped 
 Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 8.3 
Undue financial 
benefit to the 
concessionaire on 
account of 
payment of early 
completion bonus 
amounting to 
Rs.14.08 cr. By 
NHAI, Begusarai 
25-11-2019 25/05/2019 03-11-2021 
Reply sent 
to CAG 
27/06/2023 
CAG reply 
awaited 
2020-21 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 11.1 
Improper contract 
management by 
National 
Highways 
Authority of India 
(Kappalur, TNSC) 
07-02-2021 07-08-2021 07-02-2022 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
7.2.2023 
CAG reply 
awaited 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 11.2 
Undue Benefit of 
Rs. 14.53 crores to 
contractors by 
providing advance 
at lower rates (6 -
lane Eastern 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 16.06.2021 Dropped on 
27.6.2023 
no action 
required 
Dropped on 
27.6.2023 no 
action 
required 

97 
 
Peripheral 
Express. 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 11.4 
Short remittance 
of additional 
concession fee 
09.02.2021 08.08.2021 03.02.2022 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
04.02.22 
CAG reply 
awaited 
2021-22 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 10.1  
Retention of 
extraneous clause 
in Concession 
Agreements of 
four laning BOT 
(Toll) Projects. 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 31.05.2022 Action 
pending 
with 
Highways  
Action 
pending with 
Highways  
 Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 10.2  
Undue benefit of 
Rs. 11.83 crore to 
concessionaire by 
resorting to post 
contract 
modification 
against CVC 
Guidelines 
21.12.2021 20.06.2022 03.06.2022 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
3.6.2022  
CAG reply 
awaited 
2022-23 (upto December 2022) 
National 
Highways 
Authority of 
India 
Report no. 33 of 
2022/ Para 7.1 
Inability of NHAI 
to recover 
damages of 
Rs.693.24 crore 
from the 
concessionaire 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
Action 
Pending 
with NHAI 
Action 
Pending with 
NHAI 
Report no. 33 of 
2022/ Para 7.2 
Loss of toll 
revenue 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
Action 
Pending 
with NHAI 
Action 
Pending with 
NHAI 
Report no. 33 of 
2022/ Para 
7.3Doubtful 
recovery of toll 
charges due to 
non-enforcement 
of contractual 
provisions 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
Action 
Pending 
with NHAI 
Action 
Pending with 
NHAI 

98 
 
Report no. 11 of 
2022Compliance 
Audit on 
Rationalisation/de
ferment of 
premium in BOT 
projects by NHAI 
04.08.2022 03.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
 
Ministry of Science and Technology 
2010-11 to 2013-14 –NIL 
2014-15 
Central 
Electronics 
Limited 
 Report no 13 of 
2014/- Para. 15.1 
Violation of CVC 
guidelines and 
extra expenditure 
for the purchase 
of Silicon wafers.  
01.08.2014 31.01.2015 22.07.2015 No change 
CVC 
required 
No change 
CVC 
required 
                                                                                                               2015-16 –NIL 
                                                                                                                  2016-17 
Central 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report no 15 of 
2016 /Para no 3.1 
Unproductive 
expenditure on 
upscaling of 
operations 
08.08.2016 07.02.2017 23.07.2020  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
Revised ATN 
submitted to 
dropping the 
Para. Dt. 
09.10.2023. 
                                                                                                               2017-18 
Central 
Electronics 
Limited 
Report no 9 of 
2017 /Para no 
13.1 Infructuous 
Expenditure of 
Rs. 20.21 crores 
on integrated 
security system at 
Old Delhi 
Railway Station 
05.04.2017 04-10.2017 23.07.2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
Revised ATN 
submitted to 
dropping the 
Para. Dt. 
09.10.2023. 
2018-19 to 2021-22- NIL 
Ministry of Port, Shipping and Waterways 
2010-11 to 2013-14-NIL 
2014-15 
Sethusamudrm 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2014/ Para 16.1 
Sethusamudram 
Ship Channel 
Project 
01-08-2014 01-02-2015 August 2016 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
 

99 
 
2015-16 
Inland 
Waterways 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/ Para 4.1 
Review of status 
of utilization of 
infrastructure 
facilities 
08.08.2016 07.02.2017  Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
 
2016-17- NIL 
2017-18 
Dredging 
corporation of 
India limited 
Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para 14.1 
Thematic Para on 
“Operation and 
Maintenance of 
Dredgers” 
05/04/2017 04/06/2017 26/06/2018 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
Comment of 
Ministry sent 
to Dredging 
corporation 
of India 
limited on 
03.07.2024. 
ATN reply 
sent to CoPU 
The Shipping 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
Report No.  9 of 
2017/Para 14.2 
Failure of the 
Management to 
restore the interest 
payment clause 
deleted by SBI 
while renewing 
the bank 
guarantees 
resulted in loss of 
interest of Rs. 
19.24 crore  
05.04.2017 04.10.2017 25.09.2017 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
Closed. Dt. 
10.11.2020  
Report No.  9 of 
2017/Para 14.3 
Management of 
Agency 
Agreements 
05.04.2017 04.10.2017 26.04.2017 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
Further 
comments 
sent to 
Ministry 
from SCI to 
drop the 
para on 
11.07.2024 
2018-19- NIL 
2019-20 
Cochin 
Shipyard 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019-20/ Para 9.1 
Lack of pragmatic 
approach in 
quoting prices for 
construction of 
Double-Ended 
25-11-2019 25-05-2020 27-01-2020 Comment of 
Ministry 
sent to PD, 
IAAD 
Chennai on 
29.07.2020 
Comment of 
Ministry sent 
to PD, IAAD 
Chennai on 
29.07.2020 

100 
 
Ro-Ro Ferry 
vessels resulted in 
loss amounting to 
Rs.8.72 crore 
 The Shipping 
Corporation of 
India Limited 
 Report No. 13 of 
2019/Para 9.2  
Payment of 
performance 
related pay in 
violation of DPE 
Guidelines 
25.11.2019 24.05.2020 13.02.2020 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
ATN reply 
sent to CoPU 
on  
27.02.2024 
2020-21 
Dredging 
corporation of 
India limited 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 12.1 
Non-safeguarding 
of financial 
interests under 
dredging contract 
09/02/2021 08/08/2021 02/11/2021 Revised 
ATN 
awaited  
 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
2010-11 to 2011-12 –NIL 
2012-13 
National 
Backward 
Caste 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation  
Report No.8 of 
2012/ Para no.9.4  
Fund management 
in Government 
Companies 
incorporated U/s  
25 of Companies 
Act ,1956 
04-09-2012 03.03.2013 04-07-2014 Reply sent 
to CAG 
6.12.2016 
CAG Reply 
awaited 
2013-14 to 2021-22 
Ministry of Steel 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report  No. 27 of 
2010-11 
PA on CSR 
activities in SAIL  
24/3/2011 24/09/2011 21/12/2011 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
There was no 
further on 
the audit 
report. 
Finaly ATNs 
sent by 
project 
division to 
CoPU. Para 
Unsettled  
RashtriyaIspat 
Nigam 
Limited 
 
Report No 27 of 
2011-12  
PA on “Corporate 
Social 
Responsibility” 
24/03/2011 14/09/2011 18/10/2013 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  

101 
 
Para 
Unsettled 
2011-12 to 2012-13-NIL 
2013-14 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2013/Para 14.3 
Excess payment of 
allowances and 
perks amounting 
to 98.61 crore in 
SAIL 
08-08-2013 08/02/2014 29-03-2017 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
04.04.2019 
2014-15 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2014/Para 17.5  
Avoidable 
expenditure of 
Rs.10.74 crore on 
freight by 
ISP/SAIL 
01-08-2014 01/02/2015 18-11-2014 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
sent to 
C&AG on 
23.04.2024. 
Para 
Unsettled 
Metal Scrap 
Trade 
Corporation 
Limited 
ReportNo.13 of 
2014/Para 17.2 
Loss due to non -
recovery of dues 
01.08.2014 28.01.2015 28.05.2015 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE. 
Para 
Unsettled   
 ReportNo.13 of 
2014/Para 17.3 
Loss due to  failure  
to safeguard 
financial interest 
01.08.2014 28.01.2015 07.08.2015 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE. 
Para 
Unsettled   
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 21 of 
2015/ Para 5.3  
 Non recovery of 
interest on 
differential Excise 
Duty 
31-07-2015 31/01/2016 16-12-2015 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
11.10.2019 
Report No. 21 of 
2015/ Para 5.1  
Investment of 
SAIL in Joint 
Venture 
31-07-2015 31/01/2016 11-04-13 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
21.05.2019 
Report No. 23 of 
2015       
12/08/2015 12/02/2016 08-04-2016 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
sent to 
C&AG on 
18.03.2024. 

102 
 
Modernisation and 
expansion Plan  of 
SAIL 
Para 
Unsettled 
2016-17 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 15 of 
2016/Para 5.4  
Avoidable 
expenditure of  
Rs.14.35 crore of 
outsourcing-
BPCL 
08-08-2016 08/02/2017 19-11-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
22.06.2020 
Report No. 15 of 
2016 / Para 5.3  
Idle investment at 
SPU Bettiah 
project of SAIL 
08-08-2016 08/02/2017 17-12-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
22.02.2024 
2017-18 
Metal Scrap 
Trade 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No.9 of 
2017/ Para 
15.1Failure to 
safeguard 
financial interest 
of MSTC 
05.04.2017 02.10.2017 14.06.2019 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE. 
Para 
Unsettled   
 
 
National 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para 15.2 
Avoidable 
expenditure 
towards interest on 
delayed payment 
of royalty 
05/04/2017 04/06/2017 12/07/2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
24.05.2023. 
Para Settled  
RashtriyaIspat
Nigam 
Limited 
 
 Report No. 9 of 
2017/Para 18.1 
Excess payment of 
Performance 
Related Pay to the 
employees 
05/04/2017 05/10/2017 First ATN 
Awaited 
First ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 9 of 
2017 / Para 15.6  
Unauthorized 
supply of power to 
a contractor cost  
05-04-2017 05/10/2017 08-10-2018 Revised 
ATNAwaite
d 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
18.03.2021 

103 
 
Rs. 22.83 crore to 
RSP/SAIL 
2018-19 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 12.3 
Land and 
Township 
Management 
07-08-2018 07/02/2019 31-12-2018 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
2019-20 
Bisra Stone 
Lime 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019 / Para 10.1 
Operational and 
Financial 
Performance of 
the Bisra Stone 
Lime Company 
Limited 
25-11-2019 25/05/2020 03-09-2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
sent to 
C&AG. 
Para 
Unsettled 
National 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 5 of 
2019 PA on 
“Operational 
Performance of 
NMDC Limited” 
08/07/2019 07/01/2020 07/12/2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
06.12.2023. 
Para Settled 
Orissa 
Minerals 
Development 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 10.2 
Operational and 
Financial 
Performance of 
Orissa Minerals 
Development 
Company Limited  
25-11-2019 25/05/2020 03-09-2020 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in project 
division. 
Para 
Unsettled   
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 10.5 
Implementation of 
Addition, 
Modification and 
Replacement 
(AMR),Project by 
SAIL 
25-11-2019 25/05/2020 27-09-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
15.12.2023 
Para Settled 
Report No. 13 of 
2019 / Para 10.6 
Follow up audit of 
Modernisation and 
Expansion Plan 
including Contract 
enclosure 
25-11-2019 25/05/2020 07-10-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
11.03.2024 
Para Settled 
2020-21 

104 
 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/ Para 13.4 
Safety and 
Environment 
Management in 
SAIL 
09-02-2021 09/08/2021 28-07-2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
08.12.2023 
Para Settled 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 13.3 
Performance of 
Captive Mines of 
SAIL 
09-02-2021 09/08/2021 13-10-2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
RashtriyaIspat 
Nigam 
Limited 
 
Report No. 18 of 
2020/Para 
13.2Thematic 
Audit on “Energy 
Management in 
RINL” 
09/02/2021 08/08/2021 09/07/2021 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
2021-22 
Bisra Stone 
Lime 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 7.6 
Avoidable 
expenditure 
towards payment 
of stamp duly and 
registration 
charges pertaining 
to the BSLC 
limited 
21-12-2021 21/6/2022 21-11-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
Preparation 
in project 
Division. 
Para 
Unsettled 
Metal Scrap 
Trade 
Corporation 
Limited  
Report No. 14 of 
2021 /Para 7.1 
Imprudent 
financing resulting 
in non-recovery of 
dues 
21.12.2021 19.06.2022  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE. 
Para 
Unsettled   
National 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 7.2 
Avoidable extra 
expenditure 
towards Operation 
and Maintenance 
of the 
Beneficiation and 
Pelletisation 
Plants 
21/12/2021 20/06/2022 13/05/2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
11.10.2023. 
Para Settled 

105 
 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 7.3 
Payment of 
registration 
charges and stamp 
duty twice for 
Mining Lease 
21/12/2021 20/06/2022 18/04/2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
10.10.2023. 
Para Settled 
Orissa 
Minerals 
Development 
Company 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/ Para 7.7 
Avoidable 
expenditure on 
accounts of penal 
interest 
21-12-2021 21/6/2022 15-11-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
Finaly ATN 
is being sent 
to CoPU. 
Para 
Unsettled   
RashtriyaIspat 
Nigam 
Limited 
 
Report. No. 14 of 
2021/Para 7.4 
Avoidable 
expenditure due to 
delay in decision 
making 
21/12/2021 20/06/2022 01/06/2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
2022-23 (upto December 2022) 
Metal Scrap  
Trade 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report. No. 33 of 
2022/Para 5.1 
Imprudent 
financing resulting 
in loss of Rs.26.87 
crore 
 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE. 
Para 
Unsettled   
RashtriyaIspat 
Nigam 
Limited 
 
Report. No.7 of 
2022/Para 7.4 
Compliance Audit 
of activities of 
RashtriyaIspat 
Nigam Limited 
03.08.2022 02.02.2023 28.10.2022 Revised  
ATN 
awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
Steel 
Authority of 
India 
Report. No. 8 of 
2022/Para 7.4 
Compliance Audit 
of activities of 
Steel Authority of 
India 
03.08.2022 02.02.2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Revised ATN 
is under 
preparation 
in CPSE for 
resubmitting 
to C&AG.  
Para 
Unsettled 
Report. No. 33 of 
2022/Para 5.2 
Loss on account of 
deficiencies in 
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
09.02.2024 

106 
 
project 
management  
Para Settled 
Report. No. 33 of 
2022/Para 5.3 
Loss due to idling 
of gas holder 
installed at 
Rourkela steel 
plant  
21-12-2022 21-06-2023 First ATN 
awaited 
First ATN 
awaited 
Finanly ATN 
sent to CoPU 
Dt. 
03.07.2023 
Para Settled 
Ministry of Textiles 
2010-11 to 2011-12 –NIL 
2012-13 
2013-14 to 2014-15- NIL 
2015-16 
National 
Textile 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 21 
(Vol-II) of 2015/ 
Para 6.1 Loss due 
to deficiency in 
settlement 
31.07.2015 31.01.2016 05.07.2016 Reply sent 
to CAG on 
28.2.2023 
CAG Reply 
Awaited 
2016-17 to 2017-18 –NIL 
2018-19 
National 
Handloom 
Development 
Corporation 
Report No. 11 of 
2018/ Para 
13.1Implementati
on of Yarn Supply 
Scheme  
07.08.2018 07.02.2019 18.09.2020  Revised 
ATN 
Awaited  
 
2019-20 
National 
Textile 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 13 of 
2019/ Para 11.1 
Doubtful recovery 
due to lack of due 
diligence in export 
of yarn to two 
private parties in 
Pakistan 
25.11.2019 25.05.2020 9.10.2020  Reply sent 
to CAG on 
10.8.2023 
CAG Reply 
Awaited 
2020-21- NIL 
2021-22 
India United 
Textile Mills 
Limited 
 
 
Report No.14 of 
2021/Para 8 .1 
Loss on account of 
extending undue 
benefit in fabric 
trading business to 
the group 
21.12.21 20.06.2022 First ATN is 
awaited 
ATN sent to 
CAG on 
25.1.2023 
CAG Reply 
Awaited 

107 
 
companies of 
strategic partner  
National 
Textile 
Corporation 
Limited 
Report No. 14 of 
2021/Para 8.2 Non 
realization of 
Transferable 
Development 
Rights 
21.12.21 20.06.2021 First ATN is 
received on 
18.06.2021 
ATN sent to 
CAG on 
28.07.2023 
CAG Reply 
Awaited 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
2010-11 to 2011-12 
2012-13 
National 
Scheduled 
Tribe 
Development 
& Finance 
Corporation 
Report No. 8 of 
2012/ Para 9.4 
Fund management 
in Government 
Companies 
incorporated U/s  
25 of Companies 
Act ,1956 
04-09-2012 03.03.2013 05-01-2015 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
Provisional 
ATN reply is 
forwarded to 
DPE for 
consideration 
Dt. 
16.10.2024   
2013-14 to 2021-22 -NIL 
Ministry of Water & Resources River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation  
2010-11 to 2019-20 –NIL 
2020-21 
National 
Projects 
&Construction 
Corporation 
Report No.2 of 
2021/ Para 4.4 
Undue Favour to 
Contractor 
24.03.2021 23.09.2021 23-09-2022 Revised 
ATN 
Awaited 
from 
Ministry 
ATNs reply 
awaited. 
Para 
Unsettled. 
2021-22 -NIL 
 
 
--------- 
 
  

108 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2023-24)   
 
  MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 th February, 2024 from 1515 Hrs. to  
1545 Hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Extension to PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
SECRETARIAT 
        1.     Shri Neeraj Semwal                 -            Joint Secretary                       
   2. Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha       -                             Director 
   3. Smt. Mriganka Achal       -          Deputy Secretary 
OFFICE OF C&AG 
 
1. Shri Raj Ganesh Viswanathan - Dy. C&AG (Commercial) & Chairman, 
Audit Board 
2. Shri Deepak Kapoor - Director General (Commercial) 
3. Shri B.R. Mondal - Director General (Parliamentary 
Committee) 
Lok Sabha 
     2.  
     3. 
     4. 
     5. 
     6. 
     7. 
     8. 
  
Shri Anil Firojiya 
Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
Rajya Sabha 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri V. Vijaysai Reddy 
Shri Binoy Biswam 

109 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 
1. Shri Ali Raza Rizvi - Secretary (Public Enterprises) 
2. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan - Joint Secretary (Administration) 
3. Shri Mahender Kumar Jjjainia - Dy. Director General (Survey) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF CONTROLLER GENERAL OF ACCOUNTS 
 
1. Shri Shyam S. Dubey - Controller General of Accounts 
2. Smt. Aastha Saxena Khatwani - Add. CGA 
3. Smt. Tripti Patra Ghosh - Joint CGA 
4. Shri Neeraj Kumar - Joint Director (NIC) 
 
2. Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) and Controller General of Accounts (CGA), Department of Expenditure 
in connection with examination of the subject “Reviewing timely submission of Action 
Taken Notes (ATNs) on CAG Paras/Reports by the Ministries/ Departments”.   
3. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson in his address to the representatives stressed on 
one of the important aspects that came before the Committee during examination of Audit 
Paras/Reports i.e., non -submission/delayed submission of Action Taken Notes by the 
Ministries/Departments.  Further Hon’ble Chairperson emphasized on previous 
Committees deliberations on the issue i n 7th, 12 th and 13th Lok Sabha emphasizing on 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to take effective steps in setting-up of centralized 
Monitoring Cell in DPE to keep an account of the extent of compliance by various 
Ministries on follow up action on these Audit Paras/Repor ts of individual CPSU and also 
to keep a statistical count of the cases settled by them.  Hon’ble Chairperson also 
expressed the Committee’s endeavor to bring all the stakeholders (C&AG, CPSUs and 
their concerned Departments/Ministries, Department of Publi c Enterprises, Department 
of Expenditure and Committee on Public Undertakings) at one platform.  Accordingly, it 
was desired that an exclusive Audit Para Monitoring System may be designed, developed 
and maintained by the Monitoring Cell, O/o Comptroller General of Accounts, Department 
of Expenditure.  The attention of the officials was also drawn to Direction 55(1) of the 
'Directions by the Speaker' regarding maintaining confidentiality of evidence tendered 
before the Parliamentary Committees. 

110 
 
4. The representatives of the DPE sought permission from the chair to allow them to 
give their submission on the matter once the CGA complete their presentation on the 
system in place on the matter. The representatives of CGA briefly apprised the Committee 
on the existing Audit Para Monitoring System that has been operational for monitoring of 
Audit Paras/Reports (Civil) pertaining to Public Accounts Committee.  Thereafter, they 
made their Power Point Presentation on the subject and briefly apprised the Committee 
on rol e of Monitoring Cell as coordinator to collect the ATNs from various 
Ministries/Department on those Audit Paras/Reports and making the information 
available on APMS Portal at each stage of movement.  
5. Members further raised queries on various aspects and  sought clarification on 
existing set-up at DPE not working to the mark as envisaged and ways to improve the 
same.  Dy.C&AG at this point submitted that the Audit Reports presented to Parliament 
under C&AG’s DPC Act Section 19 A(2) comes for discussion of CoPU.  Presently there 
is no online system like APMS to monitor these Paras/Reports and hence the need to 
develop an online system to monitor ATN pendency is need of the hour.  Going forward 
with the issue, Hon’ble Member sought for expeditious implementat ion of online 
monitoring mechanism to be put in place for the same and thereafter, provision of a robust 
audit system for CPSUs to make it more efficacious.   
6. The representatives of DPE responded to issues raised by the Members. 
Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson also sought additional clarification on action taken by 
DPE post the recommendations given by the Committee in 13 th Lok Sabha.  Concluding 
the sitting, Hon’ble Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the C&AG, DPE and 
CGA for briefing the Committee and furnishing the available information on various issues 
on the subject.  In respect of queries on which information was not readily available, the 
Chairperson directed the officers to furnish the information within 10 days to the 
Committee Secretariat.  
    The Committee then adjourned. 
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings transcripted from Audio recording has been 
kept on record.) 
/--------/ 
 
  

111 
 
APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-2025) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Monday, 24 March, 2025 from 1530 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in 
Committee Room '1', Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
                              Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri C.P. Joshi 
3. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
4. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
5. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
    8.    Shri Neeraj Dangi 
                                               9.    Shri Milind Murli Deora 
    10.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
    11.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
    12.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
    13.  Dr. Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
        1. Shri Anjani Kumar         -    Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha    -    Director 
        2. Smt. Mriganka Achal          -      Deputy Secretary 
   
  

112 
 
PART-A: 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and 
briefly apprised the Members about the following draft Reports to be considered: 
(i)  XXXXXXXXXX  
(ii)  Reviewing Timely Submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG 
Paras/Reports (Commercial) by the Ministries/ Departments;  
(iii)  XXXXXXXXXX 
(iv)  XXXXXXXXXX  
 
3 The Committee then consider ed and adopted the draft Reports, without any 
changes/modifications.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft 
Reports on the basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
Ministries/Departments and C&AG and present the Reports during the ongoing session of 
Parliament.   
***** 
 
 