 
 
1 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. 
(NICSI) 
[Based on Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG 
related to ‘procurement of hardware/software item to the tune of 
Rs.890.34 Crores through strategic alliance relating to National 
Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)’] 
 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
FIRST REPORT 
              EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
           NEW DELHI  


ii  
FIRST REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
                                                                                        (2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. (NICSI) 
[Based on Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021] 
 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2024  
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2024 
 
 
        LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
                                        NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 


iii  
CPU No. 1054 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs…… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (…. Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi- 110001. 

iv  
 C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S  
   
  Page No. 
 Composition of the Committee (2024-25) v 
 Composition of the Committee (2023-24) vi 
 Composition of the Committee (2022-23) vii 
 Introduction viii 
 REPORT  
 PART  -  I  
   
A BACKGROUND 1 
B AUDIT PARAGRAPH 5 
(I) Procurement of hardware and software costing Rs. 890.34 crore through the  
“Strategic Alliance” route by NICSI.  
5 
(II) Audit Observations 6 
C ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 9 
(I) Applicability of GFR on NICSI 9 
(II) Procurement through Strategic Alliances  12 
(III) Propriety Article Certificate 17 
(IV) Internal Audit of NICSI and Role of Controlling Ministry 19 
   
 PART  -  II  
 OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 22 
   
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 14.06.2022 26 
II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.10.2022 28 
III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.10.2022 31 
IV Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 25.09.2024 33 

v  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.   Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.   Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar - Director (now Joint Secretary) 
3. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 
 

vi  
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) 
 
        Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar - Chairperson 
Members 
LOKSABHA 
2.     Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3.     Shri Anil Firojiya*  
4.     Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
5.     Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.     Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
7.     Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8.     Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.     Shri Arjunlal Meena 
10.   Shri Janardan Mishra 
11.   Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
12.   Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
13.   Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
14.   Shri Sushil Kumar Singh  
15.   Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.   Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
17.   Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
18.   Dr. Anil Jain 
19.   Shri Prakash Javadekar 
20.   Dr. Amar Patnaik 
21.   Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
22.   Shri Binoy Viswam 
 
 
* Elected w.e.f. 19.12.2023 vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh resigned as Member of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
06.12.2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vii  
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2022-23) 
 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sudip Banyopadhyay 
3. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Smt. K. Kanimozhi 
6. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
7. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
9. Shri Janardan Mishra 
10. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
12. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
14. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
15. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri Anil Desai 
17. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
18. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
19. Dr. Anil Jain 
20. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
21. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
22. Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
 
  

viii  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024 -25) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behal f, present this First Report on 
‘“procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) (Based on Audit Para No. 
6.1 of Report No. 03 of 2021)”. 
 
2. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2022-23) had selected the said subject for 
detailed examination. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive during the 
previous Committee terms, the present Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) decided to 
carry forward the subject so as to complete the unfinished task.  
 
3. The Committee on Public Undertakings (2022-23) was briefed about the subject by the 
representatives of the C&AG on 14th June, 2022. The Committee then took oral evidence of the 
representatives of National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) and Ministry of Electronics 
& Information Technology (MIETY)  on 11h October, 2022. 
 
4. The Committee (2024-25) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 
25th September, 2024. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of National Informatics 
Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) and Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MIETY)  for 
tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in 
connection with examination of the subject. 
 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
7. The Committee wish to express their sincere thanks to the predecessor Committee for 
their valuable contribution in examination of the subject.  
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                            BAIJAYANT PANDA  
11 December, 2024                                                                          Chairperson 
20 Agrahayana ,1946(S)                                                    Committee on Public Undertakings

 
 
R E P O R T 
PART- I 
 
A.    BACKGROUND 
 
1. National Informatics Centre (NIC) was set-up in the year 1975 under the then Department 
of Electronics (presently Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology -MeitY) for giving 
Computer & Data -Communication support to the Government sector. In 1988, NI C was 
transferred to the then Planning Commission (presently NITI Aayog) and in between, the nation -
wide Satellite based Computer Communication Network (CCN) of NIC i.e. NICNET was set -up 
linking all Civil Departments of Central Government, all States/ UT Secretariats & District Hd. 
Qrs. apart from various other services/linkages.  A need had then been felt to generate 
‘Revenue’ from the services being provided by NIC to the Government Sector both in Centre / 
States and accordingly, NIC had made a proposal to Ministry of Finance ( Department of 
Expenditure), which had advised NIC to set -up a Company under it to channelize the 
commercial services of NIC. Accordingly, the then Planning Commission had moved a Cabinet 
Note which the Union Cabinet approved in its meeting held on 07.08.1995. Thereafter, National 
Information Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) was set -up as a Section 25 Company of the 
Government of India (presently Section 8 Company under the Companies Act 2013) w.e.f. 
29.08.1995., with the following objectives: -  
 To promote the economic, scientific, technological, social and cultural development of 
India by promoting the utilization of information Technology, Computer -Communication 
Networks, Informatics etc by a spinoff of the services, technologies, infra structure and 
expertise developed by the National Informatics Centre of the Government of India 
including its computer communication network NICNET and associated infrastructure and 
services. 
 To promote further development of services, technologies, infras tructure and expertise 
supplementing that developed by NIC, in directions which will increase the revenue 
earning capacity of NIC. 
 To develop and promote value added computer and computer -communication services 
over the basic infrastructure and services developed by NIC including NICNET. 
 To raise necessary financial resources for developmental needs of NICNET and 
computer-communication services in the areas managed by the company.  
 
         -1-

- 2 -  
 as outlined above and also for the computing and computer-communication infrastructure, 
software, hardware, databases and services managed by NIC. 
 To invest in India, for profit or otherwise, on the basis of just and equitable principles of 
trade and business in securities, stocks, shares, equity, conve rtible government equity in 
joint ventures with private sector, as approved by the Government of India from time to 
time and other honorable modalities of investments provided that these investments and 
the profit / dividend received from them are calculat ed to advance and further the above 
objects and purposes of the company and also provided that the company shall not pay, 
in turn, any dividend to its promoters. 
 To set up and / or promote support subsidiaries, joint ventures, societies trusts and other 
legal entities, calculated to advance and further the objects and purposes of the company 
provided that the dividends / monies received, if any, from these legal entities will be 
utilized only for furthering the above objects and purposes of the Company subj ect to the 
undertaking that the company shall not pay any dividends to its promoters. 
 
2. The functions of NICSI are as under: -  
 
 Build capability to provide end -to-end ICT Solutions & Services to customers at 
competitive rates. 
 Build and strengthen Organizational Capacity of the customers in the Government sector. 
 Increase awareness of services and become preferred Technology Service Provider in 
the ICT field.  
 Promote & facilitate use of ICT in Governance projects / activities. 
 Assist the Government in bringing I.T. within easy reach of the common people. 
 Procurement of ICT Products & Services for the Government Sector following the General 
Financial Rules (GFR) Provisions completely and also, the guidelines issued by 
Department of Expenditure / CVC towards the same from time to time. 
3. Notable Major Achievements: NICSI has implemented around 40,000 projects 
in the ICT field both from Central / State Ministries, Departments & their Organizations 
since its inception and has thus gained expertise in providing, 

- 3 -  
Solutions & Services in almost all the spheres of life, be it in the field of Agriculture, Health, 
Education, Road & Transport, Defence, Aviation, Courts, Panchayats, Rural Development 
etc.  
4. Important projects undertaken have been as under:  National Knowledge Network 
(NKN) / Shala Darpan for Kendriya Vidhyalayas / e -Vidhan / e -Courts / PRAGATI for PMO 
VC / e -Mail Solution & Infrastructure & Services / e -Hospital /e-Taal /e-office / Local Area 
Network ( LAN) for FCI / Core Banking Solutions for Cooperative Banks / IVFRT 
(Immigration Visa Foreigner Registration Tracking) for MHA / e -Gov-App Store /SWAN  
(State Wide Area Network)  in various States / CICs  (Community Information centers)  & 
CSCs(Common Service C enters) in North East & difficult areas/ e -procurement/e-
Panchayats / Aadhar based Biometric Attendance / PRAYAS as PM Dashboard/IRAD  
(Integrated Road Accident Database)  for Ministry of Road Transport  and Highways / Lok 
Samvaad,  etc.   
Apart from above, N ICSI is also managing NIC’s Data Centers at Shastri Park (Delhi) / 
Bhubaneswar & owned Center at Laxmi Nagar (Delhi) and is also setting -up a big Data Centre 
at Guwahati (Assam) with MeitY funds. 
5.  Future Vision of NICSI 
 Continue its services to further augment providing ICT Solutions & Services in the entire 
Government Sector including States at most competitive rates following the Government 
Provisions / Guidelines towards the same. 
Augment the Data Centers  and Cloud facilities in the country using the latest updated 
technologies from time to time.  
6. C&AG examined the procurement of hardware and software costing Rs.890.34 crores by 
NICSI in contravention of General Financial Rules (GFR),2005 and Departmental instructions. In 
their Report No. 03 of 2021, C&AG had pointed out several deficiencies on the part of NICSI in 
execution of GFR, 2005. The Committee on Public Undertakings during their term 2022-23 
selected Audit Para no. 6.1 of Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG related to ‘procurement of 
hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs.890.34 Crores through strategic alliance relating to 
National Informatics Center Services Inc. (NICSI)’ for examination and report to Parliament. The 
Committee during examination of the subject heard the views of officers of the C&AG, the 

- 4 -  
representatives of NICSI and MeitY before finalizing their Report.  The detailed 
observations/recommendations of the Committee on the Audit Para have been given in bold 
type in Part-II of this Report. 

- 5 -  
B.     AUDIT PARAGRAPH 
 
(I)  Procurement of hardware and software costing Rs. 890.34 crore through the “Strategic 
Alliance” route by NICSI.  
7. As per para 6.1 of the C&AG Report, NICSI procured hardware and software costing 
Rs. 890.34 crore s through the  ‘Strategic Alliance ’ route in contravention of General Financial 
Rules, 2005  and departmental instructions and thus failed to ensure transparency and  
competitiveness in the procurement process. 
8. Rule 160 of General Financial Rules 2005 (GFR 2005) stipulates that all government 
purchases should be made in transparent, competitive and fair manner so as to secure best 
value for money. Rule 141A was inserted in GFR with effect from 09 August 2016 to provide for 
procurement on “Government e -Marketplace” (GeM) which has been established as a portal for 
online procurement of common use Goods and Services required by various Government 
Departments/ Organizations/ Public Sector Undertakings. Rule 149 of GFR 2005 gives the three 
standard methods of obtaining bids for procurement including “Singl e tender enquiry”. Rule 154 
ibid, gives the circumstances in which procurement from a single source can be resorted. These 
include cases where only a particular firm is the manufacturer of the required goods, and/ or for 
standardization of machinery or spa re parts based on advice of a competent technical expert 
and approval of the competent authority. These purchases have to be supported by a 
“Proprietary Article Certificate” in prescribed format provided by the Ministry/Department.  In 
2005, NICSI felt the need for having “Strategic Alliances (SAs)” directly with Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) for procurement of strategic items102 to reduce end cost of products. 
Subsequently, the Board of Directors of NICSI103 approved both the process and mechanism  
for entering into agreements for SAs. Following these approvals, the NICSI has been entering 
into SAs agreements with OEMs/ authorized agents for procurement of ICT products based on 
laid down criteria. In December 2013, the NICSI board approved several measures to streamline 
the system of SAs such as introduction of technical and financial evaluation of proposals of 
OEMs, limiting the number of SAs and adopting more GFR compliant processes. In June 2014, 
MeitY issued instructions that SAs fully comply with GFR and other relevant rules. 
 

- 6 -  
(II)   Audit Observations 
9. As procurement through Strategic Alliances was not covered by any rule/ order 
issued by the Government, NICSI in its 88 th Board of Director (BoD) meeting (September 
2014) decided to send a proposal through MeitY, to the Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) for inclusion of  Strategic Alliance(SA) as a process of procurement and providing 
ICT goods and services  (including solutions ) in GFR 2005. DoE while not specifically 
allowing incorporation  of SAs in GFR, conveyed (August -2015) that they have no 
objection if NICSI enters  into Strategic Alliance under Rule 154 of GFR 2005 subject to 
the condition that before  placement of each ord er, Propriety Article Certificate (PAC) as 
per Rule 154 is provided  by the Ministry/ Department. The Internal Finance Department 
(IFD) of MeitY was of the view that this implied that  before issuing a PAC, the user 
Department would have to satisfy itself th at the indented  ICT goods and services does 
not have any other competing brand or supplier, which  would make the concept of SAs 
unworkable. It, therefore, advised the Company to  carefully examine the response of 
DoE before its formal adoption as a process of procurement. Nevertheless, NICSI 
construed the communication from DoE as approval  for the system of SAs provided 
procurement was undertaken on the basis of PACs, and  decided to continue with the 
system. 
10. Audit noted that during the period from April 2014 to April 2017, NICSI procured hardware 
and software costing Rs. 890.34 crore for user Departments through the SA route. This included 
procurement of Back-Up Servers; Routers; Switches; Anti-Virus solutions; network security etc. 
Prior to September 2015, NICSI had been making procurements using SAs based on the 
approval of its Board but without obtaining any PACs. This was in contravention of Rule 154 of 
GFR, 2005 and MeitY’s subsequent instructions of June 2014. 
 
 
11. From September 2015 i.e. after rec eiving advice of the DoE, NICSI began obtaining  
PACs for purchases made from a single source. However, a test check revealed that these were 
being furnished and used without mentioning clear, specific and cogent  reasons as per the 
format prescribed in GFR,  for procurement through a single source.  There was also no 
indication that the PAC had been issued based on advice of any  technical expert. Further, 

- 7 -  
reports of the Consultant engaged for market survey indicated the existence of multiple vendors/ 
sources for each and every item. The main intent was thus, to only show perfunctory compliance 
with GFRs and DoE’s instructions on  obtaining PACs for procurements through SAs . Statement 
showing the details of irregular procurement of hardware/ software items by NICSI is as under: 
 
Period Value of Work Orders (Rs. in Crore) 
1. 2014-15 299.48 
2. 2015-16 146.27 
3. 2016-17 (up to Nov. 2016) 289.89 
4. 2016-17(Dec. 2016 to March 2017) 112.49 
5. April 2017 42.21 
Total 890.34 
 
12. Both NICSI and MeitY in its replies (March 2017, October 2018 and September 2019) 
furnished the details of the rationale and the chronology for adoption of the SA route. It 
highlighted that after receiving the advice of DoE, it has been making such procure ments on the 
basis of PACs in terms of Rule 154 of GFRs. It intimated that procurement of goods and 
services through Strategic Alliance was only 25 per cent of the total procurement made by NICSI 
and that the total value of common items was not more than 1 5 per cent of the total value of the 
procurement made through SA. It further added that SAs have been discontinued from April 
2017. 
 
13. C&AG, however, found the reply of NICSI not tenable because of the facts as stated 
below: 
 
 The reply of MeitY that it w as making procurements on behalf of the user Departments 
does not hold good as it was required to observe all rules/ orders of GoI and be GFR 
compliant which was clearly stipulated by MeitY in its orders of June 2014.  
 
 Further, prior to receipt of DoE’s a dvice in August 2015, PACs were not being obtained 
for procurements under SA route which amounted to non -compliance with Rule 154 of 

- 8 -  
GFRs. Though NICSI has claimed that it was subsequently procuring goods and services 
from single source only after obtainin g PAC, a test check of PACs showed that due 
diligence was still wanting both while furnishing and accepting PACs.  
 
 MeitY has itself admitted (September 2019) that common items worth Rs. 133.55 crores 
were procured under Strategic Alliance though these cou ld have been procured through 
rate contracts or open bids.  
 
14. Thus, NICSI undertook single source procurement through SA route to the extent of 25 
per cent of its total procurement between April 2014 and April 2017. Procurements prior to 
September 2015 using this route were not in accordance with Rule 154 of GFR and 
procurements, after 2015, based on PACs, too, were found lacking required due diligence in test 
checked cases. Following audit objections, the practice of SAs was stopped by the Company 
after April 2017 but it has not been furnished as to why it was being continued earlier in 
contravention of GFR. 

- 9 -  
C.     ISSUES EMERGED IN AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
(I) Applicability of GFR to NICSI 
 
15. General Financial Rules (GFR) were first issued in 1947 and subsequently modified in 
1963, 2005 and 2017. These rules deal with transparency, competition, fairness, efficiency and 
economy in public procurement. They also deal with elimination of arbitrariness and maintaining 
accountability in procurement of Goods and Services besides budget 
formulation/implementation, inventory management, contract management, Government 
Guarantees, Grants -in-aid/Loan etc.  These rules and orders issued thereunder are to be  
observed by all Departments and Organizations under the Government and specified Bodies 
while dealing with matters involving public finances except otherwise provided for in GFR.  
 
16. As far as applicability of GFR to NICSI is concerned, it is stated tha t NICSI has furnished 
that procurement of ICT products and services for Government sector is done following GFR 
provisions completely and also, the Guidelines issued by Department of Expenditure/CVC. On 
the request of NICSI for inclusion of Strategic Allia nce under GFR, the Department of 
Expenditure did not make a separate provision and directed NICSI to follow the procedure 
mentioned in GFR for single tendering obtaining Proprietary Article Certificate from indenting 
organization. In Feb 2023, Department o f Expenditure has issued an order regarding restrictions 
under Rule 144(xi) of GFR, 2017 which is applicable to Central Public Sector Enterprises, 
Autonomous Bodies, Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Financial Institutions, procurements 
in Public Priva te Partnership projects receiving financial support from the Government or Public 
Sector Enterprises/Undertakings. CAG has also pointed out non-adherence to provision of GFR.  
 
17. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) w.r.t. applicability of GFR 
on the NICSI, in a written reply, submitted to the Committee that: 
“Regarding applicability of GFR,2017 under PREFACE of GFR,2017 it is stated 
that GFRs are compilation of rules and orders of Government of India to be 
followed by all while dealing with matters involving public finances.” 
 
18. Further, during the course of oral evidence before the Committee, the 
representatives of MeitY deposed as under: 
“सर, मैं इस व िषय में एक -दो तथ्य और आपक े संज्ञान में लाना चाह ंगा। जीएफआर  व ित्त 
मंत्रालय का  व िषय है, व्यय व िभाग का  व िषय है, िे ही जारी  करते  हैं। मैंने इस सम मतत 

- 10 -  
में आने से पहले अध्ययन करक े  देखा तो  िषष 2005 के  जीएफआर  में कोई   स्पष्ट 
उल्लेख नहीं म मला कक यह जीएफआर  सरकारी  क ं पतनयों पर लाग  होते  हैं या नहीं होते  
हैं। यह हमारे  व िभाग का  व िषय नहीं है। मैं इसक े बारे  में स्पष्ट तौर  से कु छ नहीं कह  
सकता  कक ये लाग  होते  हैं या लाग  नहीं होते  हैं। संभित : कु छ अनुदेश भी हों। आपक े 
साथ सीएजी  कायषलय के  अध िकारी भी उपलब्ि हैं, उनकी  जानकारी  में हो। ये संगत  
प्रश्न हैं, हमें इसमें कोई  स्पष्ट तनष्कषष नहीं म मला कक जीएफआर  में ऐसा उल्लेख है।” 
 
19. During the course of deposition, representatives of MeitY regarding applicability of GFRs 
further added as under: 
“सर , मैंने  यह कतई  नहीं कहा  है कक जीएफआर  लाग  नहीं होता  है। मैं  यह स्पष्ट करना  चाहता  ह ं 
कक म ुझे जीएफआर  में  स्पष्ट उल्लेख नहीं म मला कक सरकारी  क ं पतनयों पर  लाग  होता  है। यह 
व िभागों पर  अिश्य लाग  होता  है। जीएफआर  154 में  भी व िभाग शब्द स्पष्ट म लखा हु आ है। 
शुरु आत  में  जो  एग्ज ेक्युटट ि समरी  है, उसमें  भी म लखा हु आ है।….. 
…… मैंने  जजक्र क कया था कक म ुझे स्पष्ट नहीं है, लेक कन जब  आपने मागषदशषन टदया है तो  
तनजश्चत तौर  से…।” 
 
20. Audit has observed that prior to September, 2015, NICSI has been making procurement 
in contravention of GFR. Thereafter too, the Company has not been complying GFR. In this 
connection when the Committee  sought clarifications on, whether the Board of Directors of the 
Company was authorized to take decisions without taking into cognizance the relevant 
provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR), NICSI, in a written reply to the Committee, 
submitted as under: 
“In general, the Board of Directors takes decisions considering the provisions of 
GFRs and other rules and regulations and guidelines issued by the government 
from time to time.  The Board has also suggested for procurement under 
Strategic Alliance in c ompliance of GFRs.  Similarly, the Department of 
Expenditure had also mentioned that NICSI may enters into Strategic Alliance 
under Rule 154 of GFR subject to the condition that before placement of each 
order Proprietary Article Certificate (PAC) as per Ru le 154 is provided by the 
Ministry/ Department. It is a procedural requirement to take the PAC from the 
concerned ministry/ department, which was not followed by NICSI before 
September, 2015.”  
 
21. On further being enquired of as to whether NICSI is following the relevant GFR provisions 
during the procurements, the company, in a written reply to the Committee, submitted as under: 

- 11 -  
“Procurement of ICT Products & Services for the Government Sector is made 
following the GFR Provisions completely and also, the guidelines issued by 
Department of Expenditure / CVC towards the same from time to time.” 
 
22. When DOE was contacted as to  whether the Board of Directors of NICSI or any other 
Company may undertake procurement without complying the provisions of GFR, they in a 
written reply to the Committee,  submitted that as per Rule 1 of General Financial Rules (GFRs), 
2017, these rules shall be applicable to all Central Government Ministries/Departments, attached 
and subordinate bodies. The provisions contained in GFRs are deemed to be applicable to 
Autonomous bodies except to the extent the bye -laws of an Autonomous Body provides for 
separate Financial Rules which have been approved by the Government. This implies that GFRs 
provisions are not applicable to NICSI. Howeve r, as per website of NICSI, their procurement 
processes are fully compliant with GFR rules of Government of India.  
23. When the Committee asked about the directions issued by the Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) to ensure that General Financial Rules (GFR s) are followed by all the Government 
Companies/PSUs, DoE, further submitted that: 
“ GFRs provisions are not applicable to Company/PSUs. This is a conscious 
policy as PSUs often operate in a competitive commercial environment. 
Therefore, no such action is required to be taken by this Department.”  
24. The Department of Public Enterprises with regard to applicability of GFRs on CPSUs, in a 
written reply to the Committee, stated that GFRs are not applicable to central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs). 
25. When asked by the Committee w hether the Board of Directors of CPSUs are authorized 
to devise the process of procurement not in accordance with the provisions of General Financial 
Rules and if they can devise their own Financial Rules, both DoE and DPE submitted as under: 
 
“Yes Sir.  It is permitted as CPSUs often operate in a competitive commercial 
environment.”  

- 12 -  
(II)  Procurement through Strategic Alliances 
 
26. Rule 160 of GFR 2005 (Rule 173 of GFR 2017) states that “All government 
purchases should be made  in a transparent, competitive and fair manner, to secure best 
value for money. When the Committee asked the Department of Expenditure (DoE) as to 
whether the setting up of NICSI was required when Directorate General of Supplies and 
Disposals (DGS&D) was a lready working as Central purchase & quality assurance 
Organisation and, the Ministries/Departments were also authorised to procure services and 
goods under GFR, the DoE, in a written reply to the Committee, submitted that: 
“DGS&D was a Central Procurement  Organisation of the Govt of India to 
purchase and inspect the stores for Central Government Ministries/ 
Departments, including their attached and subordinate offices, and Union 
Territories who desired to avail of its services and to utilize the expertise 
available in the fields of purchase and quality management. 
 
NICSI has been set up mainly to provide technical support and 
consultancy and to undertake turn -key projects for timely implementation in the 
area of ICT for the Central and State Governments and  other government 
bodies, coupled with utilization of NIC services, data bases software solutions, 
technologies, expertise and infrastructure as well as reliable co -location services 
and with a focus on security, network availability, capacity, processing power and 
operation management. 
 
In view of the above, with the approval of the Cabinet, NISCI was set up in 
1995 to provide effective and uninterrupted ICT services to the government, 
including apex institutions.” 
27.  On being asked the need for making Strategic Alliances (SAs), when procurement 
could have been done under GFRs and also through DGS&D, NICSI submitted the 
following: 
“In view of the following circumstances, the need for Strategic Alliance arises:  
 
1. Till 2014, the technology used in various government projects were supplied by a 
very few state-of-the-art OEMs especially in the following area: 
 Operating System 
 Data bases 
 VSAT terminals and Hubs 
 Networking requirements such as routers, switches 
 Security solutions including anti-virus solutions  
 
2.   These IT systems were tightly coupled with limited options available for 
hardware and software. These systems were designed using client - server mode 

- 13 -  
with standards and proprietary technologies available. These systems were 
based on fixed designs with cascading effects when changes were needed. 
 
3.   Since the state of the art products were hardly available from few OEMs it was 
decided to import the same from these OEMs directly to get the best rates. 
 
4.   The maintenance of the products could not have been done by any local 
vendors as these were very specialized and hence only the OEMs could supply 
the spare parts for keeping the systems in running mode.  
There was hardly any System Integrator (SI) for these components. NIC/ NICSI 
used to do the system integ ration and it was thought of having a strategic 
alliance with all the major OEMs to ensure quicker implementation of the projects 
and also to extend uninterrupted services to the government including apex 
institutions.” 
28. Further, the representatives of NICSI during the course of oral evidence deposed 
before the Committee, as under:  
“जब  हम लोग प्रोक्योरमेंट डीजीएस  एंड डी के  माध्यम से करते  थे तो  उसमें क े िल 
क म्प्य ट र और व प्रंटर होते  थे। उसमें कोई  हाई आइटम  नहीं होते  थे। तनक्सी ने िषष 2005 
और िषष 2006 की  बोडष मीटटंग  में यह ड डसाइड क कया कक हम लोग ओईएम के  साथ एक  
स्रैटेजजक  एलायंस करते  हैं, जजनक े  इजक्िमेंट हाई एंड होते  हैं। जैसे  राउटर , सिषसष और 
सॉफ्टिेयसष हैं, इनक े म लए िषष 2005-2006 में प र ी रणनीतत  बनाई  गई थी। उसक े म लए 
एक  कमेटी  बनी  थी। कमेटी  ने ड्राफ्ट गाइडलाइन क कया। उसक े बाद , उसमें एक  प्रपोजल 
बनाया  गया कक हम लोग जजस  िेंडर से गठबंिन  करेंगे  उसमें प र ा प्रोसेस फॉलो करेंगे।  
पहले हम देखते  हैं कक जो  य ज र हमसे प्रोजेक्ट करिाते  हैं, उनकी  ररक्िॉयरमेंट  क्या है? 
हमें क कस तरह  के  आइटम  प्रोक्योर करने  चाटहए? हम पहले उसकी  एसेसमेंट  करेंगे।  
उसक े बाद  प्रपोजल में जो  ररक्िॉयडष ओईएम्पस हैं, जजनसे  सामान लेना है, उनसे बात  
करेंगे।  उसक े बाद  प्रपोजल को  इिैल्य एट  करेंगे।  इिैल्य एट  करने  के  म लए एक  एपेक्स 
कमेटी  बनाई  गई। उस कमेटी  ने भी काम  क कया। फाइनली बोडष को  इंफॉम ेशन दी गई। 
बोडष की  अप्र िल के  बाद  एफए एंड एमडी  के  बाद  बोडष में प्रस्त ुत  क कया गया। इस तरह  से 
गठबंिन  डायरेक्ट नहीं क कया गया। प र ी बोडष की  सहमतत  से क कया गया। यह िषष 2005-
2006 से शुरू क कया गया। उसक े बाद , प्रोक्योरमेंट उसक े अनुसार ही करते  रहे। उसमें 
एक  बात  यह भी है कक जो  रेट  उनक े म ाके ट  में होते  थे, उसको  गठबंिन  के  दौरान 
नेगोम शएट करक े  30-40 परसेंट , जजतना  कम  से कम  कर  सकते  थे, करते  थे।” 
29. The representatives of NICSI, with regard to genesis and performance of the 
procurements through Strategic Alliance, during the course o f oral evidence further submitted to 

- 14 -  
the Committee as under: 
“अगर  स्रैटेजजक  अलाइंस का  जेनेम सस देखें, तो  हब  और  क्लाइंट ब हु त  टाइटली  कपल्ड होते  थे। 
जैसे  िीसैट , राउटसष या माइक्रोसॉफ्ट का  उदाहरण  है। उस समय  इसकी  जेनेम सस हु ई थी कक जजस  
टेक्नोलॉजी  का  हब  खरीदा  जाता  था, उसी टेक्नोलॉजी  के  िीसैट  खरीदे  जाते  थे, ताक क  आपस में  
दोनों चीजें  चल सक ें । यही चीज  एंटी  िायरस  में  थी, यही चीज  डेटाबेस  में  थी, यही चीज  ऑपरेटटंग  
म सस्टम्पस में  थी और  ऑलमोस्ट नेटिक ष में  भी यही चीज  थी। अगर  हम  उसमें  च क  माने , तो  
डेलीजेंस  में  यह हो सकता  है कक हमें  उसक े साथ जो  करना  चाटहए था, उतना  नहीं क कया है। मैं  
आपको  एश्योर करता  ह ं कक इसमें  कोई  फाइनेंम शयल लॉस नहीं है। एक्चुअली हम  जजस्टफाई कर  
सकते  थे, क्योंक क टेजक्नकली  िह उसी के  साथ ही चलता  है, इसम लए लेना पड़ता  है। जैसे  
माइक्रोसॉफ्ट ऑपरेटटंग  म सस्टम या आईफोन है, तो  माइक्रोसॉफ्ट से डॉयरेक्ट  खरीदने  पर  
स्रैटेजजक  अलाइंस कहते  हैं। बाकी  डडस्र ीब्य ट सष िगैरह  से खरीदने  से िह मच  चीपर  पड़ता  है। 
जेनेम सस तो  िहां से शुरू हु ई थी, जो  ओईएम  है, उससे डॉयरेक्ट  खरीद  म लया जाए , instead of 
getting into the system integrator. हम  15-20 साल पहले की  बात  कर  रहे  हैं, तब  इंडस्री 
इतनी  ग्रो नहीं हु ई थी, तब  ये म सस्टम इंरीग्रेटर का  काम  करते  थे।  
महोदय , जैसा  कक आपने कहा  है कक आजकल  हर  चीज  इतनी  म ॉडु लर  हो गई है, इतने  ऑ्शंस 
आ गए हैं और  जैम  भी आ गया है। अगर  हमें  अभी भी पीएसी में  कु छ खरीदना  होता  है, तो  हम  
पीएसी सटटषक फक े ट लगाकर  जेम  में  खरीदते  हैं। अभी एक  प्रोसेस ्लेटफॉमष बना  है, तो  हमने  उस 
्लेटफॉमष पर  म शफ्ट कर  टदया है। मैं  बेम सकली  यही तनिेदन करना  चाह ंगा कक पीएसी लेने में  
उतनी  डेलीजेंस  नहीं की  गई है, लेक कन स्रैटेजजक  अलाइंस में  न ही कोई  म शकायत  है और  न ही 
कोई  र ेगुलेट र ी का  इश्य  है। यहां तक  कक सीएंडएजी  ने भी यह िाक्य य ज  नहीं क कया है कक इसमें  
कोई  लॉस हु आ है। उन्होंने ये कहा  है कक आपने उसको  ठीक  से चेक  नहीं क कया है।” 
30. MeitY, in their written replies to the Committee, repeatedly stated that NICSI took the 
decision to enter into the strategic Alliance with various technology partners independently 
despite the fact that a representative of the Ministry has been on the Boar d of the Company. In 
this regard they made their submission as under:  
 
“NICSI took the decision to enter into the Strategic Alliance with various 
technology partners independently.  
 
NICSI has informed that the Board of NICSI, in its meeting held on 20.3.2013, 
advised the management that for maintaining uniformity in the period of validity 
across agreements entered into by NICSI, with various Strategic Alliance 
partners, the periodicity of such agreements of all existing partners be kept up to 
30.4.2014, and for the succeeding years as well, the period of validity of the 
agreements be kept from 1st of May of each year till the 30th of April of the 

- 15 -  
succeeding year.  
 
NICSI has further in formed that on 12.7.2013, considering the need to review 
various policies and procedures in NICSI, a working group was setup by NICSI 
to review its deputation policy, procurements for NIC’s data centre maintained by 
NICSI and Strategic Alliance. The group’ s recommendations were considered by 
NICSI’s Board in its meeting held on 11.12.2013 and, after reviewing Strategic 
Alliance, directed that NICSI should follow the tender process under the 
Government Financial Rules (GFR) 2005 for procurement of items. Pur suant to 
this direction, on  31.5.2014, NICSI issued a notice inviting tender for Strategic 
Alliance. However, on a writ petition  challenging the notice inviting tender, the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, vide its order dated 25.8.2014 in W.P.(C)4370/2014, 
directed that no further steps be taken pursuant to the said tender. Against the 
backdrop of this order, since requests were being received from various 
Departments and organisations for implementing proforma invoices already 
issued by NICSI under Strategic Alliance for various ongoing IT projects, the 
management approached the Board for approving implementation of such 
proforma invoices. Keeping in view the serious difficulty faced in procuring spare 
parts for maintenance of various existing IT installations at a reasonable cost, the 
Board, in its meeting held on 26.9.2014, while extending the validity of the 
existing Strategic Alliances expiring before 31.1.2015 till the said date, advised 
that NICSI  to take up with the Government the recognition of the proc ess of 
Strategic Alliances.  
 
Pursuant to this, on 3.6.2015, NICSI proposed through MeitY to the Department 
of Expenditure, inclusion in GFR of Strategic Alliance with OEMs for specialised 
ICT goods and services as a process of procurement. The Department of 
Expenditure, vide its ID note no. F.21/12012 -PPD, dated 28.8.2015, addressed 
to Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor (JS & FA), MeitY, communicated that 
‘This Department has no objection if NICSI enters into Strategic Alliance under 
Rule 154 of GFR sub ject to the condition that before placement of each order, 
“Proprietary Article Certificate (PAC)” as per Rule 154 is provided by the Ministry/ 
Department.’, who transmitted the same to NICSI.  
 
Subsequently, following the expiry of the period of validity of the existing 
Strategic Alliances on 31.1.2015, NICSI’s Board, in its meeting held on 4.2.2015, 
approved extension of the Strategic Alliance agreements till 31.3.2016, only for 
the purpose of procurement relating to maintenance  aspects for running projects 
and, further, directed that the aforesaid tender be withdrawn and the Hon’ble 
Court be informed accordingly. The Board, in its meeting held on 18.3.2016, 
approved extension of the existing Strategic Alliance agreements till 30.4.2017. 
  
No further extensions were granted beyond 30.4.2017 and, as a result, Strategic 
Alliances got discontinued. The management of NICSI apprised its Board in its 
meeting held on 22.6.2017: “In the light of GeM [Government eMarketplace], 
NICSI has discontinued and stopped issu ing purchase orders as per the 
Strategic Alliances after 30.4.2017.”  

- 16 -  
31. The representatives of NICSI during the oral evidence stated the reasons for changing the 
process, as mentioned below: 
“िषष 2017 से जब  से जेम  आया है, तब  से यह डडस ्कं टट न्य  हो गया है। उसक े बाद  से 
स्रैटेजजक  एलांयस नहीं हु आ है।…… 
…. यह ठीक है क क प्रोसेस जीएफआर क े  अनुसार  नहीं था। उसक ो एडमम ट  क र के  क्लोज  
कर टदया था। जैसे ही इंस्पेक्शन ररपोटष आया , हम  लोगों ने क्लोज  क र के  प र ा क ा प र ा 
जेम पर म शफ्ट कर टदया था।  
….उसकी दो क ं ड डशन्स और भी थीं।  एक तो हम लोग जो स्रैटेजजक एलायंस देख रहे हैं , 
उसमें उन्होंने हमें 60 से 65 पर सेंट  क ा डडस्क ाउं ट  टदया था। द सर ा, उन्होंने म लखा था क क 
हम  लोग इससे क म  क हीं नहीं दे र हे हैं। यह एक  कं डडशन एसएलए के  साथ साइन हु आ 
था।  ……. 
हम लोग क े िल यही कह रहे हैं क क जब तक िह चलता रहा तब तक हम लोगों क े  
ज़हन में कोई चीज नहीं आई। बाद में , ज ैसे ही आया हम  लोगों ने त ुर ंत  क्लोज  क र  
टदया।…………… 
……जैसा आप बोल रहे हैं क क पीएसी पहले जेम को लीड करता था। िह टेजक्नकल हेड 
था। हम लोगों ने जेम में भी पीएसी का प्रोव िजन बनाया था। इसमें भी प्रोव िजन  है। 
पेपर पर  थोड़ी-ब हु त  च क  हो सक त ी है, पर न्त ु हम ने प्रोसेस प र ी त र ह से फॉलो कक या है।” 
32. When asked by the Committee whether DoE had suggested any model agreement to be 
undertaken with Department/Suppliers etc. while undertaking Strategic Alliance by NICS I, the 
DoE replied as under: 
“No Sir. While conveying its no objection to NICS I’s proposal regarding Strategic 
Alliance, the Department of Expenditure vide its ID note No. F.21/12012 -PPD, 
dated 28.08.2015, advised that before placement of each order Proprietary 
Article Certificate (PAC) as per Rule 154 has to be taken.” 

- 17 -  
(III)   Propriety Article Certificate (PAC) as per Rule 154 (GFR-2005) 
33. Rule 154 of GFR, 2005 (Rule 166 of GFR, 2017) provides provisions for Single Tender 
Enquiry. The same is produced as under: 
Procurement from a single source may be resorted to in the following circumstances: 
(i) It is in the knowledge of the user department that only a particular firm is the manufacturer 
of the required goods 
(ii) In a case of emergency, the required goods are necessarily to be purchased from a 
particular source and the reason for such decision is to be recorded and approval of 
competent authority obtained. 
(iii) For standardisation of machinery or spare parts to be compatible to the existing sets of 
equipment (on the advice of a competent technical expert and approved by the competent 
authority), the required item is to be purchased only from a selected firm. 
Further, Proprietary Article Certificate in the following form is to be provided by the 
Ministry/Department before procuring the goods from a single source under the provision of sub -
Rule 166 (i) and 166 (iii) of GFR, 2017as applicable: 
“(i) The indented goods are manufactured by M/s....................... 
(ii)No other make or model is acceptable  for the  following 
reasons...................................................... 
(iii) Concurrence of finance wing to the proposal vide: ……………….. 
(iv) Approval of the competent authority vide: 
(Signature with date and designation of the indenting officer)” 
34. When the Committee sought information regarding the number of procurements made 
through Strategic Alliances (SAs) without obtaining Proprietary Article Certificate, MeitY 
furnished the following information to the Committee:  

- 18 -  
“There were 97 cases of procurement done through Strategic Alliance during the 
period from September 2015 to April 2017, and in all of these procurement was 
made after obtaining PACs. 
Procurement orders were placed directly by the procuring Ministries/Departments 
with NICSI, and not through MeitY. Response regarding procurement by NICSI 
and the bases thereof is based on NICSI’s submissions, which are reproduced in 
the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
One of the circumstances under which procurement was envisaged under rule 
154 of GFR 2005 was “standardisation of machinery or spare parts to be 
compatible to the existing sets of equipment (on the advice of a competent 
technical expert and approved by the competent authority)”. Of the various 
circumstances, only the said circumstance included mention of advice of a 
technical expert. Further, the PAC form prescribed under rule 154 did not provide 
for specific mention of either the particular applicable circumstance from among 
various circumstances envisaged under the rule, or the advice of technical expert. 
Moreover, under rule 154, PACs were issued by the procuring 
Ministry/Department, with the approval of their competent authority. It may be 
seen from the above that the facts regarding the particular circumstance resorting 
to procurement under rule 154 applicable in a particular case and the facts 
regarding technical advice where the same was required, cannot be fully 
ascertained from the contents of the PACs made available to NICSI. However, it is 
seen from the PACs available with NICSI that some of them, while describing the 
reasons for their issuance, include mention of the recommendation/decision of a 
technical committee or consultant…. 
 
…. NICSI has apprised that in 92 cases pertaining to the period from September 
2015 to April 2017, the PACs provided to NICSI stated the reason for not 
accepting other make or models.”  
35.  The NICSI on above issue of PAC, submitted to the Committee during, the course of oral 
evidence, as under: 
“िषष 2015 में तनणषय हु आ कक इसको  एक  बार  ड डपाटषमेंट ऑफ एक्सपेंड डचर को  भेजते  हैं, 
ताक क हमें पता  चल सक े कक हमारा  प्रोसेस ठीक  है या इसको  सही करने  की  अभी भी 
कोई  गुंज ाइश है? ड डपाटषमेंट ऑफ एक्सपेंड डचर ने कहा  कक आप अपना प्रोसेस फॉलो 
कीजजए।  च ंकक  ये ओईएम्पस हैं, इसम लए अच्छा होगा कक जजनसे  आप प्रोक्योरमेंट करते  हैं, 
उनसे प्रोप्राइटरी आटटषकल सटटषक फक े ट ले म लया कीजजए।  यह िषष 2015 के  बाद  की  बात  
है। पहले हम लोग नहीं लेते  थे। अगर रूल-154 को  देखें तो  जो  ड डपाटषमेंट प्रोक्योर करता  
है, उसकी  रेस्पांम सबबम लटी होती  है कक िह अपने ड डपाटषमेंट में प्रोप्राइटरी आटटषकल 
सटटषक फक े ट ले और उसको  अपने हेड ऑफ ड डपाटषमेंट से अप्र ि कराए।  हम सटटषक फक े ट नहीं 
लेते  थे। ऐसे सारे आइटम्पस का  जो  प्रोप्राइटरी आटटषकल्स होते  थे, उनका  हमने िषष 2015 
से सटटषक फक े ट लेना शुरू कर  टदया। हमारा  सी एंड एजी  का  ऑड डट िषष 1995 से जब  से 

- 19 -  
बनी  है, तब  से हर साल होता  रहा है। कोई  ऐसा ऑब्जेक्शन नहीं आया है। िषष 2015-
16 की  इंस्पेक्शन ररपोटष में सी एंड एजी  ने पहली बार  यह कहा  कक आपका  जो  प्रोसेस 
है, िह जीएफआर  के  अनुसार ठीक  नहीं है। आप आगे से एक  चीज  जरूर फॉलो कीजजए  
कक पीएसी फॉमष जरूर म लया कीजजए।  िह हम लोग करते  हैं।” (verbatim pg 4) 
…. सर, जब  िषष 2015 में ड डपाटषमेंट ऑफ एक्सपेंड डचर ने हमसे कहा  कक आप पीएसी 
सटटषक फक े ट उनसे मंगाया कीजजए , तब  से हम लोग लगातार  पीएससी सटटषक फक े ट ले रहे 
हैं।  
 
36. When the Committee asked the reasons for not obtaining proper 'Proprietary Article 
Certificate' for procurements done between April 2014 and September 2015, NICSI in a written 
reply submitted to the Committee as below: 
“A proposal was submitted by NICSI to MeitY through NIC on 20.10.2014 to 
include Strategic Alliance process in G FRs, 2005 by Department of Expenditure. 
Subsequently, on receipt of approval of NIC/ MeitY, the same was forwarded by 
MeitY to Department of Expenditure on 05/06/2015 for their consideration and 
approval.   
 
Department of Expenditure vide ID No.F.21/12012 -PPD dated 28.08.2015 gave 
No Objection if NICSI enters into Strategic Alliance under Rule 154 of GFR 
subject to the condition that before placement of each order Proprietary Article 
Certificate (PAC) as per Rule 154 is provide by the Ministry/ Department.”   
 
(IV)  Internal Audit of NICSI and Role of Controlling Ministry 
37.  The Committee, during the meeting, raised several concerns relating to the working of 
Internal audit of NICSI, role of controlling Ministry, role of Board of Directors and other 
mechanisms, if any, to keep an oversight over the functioning of Company. MeitY categorically 
submitted to the Committee that no internal audit of NICSI was done prior to 2015 -16. In this 
connection, in a written reply to the Committee, regarding the vigil ance/control mechanism 
employed by the Ministry to keep an oversight over NICSI, MeitY submitted as under: 
“NICSI is covered by audit by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (C&AG), statutory audit by C&AG -nominated chartered  accountancy (CA) 
firm and, under the provisions of section 138 of the Companies Act, 2013, 
internal audit by a CA firm.  The vigilance set -up of NICSI functions under the 
supervision and oversight of the Central Vigilance  Commission (CVC). It is 
headed by the CVC -appointed Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) of MeitY, who is 
assisted by a CVO -appointed Vigilance Officer, on part -time basis. Preventive 
vigilance is an  important part of the functions of the vigilance set -up and for 

- 20 -  
performance of the same, it undertakes  a n umber of measures aimed at 
systemic improvements to ensure that prescribed procedures are  followed and 
lapses observed avoided in future. The CVO / Vigilance Officer / Vigilance Unit in 
MeitY also issue advisories from time to time on general practices, tr aining on 
various administrative matters, etc. MeitY has recently engaged a leading global 
consulting firm to study the present organisation structure of NICSI, the roles and 
responsibilities assigned to it, suggest capacity -building programmes for its  
workforce and identify gaps and suggest revamping of its current human 
resource, with a view to make  it future -ready. The overall objective of this 
organization restructuring exercise is to evaluate the  effectiveness of NICSI’s 
organisational structure and ma nagement systems in the light of its present  
responsibilities as well as emerging opportunities.”  
38. When asked about the role of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and 
Internal Audit Department of the Company during 2005 -2014, the pe riod when the GFR, 2005 
were flouted, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“As regards arrangements to detect and take action relating to compliance with 
GFR and other financial norms etc., it is submitted that apart from audit by the 
Office of C&AG, statutory audit by a C&AG nominated CA firm, internal audit by 
a CA -firm under the provisions of section 138 of the Companies Act, 2013, 
NICSI is also covered by internal audit of a CA firm under rule 211(1) of GFR 
2005 / rule 236 of GFR 2017, based on an Annual Internal Audit Plan approved 
by Secretary, MeitY. However, there was shortfall between planned and actual 
audits due to the absence of a dedicated Internal Audit Wing in MeitY (unlike in 
other Civil Ministries). Given this constraint, priorit y was given to grantee 
organizations of MeitY. NICSI was a not -for-profit company which did not 
receive any grants in -aid from the Government, and which operated as a self -
sustaining company that met its administrative expenses from service charges 
on proj ects implemented by it. As a result, MeitY could not undertake the 
Internal Audit for NICSI during the relevant period. The issue also did not get 
flagged in NICSI’s Statutory Audit conducted prior to the Audit for the period 
2014 to 2017, it only came to MeitY’s notice upon reference being made to it by 
NICSI, whereupon MeitY immediately advised NICSI to adhere to GFR and 
other relevant rules. With regard to corrective action, it is submitted that apart 
from discontinuation of Strategic Alliance, NICSI has  now adopted a Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) to be followed before placing of a work order to 
vendors. Further, after taking the matter of providing staff/establishment for 
Internal Audit Wing with MeitY with the Office of Chief Controller of Accounts  
and continuous follow -up, agreement of the Office of the Controller General of 
Accounts has been obtained to provide the same. Moreover, post receipt of the 
C&AG audit observations, special audit of NICSI was ordered and no extension 
was granted in the tenure of the statutory auditors.”  
39. During the course of evidence, when the Committee asked to furnish the objections 

- 21 -  
raised by the internal audit department of NICSI on the procurement procedure, the 
representatives of the Company submitted as follows:  
“……….सर , सी एंड एजी  की  िषष 2015-16 की  इंस्पेक्शन ररपोटष में  ऑब्जेक्शन आई थी।….. 
…..सर , इंटनषल ऑड डट ने कभी  ऑब्जेक्शन नहीं क कया।” 
40. When asked by the Committee whether concurrence of internal Finance Wing of NIC/ 
Ministry was obtained on proposals under Strategic Alliance , NICSI, in a written reply to the 
Committee, submitted as under: 
“In NICSI, financial proposals are processed by the concerned officer/ division 
and submitted to Financial Adviser & Controller of Accounts of NICSI for 
concurrence. The Assistant/ Additional Financial Adviser of NIC were also 
assigned the functions of Financial Adviser & Controller of Accounts, NICSI till 
May 2017. 
 
Subsequently, with the approval of NIC, the responsibility of Financial Adviser & 
Controller of Accounts, NICSI was assigned to an officer of NIC on deputation 
in NICSI.”    

- 22 -  
PART- II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
A. OVERVIEW 
National In formatics Centre Service Inc. (NICSI) was established in 1995 as a  
Section-8 Company under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  (MeitY) for 
providing and procuring Information and Technology (IT) solutions for  e-governance 
projects undertaken by National Informatics Centre (NIC), MeitY and other Government 
Departments and organizations (viz. P ublic Sector Undertakings, Autonomous Bodie s 
etc.). Rule 160 of  General Financial Rules 2005 (GFR 2005) stipulates that a ll government 
purchases should be made in transparent, competitive and fair manner so as to secure 
best value for money. Rule 141A was inserted in GFR with effect from 09 August 2016 to 
provide for procurement on “Government e -Marketplace” (GeM) which has been 
established as a portal for online procurement of common use Goods and Services 
required by  various Government Departments/ Organizations/ Public Sector 
Undertakings. Rule 149 of GFR 2005 provides three standard methods  of obtaining bids 
for procureme nt including “Single Tender E nquiry”. Rule 154 ibid, mentions the 
circumstances under which procurement from a single source can be resorted  such as 
where only a  particular firm is the manufacturer of required goods, and/or  for 
standardization of machinery or spare parts based on advice of a competent technical 
expert and approval of the competent authority , procurement from a particular form may 
be resorted. These purchases have to be supported by a “Proprietary  Article Certificate” 
(PAC) provided by the Ministry/Department in prescribed format as mentioned in GFR. 
 2. The present Audit Para no. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 202 1, examined by the 
Committee, relates t o procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 
crore procured by  National Informatics Center Services Inc. (NICSI)  through strategic 
alliance (SA). In the case, NICSI undertook single source procurement through SA route 
between April 2014 and April 2017  with PACs as perfunctory compliance . Procurements 
prior to September 2015 using this route were not in accordance with Rule 154 of GFR  
and procurements, thereafter, undertaken based on PACs were  also found lack ing 
required details in test checked cases  by the C&AG . Following audit objections  and 
setting up GeM , the practice  of SAs was discontinued by the Company after April 2017 .  
The Committee, before finalizing their observations in their report heard the views of the 
officers from C&AG who conducted the Audit and also the views of the representatives of 
NICSI and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. The Committee, for further 
clarifications took the written replies from the Department of Expenditure (DoE) and 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) of Ministry of Finance.  The evidence s of the 
stakeholders, the inf ormation and clarifications submitted by them and internal 
deliberations made by the members enab led the Committee to arrive at the conclusions 
and make suggestions as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
B. GFR –APPLICABILITY 
3. The General Financial Rules (GFRs) are a compilation of rules and orders of 
Government of India to be followed by all while dealing with matters involving public 

- 23 -  
finances. The Committee are of the opinion that GFRs as issued from time to time aim  to 
provide a framework within w hich a Government Organization manages its business in a 
financially prudent manner without compromising its flexibility required in  varied 
situations. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology during the meeting 
submitted to the Committee tha t they were not clear about the applicability of GFRs on 
the Company. Both DoE and DPE, the Departments under the Ministry of Finance have 
submitted to the Committee that GFRs are not applicable to the CPSUs as they operate in 
a competitive environment, im plying that GFRs are not applicable to NICSI. The 
Committee, find that NICSI in its objectives/functions have mentioned that procurement 
of ICT product and services for the Government sector is made following provisions of 
GFR completely and also guideline s issued by Department of Expenditure and CVC from 
time to time. Department of Expenditure (DOE) also advised NICSI to enter in Strategic 
Alliance under Rule 154 of GFR, 2005 subject to the condition that before placement of 
each order, PAC, as per rule ma y be provided by the Ministry/Department. Further, DoE 
has issued an order Rule 144(xi) of GFR, 2017 wherein certain restrictions have been 
imposed on Central Public Sector Enterprises. T he Committee from the replies received, 
from NICSI, MeitY, DPE and Do E and from the observations of C&AG on this specific 
issue of applicability of GFR on NICSI, note that there is not much clarity amongst the 
various stakeholders regarding  applicability of GFR on CPSEs . At one hand Ministry of 
Finance is stating that GFRs are not applicable to CPSEs, at another they are imposing 
restrictions on CPSEs by issuing order under GFR. The Committee , therefore, 
recommend that a Committee may be formed with representatives from Mi nistry of 
Corporate Affairs, DPE, Meity, DoE and all other stakeholders so as to decide the 
applicability or extent of applicability of GFR on CPSEs. For this, Meity should take up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). 
 
C.  CLARITY ON STRATEGIC ALLIANCE 
4.  Audit had observed that NICSI procured hardware and software  items costing Rs. 
890.34 crore through “Strategic Alliance  (SA)” route in contravention of GFRs 2005 and 
thus failed to ensure transparency and  competitiveness in the  procurement process. As 
procurement through Strategic Alliances was not covered under any rule/ order issued by 
Ministry of Finance(DOE) , NICSI in its 88th B oard of Directors  meeting (September 2014) 
decided to send  a proposal through MeitY, to the Depart ment of Expenditure (DoE) for 
inclusion of Strategic Alliance as a process of procurement in GFR 2005 for providing ICT 
goods and services (including solutions). MeitY further informed the Committee that, on a 
writ petition challenging the Notice inviting Tender (NIT), the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, 
vide its order dated 25.8.2014 in W.P.(C)4370/2014, directed that no further steps be taken 
pursuant to the tender  in question . Against the backdrop of this order, since requests 
were being received from vario us Departments and organisations for implementing 
Proforma Invoices already issued by NICSI under Strategic Alliance for various ongoing 
IT projects, the management approached the Board for approving implementation of such 
proforma invoices. Keeping in vie w the serious difficulty faced in procuring spare parts 
for maintenance of various existing IT installations at a reasonable cost, the Board, in its 
meeting held on 26.9.2014, while extending the validity of the existing Strategic Alliances 
expiring before 31.1.2015 till the said date, advised that NICSI may take up the matter with 
the Government for recognition of the process of Strategic Alliances . Accordingly, 

- 24 -  
proposal for inclusion of SA in GFR was sent to Ministry of Finance by NICSI. Ministry of 
Finance (DoE) while not specifically allowing incorporation  of SAs in GFR, conveyed  in 
August-2015 that, they have no objection if NICSI enters into Strategic Alliance under 
Rule 154 of GFR 2005 subject to the condition that before placement of each order, 
Propriety Article Certificate (PAC) as per Rule 154 is provided by the Ministry/ 
Department’. The  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (Meity)  advised 
NICSI to carefully examine the response of MoF ( DoE), before its formal adoption as a 
process of procurement. NICSI construed the communication from DoE as approval for 
the system of SAs provided procurement was undertaken on the basis of PACs  and 
decided to continue with the system.  The Committee feel that, to avoid complications, 
NICSI should have  carefully examined the advice of DOE as directed by Meity before 
further undertaking procurement through SA. Meity, too, should have ensured that their 
direction are complied with  and therefore, the Committee desire that Meity should ensure 
that due importance is given to the advice rendered by them and DOE in future. 
5. The Committee was informed that 25% of total procurement by NICSI was done 
through SA. However, the Committee note that this is not supported by figure furnished 
by NICSI.  Total procureme nt by NICSI during the period 01.04.2005 till 31.03.2014  
amounts to Rs.1906.61 crore  and out of this Rs.1016.33 crore  of procurement equivalent 
to 51.64 percent  was done through SA . Similarly, during the period 01.04.2014 to 
30.09.2017, out of total procur ement of Rs.2052.19 crore , 43.38  percent i.e. Rs.890.34 
crore of the total procurement was done through SA route these procurements were more 
than 25% of total procurement against the claimed of 25% by NICSI through SA. The 
Committee would like to know the  reasons for this mismatch and therefore, advise NICSI 
to be careful in furnishing fact and figures to the Committee in future.  
6. The Committee further note that NICSI had resorted to the method of SA more than 
it was needed, indicating that NICSI employ ed SA method not just as an exigency 
requirement but as a routine -ones. A stay was imposed by Delhi High Court (DHC), on a 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) in 2014, and for finding a way therefor, BOD asked NICSI to 
take recognition of the process from Ministr y of Finance (DoE) by incorporating the 
provision of SA in GFR. Neither MeitY nor NICSI took any interest in the matter before this 
stay by DHC and rules were allowed to be flouted for more than a decade till the practice 
was discontinued in 2017 after the  introduction of GeM. The Committee therefore, feel 
that NICSI should have taken the advice of DOE before initiating process of SA in 2005 -06 
itself, and would have devised their own set of financial rules. The Committee would like 
to know the reasons behi nd such omissions by NICSI and desire that financial rules and 
procedures for procurement may be framed by BOD of NICSI for transparent 
procurement. 
D. VIOLATION OF RULE 154 OF GFR -2005 - FAILURE IN OBTAINING OF PROPRIETY 
ARTICLE CERTIFICATES(PAC)  
7. The Audit had observed that NICSI didn’t obtain the Propriety Article Certificates 
(PAC) as per the Rule 154 of GFR between the period April 2014 and September 2015 for 
its procurements from single sources as advised by DOE. From September 2015, NICSI 
began obtaining PACs for purchases made from a single source  as advised by DOE . 

- 25 -  
However, a test check revealed that these were being furnished and used without 
mentioning clear, specific and  cogent reasons as per the format prescribed in GFR, for 
procurement through a single source.  The Audit had further stated that the main intent 
was thus, to only show perfunctory compliance with GFRs.  The officials of NICSI did not 
examine whether the same was in order and in case of lacuna, did not find it fit to intimate 
concerned Ministry/Department to fulfill the requirement(s). The Committee, therefore, 
desire that such officials may be identified and responsibility be fixed. Further, the 
Company should remain more careful in future.  
E. INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISM AND THE ROLE OF MEITY 
8. The Committee , during the meeting with the representatives of NICSI and Meit y, 
came across the role of Internal Audit Department of the Company and oversight 
mechanism of the controlling Ministry i.e. Meity. The Committee, note that the 
representatives of NICSI, during the meeting categorically stated that Internal Audit 
Department of the Company had never raised any objections regarding the procurement 
procedure followed by the Company. Further, MeitY, in a written response to the 
Committee, submitted that no internal audit of NICSI was done due to shortage of staff 
prior to 2015-16 and there was absence of dedicated Internal Audit Wing in Ministry. Now 
Controller General of Accounts (CGA) has agreed to provide staff for the purpose . The 
Committee are strongly critical  of above facts and urge both NICSI and MeitY to be more 
vigilant towards their duties.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that internal audit 
system may be strengthened with suitable effective mechanism so that benefit of A udit 
may be harnessed and deficiencies may be rectified in time. 
9. Meity has informed the Committee that they have recently engaged a leading global 
consulting firm with a view to make NICSI future-ready. The Ministry further informed the 
Committee that t he overall objective of this organization restructuring exercise is to 
evaluate the effectiveness of NICSI’s organizational structure and management systems 
in the light of its present responsibilities as well as emerging opportunities. The 
Committee, while appreciating the step taken by MeitY, would like to be informed about 
the salient findings and outcome of the said Study. 
***** 
 
 
New Delhi;            BAIJAYANT PANDA 
11 December, 2024 Chairperson 
20 Agrahayana, 1946(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 

- 26 -  
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2022-2023)   
 
   
  MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 14 th June, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to  
1140 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi      -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda          -                 Director 
3. Shri G.C.Prasad                     -         Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. 
4. 
 
Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu  
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
                                  Rajya Sabha 
 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Prakash Javadekar 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri M. Shanmugam 

- 27 -  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF 
INDIA 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury  - Dy. C&AG ( Finance & Communication) 
2. Shri Manish Kumar  - Director General  
3. Shri Manish Kumar   - Director General of Audit 
4. Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh  - Director General (Parliamentary 
Committee) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members & representatives of the O/o 
C&AG and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
confidentiality of briefing before the Parliamentary Committees. Thereafter, Repr esentatives of 
O/o C&AG made a Power Point presentation and briefed the Committee on ‘Audit Para No. 6.1 
of Report No. 3 of 2021 relating to procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 
890.34 crores through strategic alliance relating to Nati onal Informatics Center Services Inc. ' in 
detail. The issues touched upon, inter-alia, included procurement of hardware and software 
costing Rs. 890.34 crore by National Informatics Centre Service Inc. (NICSI) through the 
“Strategic Alliance” route in contravention of General Financial Rules, 2005  and departmental 
instructions leading to failure in  ensuring transparency and competitiveness in the procurement 
process. 
3. Thereafter, Chairperson and Members sought clarifications from the representatives o f 
the O/o C&AG on various aspects of NICSI seeking reasons behind such glaring lapses, 
corruption motives and emphasized on need to fixing responsibility and accountability. 
4. The representatives of the C&AG clarified on issues on which information was re adily 
available with them. The Committee decided to hear the views of NICSI and Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology  (MeitY) on the Audit Para No. 6.1 of Report No. 3 of 
2021 for further examination of the subject in future sittings of the Committee.  
                   
The Committee then adjourned. 
      /---------------------/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 28 -  
 
 
APPENDIX II  
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2022-23)   
 
  MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 October, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to  
1205 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Block A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Secretariat  
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi                   -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar              -        Director 
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal                   -        Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal             -        Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
                                     Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
5. 
6. 
Shri Janardan Mishra 
Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
7. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
8. 
9. 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
                                Rajya Sabha 
 
10.  Shri Anil Desai 
11. Dr. Anil Jain 
12. 
13. 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri M. Shanmugam 

- 29 -  
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury - Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
(Finance & Communication) 
2. Sh. Manish Kumar - Director General (Finance & 
Communication) 
3. Ms. Aman Deep Chatha - Director General of Audit (Finance & 
Communication) 
4. Ms. R. Uma - Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL INFORMATICS SERVICES INC. (NICSI) 
1. Shri Rajesh Gera - Director General 
2. Dr. Vinay Thakur - Managing Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Bahadur - Deputy Director General, Ex- MD 
4. Shri Manoj Kumar Mishra - Deputy Director General, Ex- MD 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG at the sitting 
convened to take evidence of the representatives of National Informatics Center Services Inc  
(NICSI) in connection with the examination of Audit Para No. 6.1 of Report No. 03 of 2021 of 
C&AG related to ‘procurement of hardware/ software items to the tune of ₹890.34 crores through 
Strategic A lliance relating to National Informatics Center Services  Inc. (NICSI)’ . The 
representatives of O/o C&AG then further highlighted the issues pertaining to procurement of 
hardware and software costing ₹ 890.34 crore from April 2014 to April 2017 by NICSI through 
Strategic Alliance (SA) route violating the Rule 154 of the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005. 
(The representatives of NICSI were, then, called in) 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of NICSI and drew their attention to 
Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding confidentiality of evidence before the 
Parliamentary Committee.  The  Chairperson emphasized on important issues of the Audit Para 
and sought the reasons behind not complying with the GFR, 2005.  The Chairperson also sought 
clarifications as to why the procurements between the period in question  were undertaken 
without obtaining Propriety Article Certificates.  
4. Thereafter, the r epresentatives of NICSI made a presentation to the Committee on the 
subject highlighting therein the Company’s genesis and business profile; Company’s impact and 
major achievements, etc. NICSI made submissions on the observations of the Audit and 
explained the circumstances under which the provision of GFR, 2005 were not followed and the 
alternative mechanisms adopted by them in the procurements done during the period to meet 
the specific demands of the clients. 
5. The Members, then, raised various issues pertaining to Audit findings in the functioning of 

- 30 -  
NICSI vis-à-vis details of the procurements under the Strategic Alliance route, number of 
Strategic Alliances made by the Company; role of the Internal Audit Division of the Company 
during the period when GFR, 2005 were not followed by the Company; major articles bought 
under the Strategic Alliances; fixi ng of responsibility, for not following the provisions of GFR, 
2005 in procurement; items purchased/being purchased by the Company through the sources 
other than the Government Marketing (GeM) Portal; rate(s) at which articles were purchased, 
role of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), etc. 
6. The representatives of the NICSI clarified issues on which information was readily 
available with them. In respect of some points for which information was not readily available, 
the Chairperson desir ed that written replies may be furnished to the Committee Secretariat 
within 10 days. 
(The Committee, then, adjourned) 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

- 31 -  
 
APPENDIX III 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2022-23)   
 
  MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 October, 2022 from 1205 hrs. to  
1230 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Block A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar  -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
                                                                                                                                                                                      
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi                  -        Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar             -        Director 
3. Shri G.C. Dobhal                  -        Additional Director 
4. Smt. Mriganka Achal             -        Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. 
3. 
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
5. Shri Janardan Mishra 
6. Shri Ravneet Singh Bittu 
7. Shri Sushil Kumar Singh 
8. 
9. 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
 
                             Rajya Sabha 
 
10.  Shri Anil Desai 
11. Dr. Anil Jain 
12. 
13. 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri M. Shanmugam 
 
                SECRETARIAT 

- 32 -  
REPRESENTATIVES OF OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
1. Ms. Aditi Roy Choudhury - Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
(Finance & Communication) 
2. Sh. Manish Kumar - Director General (Finance & 
Communication) 
3. Ms. Aman Deep Chatha - Director General of Audit (Finance & 
Communication) 
4. Ms. R. Uma - Director 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
1. Shri Amit Agrawal - Additional Secretary 
2. Sh. Rajesh Singh - Joint Secretary 
    
(The representatives of MeitY were called in) 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' 
regarding confidentiality of evidence before the Parliamentary Committee. The Chairperson empha sized 
on important aspects of NICSI and sought the action taken by the Meity on the violation of General 
Financial Rules (GFR), 2005 by National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI). The Chairperson also 
sought clarifications on the aspect as to whether the Board of Directors (BoD) of the NICSI has allowed to 
make procurement in conflict with GFR and whether BoD is competent to allow such modifications in the 
provisions of GFR, 2005. 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of Meity gave clarifications on var ious aspects such as the 
applicability of GFR, 2005 on various companies; the action taken by the Ministry on non -compliance of 
relevant provisions of GFR, 2005 by NICSI; the views of the Meity on the Strategic Alliances followed by 
NICSI, etc.  
4. The Members, then, raised various issues such as genesis and need of compliance with GFR 
Rules; the role of Internal Audit Wing of the Ministry; the cognizance of internal audit of NICSI, and 
Department of Expenditure about non -conpliance of GFR; the audit object ions raised by C&AG and the 
action taken thereon; the lackadaisical attitude of the representatives of the Ministry on this issues. 
5. The representatives of MeitY clarified issues on which information was readily available with 
them. In respect of some po ints for which information was not readily available, the Chairperson desired 
that written replies may be furnished to the Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
(The Committee, then, adjourned) 
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept. 
 
/---------------------/ 

- 33 -  
                                                           APPENDIX IV 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 25th September, 2024 from 1350 hrs. to 1415 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda        -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. 
4. 
Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
12. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
13. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

- 34 -  
 
2. After the Committee reassembled for the afternoon session, Hon’ble Chairperson chaired 
the third agenda item  of the day .  Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the two draft 
Reports that were approved during the previous term of the Committee by erstwhile Chairperson 
and considered as part of unfinished work  of the Committee. The Committee then considered 
and adopted the following two draft report s, without any changes/modifications, On the following 
two selected subjects: - 
i. ‘Para No. 6.1 of R eport No.3 of 2021 related to “P rocurement of hardware/software 
item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 crores through strategic alliance relating to National 
Informatics Centre Services Inc” (Based on Audit Examination); and 
ii. Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) (Comprehensive Examination)  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalized the draft Reports on the basis of 
factual verification as suggested by C&AG and concerned Ministry/Department for presenting 
the Reports during the next session of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned to take-up next agenda item of the afternoon sittings. 
/-------/ 
 
 