28 
 
IREL (INDIA) LIMITED 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 


ii  
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
IREL (INDIA) LIMITED 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on IREL (India) Limited] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025  
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947(Saka)


iii  
 
 
CPU No. 1084 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 

iv  
CONTENTS 
   Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  iv 
 INTRODUCTION  v 
CHAPTER I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies 
 32 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 33 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government has furnished interim replies and final 
replies are still awaited 
 34 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 15th Sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2025-26) held on 05 December, 2025 
 39 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘IREL (India) Limited’ 
 41 
 
  

v  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.   Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13.   Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy   
15.  Shri Lalji Verma  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Dr. John Brittas 
17.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh - Executive Officer 
 

vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (202 5-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this             
Twenty-Eighth R eport on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘IREL (India) Limited’. 
2. The Twelfth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 March, 2025. The 
Action taken Replies to all the eight (08) Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report were received from the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)  on 26 September, 
2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 05 
December, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee (18 th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix -II. 
 
  
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
08 December, 2025                                 Chairperson 
 17 Agrahayana, 1947(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
 
 

1  
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings on IREL (India) Limited, which was presented to 
Parliament on 18 March 2025. It contained eight (08) Observations/Recommendations. 
 
2.  Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
eight (08) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee and since the 
Observation/Recommendation Sl. No. 1 was introductory, the Government did not offer 
comments on it. The eight (08) Observations/Recommendations have been categorized 
as follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3,5, 6, 7 & 8 
(Chapter II) 
 
 
(Total: 06) 
  
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
Nil 
(Chapter III) 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration    
 
Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
  
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited   
 
Sl. Nos. 2 & 4 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
(Total: 02) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) to furnish final 
Action Taken Notes/ Replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report.  The Committee further desire that the final 

2  
replies in respect of  Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for 
which only interim replies have been given by Government, should be furnished to 
the Committee expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
VACANT POSITIONS OF REGULAR CMD AND FOUR INDEPENDENT DIRECTORS 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee, in their Twelfth Report, had recommended the following with regard 
to vacancies in the Board of Directors: 
“The Committee note that there is no regular CMD since the superannuation of the 
officer who held the post of CMD on 30 November 2024 and since then the Director 
(Finance) has been holding the additional charge of CMD. Moreover, all the four 
(04) posts of Non -official Independent Directors are vacant and consequently, the 
Board strength has been reduc ed to half of the total sanctioned strength of 12. 
Though the Committee learned that IREL has already taken up the matter with the 
appropriate authority and their response is awaited, the Committee feel that these 
vacancies not only hamper the functioning of the Company, but also violate the 
principle of Corporate Governance. Therefore, the Committee urge upon the 
Government of India through DAE, being the administrative Ministry, to fill up the 
vacant posts of four Independent Directors and appoint a regular CMD without any 
further delay. Also, if the Company is discharging their functions effectively with less 
number of Independent Directors, they may think of reducing the sanctioned posts 
of Directors in the organization in future.” 
 
6. DAE, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
"As per the DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance dated 14.05.2010, unlisted 
CPSEs are required to have at least one -third of the Board Members as 
Independent Directors. The Department of Atomic Energy, vide its letter dated May 
4, 2018, stipulated that th e Board of IREL should comprise four Independent 
Directors. Accordingly, the company has consistently endeavoured to ensure 
adequate number of Independent Directors on its Board. 
 
Department has requested DPE through its various correspondences in the last one 
year for appointment of Non-Official Directors (NoDs) and is continuing to follow up 
with them. As efforts are under taken to fill up the vacant NoD position in Board in 
consultation with DPE, no need is felt to reduce the sanctioned posts of Directors in 
IREL. 
 

3  
With regard to the appointment of regular CMD, PESB has already conducted the 
interview and recommended the candidate, which is under process for ACC 
approval.” 
 
7. The Committee acknowledge the progress made with regard to the 
appointment of a regular CMD, with the Public Enterprise Selection Board’s (PESB) 
recommendation under process for the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet’s 
(ACC) approval. However, the Commi ttee note that despite such efforts and 
persuasion by the Company, the appointment is not finalized and a regular CMD has 
not been appointed yet. At the same time, the Committee would like to point out the 
issue of continued vacancy of all four Non -official Independent Director posts and 
the ongoing pendency on the part of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). 
The Committee underscore that the absence of Independent Directors reflects 
challenges in consistently meeting corporate governance norms an d guidelines. In 
this regard, DAE is encouraged to explore timely measures that reinforce alignment 
with established norms and expectations. The Committee consider the current 
response as interim reply and express their confidence that further progress will be 
made in due course. 
 
EXPLORING WAYS TO ESTABLISH RE ECOSYSTEM IN INDIA 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
8. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended the following with regard to 
lending margins: 
"The Committee note that creating an ecosystem of REs is very long drawn process 
and it consists of ten to twelve segments and unless all the segments are developed, 
any country cannot benefit from the ecosystem in order to move ahead. The 
Committee also learned that the monopoly that China has established is such that 
it has established the entire segments and for that to happen, it gave a red -carpet 
welcome to international investments with no conditions. So, international investors 
worked in China for 5 y ears and during this period the Chinese developed the 
required skilled manpower and consequently they were able to establish their own 
RE industry of the entire value chain. This kind of ecosystem has been developed 
there and due to this, the Chinese monop oly got established in the global RE 
market. 
 
The Committee are happy to note that India has also gained the requisite expertise 
over the years in the mining and processing of REs, which in India’s case is 

4  
radioactive too. IREL also has the capability to extract REs out of the far inferior and 
very less concentrated Indian RE ores, India’s RE content being 0.056 to 0.058% 
whereas that of China is 6%. It is also learned that over 90% of IREL customers in 
India are in MSE (Micro and Small Enterprises) category. The processed minerals 
and chemicals produced by IREL are supplied to about 2000 industries (mostly 
MSEs) operating in the downstream sector. They make ancillary products for bigger 
companies, resulting in import substitution and promote the Make in India initiative 
of the Government of India.  
 
The Committee feel that IREL and DAE may consider exploring ways for bringing 
skilled manpower and required expertise to further/fully develop the entire RE 
ecosystem to cater to the entire rare earth value chain in order to be able to counter 
to a certain extent China’s monopoly in the global RE market. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
 
9. DAE, in their action taken reply, has stated as follows: 
"The Rare Earth (RE) bearing mineral in the Indian reserves has a very lean content 
of RE to the tune of 0.056 -0.058% and is associated with radioactivity. Hence, a 
long drawn eco -system is required to move from reserves to finished product 
comprising of mu ltiple processes/plants. This includes obtaining statutory 
clearances, mining, mineral beneficiation, upgradation of RE bearing mineral, RE 
extraction, refining to oxides, metal extraction, etc. Specific to RE magnet, one need 
to convert metal to alloy an d then to magnet. Thereafter, application of finished 
product as motor finds use in energy saving appliances.  
 
While India has existing facilities from mining to separation, extraction and refining 
to oxide form and has also developed capability of metal extraction, but further 
industrial scale facilities (intermediate) to alloy, magnet etc. are non -existent. To 
address the issue of lack of industries in the intermediate value chain, IREL has 
established a Rare Earth & Titanium Theme Park at Bhopal. At this facility, rare earth 
metals have been produced for the first time in the country. Mini plants for the 
production of Cerium, Lanthanum and Neodymium Metals along with recovery of 
magnetic Rare Earths from end -of-life magnets have been established with the 
technology established by BARC on Lab scale. This ecosystem so created is 
established with a view to upscale the scientific principles proven at laboratory to 
pilot scale and demonstrate the same to aspiring Industries to set up commercial 
operations. This is an attempt to pave way for furthering the RE value chain from 
the upstream sector to mid-stream sector by allowing private industries to familiarize 
themselves with the process and gain hands-on-experience. Further, this serves as 
a training ground for the industries to develop the necessary skillsets.  
 
Once the industry scale -plant is established, the requisite skill set for magnet 
making, a crucial component of the REE value chain, can be developed. 
 
In addition, the following steps have been taken by the Government of India: 
1. National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM) has been launched by Government of 
India in January 2025 for promoting exploration, mining, beneficiation, 

5  
processing, recycling, etc. of critical minerals which also include REEs. It also 
promotes acquisition of assets abroad which may help in assisting in stockpiling 
of resources of magnetic and heavy REEs (which are not available in Indian 
resources). 
 
2. Government of India is in the process of framing a policy to establish downstream 
Industry using REE. This would pave the way for establishment of Industries in 
the Intermediate RE value chain for the production of magnets which are used in 
national securi ty, atomic energy, green sector, etc. Once the magnet making 
industries are established, skills associated with the process can be passed on 
to the workforce.” 
 
10. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by IREL and DAE, particularly 
with regard to the setting up of Rare Earth & Titanium Theme Park as a demonstrator 
and training ground. Further, the launch of the National Critical Mineral Mission  
(NCMM) and the process of framing a downstream industry policy is also a welcome 
step in the right direction . To improve further, the Committee desire that concrete 
steps may be taken to scale these pilot facilities into full -fledged industrial 
operations of international standards, if possible, in partnership with private players 
(domestic or international companies) with a long-term vision, especially to counter 
the dominance of other Countries in this field. The Committee also desire to set 
timelines to achieve t he goal and close monitoring of the same so that India can 
emerge as a competitive player in the global RE market. 
 
DELAY IN STARTING OPERATION OF IREL–IDCOL LIMITED 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
11. The Committee, in their Twelfth Report, had recommended the following regarding 
IREL-IDCOL: 
"The Committee note that IREL has formed a Joint Venture (JV) Company called 
IREL-IDCOL Limited in collaboration with Industrial Development Corporation of 
Odisha Limited (IDCOL). The JV Company was incorporated on 18.01.2018 with 
IREL holding minimum 51% a nd IDCOL holding upto 49% of the share capital. A 
CEO and a Project Co-Ordinator have been appointed for the JV Company. A mining 
Officer of IREL is assisting the Project Co -ordinator in matters related to the JV 
Company and rest of the manpower support is occasional and are being drawn from 
IREL.  
 
The Committee further note that IREL -IDCOL is under the process of obtaining 
mining lease for which the process of statutory clearances such as Environmental 

6  
Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ), etc. have 
been taken up. Because of not getting timely clearances of the above statutory 
clearances, starting of operation of the Company is getting delayed. The Committee 
recommend that  the issues pertaining to granting of clearances of the above 
statutory clearances may be taken up at the level of the Department so that the 
process may be expedited and IREL-IDCOL may start operation without any further 
delay.” 
 
12. DAE, in their action taken reply, has stated as follows: 
“Formation of JV Company and Issuance of Letter of Intent (LOI): 
The IREL -IDCOL Joint Venture company was incorporated on 18.01.2018. The 
Letter of Intent (LoI) from the Government of Odisha, covering an area of 852.459 
Ha, was issued in June 2022. This resulted in significant delay in initiating project -
related activities. The sequence of activities towards receiving LoI are as under:  
• IREL applied for grant of Mining lease for an extent of 974.369 Ha. in May 2018. 
• AMD confirmed the availability of Geological Report (GR) for 875 Ha under Rule 4 
(5)b of AMCR 2016 and the GR was submitted to State Govt. in February 2019. 
• The field survey was started in February 2020.   
• In October 2020, Government of Odisha after the field survey requested DAE to 
nominate IREL IDCOL Ltd as prospective lessee. The same was received in 
January 2021 from DAE.  
 
ToR and Environmental Clearance Process: 
• Form-1 and the Pre -feasibility Report were submitted to the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) on 30.01.2024. The 
proposal was considered in the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) meeting held 
on 06.03.2024 and the Terms of Referenc e (ToR) were issued on 12.04.2024. 
Compliance with ToR conditions is completed. On account of the delay in 
obtaining the Forest Clearance, the submission of Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) report is on hold. 
• No sooner the CRZ and Forest recommendations are received, the proposal 
would be submitted for grant of Environmental Clearance. 
 
Forest Land Diversion Requirement 
Government of Odisha issued LoI for 852.459 Ha of land to JV company. During the 
application process, it was informed by the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Chilka 
about the presence of 527.83 Ha under Pitisal Proposed Reserve Forest (PRF) in 
the lease area. While giving clearance for the Differential Global Positioning System 
(DGPS) survey, the DFO, Chilka requested to carry out DGPS survey over an extent 
of 540 Ha of Pitisal PRF. However, on completion of the DGPS survey, the 
authenticated land schedule indicated 580.806 Ha of Forest Land. With sustained 
efforts, a total of 1253.504 Ha of degraded forest land was identified in the state for 
Compensatory Afforestation (CA) against the forest land proposed for diversion.  
 
Application for forest clearance was submitted to MoEF&CC on 12.01.2024. The 
Project Screening Committee (PSC) deferred the proposal four times, raising 

7  
Essential Details Sought (EDS) observations on some pretext or the other. The 
primary issue pertained to compliance with Rule 13 of the Van (Sanrakshan Evam 
Samvardhan) Rules, 2023, notified on 29.11.2023, which mandates submission of 
a certificate from the competent authority of the state, confirming the non-availability 
of suitable government non-forest land for CA. 
 
This was finally resolved when an amendment to the aforesaid Rule 13 came into 
effect on 20.09.2024, providing necessary regulatory relief. Consequently, the 
proposal was accepted on 07.10.2024, nearly 10 months after the initial submission.  
After the requisite formalities, the Part - I field inspection was carried out by Nodal, 
PCCF in November 2024, post which Part – II field inspection was carried out by 
DFO, Chilika in March 2025.  
 
Prior to Part-III site inspection, a review meeting was conducted by Regional Chief 
Conservator of Forests (RCCF), Bhubaneswar in presence of DFO, Chilika on 
16.04.2025. Subsequently, on 29.04.2025, an observation was raised by the RCCF, 
Bhubaneswar to rev erify the Land Schedule citing that some District Level 
Committee (DLC) lands were coming under non -Forest areas and PRF. It was 
determined that approximately 39.079 hectares of DLC land were required to be 
added to the earlier documented 580.806 hectares of forest land. A revised Land 
Schedule, incorporating this additional DLC land, was submitted to DFO, Chilika for 
verification and authentication on 14.05.2025, after which during a coordination 
meeting held on 31.07.2025 in the office of DFO, Chilika, it  was informed that a 
Coastal Shelter Belt (CSB) Plantation existed within the applied Mining Lease area 
which was established by the Forest Department during 1979 -1997. The DFO 
requested submission of CSB plantation area to be included within the lease. 
 
Subsequently, on 13.08.2025, DFO, Chilika convened a joint review meeting with 
IREL to finalize the Land Schedule. The revised Land Schedule, covering a total 
area of 673.498 hectares comprising PRF 580.806 ha, DLC 39.079 ha, and CSB 
Plantation 53.613 ha with Mining Lease maps incorporating the CSB plantation, was 
submitted to the DFO, Chilika, on 25.08.2025.  
 
Due to the constant changes in the forest area, the associated requirement of 
finalizing the compensatory afforestation scheme is also getting delayed, thereby 
affecting the entire process of early operationalization of these mines. 
 
In this regard, Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, had raised concerns with 
the Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha in a meeting held on 28 th April, 2025 
regarding delays in execution of the mining lease, particularly due to repeated 
changes in the Land Schedule. It was emphasized that unless the Land Schedule 
is frozen, further delays may occur. Also, the matter was communicated to Additional 
Chief Secretary, Department of Industries, Govt. of Odisha vide letter dated 20th May 
2025 for freezing of area of Forest land of the project so as to expedite the project. 
 
Further, Secretary, DAE, vide letter dated 29.08.2025, requested Secretary, 
MOEF&CC that in consideration of strategic importance of atomic minerals, 
exemption may be granted for mining projects of atomic minerals from public 

8  
consultation to facilitate early operationalization of strategically critical projects. In 
response, MOEF&CC has granted waiver of Public hearing to all the projects 
notified in Part B of the first schedule of MMDR Act, exempting from Public 
consultation.” 
 
13. The Committee appreciate that following the Committee’s recommendation, 
DAE has taken steps including high -level intervention and securing of a waiver of 
Public Hearing for atomic mineral projects to get all necessary clearances to 
establish the Joint Vent ure (JV) i.e. IREL -IDCOL Limited. The Committee note that 
the operationalization of the JV continues to be deferred, primarily due to the 
evolving nature of the land schedule and the associated delays in finalizing 
compensatory afforestation requirements. Given the status, the Committee regard 
the response as interim reply. The Committee trust that DAE will maintain close 
coordination with the Government of Odisha and the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest, and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) to bring early resolutio n to the pending 
issues, particularly the finalization of the land schedule and requisite clearances, so 
that project activities may commence at the earliest. Given the strategic importance 
of atomic minerals, the Committee feel that early operationalization of this JV should 
be treated as a top priority and pursued with required urgency. 
 
IMPORTANCE OF TIMELY COMPLETION OF ONGOING PROJECTS 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
14. The Committee, in their Twelfth Report, recommended the following for timely 
completion of ongoing projects: 
“The Committee note that IREL has about seven major ongoing projects which are 
at different stages of implementation. Rare Earth and Titanium Theme Park is being 
set up in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh for motivating and training entrepreneurs to set 
up plants using rare earth products at commercial scale. A Joint Venture Company 
with UKTMP JSC, Kazakhstan is also being established for setting up a titanium 
slag plant and a Technology Demonstration Plant for the production of 4N pure 
nano-titania and nanozirconium oxychloride based on in -house technology is also 
being established. Moreover, mining plants are being developed at Bramhagiri 
Mineral Sand Deposits in the state of Odisha and Inayam -Midalam Mineral Sand 
Deposits in the state of Tamil Nadu. Another domesti c Joint Venture Company by 
the name of IREL-TAMIN Limited has also been incorporated, to carry out rare earth 
mining in the state of Tamil Nadu, in addition to the already incorporated IREL -
IDCOL Limited. 

9  
 
While expressing their happiness at IREL’s scale and scope of the ongoing projects, 
which if developed fully, will significantly improve the Country’s capability in 
establishing the entire value chain in rare earth from mining to processing to 
commercialization in collaboration with private entrepreneurs, the Committee are of 
the strong view that timely completion of these projects is of utmost importance to 
make the projects cost -effective and achieve their purposes for which they have 
been established and start working for the nation sooner in a strategic sector as RE 
in today’s uncertain geopolitical scenario. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that all these projects be completed within their stipulated time of completion and 
would like to be apprised of the status within six months.” 
15. DAE, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“IREL is mandated to supply strategic materials such as RE bearing mineral, Zircon 
& RE compounds, derived from the mining and processing of BSM Ore. These 
materials are critical for the national security and atomic energy.  Considering the 
strategic import ance of REEs, Zircon and RE bearing mineral, the projects 
pertaining to mining of atomic minerals are covered under Part B of First schedule 
of MMDR Act, 1957 and amendments thereof. Actions have been taken to enable 
exemption of public consultation for a ll projects or activities concerning national 
security and atomic energy for expeditious grant of all statutory clearances including 
environmental clearance and early operationalization of projects.  
 
In this regard, Secretary DAE vide letter dt. 02.05.2025 requested Secretary, 
MoEF&CC for amendments to ToR with respect to exemption of public hearing for 
the mining project of IREL in Kanyakumari district wherein as part of obtaining EC, 
IREL is facing h indrance in public hearing as District Administration was not 
announcing the date despite repeated requests from IREL. Also, IREL’s application 
for CRZ clearance has not yet been considered by District Coastal Zone 
Management Authority (DCZMA). Considering  the same, MoEF&CC issued 
amended ToR F. No. IA-Z-11013/10/2023-IA-I dt. 02.07.2025 granting exemption of 
public hearing for Environmental & CRZ clearance for the said project.  
 
Further, MOEF&CC has granted waiver of Public hearing to all the projects notified 
in Part B of the first schedule of MMDR Act, exempting from Public consultation.  
 
This will pave way for early & timely completion of projects resulting in minimizing 
risk and driving growth for critically important strategic projects. 
 
Status of Projects is furnished below:  
SI. 
No. 
Project Name  Present status 
1 Rare Earth & 
Titanium Theme 
Park: 
The Rare Earth & Titanium Theme Park is 
established at Acharpura, Bhopal with the 
objective to demonstrate technologies using 
Rare Earth oxides to produce Rare Earth 
Metals & Titanium Sponge and develop 

10  
SI. 
No. 
Project Name  Present status 
Entrepreneurs and skilled workforce to set up 
plants on an industrial scale. Process 
validation is in progress for Cerium, 
Lanthanum and Neodymium Metals along 
with recovery of Rare Earths from end -of-life 
magnets. Titanium Sponge and LED & Lamp 
Phosphors plant installation is complete and 
are also under process validation. The entire 
Project encompassing multiple pilot plants 
has been completed on 31.03.2025. 
 
2 JV with UKTMP Joint Venture Company with M/s Ust -
Kamenogorsk Titanium and Magnesium Plant 
(UKTMP) JSC, Kazakhstan was incorporated 
on 05.08.2025 for setting up of Titanium Slag 
plant in India. First meeting of the Board was 
held on 28.08.2025. Basic engineering is 
under preparation. 
 
3 Technology 
Demonstration 
Plant 
Project has been completed on 31.12.2024. 
Being an in -house R&D activity at lab scale, 
the process validation in pilot scale is in 
progress. 
 
4 BRAHMAGIRI BSM 
PROJECT, Odisha 
 
Process of selection and engagement of an 
MDO for carrying out a Pre -Project activity 
towards obtaining statutory clearances, 
mining and upgradation of Mineral sands is in 
process.  
Parallel activity of preparing mining plan has 
been taken up. Obtaining exploration report, 
field survey reassessment is in progress. 
5 INAYAM- MIDALAM 
PROJECT, Tamil 
Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRZ Clearance:  
1. On amendment of Terms of Reference 
(ToR) exempting Public Hearing by the 
MoEF&CC, the revised CRZ application 
along with final EIA report was submitted to 
the District Environmental Engineer, Tamil 
Nadu Pollution Control Board (TNPCB) & 
Convenor Distric t Coastal Zone 
Management Authority (DCZMA) on 
28.07.2025 for forwarding the DCZMA's 
recommendation to the Tamil Nadu State 
Coastal Zone Management Authority 
(TNSCZMA). 

11  
SI. 
No. 
Project Name  Present status 
 
 
 
2. The DCZMA's meeting for deliberation is 
yet to be conducted. Further, suitable 
requests are also made to District 
Collector/Chairperson of DCZMA for 
expediting the recommendation. 
3.The matter has also been taken up at the 
level of State Administration. 
 
6 IREL TAMIN 
PROJECT, Tamil 
Nadu 
 
▪ IREL TAMIN Limited was incorporated on 
28 June 2024 with the objective to mine 
and set up pre -concentration and mineral 
separation processing plant of beach sand 
mineral deposits in Kudiraimozhi (6000 Ha) 
and Sattankulam Teri heavy mineral 
deposit (1900 Ha ) areas in Thoothukudi 
districts of Tamil Nadu. 
▪ Land demarcation of all the villages of 
Kudiraimozhi and Sattankulam area is 
digitized and field survey along with 
classification of land completed by the 
team constituted by the State Government. 
▪ The Survey Report was submitted to the 
District Collector, Thoothukudi on 
25.01.2025 for onward submission to the 
Commissioner of Geology and mining, 
Tamil Nadu. 
▪ The above Field Survey Report is 
forwarded to Tamil Nadu Govt by the DC, 
Thoothukudi in end February. 
• Recommendation of the State Govt to the 
Central Govt (DAE) recommending IREL 
TAMIN Ltd as prospective lessee and 
intimation from Central Govt (DAE) on 
nominating the prospective lessee is 
awaited. 
 
7 IREL-IDCOL 
Limited (IIL) Odisha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha issued Letter of Intent 
(LOI) in June 2022 towards grant of mining 
lease in favour of IREL IDCOL Ltd. Term of 
Reference (ToR) was received from 
MoEF&CC on 12.04.2025 for grant of EC.  
Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA)/Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) report preparation is completed. 
Parallel activities for obtaining other statutory 

12  
SI. 
No. 
Project Name  Present status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clearances such as CRZ, and Forest 
Clearance are also in progress.   
It may be noted that on account of lack of 
clarity in the land records regarding forest 
land, the forest area which was initially 527 Ha 
was changed to 580 Ha. Further, after two 
stages of field inspection, there was a 
recommendation to reverify the records.  
 
The revised land schedule covering a total 
area of 673.498 Ha (comprising of PRF 
580.806 Ha, DLC 39.079 Ha and CSB 
plantation of 53.613 Ha) in the mining lease 
maps was submitted to the DFO, Chilika on 
25.08.2025 for approval. 
On account of frequent changes in the forest 
area, the project has been inordinately 
delayed. Further, because of consistent 
changes, there are difficulties in identifying CA 
land. 
• Matter has been taken up at different levels 
of the state government to freeze the forest 
land with a view to expedite implementation 
of the project as detailed in page no. 11. 
 
16. The Committee appreciate the detailed status provided by DAE and are 
content to note that some of the projects have been completed and commend the 
proactive steps taken, particularly securing the waiver of Public Hearing and Public 
Consultation from MoEF&CC, as they directly address the delays noted in obtaining 
statutory clearances, thereby facilitating the early and timely completion of 
strategically important projects. The Committee also note that certain aspects of the 
projects continue to face delays, particularly in relation to the Coastal Regulation 
Zone (CRZ) and forest clearance processes. While acknowledging the inherent 
complexities of these regulatory frameworks, the Committee encourage a more 
structured and proactive approach to project manageme nt. In this regard, it would 
be beneficial to define clear goals and timelines for each phase of the project, 
supported by a system of quarterly progress reporting to help maintain momentum 
and ensure accountability throughout the execution process. The Co mmittee are 

13  
hopeful that timely completion of all ongoing projects will strengthen the Company 
in establishing strong position not only domestically but also in international 
market. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF RARE EARTH (RE) MINING 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
17. The Committee, in their Twelfth Report, recommended the following regarding 
environmental impact of RE mining: 
“The Committee learn that Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential for modern 
technologies, including electronics, renewable energy systems, and defence 
applications. However, the long -term extraction and utilization of these materials 
pose significant envi ronmental and health risks that must be addressed through 
responsible policies and sustainable practices. Moreover, RE mining is highly 
disruptive to ecosystems and the extraction process generates large amounts of 
toxic waste, including radioactive materials such as uranium and thorium, which can 
contaminate soil and water sources. Additionally, open -pit mining and chemical 
processing lead to deforestation, habitat destruction, and increased greenhouse gas 
emissions. Over time, these impacts contribute to  biodiversity loss and 
environmental degradation. 
 
The Committee have also learned that communities near rare earth mining sites 
face serious health concerns. Exposure to heavy metals and radioactive by -
products can lead to respiratory diseases, organ damage, and increased cancer 
risks. Workers in the indu stry are particularly vulnerable to occupational hazards, 
including exposure to toxic dust and chemicals.  
 
The Committee also acknowledge that IREL has taken steps to reduce its 
environmental footprint and to achieve net zero targets by putting in place 
mandatory Environmental Management System (EMS) and adopting practices such 
as not using chemicals in the min ing and mineral processing activities and using 
physical separation process to extract the minerals; systematic plantation of native 
species over the mined -out area; installation of solar power plants to the tune of 
1588 kWp for its use and for local consu mption; use of LPG as a replacement for 
coal in boilers and furnace oil in dryers and so on. 
 
While appreciating the fact that IREL has been doing everything in its capacity to 
reduce its operations’ impact and harm on environment, the Committee strongly 
desire that to mitigate these risks, IREL should never let its guards down and adopt 
stricter e nvironmental regulations, invest in cleaner extraction technologies, and 
promote recycling of rare earth elements from electronic waste. The Company 
should also collaborate with industries to develop sustainable alternatives and 
improve waste management practices. 
 

14  
The Committee feel that by implementing responsible mining practices and 
prioritizing environmental and public health safeguards, we can balance the demand 
for rare earth elements with the need for a sustainable and healthy future.” 
 
18. DAE, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“The environmental impact of RE mining are primarily due to the complex and often 
toxic nature of the ore body including various radioactive and non -radioactive 
impurities which require extensive use of water and chemicals/alkalis/acids for 
extracting the material.  
 
In the Indian context, the resource of REE is occurring in association with 
radioactivity, making the extraction process long, complex and expensive. During 
the process some quantity of radioactive residue is generated which is stored in 
compliance with AERB guidelines. Health Physics Unit (HPU), an independent unit 
of Environmental Assessment Division (EAD) of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
(BARC), Government of India, monitors the radiological safety aspects in all the 
facilities of IREL as per AERB guidelines.  
 
Before obtaining mining lease, an Environmental impact assessment (EIA) study is 
conducted to assess the environmental impact and its mitigation which is submitted 
to MOEF&CC. Only after clearance of MoEF&CC, the lease is executed for mining. 
The impact of environmental degradation is thus minimized through adherence to 
the conditions laid down in the EIA report. Further, regular reports are also submitted 
to various authorities for monitoring. 
 
IREL has collaborated with Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai, for 
developing the process for decomposition of trace quantity of amines available in 
effluents by Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP). IREL is also in collaboration with 
CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology (IMMT), Bhubaneswar, for 
recovery of heavy minerals from mining tails. 
 
IREL continuously upgrades its equipment to adopt new generation technologies 
with a view to reduce waste and improve recovery.” 
 
19. The Committee appreciate the measures already undertaken by IREL/DAE to 
minimize environmental degradation, including compliance monitoring by 
independent agencies and forward -looking research and development (R&D) 
initiatives. The continuous radiological safety oversight by BARC, coupled with 
strategic collaborations for effluent decomposition and recovery of minerals from 
mining tails, demonstrates a strong commitment to cleaner technology and 
sustainable waste management, thereby fully addressing the concerns raised by the 
Committee. However, recognizing the strategic importance of Rare Earth Elements 

15  
(REEs) and the long -term environmental risks posed by conventional mining 
practices, the Committee encourage IREL to adopt global best practices in waste 
management, accelerate R&D in recycling technologies and recommend publishing 
annual sustainability re ports to promote transparency and public confidence. The 
Committee are hopeful that these actions will help fulfil the Company’s 
environmental sustainability goals or helpful in achieving such goals for the benefit 
of the larger good of the society. 
 
ADDRESSING ILLEGAL MINING AND SOCIAL RESISTANCE 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
20. The Committee, in their Twelfth Report, recommended the following addressing 
illegal mining and social resistance: 
“The Committee have learned that among the many challenges faced by IREL 
during its mining operations, lobby of illegal miners during opening of the sector 
creating hindrances at every step including award of contract and undue protests 
from NGOs instigatin g locals misrepresenting factual information about its 
mines/plants. The Committee recommend that IREL should work with local 
governments and law enforcement agencies to prevent illegal operations and 
strengthen security and legal measures to counter unau thorized mining activities. 
The Company should also implement transparent community engagement 
programmes with NGOs and local people to counter misinformation and gain local 
support. The Company should also implement projects that help in local 
employment generation and support local economy and create awareness 
regarding the benefits of establishing the mines/plants in their area. 
 
21. DAE, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“As regard to addressing illegal mining of BSM, following actions have been 
implemented: 
➢ The mining leases granted to Private BSM companies have been terminated by 
the government.  
➢ AMCR 2016/19 has come into effect as per which only government -controlled 
entities can carry out mining of atomic minerals. As on date, IREL & KMML (State 
PSU of Kerala) are only engaged in mining and mineral processing activities. 
➢ IREL extends its support to law and enforcement agencies (Revenue, police and 
Geology & Mining Department) from time to time by providing information on the 
hurdles faced in obtaining mining lease and hindrances in plant operations. 
 
Towards transparent community engagement (for instance in MK unit in Tamil 
Nadu), IREL interacts with organisations/associations such as Kumari Maha Sabha 
(KMS), Institution of Engineers (India)(IEI), Ushas -Nagercoil, Team of Horticulture 

16  
Department (led by The Dy. Director), Government of Tamil Nadu etc. to apprise 
regarding the importance of IREL’s environment friendly sustainable operations, role 
in reducing the background radiation by 8 -10 fold from the natural background 
radiation etc. IREL also organizes visit of various associations to plant facilities for 
better understanding of IREL operation in transparent manner such as; 
1. Institution of Engineers (India)(IEI), Kanyakumari Chapter 
2. Ushas, Nagercoil 
3. Team of Horticulture Department (led by The Deputy Director), Government of 
Tamil Nadu, etc.   
 
Further, IREL carries out the following public outreach programme to counter 
misinformation and gain support from locals: 
1. Publishing the Fact sheet on “Clarification of IREL Operation” in the daily 
newspaper. 
2. Awareness and interaction session in the local village committees, Schools, 
colleges, Forums. 
3. Awareness program in Colleges through Health Physics Division, BARC. 
 
As far as implementing projects to help local employment is concerned, IREL carries 
out beach washings collection by engaging local fisherman societies which helps in 
sustaining their livelihood and improve standard of living. Further, job oriented skill 
development training has been imparted to local unemployed youth through training 
institutes like CIPET & PMKK. 
 
Similar activities are also carried out in OSCOM, Odisha and Chavara, Kerala.” 
 
22. The Committee commend IREL’s initiatives in engaging with communities, 
NGOs and educational institutions to counter misinformation and generate 
awareness about the benefits of its operations, alongwith the multi -faceted public 
outreach strategy that includ es providing local employment and education. While 
appreciating these steps, the Committee desire that the process of local 
participation be institutionalized through structured community partnership 
framework(s) based on norms and technique that should be  followed in strict 
manner. The Committee, therefore, desire that DAE and IREL create a dedicated 
grievance redressal and community consultation mechanism at each project site, 
so as to build trust and reduce social resistance to mining projects of nationa l 
importance. The Committee are hopeful that implementation of these guidelines in 
letter and spirit will bring expected results for the Company and society in general. 
 

17  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Overview 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that IREL (India) Limited is a key contributor to India’s  strategic 
mineral supply chain. It was founded in 1950 as Indian Rare Earths  Limited, IREL (India) 
Limited (Company’s current name) is a wholly owned  Central Public Sector Undertaking 
(CPSU) of the Government of India, under the administrative control of the Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE). It is100% owned by Government of India. It plays a vital role in 
India's atomicenergy sector, particularly in the mining and processing of rare earth minerals 
and heavy minerals. The Company operates mining and mineral processing plants across 
Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Its activities align  with national priorities, including self -
eliance in critical minerals, defence  applications and nuclear energy. It is a ‘Mini Ratna’ 
Category – I CPSU with“Excellent” MoU rating over the last six consecutive years. 
 
The Committee were further informed that IREL's mandate is to produce  atomic 
minerals and rare earths, contributing to India's strategic nuclea r program and various 
commercial sectors. Its vision is to be a significant  contributor to the global clean energy 
mission by providing high-quality materials in a responsible manner. 
 
It has also been noted that as per the geological information available,  the reported 
rare earth (RE) resources in India is about 6.9 million tons, which accounts for around 6% 
of total global RE reserves. India has fifth largest reserves of rare earth elements (REEs). 
Apart from low concentration of RE oxide of India, mineability is further constrained due to 
CRZ (coastal regulation zone) regulations, mangroves, forest  land and uncontrolled 
inhabitation. 
 
The Committee further note that India is among three to four countries globally having 
the apability to produce refined REEs, the other Countries  being China and Malaysia. 

18  
China has established a near -monopoly in the  global rare earth market, controlling 
approximately 60-70% of global production and 85-90% of RE processing capacity. 
 
The Committee were informed that due to their critical applications in  electronics, 
defense, and renewable energy, REEs have gained strategic  importance globally. IREL 
caters to nuclear energy, defense and space  sectors by supplying critical rare earths to 
these industries. Over 90% of its  customers in India are in MSE (Micro and Small 
Enterprises) category. Total  revenue from exports of some of the non -strategic heavy 
minerals such as  Ilmenite, Zircon and Rutile consistently ranges from 40 to 50% of the 
sales. Revenue from operations has grown at CAGR of over 26%.  The Committee have 
also learned that IREL faces some challenges such as  dominance of China in rare earth 
markets, controlling global supply and pricing; stringent environmental and land acquisition 
regulations; long  gestation periods for mining approvals; lobbying and illegal mining 
activities impacting operations; and low -grade Indian rare earth deposits compared to  
global standards. 
 
IREL (India) Limited plays a pivotal role in India’s nuclear and strategic material supply 
chain. In view of China’s near -monopoly in the global supply  and pricing of REs and the  
imperative need for India’s self -sufficiency in RE  production and supply to meet its  
domestic requirement and to assess India’s preparedness to face any global geo-political 
challenges in terms of  RE value chain, the Committee have put forth their Observations/  
Recommendations in the subsequent paras after having heard the views of  IREL and 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). The Committee hope that the Company would make 
earnest efforts for implementation of the Observations/Recommendations in this Report to 
augment their overall performance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
No comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19  
Exploring ways to establish RE Ecosystem in India 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that creating an ecosystem of REs is very long drawn process 
and it consists of ten to twelve segments and unless all the segments are developed, any 
country cannot benefit from the ecosystem in order to move ahead. The Committee also 
learned that the monopoly that China has established is such that it has established the 
entire segments and for that to happen, it gave a red -carpet welcome to international 
investments with no conditions. So, international investors worked in China for 5 years and 
during this period the Chinese developed the required skilled manpower and consequently 
they were able to establish their own RE industry of the entire value chain. This kind of 
ecosystem has been developed there and due to this, the Chinese monop oly got 
established in the global RE market. 
 
The Committee are happy to note that India has also gained the requisite expertise 
over the years in the mining and processing of REs, which in India’s case is radioactive 
too. IREL also has the capability to extract REs out of the far inferior and very le ss 
concentrated Indian RE ores, India’s RE content being 0.056 to 0.058% whereas that of 
China is 6%. It is also learned that over 90% of IREL customers in India are in MSE (Micro 
and Small Enterprises) category. The processed minerals and chemicals produced by IREL 
are supplied to about 2000 industries (mostly MSEs) operating in the downstream sector. 
They make ancillary products for bigger companies, resulting in import substitution and 
promote the Make in India initiative of the Government of India.  
 
The Committee feel that IREL and DAE may consider exploring ways for bringing 
skilled manpower and required expertise to further/fully develop the entire RE ecosystem 
to cater to the entire rare earth value chain in order to be able to counter to a certain extent 
China’s monopoly in the global RE market. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
The Rare Earth (RE) bearing mineral in the Indian reserves has a very lean content of 
RE to the tune of 0.056-0.058% and is associated with radioactivity. Hence, a long drawn 
eco-system is required to move from reserves to finished product comprising of multiple 

20  
processes/plants. This includes obtaining statutory clearances, mining, mineral 
beneficiation, upgradation of RE bearing mineral, RE extraction, refining to oxides, metal 
extraction, etc. Specific to RE magnet, one need to convert metal to alloy and then t o 
magnet. Thereafter, application of finished product as motor finds use in energy saving 
appliances.  
 
While India has existing facilities from mining to separation, extraction and refining to 
oxide form and has also developed capability of metal extraction, but further industrial scale 
facilities (intermediate) to alloy, magnet etc. are non-existent. To address the issue of lack 
of industries in the intermediate value chain, IREL has established a Rare Earth & Titanium 
Theme Park at Bhopal. At this facility, rare earth metals have been produced for the first 
time in the country. Mini plants for the producti on of Cerium, Lanthanum and Neodymium 
Metals along with recovery of magnetic Rare Earths from end -of-life magnets have been 
established with the technology established by BARC on Lab scale. This ecosystem so 
created is established with a view to upscale the scientific principles proven at laboratory 
to pilot scale  and demonstrate the same to aspiring Industries to set up commercial 
operations. This is an attempt to  pave way for furthering the RE value chain from the 
upstream sector to mid -stream sector  by a llowing private industries to familiarize 
themselves with the process and gain hands -on-experience. Further, this serves as a 
training ground for the industries to develop the necessary skillsets.  
 
Once the industry scale-plant is established, the requisite skill set for magnet making, 
a crucial component of the REE value chain, can be developed. 
In addition, the following steps have been taken by the Government of India: 
3. National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM) has been launched by G overnment of India 
in January 2025 for promoting exploration, mining, beneficiation, processing, recycling, 
etc. of critical minerals which also include REEs. It also promotes acquisition of assets 
abroad which may help in assisting in stockpiling of resources of magnetic a nd heavy 
REEs (which are not available in Indian resources). 
4. Government of India is in the process of framing a policy to establish downstream 
Industry using REE. This would pave the way for establishment of Industries in the 
Intermediate RE value chain for the production of magnets which are used in national 

21  
security, atomic energy, green sector, etc. Once the magnet making industries are 
established, skills associated with the process can be passed on to the workforce.  
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Importance of early and timely completion of ongoing Projects 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that IREL has about seven major ongoing projects which are at 
different stages of implementation. Rare Earth and Titanium Theme Park is being set up in 
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh for motivating and training entrepreneurs to set up plants usi ng 
rare earth products at commercial scale. A Joint Venture Company with UKTMP JSC, 
Kazakhstan is also being established for setting up a titanium slag plant and a Technology 
Demonstration Plant for the production of 4N pure nano -titania and nanozirconium 
oxychloride based on in -house technology is also being established. Moreover, mining 
plants are being developed at Bramhagiri Mineral Sand Deposits in the state of Odisha and 
Inayam-Midalam Mineral Sand Deposits in the state of Tamil Nadu. Another domestic Joint 
Venture Company by the name of IREL -TAMIN Limited has also been incorporated, to 
carry out rare earth mining in the state of Tamil Nadu, in addition to the already incorporated 
IREL-IDCOL Limited. 
 
While expressing their happiness at IREL’s scale and scope of the ongoing projects, 
which if developed fully, will significantly improve the Country’s capability in establishing 
the entire value chain in rare earth from mining to processing to commercializ ation in 
collaboration with private entrepreneurs, the Committee are of the strong view that timely 
completion of these projects is of utmost importance to make the projects cost -effective 
and achieve their purposes for which they have been established and start working for the 
nation sooner in a strategic sector as RE in today’s uncertain geopolitical scenario. The 

22  
Committee, therefore, recommend that all these projects be completed within their 
stipulated time of completion and would like to be apprised of the status within six months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
IREL is mandated to supply strategic materials such as RE bearing mineral, Zircon 
& RE compounds, derived from the mining and processing of BSM Ore. These materials 
are critical for the national security and atomic energy.  Considering the strategic 
importance of REEs, Zircon and RE bearing mineral, the projects pertaining to mining of 
atomic minerals are covered under Part B of First schedule of MMDR Act, 1957 and 
amendments thereof. Actions has been taken to enable exemption of public consultation 
for all projects or activities concerning national security and atomic energy for expeditious 
grant of all statutory clearances including environmental clearance and early 
operationalization of projects.  
 
In this regard, Secretary DAE vide letter dt. 02.05.2025 requested Secretary, 
MoEF&CC for amendments to ToR w ith respect to exemption of public hearing for the 
mining project of IREL in Kanyakumari district wherein as part of obtaining EC, IREL is 
facing hindrance in public hearing as District Administration was not announcing the date 
despite repeated requests from IREL. Also, IREL’s application for CRZ clearance has not 
yet been considered by District Coastal Zone Management Authority (DCZMA). 
Considering the same, MoEF&CC issued amended ToR F. No. IA-Z-11013/10/2023-IA-I dt. 
02.07.2025 granting exemption of public hearing fo r Environmental & CRZ clearance for 
the said project.  
 
Further, MOEF&CC has granted waiver of Public hearing to all the projects notified 
in Part B of the first schedule of MMDR Act, exempting from Public consultation.  
 
This will pave way for early & timely completion of projects resulting in minimizing 
risk and driving growth for critically important strategic projects. 
 
Status of Projects is furnished below:  

23  
SI. No. Project Name  Present status 
1 Rare Earth & 
Titanium Theme 
Park: 
The Rare Earth & Titanium Theme Park is 
established at Acharpura, Bhopal with the objective 
to demonstrate technologies using Rare Earth 
oxides to produce Rare Earth Metals & Titanium 
Sponge and develop Entrepreneurs and skilled 
workforce to set up plants on an industrial scale. 
Process validation is in progress for Cerium, 
Lanthanum and Neodymium Metals along with 
recovery of Rare Earths from end -of-life magnets. 
Titanium Sponge and LED & Lamp Phosphors plant 
installation is complete and are also under process 
validation. The entire Project encompassing 
multiple pilot plants has been completed on 
31.03.2025. 
2 JV with UKTMP Joint Venture Company with M/s Ust-Kamenogorsk 
Titanium and Magnesium Plant (UKTMP) JSC, 
Kazakhstan was incorporated on 05.08.2025 for 
setting up of Titanium Slag plant in India. First 
meeting of the Board was held on 28.08.2025. 
Basic engineering is under preparation. 
3 Technology 
Demonstration Plant 
 Project has been completed on 31.12.2024. Being 
an in-house R&D activity at lab scale, the process 
validation in pilot scale is in progress. 
4 BRAHMAGIRI BSM 
PROJECT, Odisha 
 
Process of selection and engagement of an MDO 
for carrying out a Pre -Project activity towards 
obtaining statutory clearances, mining and 
upgradation of Mineral sands is in process.  
Parallel activity of preparing mining plan has been 
taken up. Obtaining exploration report, field survey 
reassessment is in progress. 

24  
SI. No. Project Name  Present status 
5 INAYAM- MIDALAM 
PROJECT, Tamil 
Nadu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRZ Clearance:  
1. On amendment of Terms of Reference (ToR) 
exempting Public Hearing by the MoEF&CC, the 
revised CRZ application along with final EIA report 
was submitted to the District Environmental 
Engineer, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board 
(TNPCB) & Convenor Distric t Coastal Zone 
Management Authority (DCZMA) on 28.07.2025 
for forwarding the DCZMA's recommendation to 
the Tamil Nadu State Coastal Zone Management 
Authority (TNSCZMA). 
2. The DCZMA's meeting for deliberation is yet to 
be conducted. Further, suitable requests are also 
made to District Collector/Chairperson of DCZMA 
for expediting the recommendation. 
3.The matter has also been taken up at the level 
of State Administration. 
6 IREL TAMIN 
PROJECT, Tamil 
Nadu 
 
▪ IREL TAMIN Limited was incorporated on 28 
June 2024 with the objective to mine and set up 
pre-concentration and mineral separation 
processing plant of beach sand mineral deposits 
in Kudiraimozhi (6000 Ha) and Sattankulam Teri 
heavy mineral deposit  (1900 Ha) areas in 
Thoothukudi districts of Tamil Nadu. 
▪ Land demarcation of all the villages of 
Kudiraimozhi and Sattankulam area is digitized 
and field survey along with classification of land 
completed by the team constituted by the State 
Government. 

25  
SI. No. Project Name  Present status 
▪ The Survey Report was submitted to the District 
Collector, Thoothukudi on 25.01.2025 for 
onward submission to the Commissioner of 
Geology and mining, Tamil Nadu. 
▪ The above Field Survey Report is forwarded to 
Tamil Nadu Govt by the DC, Thoothukudi in end 
February. 
• Recommendation of the State Govt to the Central 
Govt (DAE) recommending IREL TAMIN Ltd as 
prospective lessee and intimation from Central 
Govt (DAE) on nominating the prospective lessee 
is awaited. 
7 IREL-IDCOL Limited 
(IIL) Odisha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha issued Letter of Intent (LOI) 
in June 2022 towards grant of mining lease in 
favour of IREL IDCOL Ltd. Term of Reference (ToR) 
was received from MoEF&CC on 12.04.2025 for 
grant of EC.  Environmental Impact Assessment  
(EIA)/ Environmental Management Plan  (EMP) 
report preparation is completed. Parallel activities 
for obtaining other statutory clearances such as 
CRZ, and Forest Clearance are also in progress.   
It may be noted that on account of lack of clarity in 
the land records regarding forest land, the forest 
area which was initially 527 Ha was changed to 580 
Ha. Further, after two stages of field inspection, 
there was a recommendation to reverify the 
records.  
The revised land schedule covering a total area of 
673.498 Ha (comprising of PRF 580.806 Ha, DLC 
39.079 Ha and CSB plantation of 53.613 Ha) in the 

26  
SI. No. Project Name  Present status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mining lease maps was submitted to the DFO, 
Chilika on 25.08.2025 for approval. 
On account of frequent changes in the forest area, 
the project has been inordinately delayed. Further, 
because of consistent changes, there are 
difficulties in identifying CA land. 
Matter has been taken up at different levels of the 
state government to freeze the forest land with a 
view to expedite implementation of the project as 
detailed in page no. 11. 
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Exploring ways for Collaboration with other Foreign Companies 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee have learned that the main competitors of IREL for rare earth minerals 
and heavy minerals in the international market are mainly based in China, Australia, South 
Africa, Senegal, Mozambique, etc. and China has monopolized the International RE  
market because of the sheer scale and size of its well -developed RE industry ecosystem 
and globally diversified source of RE ores. The Committee strongly feel that in today’s 
interconnected global economy, collaboration with like-minded foreign companies may give 
an edge for long -term success and growth. Partnering with International Companies 
provides businesses with access to new markets, advanced technologies, diverse 
expertise, and expanded networks that drive innovation and competitiveness. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that IREL should explore the avenues to collaborate with 
foreign companies of Australia, South Africa, Senegal, Mozambique, etc. through mutual 
understanding for technology transfer, sharing of skilled manpower, knowhow and 

27  
expertise to grow together in the international market on mutual benefit or win -win 
condition. 
 
Reply of the Government 
➢ Indian resources are lean in heavy REE which are not available in economically 
extractable form. IREL is into engagements with countries having the HREE 
deposits such as Oman, Mongolia etc.  
➢ MoUs have been entered with Coal India Ltd, Oil India Ltd & NLC India Ltd for 
co-operation in the field of rare earths. These companies have been requested 
to assess potential magnetic and HREE resources abroad for acquisition or 
investment with assured offtake into India. 
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Environmental impact of Rare Earth (RE) mining 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee learn that Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential for modern 
technologies, including electronics, renewable energy systems, and defence applications. 
However, the long -term extraction and utilization of these materials pose significant 
environmental and health risks that must be addressed through responsible policies and 
sustainable practices. Moreover, RE mining is highly disruptive to ecosystems and the 
extraction process generates large amounts of toxic waste, including radioactive materials 
such as uranium and thorium, which can contaminate soil and water sources. Additionally, 
open-pit mining and chemical processing lead to deforestation, habitat destruction, and 
increased greenhouse gas emissions. Over time, these impacts contribute to biodiversity 
loss and environmental degradation. 
 
The Committee have also learned that communities near rare earth mining sites face 
serious health concerns. Exposure to heavy metals and radioactive by -products can lead 
to respiratory diseases, organ damage, and increased cancer risks. Workers in the industry 
are particularly vulnerable to occupational hazards, including exposure to toxic dust and 
chemicals.  

28  
 
The Committee also acknowledge that IREL has taken steps to reduce its 
environmental footprint and to achieve net zero targets by putting in place mandatory 
Environmental Management System (EMS) and adopting practices such as not using 
chemicals in the min ing and mineral processing activities and using physical separation 
process to extract the minerals; systematic plantation of native species over the mined-out 
area; installation of solar power plants to the tune of 1588 kWp for its use and for local 
consumption; use of LPG as a replacement for coal in boilers and furnace oil in dryers and 
so on. 
 
While appreciating the fact that IREL has been doing everything in its capacity to 
reduce its operations’ impact and harm on environment and, the Committee strongly desire 
that to mitigate these risks, IREL should never let its guards down and adopt strict er 
environmental regulations, invest in cleaner extraction technologies, and promote recycling 
of rare earth elements from electronic waste. The Company should also collaborate with 
industries to develop sustainable alternatives and improve waste management practices. 
 
The Committee feel that by implementing responsible mining practices and prioritizing 
environmental and public health safeguards, we can balance the demand for rare earth 
elements with the need for a sustainable and healthy future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The environmental impact of RE mining are primarily due to the complex and often 
toxic nature of the ore body including various radioactive and non -radioactive impurities 
which require extensive use of water and chemicals/alkalis/acids for extracting the 
material.  
 
In the Indian context, the resource of REE is occurring in association with radioactivity, 
making the extraction process long, complex and expensive. During the process some 
quantity of radioactive residue is generated which is stored in compliance with AE RB 
guidelines. Health Physics Unit (HPU), an independent unit of Environmental Assessment 

29  
Division (EAD) of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Government of India, monitors 
the radiological safety aspects in all the facilities of IREL as per AERB guidelines.  
 
Before obtaining mining lease, an Environmental impact assessment (EIA) study is 
conducted to assess the environmental impact and its mitigation which is submitted to 
MOEF&CC. Only after clearance of MoEF&CC, the lease is executed for mining. The 
impact of  environmental degradation is thus minimized through adherence to the 
conditions laid down in the EIA report. Further, regular reports are also submitted to various 
authorities for monitoring. 
 
IREL has collaborated with Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai, for 
developing the process for decomposition of trace quantity of amines available in effluents 
by Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP). IREL is also in collaboration with CSIR-Institute of 
Minerals and Materials Technology (IMMT), Bhubaneswar, for recovery of heavy minerals 
from mining tails. 
 
IREL continuously upgrades its equipment to adopt new generation technologies with 
a view to reduce waste and improve recovery. 
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Addressing Illegal Mining and Social Resistance 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee have learned that among the many challenges faced by IREL during 
its mining operations, lobby of illegal miners during opening of the sector creating 
hindrances at every step including award of contract and undue protests from NGOs 
instigating locals misrepresenting factual information about its mines/plants. The 
Committee recommend that IREL should work with local governments and law 
enforcement agencies to prevent illegal operations and strengthen security and legal 

30  
measures to counter unauthorized mining activities. The Company should also implement 
transparent community engagement programmes with NGOs and local people to counter 
misinformation and gain local support. The Company should also implement projects that 
help in local employment generation and support local economy and create awareness 
regarding the benefits of establishing the mines/plants in their area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As regard to addressing illegal mining of BSM, following actions have been 
implemented: 
➢ The mining leases granted to Private BSM companies have been terminated by the 
government.  
➢ AMCR 2016/19 has come into effect as per which only government -controlled entities 
can carry out mining of atomic minerals. As on date, IREL & KMML (State PSU of 
Kerala) are only engaged in mining and mineral processing activities. 
➢ IREL extends its support to law and enforcement agencies (Revenue, police and 
Geology & Mining Department) from time to time by providing information on the hurdles 
faced in obtaining mining lease and hindrances in plant operations. 
 
Towards transparent community engagement (for instance in MK unit in Tamil Nadu), 
IREL interacts with organisations/associations such as Kumari Maha Sabha (KMS), 
Institution of Engineers (India)(IEI), Ushas-Nagercoil, Team of Horticulture Department (led 
by The Dy. Director), Government of Tamil Nadu etc. to apprise regarding the importance 
of IREL’s environment friendly sustainable operations, role in reducing the background 
radiation by 8-10 fold from the natural background radiation etc. IREL also organi zes visit 
of various associations to plant facilities for better understanding of IREL operation in 
transparent manner such as; 
4. Institution of Engineers (India)(IEI), Kanyakumari Chapter 
5. Ushas, Nagercoil 
6. Team of Horticulture Department (led by The Deputy Director), Government of 
Tamil Nadu, etc.   
 

31  
Further, IREL carries out the following public outreach programme to counter 
misinformation and gain support from locals: 
4. Publishing the Fact sheet on “Clarification of IREL Operation” in the daily 
newspaper. 
5. Awareness and interaction session in the local village committees, Schools, 
colleges, Forums. 
6. Awareness program in Colleges through Health Physics Division, BARC. 
 
As far as implementing projects to help local employment is concerned, IREL carries 
out beach washings collection by engaging local fisherman societies which helps in 
sustaining their livelihood and improve standard of living. Further, job oriented skill 
development training has been imparted to local unemployed youth through training 
institutes like CIPET & PMKK. 
 
Similar activities are also carried out in OSCOM, Odisha and Chavara, Kerala. 
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
  

32  
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

33  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  

34 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Vacant Positions of Regular CMD and Four Independent Directors 
           (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that there is no regular CMD since the superannuation of the 
officer hold the post of CMD on 30 November 2024 and since then the Director (Finance) 
has been holding the additional charge of CMD. Moreover, all the four (04) posts of Non-
official Independent Directors are vacant and consequently, the Board strength has been 
reduced to half of the total sanctioned strength of 12. Though the Committee learned that 
IREL has already taken up the matter with the appropriate authority and their r esponse 
is awaited, the Committee feel that these vacancies not only hamper the functioning of 
the Company, but also violate the principle of Corporate Governance. Therefore, the 
Committee urge upon the Government of India through DAE, being the administra tive 
Ministry, to fill up the vacant posts of four Independent Directors and appoint a regular 
CMD without any further delay. Also, if the Company is discharging their functions 
effectively with less number of Independent Directors, they may think of reduc ing the 
sanctioned posts of Directors in the organization in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the DPE Guidelines on Corporate Governance dated 14.05.2010, unlisted 
CPSEs are required to have at least one -third of the Board Members as Independent 
Directors. The Department of Atomic Energy, vide its letter dated May 4, 2018, stipulated 
that the Board of IREL should comprise four Independent Directors. Accordingly, the 
company has consistently endeavoured to ensure adequate number of Independent 
Directors on its Board. 
 
Department has requested DPE through its various correspondences in the last one 
year for appointment of Non-Official Directors (NoDs) and is continuing to follow up with 
them. As efforts are under taken to fill up the vacant NoD position in Board in consultation 
with DPE, no need is felt to reduce the sanctioned posts of Directors in IREL. 

35 
 
With regard to the appointment of regular CMD, PESB has already conducted the 
interview and recommended the candidate, which is under process for ACC approval. 
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Delay in starting operation of IREL-IDCOL Limited 
(Recommendation SI. No. 4) 
The Committee note that IREL has formed a Joint Venture (JV) Company called 
IREL-IDCOL Limited in collaboration with Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha 
Limited (IDCOL). The JV Company was incorporated on 18.01.2018 with IREL holding 
minimum 51% and IDCOL holding upto 49% of the share capital. A CEO and a Project 
Co-Ordinator have been appointed for the JV Company. A mining Officer of IREL is 
assisting the Project Co -ordinator in matters related to the JV Company and rest of the 
manpower support is occasional and are being drawn from IREL.  
 
The Committee further note that IREL -IDCOL is under the process of obtaining 
mining lease for which the process of statutory clearances such as Environmental 
Clearance (EC), Forest Clearance (FC), Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ), etc. have been 
taken up. Bec ause of not getting timely clearances of the above statutory clearances, 
starting of operation of the Company is getting delayed. The Committee recommend that 
the issues pertaining to granting of clearances of the above statutory clearances may be 
taken up at the level of the Department so that the process may be expedited and IREL-
IDCOL may start operation without any further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Formation of JV Company and Issuance of Letter of Intent (LOI): 
The IREL-IDCOL Joint Venture company was incorporated on 18.01.2018. The Letter 
of Intent (LoI) from the Government of Odisha, covering an area of 852.459 Ha, was 
issued in June 2022. This resulted in significant delay in initiating project-related activities. 
The sequence of activities towards receiving LoI are as under:  

36 
 
• IREL applied for grant of Mining lease for an extent of 974.369 Ha. in May 2018. 
• AMD confirmed the availability of Geological Report (GR) for 875 Ha under Rule 
4 (5)b of AMCR 2016 and the GR was submitted to State Govt. in February 2019. 
• The field survey was started in February 2020.   
• In October 2020, Gov ernment of Odisha after the field survey requested DAE to 
nominate IREL IDCOL Ltd as prospective lessee. The same was received in 
January 2021 from DAE.  
ToR and Environmental Clearance Process: 
• Form-1 and the Pre -feasibility Report were submitted to the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) on 30.01.2024. The 
proposal was considered in the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) meeting held 
on 06.03.2024 and the Terms of Reference (ToR) were issued on 12.04.2024. 
Compliance with ToR conditions is completed. On account of the delay in obtaining 
the Forest Clearance, the submission of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
report is on hold. 
• No sooner the CRZ and Forest recommendations are received, the proposal would 
be submitted for grant of Environmental Clearance. 
Forest Land Diversion Requirement 
Government of Odisha issued LoI for 852.459 Ha of land to JV company. During the 
application process, it was informed by the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Chilka about 
the presence of 527.83 Ha under Pitisal Proposed Reserve Forest (PRF) in the lease 
area. While giving clearance for the Differential Global Positioning System  (DGPS) 
survey, the DFO, Chilka requested to carry out DGPS survey over an extent of 540 Ha of 
Pitisal PRF. However, on completion of the DGPS survey, the authenticated land 
schedule indicated 580.806 Ha of Forest Land. With sustained efforts, a total of 1253.504 
Ha of degraded forest land was identified in the state for Compensatory Afforestation 
(CA) against the forest land proposed for diversion.  
 
Application for forest clearance was submitted to MoEF&CC on 12.01.2024. The 
Project Screening Committee (PSC) deferred the proposal four times, raising Essential 
Details Sought (EDS) observations on some pretext or the other. The primary issue 
pertained to compliance with Rule 13 of the Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Rules, 
2023, notified on 29.11.2023, which mandates submission of a certificate from the 

37 
 
competent authority of the state, confirming the non -availability of suitable government 
non-forest land for CA. 
 
This was finally resolved when an amendment to the aforesaid Rule 13 came into 
effect on 20.09.2024, providing necessary regulatory relief. Consequently, the proposal 
was accepted on 07.10.2024, nearly 10 months after the initial submission.  After the 
requisite formalities, the Part - I field inspection was carried out by Nodal, PCCF in 
November 2024, post which Part – II field inspection was carried out by DFO, Chilika in 
March 2025.  
 
Prior to Part-III site inspection, a review meeting was conducted by Regional Chief 
Conservator of Forests  (RCCF), Bhubaneswar in presence of DFO, Chilika on 
16.04.2025. Subsequently, on 29.04.2025, an observation was raised by the RCCF, 
Bhubaneswar to reverify the Land Schedule citing that some  District Level Committee  
(DLC) land were coming under non -Forest areas and PRF. It was determined that 
approximately 39.079 hectares of DLC land were required to be added to the earlier 
documented 580.806 hectares of forest land. A revised Land Schedule, incorporating this 
additional DLC land, was submitted to DFO, Chilika for verification and authentication on 
14.05.2025, after which during a coordination meeting held on 31.07.2025 in the office of 
DFO, Chilika, it was informed that a Coastal Shelter Belt (CSB) Plantation existed within 
the applied Mining Lease area which was established by the Forest Department during 
1979-1997. The DFO requested submission of CSB plantation area to be included within 
the lease. 
 
Subsequently, on 13.08.2025, DFO, Chilika convened a joint review meeting with 
IREL to finalize the Land Schedule. The revised Land Schedule, covering a total area of 
673.498 hectares comprising PRF 580.806 ha, DLC 39.079 ha, and CSB Plantation 
53.613 ha with Mining Lease maps incorporating the CSB plantation, was submitted to 
the DFO, Chilika, on 25.08.2025.  
 
Due to the constant changes in the forest area, the associated requirement of 
finalizing the compensatory afforestation scheme is also getting delayed, thereby 
affecting the entire process of early operationalization of these mines. 
 

38 
 
In this regard, Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, had raised concerns with the 
Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha in a meeting held on 28 th April, 2025 regarding 
delays in execution of the mining lease, particularly due to repeated changes in the Land 
Schedule. It was emphasized that unless the Land Schedule is frozen, further delays may 
occur. Also, the matter was communicated to Additional Chief Secretary, Department of 
Industries, Govt. of Odisha vide letter dated 20th May 2025 for freezing of area of Forest 
land of the project so as to expedite the project. 
 
Further, Secretary, DAE, vide letter dated 29.08.2025, requested Secretary, 
MoEF&CC that in consideration of strategic importance of atomic minerals, exemption 
may be granted for mining projects of atomic minerals from public consultation to facilitate 
early operationalization of strategically critical projects. In response, M oEF&CC has 
granted waiver of Public hearing to all the projects notified in Part B of the first schedule 
of MMDR Act, exempting from Public consultation.  
[Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)] 
(O.M. No. 1/1(10)/2024-PSU/Vol.II/12797 Dated 26.09.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
08 December, 2025                                 Chairperson 
 17 Agrahayana, 1947(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 2025 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. ‘2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                     Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft 
Reports. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft reports, without 
any changes/modifications: - 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited  (SFCL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  

40 
 
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs (Horizontal 
Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to flaring of 
High-pressure gas’ relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limited. 
(Audit Based Examination); 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Procurement of 
hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)”  [Based 
on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Undue enrichment through 
recovery of turnover tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Design and Development 
(D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)” [Based on Chapter-II of C&AG 
Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Reviewing timely 
submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the current 
session of Parliament.   
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
***** 
 
 

41 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (18TH LOK SABHA) ON IREL (INDIA) 
LIMITED 
I. Total number of recommendations  08 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 & 8 
Percentage of total: 
  
06 
75.00% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
NIL 
Percentage of total: 
  
00 
00.00% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
NIL 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
00 
00.00% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are 
still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 2 & 4 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
02 
25.00 
 