i 
 
13 
    
 
 
AUDIT REPORT(S)/PARA(S) REFERRED TO CoPU FOR 
FINAL DECISION  
 
[Case 1 - Audit Para No. 9.2 of Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 
relating to Payment of Performance Related Pay in violation 
of DPE Guidelines relating to Shipping Corporation of India 
(SCI) Limited] 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
 
AND 
 
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


ii 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
AUDIT REPORT(S)/PARA(S) REFERRED TO CoPU FOR 
FINAL DECISION  
 
[Case 1 - Audit Para No. 9.2 of Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 
relating to Payment of Performance Related Pay in violation 
of DPE Guidelines relating to Shipping Corporation of India 
(SCI) Limited] 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
 
AND 
 
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2025  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947(Saka) 


iii 
 
CPU No._1069_ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha ( Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 
001. 
 
 
  

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) v 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) vi 
INTRODUCTION vii 
ACRONYMS viii 
REPORT 
PART I 
 Overview 1 
Case 1 - Audit Para No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019 relating to Payment of 
Performance Related Pay in violation of DPE Guidelines relating to Shipping 
Corporation of India (SCI) Limited 
3 
A. Brief Overview of SCI 3 
B. Strategic Importance of SCI 4 
C. Audit Para No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019 4 
i. Audit Observations 6 
ii. Status of Audit Observations 10 
iii. Extract from Memorandum of Association (MoA) –  
Relevant Objectives of SCI 
12 
iv. SCI’s views on PRP-DPE Guidelines 12 
v. SCI/ MoPSW position w.r.to open observations 14 
vi. Final views of SCI/MoPSW on three unsettled Audit observations 14 
vii. Request of CMD, SCI 16 
viii. Views of the Audit 18 
D.  Excerpts from Verbatim Proceedings 18 
E.  Select remarks of the Committee 31 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 34 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-
25) held on 05.12.2024 
52 
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-
26) held on 26.06.2025 
57 
 
 

v 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.    Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13.   Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy   
15.  Shri Lalji Verma 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.  Dr. John Brittas 
17.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
                          SECRETARIAT * 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha - Joint Secretary (then Director) 
2. Smti Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Smt. Smita Khade - Under Secretary 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________
* Shri Neeraj Semwal, Joint Secretary and the then In -charge of PU Branch submitted the draft 
Report for approval of Hon’ble Chairperson, CoPU. 
 

vi 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.   Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.   Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
  

vii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025 -26) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth  
Report on ‘Audit Report(s)/Para(s) referred to CoPU for final decision’ [Case 1 - Audit 
Para No. 9.2 of Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 relating to Payment of Performance Related 
Pay in violation of DPE Guidelines relating to Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) Limited]. 
 
2.  The Committee on Public Undertakings selected and examined the said subject 
during (2024-25). The present Committee decided to carry forward and finalise the draft 
Report on the subject. 
 
3.  The Committee on Public Undertakings (2024 -25) was briefed about the subject 
by the representatives of the C&AG and thereafter took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Finance), Shipping 
Corporation of India (SCI) and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Wat erways (MoPSW) on 
on 5th December, 2024.  
 
4.  The Committee (2025-26) considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting 
held on 26th June, 2025.  
 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of Department 
of Public Enterprises (Ministry of Finance), Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) and 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) for tendering evidence before the 
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to them in connection with 
examination of the subject.  
 
6.  The Committee would also like to place on record their appreciation for the 
assistance rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India.  
 
7.  The Committee wish to express their sincere thanks to the predecessor Committee 
for their valuable contribution in examination of the subject.  
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
  New Delhi;      BAIJAYANT PANDA 
  08_August, 2025               CHAIRPERSON 
  17 Shravana, 1947(S) COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

viii 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
1.  ATNs Action Taken Notes 
2.  C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
3.  C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General's  
4.  (DPC Service) Act, 1971 (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 
5.  CoPU Committee on Public Undertakings 
6.  CPSU Central Public Sector Undertaking 
7.  CPSE Central Public Sector Enterprise 
8.  DIPAM Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
9.  DNME Do Not Meet Expectation 
10.  DPE Department of Public Enterprises 
11.  DRDO Defence Research and Development Organisation 
12.  DWT Dead Weight Tonnage 
13.  GSI Geological Survey of India 
14.  ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
15.  IPKF Operations Indian Peace Keeping Force Operations 
16.  ICSL Inland & Coastal shipping Ltd 
17.  JV Joint Venture 
18.  LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
19.  LNG Liquefied Natural Gas 
20.  MoA Memorandum of Association 
21.  MoPSW Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
22.  OFD Opportunity For Development 
23.  ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
24.  PBT Profit Before Tax 
25.  PRP Performance Related Pay 
26.  POM Preliminary Office Memorandum 
27.  SCI Shipping Corporation of India 
 
  

ix 
 
 

1 
 
PART I 
 
I.  OVERVIEW 
 
 The Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU) under - Rule 312A (Functions) of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha have been mandated for 
examination of the Public Undertakings specified in the Fourth Schedule.  The functions 
inter-alia includes examination of Reports, if any, of the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
on the Public Undertakings.  As regards Audit Reports, the C&AG assists the Committee 
on Public Undertakings in pursuing such matters as have been raised in the Audit Reports 
(Commercial) or in the Audit Reports perta ining to the Government Companies or 
Statutory Corporations that are laid in Parliament under the provisions of Section 19-A of 
the C&AG’s (DPC Service) Act, 1971. 
2. During the term, the Committee select Comprehensive, Horizontal and Audit based 
subjects for examination and report to Parliament.  As regards Audit based subjects, 
every year the Committee select only few of the Audit Reports/Paras from the C&AG 
Reports (Commercial) for examination.  The administrative Ministry/Department of the 
concerned Central Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU) is required to submit follow -up 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) duly vetted by the Audit to the Committee in respect of all 
Reports of C&AG (Commercial). The action on furnishing of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
on all Audit Paras/Reports, irrespective of selection/non -selection for examination by 
CoPU, lies between the C&AG and concerned CPSU through its administrative 
Ministry/Department.   
3. The submission of ATNs by the Ministry/Department on observations made in the 
Audit Reports/Paras followed by vetting comments by the C&AG is continued till all the 
observations raised by the Audit are settled.  Audit while giving final vetting remarks in 
ATNs to the concerned Department/Ministry make a request to submit the final vetted 
ATNs to CoPU.  The Ministry/Department, thereafter, forward the settled ATNs to CoPU 
for final settlement and deletion/dropping of Audit Para/Report from the list of 
pending/unsettled Paras/Reports.   

2 
 
4. The Committee in their Second Report (Original) (1998-99) (12th Lok Sabha) took 
serious view on the non -submission/delay in submission of ATNs and casual attitude 
shown by the Ministries/Departments in finalizing the ATNs on the Reports of the C&AG 
of I ndia (Commercial) and recommended that the follow up Action Taken Notes , duly 
vetted by audit in respect of all reports of C&AG (Commercial) presented to Parliament, 
should be furnished to the Committee within six months from the date of presentation of 
the relevant audit reports.   
Despite six months timeline, it has been observed that the same has been seldom 
adhered to leading to delay in settlement of Audit Para/Reports sometime spanning in 
years. In fact, it has been noticed that the process of submission of ATNs followed by 
vetting comments of the Audit is repeated till all the observations on the Audit Report/Para 
are settled and sent finally to CoPU.  It has also been observed that the entire process 
take years and is done in several rounds/journeys over the period of time. 
 
5. During the First sitting of the Committee held on 5 September, 2024, C&AG of 
India inter-alia had briefed the Committee on various issues pertaining to the 
Reports/Paras of C&AG (Commercial) and highlighted that there are 265 pending Audit 
Reports/Paras pertaining to various CPSUs, after several journeys for ATNs submission 
followed by vetting com ments, the Audit due to stalemate on some of the observations 
has conveyed the Ministry to send the ATNs to CoPU for final decision in the last five 
years. 
 
6. The Committee at the beginning of the term, select subjects under three categories 
viz. Comprehensive, Horizontal and Audit based for in -depth study and Report.  The 
subjects selected for examination are a mixed bag of the above -mentioned three 
categories and are selected in such a manner that the Committee are able to deliberate 
on maximum subjects within the limited time available and present Reports on the 
subjects.  
 

3 
 
In this context, out of 265 Audit Reports/Paras referred to the Committee for final 
decision, the Committee at their sitting held on 5 December, 2024 decided to have 
selective approach and thus undertook examination of one Audit Para viz.  ‘Audit Para 
No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019 relating to Payment of Performance Related Pay 
(PRP) in violation of DPE Guidelines relating to Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) 
Limited’ (Case 1) on priority under the broader aspect of “Audit Report(s)/Para(s) referred 
to CoPU for final decision”.  
 
Case 1 - Audit Para No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019 relating to 
Payment of Performance Related Pay in violation of DPE Guidelines 
relating to Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) Limited 
 
A. Brief Overview of SCI 
 
7. The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. (SCI), is a Navratna PSU under the 
Administrative control of Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways (MoPSW). SCI owns 
and operates around 25% of Indian tonnage - Diversified fleet includes Bulk carriers, 
Crude Oil Ta nkers, Product Tankers, Container Vessels, LPG Carrier and Offshore 
Supply Vessels.  SCI owns 57 vessels with a total tonnage of 5.25 million DWT.  SCI also 
manages a fleet of 36 vessels owned by various Government Agencies and 
Organizations, viz. Andaman & Nicobar Administration, ONGC, GSI, JV companies (India 
LNG Transport Companies). Subsidiary Inland & Coastal Shipping Limited ( ICSL) 
manages 3 vessels of Inland Waterways Authority.  SCI has been a profitable CPSE - 
During last 10 years, barring incurring  losses only in FY 18 -19.  Currently, under the 
directions of MoPSW, Government of India, expansion of SCI is being carried out in a big 
way to serve the country better.  
 
 
 

4 
 
B. Strategic Importance of SCI  
8. National Security and Energy Security – SCI acts as a Second Line of Defence 
during emergencies. Eg. Gulf War, IPKF Operations, Oil Shock in the 1970s etc. It is the 
only Indian Shipping Company for Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) transportation in India.   
SCI has been closely associated with DRDO, Navy, ISRO on their projects of National 
Importance. 
Angel Support - 
➢ SCI has always promoted the cause of indigenization. 
➢ SCI forayed into providing support to Indian Shipyards by acquiring vessels built 
by them. 
Crucial Support to Government - 
➢ SCI was first to start direct services from India to China, Europe, Gulf, USA etc. – 
When SCI withdrew from US Service, the freight levels tripled and later on when 
SCI re-entered after two years, the freight levels came down to 1/4th.  
➢ Act as a freight moderator in EXIM/Coastal services in containers, thereby, saving 
foreign exchange. 
SCI has trained 2 Lakh plus seafarers who have been serving on Indian & International 
vessels keeping Indian and SCI flag flying high. 
 
 
C. Audit Para No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019  
9. The Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 was laid in Parliament on 25 November, 2019.  
In Para No. 9.2 of the Audit Report, the Audit pointed at SCI making payment of Rs. 11.03 
crore to its employees as PRP that was not in compliance of with the DPE Guidelines.  
Audit observed that as per DPE Guidelines, profits from only the core business activities 
of the CPSEs were to be considered for distribution of Performance Related Pay (PRP) 

5 
 
to employees but the Shipping Corporation of India considered non -core profits also, for 
distributing PRP. 
10. As per Audit, the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) approved (November 
2008) payment of Performance Related Pay (PRP) for Board level and below Board level 
executives and non-unionized supervisors of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs). 
The CPSEs were required to follow a ‘Bell Curve’ approach in grading the officers so that 
not more than 10 % to 15 % are graded outstanding and 10 % are to be graded below 
par who are not to be paid any PRP . Further, DPE clarified that PRP should be distributed 
based on profits accruing only from core business activities of the CPSEs.  
During 2014-15, Shipping Corporation of India reported Profit Before Tax (PBT) 
amounting to ₹276.13 crore and PRP of ₹11.03 crore was paid to employees, as per 
approval (November 2016) of Board of Directors.  
Audit observed that while calculating profit available for distribution of PRP, the 
Management did not deduct non-core profits from PBT i.e., profit on sale of fixed assets 
including ships (₹122.42 crore), interest on employees loan (₹0.64 crore), Interest on loan 
given to joint venture (JV) (₹ 28.67 crore), dividend from mutual funds (₹6.72 crore) and 
interest income on rescinding of ship building contracts (₹ 124 crore) aggregating to ₹ 
282.45 crore. If such profits are excluded, being non -core profits, t here was no profit 
arising from core business activity.  
Further, SCI categorized the below par employees into two categories viz. 
‘Opportunity For Development (OFD)’ (9.84 % of total employees) and ‘Do Not Meet 
Expectation (DNME)’ (1.48% of total employees). The OFD category employees were 
paid PRP amounting to ₹38.46 lakh. Thus PRP paid to major section of below par 
employees was also in violation of DPE guidelines. 
Thus, Audit concluded that the payment of ₹11.03 crore to its employees by SCI 
as “Performance related pay”, was not in compliance with DPE guidelines. 
 

6 
 
11. The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) vide OM dt. 27 February 
2024 while sending Action Taken Notes (ATNs) to CoPU enclosed the copy of letter from 
the O/o C&AG for final decision of CoPU on the unsettled observations in the Audit Para. 
12. During the financial year 2014 -15, SCI recorded Profit Before Tax (PBT) of Rs. 
276.13 crore and PRP was payable to employees with a ceiling of Rs.13.81 crores basis 
profit (3% of profit) and incremental profit (2% of incremental profit). Accordingly, in li ne 
with approval accorded by its Board, SCI paid Rs.11.03 crore as PRP to the eligible 
employees for the FY 2014-15. 
13. The Committee observe that the Audit observations covered the aspects of 
Performance Related Pay (PRP) for the Financial Year 2014 -15 that were included in a 
POM (Preliminary Office Memorandum) raised by Resident Audit Party (RAP) on                           
7 February, 2018 and finally appearing in the Audit Report presented to Parliament in 
2019.  
 
(i) Audit Observations 
14. As per C&AG, the inclusion of income on account of seven (7) non-core business 
activities, two (2) of which were settled at Preliminary Audit Stage,  in the PBT for the 
purpose of calculation of PRP resulted in violation of DPE guidelines and avoidable 
payment of PRP of Rs.11.03 crore. A tabular summary of said seven (7) business 
activities and status of observations thereupon, as furnished, is tabulated below:- 
Sl.No.  C&AG 
Observation 
C&AG Argument SCI’s clarification and 
submission 
1. Mgmt. did not 
deduct non -core 
Profit on sale of 
fixed assets 
including ships 
(Rs.122.42 crore) 
 
➢ As per DPE guidelines, 
02.11.2010, 18.09.2013,  
02.09.2014, PRP to be 
distributed based on profits 
accruing from Core Business 
activities of CPSE. 
➢ SCI’s core business activity is 
marine logistics and income 
derived from it as freight, 
charter hire, demurrage etc. 
Disposal of vessel is not part 
of core business activity as 
➢ SCI MOA defines the “core 
business activity“ of SCI. As 
per MOA the objective of 
SCI is to Purchase, Charter 
hire or acquire otherwise, 
sell exchange, let or charter 
ships or vessels of any 
description with all 
equipment. To operate 
transport services thro ugh 
waterways in a profitable 
manner. 

7 
 
company is not into trading 
activity of purchase & sale of 
ships. 
➢ Activities listed in MOA is for 
SCI whereas DPE guidelines 
based on which the PRP/PBT 
is calculated is applicable to 
all CPSEs.   
➢ As per DPE OM dated 
02.11.2010, extra ordinary 
items like valuation of stock , 
sale of land etc (list not 
exhaustive) should not be 
included in PRP calculation. 
 
➢ Purchase & Sale of vessels, 
based upon their 
commercially viable life and 
other reasons, forms an 
intrinsic part of core 
business of SCI and same 
holds true for any other ship-
owner company in the world.  
➢ The sale of vessels is 
necessitated for 
replacement of old tonnage 
with a modern vessel 
complying with constantly 
upgrading IMO regulation 
and meeting international 
environment standards. 
➢ It also helps SCI in achieving 
a commercially competitive 
young fleet of vessels. 
Income from sale of vessel 
presently is shown under 
Other Income.  
➢ The profit on sale of vessels 
(operating assets) cannot be 
equated with profit on sale of 
other ‘Fixed Assets’ such as 
land or building. Hence the 
same as been considered as 
revenue from operation. 
C&AG did not agree to SCI’s 
submissions and not dropped 
this point. 
2. Interest on loans 
given to JVCs 
(Rs.28.67 crore) 
 
➢ Loan given to JVs is a 
financing activity not a core 
business activity, since SCI is 
not in financing business, this 
can not be considered as 
Core Business activity of SCI. 
 
➢ In order to achieve greater 
reach in global markets and 
facilitating diversification into 
new specialized business 
lines, SCI also enters/ forms 
JVs. 
➢ Loans are extended to JVs 
as equity contribution for 
fulfilling requirement of loan 
availed for vessel 
acquisition.  
➢ In these JVs, SCI is also the 
Manager/Operator of the 
vessels and gets the 
remuneration.  
➢ These JVs have granted on 
SCI the distinction of being 
the only Indian Shipping 

8 
 
company in the business of 
transporting LNG which is a 
vital fuel for India's power 
plant and chemical/ 
petrochemical industry. 
SCI’s presence in the LNG 
segment is of strategic 
importance to the country.  
➢ The loan extended by SCI to 
SCI’s JVs is as part of its 
business requirements and 
commercial terms between 
the JV partners since 
inception.  
➢ The earnings from this 
investment constitute core 
business activity of SCI. 
C&AG not agreed to SCI’s 
submissions and accordingly 
not dropped this point. 
 
3. Interest on  on 
employee loans 
(Rs.0.64 crore) 
 
➢ It is an investment and not a 
core operating activity. 
 
➢ Employees form part of SCI 
business and soft loans 
granted motivates 
employees for high 
productivity and hence 
directly contributes to core 
business of SCI. Interest on 
employee loans is not 
interest on ideal cash/bank 
balance. 
However, SCI agreed and 
excluded this component in 
the revised PBT calculation.  
 
4. Interest - Others 
(Rs.22.96 crore) 
 
➢ It is an investment activity and 
not a operating activity. 
 
➢ Interest Others, amounting 
into Rs.22.96 crore for FY 
2014-15. 
➢ Out of the said amount 
approximately Rs. 22.72 
crore is interest received 
from A&N Administration 
towards the delay in 
payment by them to SCI, as 
contractual provision 
governing ‘Operation & 
Maintenance of vessel’ 
services provided by SCI to 
A&N Administration.  

9 
 
➢ SCI derives working capital 
from borrowed funds and 
pays out interest. To recover 
this outgo, contract 
empowers to recover 
interest from A&N 
Administration. Hence the 
same appears as receivable 
is directly attributable to core 
business of (managing ships 
of other ship owner) SCI. 
C&AG has agreed to SCI’s 
submissions and accordingly 
dropped this point  at 
Preliminary Audit Stage. 
5. Dividend from MF 
(Rs.6.72 crore) 
 
➢ It is an investment activity and 
not a operating activity. 
 
➢ The DPE guidelines 
mandate to exclude interest 
on idle cash/ bank balances. 
It is submitted that SCI didn't 
have any idle cash / Bank 
balances during the FY 
2014-15. 
SCI agreed and excluded this 
component in the revised PBT 
calculation. 
6. Interest on FD 
(Rs.93.62 crore) 
 
➢ It is an investment activity and 
not a operating activity 
➢ For FY 2014 -15 interest 
income on fixed deposits 
was Rs.93.62 crore. 
However all the FDs and 
investments were 
mandatory in nature for 
various requirements such 
as maintaining minimum 
Debt Service Coverage 
Ratio and or as per 
covenants of loan taken for 
acquisition of vessel, which 
forms and intrinsic part of 
SCI’s core busi ness. 
Similarly, the unutilized 
proceeds of FPO were 
specifically for fleet 
expansion and could not 
have been diverted for any 
other business activity. 
Thurs it would be incorrect to 
term it as income from idle 
cash /bank balance 
C&AG has agreed to SCI’s 
submissions and accordingly 

10 
 
dropped this point  at 
Preliminary Audit Stage.  
 
7. Interest income 
on rescindment of 
ship (Rs.124 
crore) 
 
➢ Interest Income from 
rescindment of contract which 
was meant for acquisition of 
vessel, which is a fixed asset, 
can’t be compared with the 
liquidated damages. 
 
➢ The interest income on 
rescindment of ship building 
contracts due to subpar 
performance of building 
yards, constitutes part of 
process of acquisition and 
was carried out as per 
commercial contractual 
provisions, hence a normal 
business activity of a 
Shipping Company. 
➢ Had the vessel delivered in 
time, SCI would have 
earned income from charter 
hire/freight. 
C&AG did not agree to SCI’s 
submissions and not dropped 
this point. 
 
 
(ii)  Status of Audit Observations 
15. After scrutiny, it has been found that out of the seven observations of C&AG on 
payment of PRP (2014-15) to the SCI employees, the stalemate between the C&AG and 
Ministry pertains to the issue of interpretation of core and non -core business activities 
based on SCI’s Memorandum of Association (MoA) (as stated by the Ministry) and DPE’s 
guidelines (as stated by C&AG) and PRP distributed to the Company’s employee during 
2014-15.   
 Out of the following seven Audit observations, four have been settled (two agreed 
by SCI and other two dropped by C&AG  at Preliminary Audit Stage ) between the 
MoPSW/SCI and C&AG and stalemate on the three remaining observations were 
deliberated upon for final decision on the matter:- 
Sl.No. Summary of Audit 
Observation 
 
Amount Remarks 
1. Interest income on rescinding of 
ship building contracts * 
Rs. 124.00 crore Live. 

11 
 
(As per SCI, this income 
forms part of its vessel 
acquisition process)  
 
2. Profit on sale of fixed assets 
including ships * 
Rs. 122.42 crore Live. 
(As per SCI, this aligns 
with its practice of 
managing a 
commercially viable 
fleet) 
3. Interest on loan given to Joint 
Venture (JV) Companies * 
Rs. 28.67 crore Live. 
(As per SCI, these loans 
are integral to its 
strategic and operational 
goals, particularly in the 
LNG shipping sector) 
4. Dividend from mutual funds Rs. 6.72 crore Settled. 
(SCI agreed  and 
excluded this 
component in the 
revised PBT calculation) 
5. Interest on employees Loan Rs.0.64 crore Settled. 
(SCI agreed  and 
excluded this 
component in the 
revised PBT calculation) 
6. Interest income on fixed deposits Rs.93.62 crore Settled. 
(C&AG agreed to SCI’s 
submissions and 
accordingly dropped the 
point at Preliminary Audit 
Stage). 
7. Interest - others Rs. 22.96 crore Settled. 
(C&AG agreed to SCI’s 
submissions and 
accordingly dropped this 
point at Preliminary Audit 
Stage) 
 
*As submitted by SCI, these activities form part of its core business and meet the DPE 
guidelines and in pursuance, the Company has secured approvals from its Board and 
MoPSW, reflecting consistency with its long-term objectives.    
 
 

12 
 
(iii)  Extract from Memorandum of Association (MoA) – Relevant Objectives of SCI  
16. During submission before the Committee, SCI has placed following position on 
Memorandum of Association (MoA) – Relevant Objectives of SCI :- 
➢  “As per MOA, few of the objectives of SCI relevant to the subject are:  
• To Purchase, Charter hire or otherwise acquire, sell exchange, let or charter 
either in India or in any other country or otherwise deal with steam and other 
ships or vessels of any description with all equipment and furniture and to 
establish maintain and operate transport services by water and land between 
India and other countries of the world for conveyance of passengers, mail and 
freight and for any other purpose including conveyance of troops, carriage of 
munitions, all merchandises etc. …. (Page No. 1 of MOA - Sr. No. 3(a)) 
• To maintain, operate, renew, replace, repair, improve, alter, break, sell, 
exchange or let out on hire or charter load on commission or otherwise use, 
utilise, deal with and dispose of any ships and vessels. (Page No. 2 of MOA 
- Sr. No. 3(h)) 
• To grant loans on ships, vessels, or on goods and merchandise carried or to 
be carried or to be carried on any vessels…. (Page No. 3 of MOA - Sr. No. 
3(s))     
➢  The objective of SCI includes : 
• To provide its clientele safe, environmentally sustainable, reliable, efficient 
and quality shipping services, complying with all legal and other 
requirements. 
• To own or acquire an adequate, well designed and efficient fleet to cater to 
the demand of global maritime trade through options like leasing, demise 
charter, joint ventures and other innovative financial measures. 
 
(iv)  SCI’s views on PRP-DPE Guidelines 
17. Further, SCI has placed following position for perusal of the Committee  on PRP – 
DPE Guidelines:- 
” PRP under 2007 Pay Revision – Vis-a-Vis Core Profit / Business Activity. 
➢ PRP is Performance Related Pay / Variable Pay based on: 
• Profits of the CPSE, it's MoU rating and Performance of the individual 
employee. 
 

13 
 
➢ Initial DPE OMs which were issued to all CPSEs and are relevant to PRP: 
• are dated 26.11.2008, 09.02.2009 and 06.07.2011 
• above OMs did not illustrate about Core and non Core Profit 
Concept of Core business activities was first mentioned in DPE OM dtd. 
18.09.2013.  The excerpt from the OM titled ‘Deduction of interest on idle 
cash/bank balances for the purpose of calculating Profits Before Tax (PBT) and 
distribution of Performance Related Pay (PRP) in CPSEs’ is as under:- 
DPE guidelines of 2007 pay revision of executives and non -unionized 
supervisors of CPSEs inter-alia provide for payment of PRP subject to a 
ceiling of 5 % of Profit Before Tax (PBT) of a CPSE.  In response to queries 
from CPSEs/administrative Ministries/Departments in this regard, it has been 
clarified that interest on idle cash/bank balances may be decucted from PBT 
and PRP may be distributed based on profit accruing only from core business 
activities of the CPSEs.  This position is once again reiterated to remove any 
doubts in this matter. 
➢ CAG has also relied upon a separate DPE OM dated 02.11.2010 while auditing SCI:  
• This OM was circulated to Dept. of Defence Production only  
• This OM contains clarification wrt PBT for computation of PRP as: 
‘CPSEs have been set up for specified objectives so that they can conduct 
their business on sustainable basis. It is expected that their profit will come 
out from: 
✓ their specified objectives 
✓ through their normal business and 
✓ core activities 
✓ Not to include  – extra ordinary items like valuation of stock, grant 
waived by Government, sale of land, etc.’ 
PRP under 2017 (current) Pay Revision: 
Excerpt of Para 11 from DPE OM dated 03.08.2017 is as under:- 
 (I) Allowable profits: 
a. The overall profits for distribution of PRP shall be limited to 5 % of the 
year’s profit accruing only from core business activities (without 
consideration of interest on idle cash/bank balances), which will be 
exclusively for executives and for non -unionized supervisors of the CPSE.  
The ratio break -up of profit accruing from core business activities for 
payment of PRP between relevant year’s profit to Incremental profit shall be 
65.35 to arrive at the Allocable profits and the Kitty factor. 
 

14 
 
 
(v) SCI/ MoPSW position w.r.to open observations – 
18. The SCI/MoPSW made the following submission clarifying their position before the 
Committee:- 
➢ CAG observation, initially raised in June, 2018, is open on total of three(3) 
business activities of SCI, where there is a difference in the 
interpretation of the “Core Business Activity”.  
➢ Purpose of PRP is to reward & motivate employees. The same has to be 
considered together with DPE guidelines. 
➢ DPE guidelines have not specifically excluded any items which CAG 
has not agreed to close (the observation). 
➢ Thus, to ascertain activities forming part of “Core Business” of SCI: 
• Matter has been independently deliberated and decided by the 
NRC of the Board of SCI in meeting dated 04.02.2020.  
• Approved by the Board of SCI. 
• Concurred by MoPSW vide response dated 13th January 2021 
to CAG: 
“SCI is in the business of transportation services through waterways and for 
its sustainability various activities form part of its core business activities 
which are interlinked and is the basis of SCI’s business presence. Hence, 
SCI’s stand may not be tr eated as an argument and to be treated in right 
spirit….” (excerpt) 
➢ Under recent Demerger process by DIPAM / MoPSW – Vessels have 
been established as Core assets and retained with SCI. 
  
(vi) Final views of SCI/MoPSW on three unsettled Audit observations 
The final views of SCI/MoPSW, justifying the referred three(3) nos. activities are part 
& parcel of SCI’s core business activities, as placed for kind consideration of the Committee 
have ben summarized as under – 
Sl.No. Activity Clarification by SCI / MoPSW and further submission 
to establish activity as part of Core Business 
1. Interest income 
on rescindment 
of ship  
(Rs.124 cr.) 
 
➢ The interest income on rescindment of ship building 
contracts due to subpar performance of building yards, 
constitutes part of process of acquisition of vessel, 
which is a core business activity, and was carried out 
as per commercial contractual provisions. 

15 
 
➢ Contract was given to Shipyard (contractor) for building 
vessel and in case of delay / non performance of 
contract, Shipyard repaid the money along with 
compensation. 
➢ While purchasing any vessel, SCI also avails loan and 
has to pay interest on the same. 
➢ SCI would have operated new vessel, if delivered, for 
generating revenue profitably. 
➢ Hence, SCI Board / MoPSW considered same as 
revenue from core operations for purpose of 
calculation of PBT for purpose of PRP. 
 
2. Mgmt. did not 
deduct Non core 
Profit on sale of 
fixed assets 
including ships 
(Rs.122.42 
crore) 
 
➢ Purchase & Sale of vessels, based upon their 
commercially viable life and other reasons like market 
scenario etc., forms intrinsic part of core business of 
SCI. 
➢ Normal business of any other ship -owner company in 
the world includes tonnage acquisition and disposal at 
opportune time especially since shipping is a cyclical 
business. 
➢ The sale of vessels is also necessitated for 
replacement of old tonnage with a modern vessel 
complying with constantly upgrading IMO regulation 
and meeting international environment standards. 
➢ It also helps in achieving a commercially competitive 
young fleet of vessels. 
➢ SCI’s objectives (MoA) include ‘ sell exchange ’ of 
ships or vessels. 
➢ The profit on sale of vessels (operating assets) 
cannot be equated with profit on sale of other 
‘Fixed Assets’ such as land or building. 
➢ Hence, SCI Board / MoPSW considered same as 
revenue from core operations for purpose of Profit for 
PBT. 
➢ Under recent Demerger process by DIPAM / 
MoPSW – Vessels have been established as Core 
assets and retained with SCI. 
 
3. Interest on loans 
given to Joint 
Venture (JV) 
Companies 
(Rs.28.67 crore) 
 
➢ In order to achieve greater reach in global markets and 
facilitating diversification into new specialized business 
lines, SCI enters/forms JVs. These JVs are in line 
with core Business Objectives of SCI. 
➢ By this SCI ensured that niche, technically challenging 
& capital intensive segment of LNG shipping is brought 
to India to protect its strategic interest. 

16 
 
➢ LNG is a vital fuel for India's power plant and chemical 
/ petrochemical industry. SCI has the distinction of 
being the only Indian Shipping company in the 
business of transporting LNG - Achieved by SCI 
through JVs.  
➢ Loans are extended by SCI to JVs in lieu of equity 
contribution (quasi -equity) for fulfilling requirement of 
loans availed for purchasing costly LNG vessel through 
JVs. Loans were extended once at the time of 
establishing JVs. 
➢ Thus, loan extended by SCI to SCI’s JVs is as part 
of its core business requirements  and as part of 
commercial terms between the JV partners since 
inception.  
➢ In these JVs, SCI is also the Manager/Operator of the 
vessels. SCI employees are handling operations, 
commercials & accounting of the JV vessels. 
➢ Hence, SCI Board / MoPSW considered income from 
this loan as revenue from core operations for purpose 
of calculation of PBT for purpose of PRP. 
 
 
19. Summary of monetary impact on the SCI employees 
Sl.No. Particulars No. of employees Amount (Rs.) 
1. Set-aside from separated 
employees 235 4,45,07,895 
2. Could not be set-aside as 
employee had already 
superannuated 
110 1,58,24,296 
3. Active employees 350 5,00,42,794 
TOTAL 695 11,03,74,985 
 
(vii)  Request of CMD, SCI  
20. The SCI, in their PRAYER to the Committee, has requested for redressal of the 
issue and made following submission :- 
“ During the FY 2014-15, SCI recorded profit before Tax (PBT) of Rs. 276.13 crore; 
and as per DPE guidelines and SCI’s PRP scheme: 

17 
 
• Ceiling of Rs.13.391 crore was applicable for payment of PRP, basis 3% 
of annual profit & 2% of incremental profit,after deducting profit from 
accepted non-core activities 
• SCI paid Rs.11.03 crore as PRP to the eligible employees for the FY 
2014-15 - Within the ceiling and not exceeded the upper limit of 5% of 
PBT 
➢ Thus, no excess payments were made by SCI on account of PRP for the 
financial year 2014-15. 
➢ Yet, hardship is being faced by employees and COPU is requested to 
resolve the matter in the interest of retired & existing employees : 
➢ Entire amount paid in 2016 as PRP for FY 2014-15 is being set-aside from the 
employees separating from SCI, including employees superannuating after 
long career of over 3 decades in SCI  
• Applicable Income tax on PRP paid to the employees had already been 
deposited with authorities at time of payment. 
➢ Recovery from retired employees is bound to expose SCI to undue litigations 
➢ Threat of recovery from separating employees is demotivating and creating 
unpleasant atmosphere amongst the active (in service) employees 
 
➢ As explained, the Business of Shipping is in many ways different than a land / factory 
based organizations / other CPSEs.  
➢ The humble submission to the Committee is that, with due consideration to the 
peculiar nature of the Shipping Business, the “Core Business Activity” of SCI 
considered for determination of profits for distribution of PRP may be accepted as: 
• deliberated and resolved by the NRC of SCI Board (which includes 
Independent Directors), in meeting dated 04.02.2020, and subsequently 
• approved by SCI Board 
• concurred & forwarded by MoPSW vide response dated 13th January 2021 
to CAG 
➢ It is therefore humbly requested to COPU: 
• To compassionately view & settle the subject matter considering the 
deliberations & decisions taken by SCI Board and concurred by MoPSW. 
• Accordingly, Interest income on rescindment of ship, Profit on sale of ships 
and Interest on loans given to Joint Venture (JV) Companies should also be 
treated as income arising in course of core business activities of SCI for 
purpose of PRP.” 

18 
 
(viii)  Views of the Audit 
21. The C&AG in their briefing to the Committee, furnished their rebuttal to the reply of 
the Ministry as under:- 
Ministry’s Reply: 
“ The objects for which SCI was established were defined in its Memorandum 
of Association and purchase and sale of vessels was mentioned therein, 
indicating that profit arising from sale of ships was an income from core 
activity.  The placing of orders and consequent rescindment of ship building 
contracts was in line with the core business activities and hence nay 
associated income was also core business income for SCI.” 
Audit Rebuttal: 
“SCI’s core activity is Marine logistics and income derived from this activity 
are in the nature of freight, charter hire, demurrage, etc.  The Company is not 
into trading activity of purchase and sale of ships.  Mention of an activity in 
the MoA does not mean that it is a core activity.” 
 
D. Excerpts from Verbatim Proceedings 
22. On the issue of Audit’s observation on ‘Internal income on rescindment of ship 
(Rs.124 cr)’,  the CMD, SCI submitted as under:- 
“पहला मुद्दा है कि  ि ु छ हमारे  किकपिंग िािंट् रैक्ट्स, जो हमने  किपयार्ड  िे  साथ असाइन किए  थे, किसी  
िारणवि  वे ि ैं सल हुए। उन पर  हमारा  जो पैसा गया हुआ था, उस पर  ि ु छ बयाज कमला।  हमारा  
इिंट्रप्रेट्ीिन यह है कि  हमारा  िोर  कबजनेस जहाज बनाना, बनवाना और  खरीदना  है। उससे हमें जो 
इनिम  हुई, वह िोर  कबजनेस से हुई। यह हमारा  लॉकजि  रहा  है। यकद वह जहाज बनता, तो वह 
जहाज रेवेन्यू  िे  रूप  में, फ्र े ट् िे  रूप  में एससीआई िे  प्रॉकिट् में िाउिंट् होता। िरदर  जो भी पैसा 
हम  यार्ड  िो  देते हैं, वह किसी  न किसी  रूप  में माि े ट् से लोन िे  रूप  में लेते हैं। उस पर  हम  ब्याज 
देते हैं। हम  जो ब्याज माि े ट्, बैंि िो  दे रहे  हैं, तो यकद िोई  किपयार्ड  कर्िॉल्ट  हुई है तो उनिो  
हमें िम्पेनसेट् िरना  है। हमारे  कहसाब से यह नॉमडल  िोर  कबजनेस िा  पाट्ड है।“ 
{ The first issue is that some of the shipping contracts assigned with the shipyard 
were cancelled for certain reasons. The money that had already been invested in 
these contracts earned some interest. The interpretation is that the core business 
involves building, commissioning, and purchasing ships. Therefore, the income 
received from this is consi dered part of the core business. This has been the 
underlying logic. Had the ship been built, it would have  been counted as revenue 
for SCI in the form of freig ht. Moreover, any payments made to the yard are, in 
some way, sourced from the market as a loan, on which interest is paid. Since 

19 
 
interest is being paid to the market and banks, it is expected that if a shipyard 
defaults, they should provide compensation. From this perspective, such 
transactions are regarded as a normal part of the core business.} 
 
23. On the issue of Audit’s observation on ‘Management not deducting no n-core 
profit on sale of fixed assets including ships (Rs. 122.42 cr)’, the CMD, SCI submitted 
as under:- 
“द ू सरा, disposal of ships, जब भी हम  िोई  नया जहाज खरीदते  हैं, उसमें प्रोजेक्ट ररपोट्ड  तैयार  
होती है, ि ै लि ु लेिन होती है। उस ि ै लि ु लेिन में बहुत महत्वपूणड पाट्ड होता है, जहािं प्रोजेक्ट िी  
वायबेकलट्ी अप्रूव या ररजेक्ट  होती है। at the end of the life, उस एसेट््स, जहाज िी  वैल्यू क्या  
होगी, वह भी उस समीिरण  में किट् बैठता है। ये सारी  िी  सारी  सूचनाए िं उस इक्व े िन में बैठती हैं। 
जो भी िम्पोनेंट् इस ि ै लि ु लेिन में आते हैं, disposal of the vessel is also one of the integral 
parts. हमारे  कहसाब से disposal of the vessel is also a part of our core business.” 
 
{Secondly, regarding the disposal of ships, whenever a new ship is purchased, a 
project report is prepared, and calculations are conducted. A crucial aspect of this 
calculation determines whether the project's viability is approved or rejected. At 
the end of its life, the value of the asset—the ship—also factors into this equation. 
All such information is taken into  account in this analysis. Among the various 
components included in the calculation, the disposal of the vessel is considered 
an integral part. From this perspective, the disposal of the vessel is also regarded 
as part of the core business.} 
 
24. On the issue of Audit’s observation on ‘Interest on loans given to Joint Venture 
(JV) Companies (Rs.28.67 cr)’, the CMD, SCI submitted as under:- 
“तीसरा , आईएलट्ी वेसेल्स, जो जापानी ओनसड िे  साथ वर्ड  2004 में जॉइिंट् वेंचर बना था। उस समय  
ि िं ट् र ी िी  ररक्वायरमेंट् एलएनजी इम्पोट्ड िरना  थी। SCI was one of the leading companies in 
the Ministry of Shipping. We formed the joint venture. उस जॉइिंट् वेचर  में यह कनणडय था 
कि  कजतने भी िेयर  होल्डसड  होिंगे, वे ि ु छ न ि ु छ पैसा लोन िे  रूप  में उस ि िं पनी िो  देंगे। आज िी  
र्ेट्  में सारी  िी  सारी  आईट्ी ि िं पनीज एससीआई और  भारत  सरिार  िो  प्रॉकिट् दे रही  हैं। यह मॉर्ल  
इतना सिल  है कि  अभी जो हमारा  एक्सपैंिन प्लान जॉइिंट् वेंचर िे  रूप  में प्लान हो रहा  है, उसमें 
यह सब रेप्लप्लि े ट् िरने  िे  कलए हमारा  मिंत्रालय प्रयास िर  रहा  है। जो भी पैसा हमने  इन जहाजोिं िो  
एज अ िेयर  होल्डर  लोन िे  रूप  में कदया, वह भी हमारे  िोर  कबजनेस िा  पाट्ड था। उस लोन िे  रूप  
में जो ि िं पनी है, जो अकनिंग होती है, कजतने िेयर  होल्डसड  होते हैं, जो पैसा लोन िे  रूप  में कदया गया, 
उस पर  ब्याज देते हैं।“ 

20 
 
 
{ Thirdly, ILT vessels were part of a joint venture established with Japanese owners 
in 2004. At that time, there was a national requirement to import LNG. SCI, being 
one of the leading companies under the Ministry of Shipping, played a key role in 
forming the joint venture. As part of this collaboration, it was decided that all 
shareholders would contribute funds as a loan to the company.  As of today, all 
ILT companies are generating profits for SCI and the Government of India. This 
model has been so successful that the ministry is now working to replicate it in 
ongoing expansion plans under joint ventures. The funds provided to these vessels 
as a shareholder loan were also considered part of the core business. The 
earnings generated by the company through this loan, along with the interest paid 
on the funds provided by shareholders, all contribute to this financial model. } 
 
 25. In closing remarks on the three observations raised by the Audit, the CMD, 
SCI made following submission to the Committee:- 
“We deliberated it in the Board after observations raised by the CAG. बोर्ड  ने भी यह 
अप्रूव किया  कि  Shipping is a unique industry. It is not like a normal land-based industry. 
ये तीनोिं मुद्दे बोर्ड  ने सबसीक्व ें ट्ली िािी  र्ेकलबरेट्  किए।  बोर्ड  में हमारे  इिंकर्पेंर्ेंट् र्ायरेक्टसड , सरिारी  
र्ायरेक्टसड  भी हैं। उन्ोिंने यह पाया कि  ये तीनोिं िे  तीनोिं मुद्दे हमारे  कबजनेस िा  पाट्ड हैं। “ 
 
{ The Board deliberated on this matter following the observations raised by the 
CAG. It was also approved by the Board that the shipping industry is unique and 
cannot be compared to a typical land -based industry.  All three of these issues 
were subsequently dis cussed in detail by the Board, with the participation of 
Independent Directors and Government Directors. After thorough discussions, 
they concluded that all three issues are indeed integral to the business. } 
26.  The Secretary, MoPSW representing the SCI in the matter, sought Committee’s 
intervention and clarification on :- 
“I have just one point relating to core and non -core. This is actually a matter which 
is not very precisely defined and this is being left because of the lack of the expertise 
in the CAG. It is actually left to the Ministries and the concerned organizations . So, 
there is some ambiguity about this. So, that also may kindly be taken note of.” 
 

21 
 
27. On the issue of Cargo volume at major p orts of India , the CMD, SCI furnished 
following information:- 
“आज िी  तारीख  में मैं आप सबि े सिंज्ञान में लाना चाहता हिं कि  ि े वल पािंच परसेंट् िागो  भारतीय  
जहाज लेिर  आते हैं। इिंकर्या िे  इम्पोट्ड में 95 परसेंट् िागो  बाहर  िे  जहाज लेिर  आ रहे  हैं, इसिी  
वजह से हर  साल लगभग 80 कबकलयन र्ॉलर  फ्र े ट् इिंकर्यन िरेंसी िे  रूप  में बाहर  जा रहा  है और  
इससे बहुत नुिसान  हो रहा  है।“ 
 
{ As of today, it is important to note that only 5% of cargo is transported by Indian 
ships. In India's imports, 95% of the cargo is carried by foreign ships. Due to this, 
approximately $80 billion in freight is paid to foreign entities every year in Indian 
currency, leading to significant financial losses. } 
 
On being asked to further elaborate on this issue on measures taken to increase the 
cargo volume from existing to 5 %, the CMD, SCI submitted as under:- 
“हम  ि े वल 5 प्रकतित िागो  ि ै री  िर  रहे  हैं, बाहर  िे  95 प्रकतित ओनर  उसिा  लाभ उठा रहे  हैं। 
इस कदिा में हमारा  मिंत्रालय इस देि िे  सबसे उच्च िायाडलयोिं िे  अधीन बहुत ही क्लोजली  और  
िोिस  िे  साथ िाम  िर  रहा  है। हमारी  कजतनी भी कर्मािंर् एग्रीग्रेिन ऑयल ि िं पनीज़ हैं, उनिो  
ट्ारगेट् किया  जा रहा  है। इनीकियल 5 से 30 प्रकतित  ट्ारगेट् है। हम  िम  से िम  30 प्रकतित ट्ारगेट् 
िो  पहले अचीव िरें। अिंत में हम  100 प्रकतित भारतीय  िागो  जहाज ि ै री  िरें। हमारा  सपना यह है 
कि  हम  अपना ही िागो  नहीिं, बप्लि अन्य देिोिं िा  िागो  भी लाए िं । यह उद्योग इस देि िी  ग्रोथ में 
ज्यादा से ज्यादा पाकट्डकसपेट् िर  सि े ।“ 
{ Indian ships currently transport only 5% of the cargo, while 95% is benefiting 
foreign owners. In this regard, the ministry is working closely and with a focused 
approach under the highest offices of the country. Efforts are being directed toward 
major dem and aggregation oil companies, with an initial target of increasing the 
share from 5% to 30%. The first goal is to achieve at least 30%, with the ultimate 
aim of ensuring that 100% of Indian cargo is carried by Indian ships. The broader 
vision is not onl y to transport domestic cargo but also to handle cargo from other 
countries, allowing the industry to contribute significantly to the nation's growth. } 
 
 
Adding to the above, the Secretary, MoPSW submitted as under:- 
”महोदय , मैं इसमें एर्  िरना  चाहिंगा कि  अभी हमारे  पास 1,500 जहाज हैं। हम  पूरे  कवश्व िा  ि े वल 
एि  प्रकतित फ्लीट् ओन िरते  हैं। हम  एि  प्रकतित  से िम  जहाज बनाते हैं। कपछले िई  सालोिं में 
ओनरकिप  में बहुत िमी  हुई है। 
हम  प्रत्येि वर्ड  85 कबकलयन र्ॉलसड  फ्र े ट् पर  खचड िरते  हैं, उसमें से 75 कबकलयन र्ॉलसड  बाहर  िे  किप  
ऑनसड िो  पे िरते  हैं, जो अपने फ्र े ट् िो  ले जाने िे  कलए होता है। इसकलए मिंत्रालय िी  भी यह स्कीम  
रही  है कि  we will build ships in India, own ships in India, and as far as possible, we will 

22 
 
ensure that at least a percentage of our cargo is carried on our ships. हम  उसमें बहुत 
तीव्र गकत से आगे बढ़ रहे  हैं।“ 
{ It is important to note that India currently has 1,500 ships and owns only 1% of the 
global fleet. The country builds less than 1% of the world's ships, and in recent years, 
there has been a significant decline in ship ownership. Each year, $85 billion is spent 
on freight, with $75 billion paid to foreign shipowners for transporting Indian cargo. 
Therefore, the ministry’s policy has been to build ships in India, own ships in India, 
and, as far as possible, ensure that a percentage of India's cargo is carr ied on 
domestic ships. Progress in this direction is advancing rapidly. } 
 
On being further asked to clarify on the timeline to reach 30 % cargo volume, the 
Secretary, MoPSW submitted as under:- 
“सर , यह कर्माण्ड  एग्रीगेिन  िी  बात है, क्योिंकि हमारे  क्र ू र्  िो  लाने िे  कलए एमओपीएनजी  िे  अिंर्र 
पप्लिि सेक्टर  यूकनट््स हैं। उनमें गेल, ऑयल इिंकर्या, ओएनजीसी जैसी ि िं पनीज हैं, कजनिो  हमने  
ररक्व े स्ट िी  है कि  आपि े पास पैसा है, यकद आप चाहें तो उनिी  कर्माण्ड  में 30 परसेंट् ति  इिंप्लण्डयन 
ओन्ड  किप्स में अपना क्र ू र्  ला सिते  हैं। िहने  िा  मतलब  है कि  आप 100 परसेंट् ले आइए, लेकिन  
हम  30 परसेंट् ति  स्टाट्ड िर  सिते  हैं। लक्ष्य है कि  वर्ड  2047 ति  हमारी  पॉकज़िन  अलग होगी। 
अभी हमारी  पॉकज़िन  17 पर  है। So, we can go up to tenth position by 2030 an d fifth 
position in the world by 2047. यह हमारा  लक्ष्य है।“ 
{ This initiative focuses on demand aggregation, as public sector units under 
MOPNG are responsible for transporting India's crude. Companies such as GAIL, 
Oil India, and ONGC have been urged to leverage their financial capacity and opt to 
transport up to 30 % of their crude using Indian -owned ships. While the long -term 
vision is to transport 100% of their crude on Indian ships, the initial target is set at 
30%. The goal is to achieve a significantly improved position by 2047. Currently 
ranked 17th, the aim is to reach the 10th position by 2030 and the 5th position 
globally by 2047. } 
 
28. On being asked to furnish clarification on approach followed by SCI on purchase 
of a ship and preparation of report including its final value, whether this value includes 
the disposal value and whether the necessary authority has been granted for it, the CMD, 
SCI made the following submission before the Committee on the issue:- 
“सर , कर्स् पो जल िे  बारे  में माननीय  सदस्ोिं ने प्रश्न रेज  किए  हैं। जब भी हम  किसी  जहाज िा  कर्स्पोजल  
िरते  हैं, हम  बड़े ही ड्यू  कर्कलजेंस तरीि े  से िरते  हैं। इकनकियली  ट्ेक्नो इिोनॉकमि  स्र्ट्ी तैयार  होती 
है, िाइनली  बोर्ड  र्ेकलब्रेट्  िरता  है और  एि  थर्ड  पाट्ी िाइनेंकियल इिंस्टीट्यूिन उसे वैट् िरता  है। 
कर्स्पोजल  िोई  साइर्  एप्लक्टकवट्ी नहीिं है, बप्लि यह हमारे  कबजनेस िा  अकभन्न भाग है। 
 XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 

23 
 
कर्स्पोजल  वैल्यू आईआरआर  िे  ि िं पोनेंट् आईआरआर  ि ै लि ु लेिन में कर्स्पोजल  िी  15 या 20 साल 
िे  बाद क्या  एक्सपेक्टेर्  वैल्यू होगी, उस इक्व े िन में हम  कितने  िा  एसेट् खरीदेंगे, कितने  जहाज 
खरीदेंगे, उसि े बाद क्या  रेवेन्यु  एक्सपेक्टेर्  है, क्या -क्या  एक्सपेंसेस होिंगे और  अिंत में इस जहाज िी  
एक्सपेक्टेर्  कर्स्पोजल  वैल्यु कितनी  होगी, वह भी एि  महत्वपूणड रोल  इस सारे  कर्सीज़न  में प्ले िरता  
है।“ 
 
{ Honorable Members raised questions regarding the disposal of ships. Whenever a 
vessel is disposed of, a thorough due diligence process is followed. Initially, a 
techno-economic study is conducted, and the matter is deliberated upon by the 
Board. Additionally, a third-party financial institution evaluates the disposal process. 
Disposal is not merely a side activity but an integral part of the business. 
 xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx 
The disposal value is a key factor in the IRR calculation. This process considers 
various elements, including the expected value of the ship after 15 or 20 years, the 
cost of asset acquisition, the number of ships to be purchased, and projected 
revenue and expenses. Ultimately, the expected disposal value of the ship plays a 
crucial role in the overall decision-making process. } 
 
29. The Committee, while extensively deliberating on other aspects sought clarification 
on varuous issues seeking the inputs on (i) concern of delay in bringing the matter before 
the Committee for discussion on  the issue after 6 years (i.e., in 2024) of the Audit 
observations made in 2018; (ii) ‘Nature of Business’; ‘Disposal of assets - old/wrecked ships 
through sale’ – and its inclusion in ‘Other Income’; (iii) Tonnage acquisition;(iv) Clarification 
on its classification as ‘Routine nature of business’ and ‘Expert opinion sought ’ from 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and its Expert Advisory Committee, if any, 
to decide on its categorization as core or non-core business as per Accounting Standard 9; 
(v) Whether SCI earned any profit from core business i.e., shipping business or the the 
business you have earned like these only (sell of fixed assets –ships); and (vi) steps taken 
by the administrative MoPSW to ( a) resolve the deadlock between SCI and C&AG; ( b) 
plans to prevent such anomalies in future (w.r.to SCI and other CPSUs under its purview); 
and ( c) efforts put -in towards SCI’s  ambition to become a Maharatna Company and 
responsibility for giving free hand to private players for so long, following submissions were 
made by the  CMD, SCI:- 
 
“हमने  अपने पीपीट्ी में जो ऑब्जेप्लक्टव्स रेिर  किए  हैं, वे एमओए  में कलस्टेर् हैं। हमने  यह इसकलए 
पीपीट्ी में र्ाला  है कि  जब सीएजी िे  साथ हमारी  चचाड हो रही  थी, जब ऑकर्ट्  हुआ, तो उसमें वर्ड  
2010 िा  एि  ओएम  िोट् हुआ और  वह हमारे  सिंज्ञान में लाया गया। वह र्ीपी  िा  ओएम  है। This 
was a clarification with regard to the Defence sector. It was not available to all 
CPSEs. Under that, one of the conditions was that this income profit should be from 

24 
 
the specified objectives. हमने  पीपीट्ी में क्लॉज  नम्बर , पेज नम्बर , ये ऐप्लक्टकवट्ीज हमारे  एमओए  
में मेन्िन हैं। इसकलए हमने  इसमें एमओए  िे  रेिरेंसेज  कलए हैं।“ 
 
{ The objectives mentioned in the presentation are listed in the Memorandum of 
Association (MOA). These were included in the presentation because, during 
discussions with the CAG and the audit process, a 2010 Office Memorandum (OM) 
was cited and brought to atte ntion. This OM, issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE), was a clarification related to the Defence sector and was not 
applicable to all Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs).  According to that OM, 
one of the conditions stated that income  or profit should be derived from the 
specified objectives. In the presentation, the clause number, page number, and 
activities specified in the MOA were clearly mentioned. This is why references to 
the MOA were included in this context. } 
-------- 
“द ू सरा, प्रश्न पूछा गया है कि  यह अदर  इनिम  में नहीिं कदखता है। मेरी  समझ  से यह है कि  एससीआई 
ने र्ीपी  गाइर्लाइन  िा  वायलेिन  किया  है या नहीिं। अदर  इनिम , ि िं पनी िी  जो एनुअल िीट् होती 
है, उसमें जो िॉमेट् है, वह िॉमेट् ि िं पनी एक्ट से आता है। There are DPE’s guidelines with 
respect to PRP. वह इस परपस  से र्ीपी  और  भारत  सरिार  िी  होती है, कजससे इम्प्प्लॉइज िो  
पीआरपी  कदया जाए। वे मेहनत  िरें और  उनि े साथ िेयर  िरें। िॉमेट् और  इसिा  िोई  र्ायरैक्टली  
सिंबिंध नहीिं है। पीआरपी  और  अदर  इनिम  िा  िॉमेट् िे  बारे  में ि िं पनी एक्ट में एि  िेड्युल  कलखा 
हुआ है। CAs are basically for how to deal with accounting procedures. यह मैट्र  है, 
भारत  सरिार  िे  जो कनदेि हैं from the DPE, उसमें सीए िा  रोल  एग्जाकमन िरवाया  जा सिता  
है।“ 
{ A question has been raised regarding why this is not reflected under "Other 
Income." The key issue to consider is whether SCI has violated the DPE 
guidelines. The "Other Income" section in a company's annual financial statements 
follows a specific format p rescribed under the Companies Act.  The DPE has 
established guidelines related to Performance -Related Pay (PRP), formulated by 
the DPE and the Government of India to ensure that employees receive PRP as 
an incentive for their hard work and contributions.  However, this format is not 
directly related to PRP or the "Other Income" section. } 
-------- 
“Tonnage acquisition िे  सिंदभड में आपने प्रश्न रेज  किया  है। इस पर  एज ए किकपिंग िॉपोिन  
ऑि  इिंकर्या, आज िी  र्ेट्  में हमारी  बोर्ड  ने लगभग 20 नए जहाज, पुराने  जहाज परचेज  िरने  िे  
कलए एप्रुवल कदए हैं। आज िी  र्ेट्  में दो जहाज िे  नेगोकसएििंस एर्वािंस स्टेज में हैं। मेरे  साथ में 
हमारे  र्ायरैक्टर  िाइनैंस, वह उस नेगोकसएिन िो  लीर्  िर  रहे  हैं। So, this is on the table. 
Any day we will have a final deal done. The SCI, under the Ministry of Ports, 

25 
 
Shipping and Waterways, is very actively involved in replacing the old vessels and 
adding new vessels. Tonnage multiplication is our prime objective.” 
 
{ A  question has been raised regarding tonnage acquisition. The Board of the 
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) has approved the purchase of approximately 
20 new and used vessels as of today. Currently, negotiations for two vessels are 
in the advanced stage, led by the Director of Finance. A final deal is expected to 
be concluded soon.  SCI, under the Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways, is 
actively engaged in replacing old vessels and adding new ones. Tonnage 
multiplication remains a primary objective. } 
------ 
 
“मैंने कमकनस्ट र ी िे  ऐक्शन िे  बारे  में बताया है। This is all under the direction of our Ministry. 
There is Ministry’s plan to prevent such situation. हमने  बोर्ड  िी  एनआरसी  िमेट्ी में यह 
र्ेकलब्रेट्  किया , उसि े बाद बोर्ड  ने र्ेकलब्रेट्  किया , उन्ोिंने र्ायरैक्शन  दी, उसि े बाद में यह मैट्र  
कमकनस्ट र ी िे  पास भेजा गया। यह कमकनस्ट र ी में भी र्ेकलब्रेट्  हुआ और  कमकनस्ट र ी िी  भी ि िं सेन्ट इस 
ओकपकनयन पर  िोपू , सीएजी िे  पास गई हुई है। इस मुद्दे पर  हमारी  ऐर्कमकनस्ट रेकट्व कमकनस्ट र ी भी 
सहमत  है।“ 
 
{ The Ministry's actions have been carried out under its direction, with a plan in 
place to prevent such a situation. This matter was first deliberated in the Board’s 
NRC Committee, followed by discussions at the Board level, where directions were 
provided. Subsequently, the matter was forwarded to the Ministry for further 
consideration.  After thorough deliberation, the Ministry conveyed its consent on 
this opinion to COPU and CAG. The Administrative Ministry is also in agreement 
on this issue. } 
------ 
” हिं। वर्ड  2014-15 में हमने  पीआरपी  ि ै लि ु लेट् किया , कर्प्लस्ट र ब्यूट् किया , जो पास्ट में हमारी  प्रैप्लक्टस 
थी या पीआरपी  स्कीम  थी, एप्रूव्र्  बाई बोर्ड  उसमें हमने  िोई  र्ेकवएिन  नहीिं किया  है। मैनेजमेंट् ने 
ऐसा िोई  िदम  नहीिं उठाया है कि  इस साल, जैसे आपने यह रेज  किया  है कि  अगर  इसमें से जहाज 
िो  माइनस  िर  दें, तो ि ु छ नहीिं बचता है। आप िहते  हैं कि  ठीि  है, लेकिन  िोई  भी प्रोकसजर  से 
हमने  एज ए मैनेजमेंट् या बोर्ड  ने र्ेकवएिन  नहीिं किया  है। ये सारी  ि ै लि ु लेिन, इन िॉमड  ऑि  
एजेंर्ा बोर्ड  िे  पास जाती है और  बोर्ड  इसे र्ेकलब्रेट्  िरता  है, including all calculations, तभी 
एप्रुवल कमलता  है। “ 
{ In the year 2014-15, PRP was calculated and distributed as per past practice and 
the PRP scheme approved by the Board, with no deviations from the established 
process. The management has not taken any steps that would alter this procedure.  
Regarding the con cern that if the ship is excluded, nothing remains, it may be a 

26 
 
valid observation. However, as a management and Board, no deviations from any 
procedures have occurred. All calculations are presented to the Board as part of 
an agenda, and the Board thoroughly deliberates on them, including all 
computations, before granting approval.} 
------ 
“सर , किप्स िी  कबक्री  िे  सिंबिंध में एि  सवाल था, हमारी  समझ  िे  कहसाब से किप्स िी  कबक्री  में 
हमारा  नवरत्न बोर्ड  भी इिंवॉल्व होता है। किप्स िी  सेल में जो भी प्रोसीर््स  कमलती  है, उसे हम  नया 
जहाज खरीदने  में इिंवेस्ट िरते  हैं। यह एि  साइिल  है और  यह सारा  िा  सारा , मेरी  समझ  िे  कहसाब 
से, हमारी  िोर  कबजनेस िा  एि  कहस्सा है।“ 
 
{ A question was raised regarding the sale of ships. As per the understanding, the 
Navratna Board is also involved in the sale of ships. The proceeds from these sales 
are reinvested in the purchase of new ships. This process operates as a cycle and 
is considered an integral part of the core business.} 
------ 
 
“सर , आपने इसमें कर्िाइिंर् एज िे  बारे  में एि  पॉइिंट् उठाया है। Age is one of the criteria. जो 
रेगुलेट्र  र्ी .जी., किकपिंग है, उन्ोिंने उसमें ि ु छ गाइर्लाइिंस इश्यु िी  हुई हैं, बट् ओवरऑल  उसमें 
मैट्र  यह है कि  किप ऑनर  उस जहाज िो  किस  ि िं र्ीिन में रखता  है। हो सिता  है कि  वह उसे 
दस साल में खराब  िर  दे। आपिो  ि ु छ ऑनसड ऐसे कमलेंगे, कजनि े 40-40 साल ति  जहाज चलते 
हैं। कमकनस्ट र ी ऑि  अथड साइिंस िे  जो किप्स ररसचड  वैसल हैं, वे 40 ईयर  प्लस है। ि ु छ पैसेंजर जहाज 
कजन्ें अिंर्मान कनिोबार  ऑन िरता  है, उन्ें एससीआई, ट्ेक्नीिल वेकनिंग मैनेज  िरता  है, ि ु छ िी  
उम्र  40 साल है। हमारे  एलएनजी और  एलपीजी जहाज जो एिदम  स्पेिलाइज हाई ए िं र् वैसल हैं, वे 
आराम  से 35-40 साल ति  सकवडस देते हैं। So, age is not a criterion. Basically, every year 
or every 2 ½ years or every five years their survey certification is done that it is fit 
for service. It is the most important thing.” 
 
{ A point was raised regarding the defined age of vessels. While age is one of the 
criteria, the overall condition of a ship depends on how well it is maintained by the 
owner. The regulator, D.G. Shipping, has issued certain guidelines, but vessel 
longevity varies. Some ships may deteriorate within ten years, while others 
continue operating for as long as 40 years. For example, the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences operates research vessels that are over 40 years old. Similarly, some 
passenger ships owned by the A ndaman & Nicobar administration, which are 
technically managed by SCI, are also around 40 years old. Highly specialized LNG 
and LPG vessels can comfortably serve for 35 -40 years. Therefore, age alone is 
not the primary criterion. More importantly, vessels undergo survey certification 
every year, every 2 ½ years, or every five years to ensure they remain fit for 
service, which is the most critical factor. } 

27 
 
----- 
“सर , र्ीपी  वायलेििंस – हमने  अपना पक्ष आपि े सामने  रख  कदया है। यह पक्ष ि े वल मैनेजमेंट् िा  
ही नहीिं है, हमने  बोर्ड  में र्ेकलब्रेट्  िरवाया  है, उसि े बाद हमने  अपने मिंत्रालय िो  सप्लममट् किया  है 
और  ररपोट्ड  आपि े सामने  है।“ 
 
{ Regarding DPE violations, the stance has been clearly presented. This position 
is not solely that of the management but has been thoroughly deliberated by the 
Board, submitted to the Ministry, and is now presented in the report before the 
concerned authority. } 
------ 
 
30. On being asked to elaborate on steps being taken to increase the Capacity of ship-
building in India and indigenize foreign cargo ships and replace them by Indian ones and 
estimated time to achieve the goal, the CMD, SCI submitted as under:- 
 
“भारत  सरिार  किप कबप्लल्डिंग दृढ़ कनश्चय से िाम  िर  रही  है। आज ति  इिंकर्या में यह लेस दैन एि  
प्रकतित, पैथेकट्ि ि िं कर्िन है। यह ट्ारगेट् है कि  हम  िम  से िम  यह 10 प्रकतित इिंकर्या में स्थाकपत 
िरें। अभी हमारे  सकचव साहब साउथ िोररया  से आए हैं। इन्ोिंने छ: कदनोिं िे  कलए र्ेलीगेट््स  िो  
लीर्  किया  है। Under this, the whole thrust was on how to increase ship building in 
India. जो साउथ िोररयन  बड़ी-बड़ी यार््डस  हैं, इस मामले  में वल्डड  में नम्बर  वन पर  चाइना है और  
नम्बर  दो पाकजिन पर  साउथ िोररया  है, हमारी  उनसे फ्र ु ट्ि ु ल मीकट्िंग हुई है। साउथ िोररयन  
र्े लीगेिन इिंकर्या आने वाला है। हमारी  िोकिि  है कि  हम  अपने ऑर्डर  साउथ िोररया  िो  नहीिं दे, 
बप्लि वे अपनी ि ै क्ट र ी यहािं पर  लगाए िं । 
मैन्यूि ै क्चररिंग – मेि  इन इिंकर्या हो। उसिा  सबसे बड़ा प्रभाव यह है कि  किप  कबप्लल्डिंग में बहुत 
रोजगार  है। यकद एि  िमडचारी  िो  किप कबप्लल्डिंग में रोजगार  कमलता  है तो उससे एलाइर्  इिंर्स्ट र ी में 
5 लोगोिं िो  रोजगार  कमलता  है। इसकलए यह भारत  सरिार  िा  ट्ारगेट् है और  इसमें बहुत ही 
िोिस्र्  तरीि े  से िाम  हो रहा  है।  
सर , किप कबप्लल्डिंग में ईस्ट िोस्ट में िई  स्पॉट््स कचकित किए  गए हैं। यहािं किप  क्लस्टसड िे  िॉमेिन  
िी  बात चल रही  है।“ 
 
{ The Government of India is strongly committed to advancing the shipbuilding 
industry. Currently, India's shipbuilding sector is in a poor state, contributing less 
than one percent globally. The target is to increase this share to at least 10 percent. 
Recently, the Secretary led a six -day delegation to South Korea, focusing on 
strategies to boost shipbuilding in India. South Korea has some of the world's 
largest shipyards, with China ranking first globally and South Korea second. 

28 
 
Productive discussions were held, and a South Korean delegation is expected to 
visit India soon. The objective is not to place orders with South Korea but to 
encourage them to establish manufacturing facilities in India. 
The initiative aligns with the ‘Make in India’ program, aiming to promote domestic 
manufacturing. A significant benefit of this initiative would be job creation in 
shipbuilding, as every job in this sector generates five additional jobs in allied 
industries. This is a key focus of the Indian government, and efforts are being made 
in a highly targeted manner. 
Additionally, several locations on the East Coast have been identified for 
shipbuilding, and discussions are ongoing regarding the formation of ship clusters 
in these areas. } 
 
Adding to the above submission, Secretary, MoPSW submitted as under:- 
“सर , किप कबप्लल्डिंग में अभी हमने  तीन वकट्डिल्स िो  आइर्ैंकट्िाई किया  है। उसमें से एि  तो किप 
यार््डस  िो  मजबूत  िरना  है, उनिी  ि ै पेकबकलट्ीज़ और  ि ै पेकसट्ीज़ िो  बढ़ाना है। द ू सरा किप  
कबप्लल्डिंग िाइनैंकियल अकसस्टैंस पॉकलसी है। जो किप्स भारत  में बनती हैं, compared to what is 
manufactured abroad, उसमें जो 20 प्रकतित  िा  िॉस्ट कर्िरेंस  है, उसि े कलए we are trying 
to see if we can give a subsidy so that the manufacturing happens here. 
सर , तीसरी  बात यह है कि  भारत  में किप कबप्लल्डिंग न होने िा  िारण  यह है कि  यहािं पर  ि िं कर्िंग िी  
अनुपलब्धता है। ि िं कर्िंग इसकलए उपलब्ध नहीिं है, क्योिंकि ship-building is not classified as 
infrastructure. इसि े साथ ही, उनिो  सात सालोिं िे  कलए और  उच्च ब्याज दर  पर  िाइनैंकसिंग 
कमलती  है, लेकिन  कवदेि में उन्ें यह बीस सालोिं िे  कलए कमलती  है और  बहुत सस्ते ब्याज दरोिं पर  
कमलती  है, इसकलए यहािं िाइनैंकसिंग इिो -कसस्टम नहीिं है। इसिो  बनाने िे  कलए हमने  एि  मैररट्ाइम  
र्ेवलपमेंट् ि िं र् िा  प्रपोजल कदया है। अब ये तीन proposals are under examination at 
different stages in the Ministry of Expenditure, etc. We hope that once it is 
approved, we will be able to take these ship-building schemes forward. Like, South 
Korea manufactures 13 million GT every year and in India we are only 
manufacturing 100,000 GT every year. So, that is the difference. वहािं 13 कमकलयन  होता 
है और  हमारे  यहािं एि  लाख होता है। हमारी  ि ै पेकसट्ी ि े वल 1 कमकलयन  िी  है। So, we have to 
do a lot of work in ship-building, and that is what the Ministry is now trying to do.” 
 
{ Three key verticals have been identified in shipbuilding. The first focuses on 
strengthening shipyards by enhancing their capabilities and capacities. The 
second involves the Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy. Compared to ships 
built abroad, those manufactured in India have a cost difference of approximately 
20 percent. To bridge this gap, the possibility of providing subsidies to encourage 
domestic manufacturing is being explored. 
The third major issue is the lack of shipbuilding in India due to the unavailability of 
adequate funding. This challenge arises because shipbuilding is not classified as 

29 
 
infrastructure. As a result, financing is available only for seven years at high 
interest rates, whereas, in foreign countries, funding is accessible for up to 20 
years at significantly lower interest rates. This creates a weak financing ecosystem 
for ship building in India. To address this, the establishment of a Maritime 
Development Fund has been proposed. 
These three proposals are currently under examination at different stages within 
the Ministry of Expenditure and other departments. Once approved, these 
initiatives are expected to drive shipbuilding forward in India. For instance, South 
Korea manufactures 13 million GT (Gross Tonnage) of ships annually, whereas 
India produces only 100,000 GT. The stark difference —13 million GT there 
compared to just 100,000 GT in India —highlights the need for significant 
improvements. India's total capacity stands at only 1 million GT, indicating 
substantial work ahead in shipbuilding. The Ministry is actively working to address 
these challenges and boost the sector. } 
 
31. On being asked about whether the incentives given to employees should be based 
on the Bell C urve method , Chairperson sought clarity about what exactly the DPE 
guidelines are on this matter. Although, the board has been following the same system 
for decades, Chairperson further sought feedback from the DPE alongwith SCI on the 
lack of application of the bell  curve, so that non -performing employees or below -par 
performing employees should not be rece iving performance-related pay, following were 
the submission made by the representatives of SCI and DPE :- 
The CMD, SCI made following submission before the Committee:- 
“सर , मैं आपिी  अनुमकत  से इस पर  इनपुट् देना चाहिंगा कि  बेल िवड  िा  जो िािंसेप्ट है, उसे भारत  
सरिार  ने और  र्ीपीई  ने ऑलरेर्ी  सिंिोकधत िर  कदया है। इसकलए अब बेल िवड  िा  िािंसेप्ट नहीिं 
है। एि  नये िािंसेप्ट, नये कप्रिंकसपल िे  कहसाब से पीआरपी  कर्प्लस्ट र ब्यूट् होता है।“ 
{ With permission, an input on this matter is provided. The concept of the bell curve 
has already been revised by the Government of India and the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE). As a result, the bell curve concept is no longer applicable. PRP 
is now distributed based on a new concept and updated principles. } 
 
 The representatives of Department of Public Enterprises at the evidence of the 
Committee, made the following submission on the issue:- 
“सर , र्ीपीई  जो गाइर्लाइिंस इश्यू िरता  है, उसिा  इम्प्प्लीमेंट्ेिन ि िं सन्डड लाइन कमकनस्ट र ी िरती  है। 
र्ीपीई  िी  गाइर्लाइिंस में िहीिं पर  भी किसी  सीपीएसई िो  या एर्कमकनस्ट रेकट्व कमकनस्ट र ी िो  र्ाउट्  

30 
 
होता है, तो वे हमारे  पास क्लैररकिि े िन  िे  कलए एप्रोच िरते  हैं, उसि े बेकसस पर  हम  क्लैररकिि े िन  
इश्यू िरते  हैं। उदाहरण  िे  कलए, वर्ड  2013 और  2014 में, हमारे  पास सीपीएसईज़ से जो रेिरेंस  
आए, उनि े बेकसस पर , we have specifically mentioned in the revised guidelines, by 
way of clarification, that interest of portion of idle cash and bank balances should 
not form the part while computing the PRP for the purpose of profit before tax. तो 
जो इिंट् रेस्ट ऑन आइर्ल  ि ै ि है, उसिो  प्रॉकिट् कबिोर  ट्ैक्स में से ररड्यूस  किया  जाएगा for the 
purpose of computation. इसकलए जब भी िोई  सीपीएसई हमें ऐसी क्लैररकिि े िन  िे  कलए 
एप्रोच िरती  है, तो हम  उनिो  क्लैररकिि े िन  देते हैं, because more than 400 CPSEs are 
there which fall in 20 Cognate Groups. It is difficult for DPE because we are not 
technical experts that we define what is core activity and what is non -core. That is 
why it is with the concerned CPSE or administrative Min istry. We let them take 
decision based on their expertise.” 
   
{ The  implementation of the guidelines issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) is carried out by the respective Administrative 
Ministry/Department. If any Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) or 
administrative Ministry/Department has doubts regarding DPE guidelines, they 
seek clarification, and DPE provides guidance accordingly. 
For example, in 2013 and 2014, based on references received from CPSEs, the 
revised guidelines explicitly clarified that interest earned on idle cash and bank 
balances should not be considered when computing Performance -Related Pay 
(PRP) for the purpose of  profit before tax. Therefore, the interest on idle cash is 
deducted from profit before tax for computation purposes. 
Whenever a CPSE seeks such clarifications, they are provided as required. Since 
there are more than 400 CPSEs classified under 20 Cognate Groups, it is 
challenging for DPE, as a non-technical body, to define what constitutes a core or 
non-core activity. Fo r this reason, the decision is left to the respective CPSE or 
administrative Ministry/Department, allowing them to determine the classification 
based on their expertise. } 
 
32. On being asked to clarify on wheter any cla rification was sought from the D PE in this 
particular case about core and non-core classification, the CMD, SCI submitted the following:- 
“Sir, we did not do that.” 
{ एससीआई ने ऐसा नहीिं किया।  } 
 
 
 

31 
 
E.  Select remarks of the Committee 
 
After reviewing the case in detail, Hon’ble Chairperson made the f ollowing important 
observations on the subject:- 
  
(i). The matter as brought before the Committee reflects broader challenges in 
interpreting and implementing DPE guidelines regarding the distribution of PRP to 
employees of SCI based on its core business profits during the financial year 2014-15.  It 
is already a 10-year-old matter. 
 It is evident that while SCI’s Management has argued that certain income streams 
such as profits from the sale of ships, interest from joint ventures and other related 
sources are part of core business activities, the Audit has contested this classificati on. 
According to the Audit, these income streams are categorized as “Other Income” in the 
financial statements and do not align with DPE guidelines for calculating PRP, which 
emphasise using profits strictly from core business activities. 
This divergence in interpretation has not only prolonged the settlement of this issue 
but has also brought to light systemic challenges in defining and adhering to “core 
business” in the context of CPSUs.  This particular matter has been pending for a very  
long time, about almost a decade now. 
A request from the CMD, SCI has been received highlighting the unresolved nature 
of issues leading to multifaceted consequences of delay in resolution of matter affecting 
organizational morale, administrative and procedural burden of multiple journeys of Action 
Taken Notes without satisfactory resolution and having potential to set important 
benchmarks for the interpretation of DPE guidelines for other CPSUs that may be facing 
similar challenges. 
As a way forward, the Committee understands the complexities involved in 
balancing regulatory compliance with the operational realities of a commercial entity like 
SCI. However, as custodians of public accountability, it is the Committee’s  joint 

32 
 
responsibility to ensure that the interpretation of policies, such as those of the DPE, is 
consistent, fair and promotes the integrity of our established institutions. 
Coming to the goals of discussions at the sitting , active deliberations shall be 
aimed to be helpful to arrive at a definite conclusion on (i) Clarification of DPE guidelines 
– A consistent framework for defining core versus non-core income must be established 
to eliminate ambiguities; (ii) Engagement of stakeholders – To understand the operational 
rationale, policy interpretations and implications of decisions; and (iii) Time -bound 
resolution – To ensure both organisational stability at SCI and a relia ble precedent for 
future cases. 
 
(ii).  After going through the matter in detail and, on the one hand, it is understood why 
audit has raised an objection. On the other hand, being actually quite sympathetic to the 
corporation because the two main items of dispute of the three remaining, one relates to 
disposal of fixed assets, that is, ships.  
It is a little baffling that why disposal of ships is not considered as a core business. 
As was mentioning a little bit earlier, the age of the ships after they are depreciated, after 
they have been operating for 15 years or 20 years or 30 years is a critical factor in how 
efficient they are and what it will lead to in terms of profitability and effectiveness. 
So, in understanding of the issue, whether to continue with old ships or to dispose 
them and buy, replace the fleet, have a new fleet is a critical core decision that this 
company has to make. It is not just about their operating revenues because there are 
different models which are calle d asset lite, whether in transport like Uber, whether in 
hotels or accommodation like OYO. They do not own the assets.  
They focus entirely only on operating them. Asset's age does not matter because 
it belongs to somebody else. When a company like Air India or the railways, when they 
own the assets, the age of the assets and whether to keep operating or to dispose, to me, 
sounds like a critical core nature of the business. Same thing goes for joint ventures 
because when companies become large apart from themselves doing manufacturing or 
processing or whatever they are doing, quite often to expand their capacity, they will have 

33 
 
joint ventures and that contributes to the financial income that they have. There may be 
one or two items where maybe it is not really core.  
Other point in mind was that is it specifically defined by DPE that this is core and 
that is not core and you have just now shed light on this and even the C&AG also 
highlighted that there is some ambiguity. When there is ambiguity, one needs to give the 
benefit of doubt to the enterprise concerned otherwise our public sector will never be able 
to compete.  
Now when there are very specific guidelines by the DPE, then there is no room for 
any complacence. In this particular case, it seems like may be some more exercise needs 
to be done by DPE to bring about more clarity. One extreme can be that you can leave it 
to the board of the company to decide what is core, what is not core. Here we have other 
complexities. On the one hand because of accounting standards as the Deputy C&AG 
has briefed us, the income goes into other income.  
On the other hand, in the memorandum of association very clearly this is defined 
as one of their main activities. So in the light of  these kind of contradictions, the real 
emphasis ought to be that DPE ought to take further steps to remove such ambiguity 
going forward so that other CPSUs do not face the same kind of dilemma. Such a matter 
going on for ten years can be a huge burden f or public sector employees and  can 
understand that it must be demotivating to have these questions hanging on their head 
for so long.  

34 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Overview 
'Audit Paras/Reports Referred to CoPU for Final Decision' 
The Committee on Public Undertakings (CoPU), under Rule 312A of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, is mandated to examine Audit 
Reports and Paras (referred to as Commercial Reports of the Audit) related to 
Central Public Sector Un dertakings (CPSUs), as presented by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (C&AG). 
Each year, the Committee select specific audit -based subjects for 
examination inter-alia focusing on pending and unsettled audit observations 
requiring parliamentary intervention for resolution. The audit process involves 
multiple rounds of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) submission and vetting by C&AG, but 
certain contentious observations of the Audit remain unresolved due to differences 
in interpretation between the matter pertaining to the concerned CPSU through its 
Administrative Ministry and the Audit, somet imes covering areas involving the 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). 
As informed by C&AG Office, as on September 2024, 265 Audit Paras/Reports 
were pending with CoPU for final decision, some of which have remained unresolved 
for years. To address this, the Committee decided to take up the matter and review 
critical Audit Para/Report requiring immediate resolution. 
In its sitting held on 5 December 2024, the Committee prioritized one such 
Audit Para (numerated as Case 1) for examination under the broader subject 'Audit 
Paras/Reports referred to CoPU for final decision'. 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
'Case 1' – Audit Para No. 9.2 of C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019 
 
The first case selected by the Committee pertains to Audit Para No. 9.2 of 
C&AG Report No. 13 of 2019, which has highlight the issue of Performance Related 
Pay (PRP), which as per Audit was paid by the Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) 
Limited in violation of DPE Guidelines. 
According to DPE’s 2007 Pay Revision Guidelines, PRP should be distributed 
only from the profits accruing from core business activities of a CPSE.  However, 
Audit observed that SCI included non-core profits in its PRP calculations for the year 
2014-15, resulting in an avoidable payment of ₹11.03 crore to its employees. 
The Audit pointed out that the inclusion of income on account of seven (7) 
non-core business activities , two (2) of which were settled at Preliminary Audit 
Stage, in the PBT for the purpose of calculation of PRP resulted in violation of DPE 
Guidelines and avoidable payment of PRP of ₹11.03 crore.  After settling of four out 
of the seven contentious observations, Audit has observed that SCI did not exclude 
the non-core income sources while calculating PRP on three unsettled observations 
viz., (i) Profit on sale of fixed assets, including ships (₹122.42 crore); (ii) Interest on 
loans given to joint ventures (JVs) (₹28.67 crore); and (iii) Interest income on 
rescinded shipbuilding contracts (₹124 crore).  According to C&AG, if these were 
excluded, SCI would not have had sufficient core business profits to pay PRP in 
2014-15. 
The Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways (MoPSW) in their submission to the Committee have argued that Profit 
from ship sales, Joint Venture (JV) earnings and Contract Rescindment income were 
part of its core bu siness, as defined in its Memorandum of Association (MoA).  
Moreover, the Board and the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways (MoPSW) 
had approved the PRP calculation methodology. It was emphasized that ambiguities 
in DPE Guidelines on core business ac tivities had led to the dispute on the matter 
and requested for the Committee’s intervention for amicable resolution of the 
matter.  The MoPSW’s also supported SCI's stance on the matter, highlighting the 
lack of clear, sector -specific Guidelines from DPE and also requested the 

36 
 
Committee’s intervention for a final decision to avoid prolonged uncertainty 
affecting employee morale and operational efficiency. 
 
Observations and Remarks of the Committee 
 
Hon’ble Chairperson, after reviewing the case in detail, steered the 
Committee’s discourse on a complex yet an important and wide impacting issue 
with the following key observations: 
  
(i) Challenges in Interpreting Core Business Activities for PRP Calculation 
• The core issue lies in the interpretation of DPE Guidelines regarding 
what constitutes "core business activities" for PRP distribution. 
• While SCI has justified certain income streams (Profit from ship sales, 
Interest from JVs and Rescindment of contracts) as part of core 
business, Audit has classified them as "Other Income" in the financial 
statements. 
• This divergence in interpretation has prolonged the issue for nearly a 
decade, highlighting systemic challenges in defining "core business" 
across CPSUs. 
 
(ii) Need for Consistency and Fairness in Policy Application 
• The lack of clarity in DPE Guidelines may have caused multiple 
interpretations across CPSUs, leading to uncertainty and disputes. 
• In cases where ambiguity exists, the benefit of doubt should be given 
to the Public Undertaking to ensure public sector competitiveness and 
operational efficiency. 
• A uniform framework must be established to define "core business" for 
PRP calculation across sectors. 
 
(iii) Need for Timely Resolution to Maintain Organizational Stability 
The issue has remained unresolved for nearly 10 years, causing: 
• Low employee morale due to continuous financial uncertainty. 
• Repeated cycles of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) between SCI/ MoPSW 
and CAG without conclusive settlement. 

37 
 
• Unnecessary administrative burden on stakeholders, diverting focus 
from strategic growth. 
• The Committee in their deliberation on the matter aimed to provide a 
final resolution to ensure stability within SCI and set a precedent for 
resolving similar cases in other CPSUs. 
 
(iv) Role of DPE in Resolving Ambiguities 
• It was emphasized that DPE, as the Nodal Department for CPSUs, must 
take proactive steps to remove ambiguities in Guidelines. 
• Sector-specific clarity should be provided to address disputes in 
industries like shipping, where operations differ from other CPSUs. 
 
(v) The Way Forward: Committee’s Deliberations and Expected Outcomes 
The Committee aimed to arrive at a definitive conclusion on three key aspects: 
• Clarification of DPE Guidelines: A consistent policy framework for 
defining core vs. non-core income must be established. 
• Stakeholder Engagement: Understanding the rationale behind SCI’s 
operational and financial decisions. 
• Time-bound Resolution: Ensuring organizational stability at SCI and 
creating a precedent for future cases. 
 
(vi) Final Perspective 
• Given the contradictions between financial accounting classifications 
and operational realities, the Committee’s discussion centered around 
active deliberation on whether PRP calculations should be governed by 
strict financial reporting norms or a more business-oriented approach. 
• DPE should play a more active role in preventing long -drawn audit 
disputes by issuing clear Guidelines that apply uniformly across all 
CPSUs. 
 
Significance of the Case and Next Steps by the Committee 
 
This particular case is significant as it represents broader challenges in 
interpreting DPE Guidelines across CPSUs, making it a benchmark for future 
disputes.  The lack of sector-specific Guidelines for defining core business activities 
in the shipping in dustry has led to ambiguities in PRP calculations.  The case has 

38 
 
remained unsettled for nearly a decade, underscoring the need for timely resolution 
mechanisms for audit disputes. 
Going forward, the Committee after hearing of all stakeholders—SCI, MoPSW, 
DPE and Audit officials unanimously concluded that, given the specific nature of 
SCI’s business, there is an urgent need for determining rightful interpretation of PRP 
calculations.  The Committee’s intervention should help finalizing long -pending 
audit paras in a structured manner thereby aiding settling the dispute and need for 
issuing sector-specific Guidelines to prevent similar cases in the future.  Further, 
this case should ser ve as a test case for resolving long -pending audit paras and 
streamline decision-making on policy ambiguities in CPSUs. 
 
2. Interpretation of Core and Non-Core Business Activities in PRP Calculation 
The Committee note that the dispute between the Audit and SCI/MoPSW have 
arisen from the interpretation of "core business activities" under DPE Guidelines for 
PRP distribution. While the C&AG classified profits from the Sale of fixed assets, 
Interest from Joint Ventures and Interest on rescinded shipbuilding contracts as 
"Other Income," SCI contended that these are integral to its core business as per its 
Memorandum of Association (MoA). The ambiguity in defining core business 
activities has led to prolonge d delays in resolving the issue, affecting employee 
morale and operational efficiency. 
The SCI argued that selling ships, financing Joint Ventures and interest 
income on rescinded contracts are part of core business, supporting long-term fleet 
management and operational sustainability.  The MoPSW, in this regard, has 
endorsed SCI’s classific ation and approved the decision of SCI in PRP payments.  
The Audit in their observation empahasised on the interpretative intent behind the 
DPE Guidelines and financial reporting practices, stating these incomes were 
booked under “Other Income” and not directly linked to core marine logistics. 
The Committee, in view of the above position, are of the firm opinion that since 
DPE Guidelines applies across all CPSUs, the Committee recommend that (i) DPE, 
in future, should issue clear sector -specific Guidelines clarifying ‘core’ and ‘non -
core’ activities for applicability to the shipping industry not only for PRP calculation 

39 
 
but also for other related matters; (ii) Given the non -specificity of the then existing 
Guidelines and approval by SCI’s Board and concurred by its administrative Ministry 
on activities forming ‘Core Business’, the Committee are also of unanimous opinion 
that the unsettled observations should be resolved in favor of SCI as a one -time 
measure; and (iii) Further, the future cases should follow updated DPE Guidelines 
to prevent any scope of ambiguity. 
 
3. Delayed Resolution of PRP Dispute and its Impact 
The Committee observe that the dispute has been ongoing for nearly a 
decade, leading to administrative inefficiencies and financial uncertainties for SCI 
employees. Continuous re -submission of ATNs without resolution on unsettled 
observations has created a  regulatory bottleneck, delaying final settlement of the 
Audit Para. Further, employees who received PRP have faced deductions from 
salaries upon separation or retirement, causing dissatisfaction. 
In this regard, SCI highlighted the demotivating impact of prolonged 
uncertainty on employees and requested the august Committee’s intervention for 
resolution and made a plea for sympathetic consideration.  Audit, during their 
briefing maintained its stand  on adherence to DPE Guidelines but acknowledged 
ambiguities in classification. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend (i) a time -bound mechanism for 
resolving audit observations in CPSUs; (ii) CAG related Reports/Paras should be 
reviewed in the Company’s Board Meetings and Annual Report must reflect on 
number of pending and settled Audi t Reports/Paras; and (iii) Further, the 
Government Nominee Directors should play an active role in addressing such 
disputes early to prevent protracted delays. 
 
4. Role of DPE in Ensuring Clarity in PRP Guidelines 
The Committee note that the lack of clear definitions for sector-specific ‘core 
business’ activities in DPE Guidelines may have led to multiple interpretations 
across CPSUs similar to the deliberated issue pertaining to SCI. The Committee are 

40 
 
of the view that the issue may not be unique to SCI and may have implications for 
other CPSUs facing similar dilemmas. 
The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), in consonance on the issue with 
the Committee’s observation, submitted that the existing Guidelines broadly define 
core business activities but do not provide sector-specific clarity.  The Audit, in lack 
of clear  sector specific Guidelines, opined for strict adherence to financial 
classifications in audited reports.  In this case, as observed by the Committee and 
echoing the ambiguity of DPE Guidelines, the MoPSW urged DPE to issue clearer 
directives to prevent future disputes. 
To bring crystal clarity on the issue, the Committee recommend that   (i) Since 
DPE Guidelines applies across all CPSUs, there is an urgent need for sector–specific 
Guidelines; (ii) Further DPE being the Nodal Department for CPSU regulations, 
should not only formulate sector -specific Guidelines but also allow administrative 
Ministries/Departments to establish norms for their respective CPSUs. In case 
sector-specific Guidelines are not possible, scope/leverage for deciding specific 
norms for the particular C PSU may invariably be given to the administrative 
Ministry/Department. Once approved by the administrative Ministry/Department, the 
same may be communicated to DPE for their final endorsement and oversight; (iii) 
Further, the Committee desire that DPE shou ld act as a ‘Deciding Authority’ for all 
CPSUs to resolve all pending matters arising out of deviations in 
Guidelines/Instructions; and (iv) Moreover, DPE should also proactively engage with 
stakeholders to refine policies based on operational realities.  To achieve all of the 
above, all Government Ministries/Departments should work in cohesion and strictly 
abstain from compartmentalization approach. 
 
5. Final Resolution of Three Unsettled Audit Observations 
The Committee observe that out of seven audit observations, four were 
settled between SCI/MoPSW  and the Audit. The remaining three —(i) Profit on the 
sale of ships; (ii) Interest income on rescinded shipbuilding contracts; and (iii) 
Interest on loans to Joint Ventures —remained contentious. These activities have 
been integral to SCI’s long -term busine ss model and have been approved by its 

41 
 
Board and Administrative Ministry as activities forming part of ‘Core Business’ of 
SCI. 
 The SCI in their submission before the Committee strongly argued in favour 
of the three unsettled position emphasizing that these activities align with its 
operational model and long-term sustainability strategy.  The Board along with the 
administrative Ministry are in agreement of the stand and decision taken by SCI and 
accepted SCI’s justification as a reasonable interpretation of the DPE Guidelines.  
Audit, on the other hand have not accepted SCI’s argument due to lack of explicit 
support in existing DPE Guidelines. 
The Committee find it odd regarding the interpretation of the sale and 
purchase of ships not being considered a core business of SCI, since it appears to 
be the primary capex of this industry. It seems logical for the Company to take 
decisions about the de preciated condition of their equipment and the useful life 
remaining, and to decide on the disposal/replenishment of the same — which has a 
direct bearing on the quantity and quality of the Company’s shipping services. 
Considering the prolonged nature of the dispute, absence of clear sector -
specific DPE Guidelines and the same been already approved by SCI’s Board and 
its administrative Ministry, the Committee recommend  (i) Settling the three 
remaining audit observations as a one-time resolution.  The three unsettled cases 
may be cleared for settlement, in line with submission made by the SCI before the 
Committee on sympathetic ground and non -specificity of DPE Guidelines which 
have already been approved by the Board and its administrative Ministry; and (ii) 
Also, since the MoPSW had approved the Board’s decision on activities of SCI 
forming part of ‘Core Business’, the Ministry may see for uniform applicability of the 
same across all CPSUs under its wing. 
 
6. Need for Stakeholder Engagement and Institutional Mechanisms for Audit 
Disputes 
The Committee, while going through the matter at depth, acknowledge that 
similar audit disputes could arise in other CPSUs due to evolving business practices 
and ambiguous policy frameworks. Thus, lack of structured stakeholder 

42 
 
engagement between CAG, DPE, administrative Ministries/Departments and CPSUs 
exacerbates delays in resolution. 
 The Committee find themselves in agreement with the Audit’s observation for 
stress needed to standardise policy interpretation across CPSUs.  The peculiar case 
of SCI alongwith MoPSW also points towards need for improved coordination 
among stakeholders to  prevent such disputes in the future and acknowledge the 
essentiality for periodic engagement between CPSUs and regulatory bodies for 
policy clarity. 
In this regard, the Committee recommend that (i) The Independent Auditors’ 
of CPSUs be made aware of all Guidelines and this has to be the responsibility of 
CPSU; (ii) Further, the Government Nominee Director in CPSU to act as Nodal in 
Board Meetings as well as the Ministry for CAG Related Reports/Paras; (iii) To take 
up the matter for settlement of Audit Report/Para with stakeholders in time bound 
manner; (iv)  In case of ambiguity or non -clarity in Guidelines/Instructions issued 
from time to time, the Nodal should act for resolution by process of consultation and 
placing the matter for decision of Head of the administrative Department/Ministry 
and intimation to DPE, if required.  The Committee also recommend for (v) Taking 
such unresolved cases under the a lready established forum viz., Centralised  
Monitoring Cell (CMC) that is functional under DPE to periodically review Audit -
related disputes in CPSUs. The forum should increase its ambit in covering the 
representatives from DPE, CAG, administrative Ministries/Departments and CPSUs 
to proactively address ambiguities in Guidelines and expedite dispute resolution.   
 
7. Bell Curve Approach and Its Latest Position 
The Committee note that the Bell Curve approach for Performance Related 
Pay (PRP), as mandated by DPE Guidelines (2007 Pay Revision), require CPSEs to 
grade employees into performance categories where 10% of employees were to be 
graded below par and were n ot eligible for PRP; 10 -15% were to be graded 
outstanding; and the rest were to be distributed across other performance bands. 
In SCI’s case, the Audit highlighted that the Corporation deviated from this 
mandated structure by introducing two subcategories within the “Below Par” 

43 
 
segment—‘Opportunity for Development (OFD)’ (9.84%) and ‘Do Not Meet 
Expectation (DNME)’ (1.48%) —and paying PRP to OFD employees. The Audit 
pointed out that this was not in compliance with DPE Guidelines. 
The Committee also note that over the years, there has been a shift in the 
position of DPE regarding the Bell Curve approach, with many organizations moving 
towards more flexible appraisal systems. However, the Committee find that no clear 
decision has bee n made on whether CPSUs should fully abandon the Bell Curve 
model. 
The Audit, in their observation, insisted that SCI’s deviation was not as per 
DPE’s 2007 Guidelines and that PRP should not have been paid to the OFD category. 
However, DPE’s any modifications to the Bell Curve may have left a gap in clarity, 
creating inco nsistencies in application across CPSUs.  SCI in their submission 
defended their decision on distribution of PRP by stating that its approach aimed to 
reduce demotivation among employees who fell under the below-par category.  The 
Company argued that PRP s hould be linked to overall Company performance and 
not just individual rankings, especially when the organization as a whole performed 
well. SCI also emphasized that the Government of India and DPE have already 
amended the concept of Bell Curve and presently PRP is being distributed according 
to new concept and new principle.  Accordingly, other CPSUs had also moved away 
from the strict Bell Curve implementation.  On this issue, the administrative 
Ministry’s support to the new approach of DPE, as adopted by SCI and other CPSUs, 
have made it clear that the rigid application of the Bell Curve could lead to an 
artificial force-fitting of ratings, which may be counterproductive.  The Committee 
find that the review in Bell Curve approach by the DPE must have come  in light of 
modern HR practices in CPSUs to survive and compete with private and global 
competitors.   
 
In view of the deliberation held with the stakeholders and emphasis on 
resolving ambiguity in policy interpretation and ensuring sector-specific clarity, the 
Committee recommend the following measures to ensure clarity and fairness in PRP 
distribution: 

44 
 
(i)  Need for Clear Policy on Bell Curve Application 
DPE should issue a clear directive on the Bell Curve model’s applicability in 
CPSUs considering that many organizations in India and globally may have moved 
to more flexible performance evaluation systems.  If a sector -wise exemption is 
needed, the adminis trative Ministry should be empowered to decide the 
performance grading structure for SCI and other shipping-sector PSUs. 
 
(ii)  Settlement of SCI’s PRP Case 
Considering that SCI’s approach was aimed at employee motivation rather 
than guideline violation, the Committee recommend that this specific instance be 
accepted as a one-time exception and closed.  Future PRP distribution in SCI should 
align with DPE’s clarified stance, once issued. 
 
(iii)  Re-evaluation of the Bell Curve for CPSUs 
DPE should conduct a comprehensive review of the Bell Curve system for all 
CPSUs and decide whether it remains relevant or if a new, performance -linked but 
flexible system should replace it.  This review should be concluded in a time-bound 
manner, ensuring that PRP-related audit disputes do not arise in the future.   
 
By implementing the above measures, ambiguity in PRP evaluation can be 
eliminated to a larger extent, ensuring both employee motivation and compliance 
with Government policies. 
 
8. 'Cargo Volume' and achieving the Milestone of 30% 
The Committee note that SCI currently handles only 5% of India’s total cargo 
volume, despite being a Navratna PSU and India’s largest shipping Company. This 
low market share is concerning, given India’s growing trade volumes, strategic 
maritime interests a nd the need for self -reliance in shipping.  The Committee 
observed that SCI and MoPSW have set an ambitious goal to increase SCI’s cargo 
handling capacity to 30%. Achieving this goal requires – (i) Expanding SCI’s fleet 
size to handle higher cargo volumes;  (ii) Strengthening SCI’s participation in 

45 
 
Government cargo transportation to reduce reliance on foreign shipping 
companies; (iii) Introducing policy interventions to ensure cargo reservation for 
Indian shipping lines; (iv) Enhancing operational efficiency through digital 
transformation and port in frastructure upgrades; (v) Exploring new international 
trade routes and securing long-term contracts with Indian exporters and industries. 
The Committee further noted that while SCI has played a historic role in India’s 
maritime trade, its growth has been constrained by limited fleet expansion, lack of 
competitive freight pricing and dependence on foreign carriers for bulk cargo 
transportation. To bridge this gap, SCI requires a structured roadmap with policy 
and financial support from the Government. 
SCI while acknowledging the challenges of increasing cargo volume and 
detailed its efforts towards fleet expansion, improved cost efficiency and 
partnerships with Indian exporters. The Company’s emphasis on urgent need for 
Government-backed cargo reservati on policies, as foreign shipping companies 
currently dominate India’s trade routes due to their competitive pricing and larger 
fleet size is considered to be valid.  Further, the access to concessional financing 
and lower capital costs for new vessel acquisition is essential for achieving the 30% 
target.  Also, concerns over high port charges and turnaround time at Indian ports, 
which impact operational efficiency has to be considered. 
The MoPSW recognized the need to strengthen SCI’s market share and 
expressed commitment to supporting its expansion.  Further, the Ministry is 
exploring financial incentives and policy frameworks to prioritize Indian flag vessels 
for Government cargo movem ent. The Ministry further highlighted ongoing 
discussions with major PSUs, exporters and private players to secure cargo 
commitments for SCI and stressed the importance of port modernization and 
operational improvements to support SCI’s growth. 
Keeping in view SCI’s ambitious expansion plans and MoPSW’s strategic 
vision, the Committee recommend a multi-pronged strategy to increase SCI’s cargo 
volume from 5% to 30%, with a focus on fleet expansion, policy support and 
operational efficiency.  To achieve this following measures may be taken by SCI and 
the Ministry in this regard:- 

46 
 
 
(i)  Fleet Expansion and Modernization - 
The Government should facilitate SCI’s acquisition of new vessels through 
concessional financing, tax incentives and lower capital costs.   MoPSW and SCI 
should develop a time -bound roadmap for fleet expansion, prioritizing (a) LNG 
carriers (to support India’s growing energy needs); (b) Crude oil and product tankers 
(to reduce reliance on foreign tankers for oil imports); (c) Container ships (to 
increase SCI’s share in India’s EXIM trade); and (d) SCI should explore strategic 
partnerships with global fleet owners to acquire modern vessels through leasing or 
joint ventures. 
 
(ii) Policy Support for Cargo Reservation and Freight Contracts 
The Committee recommend that MoPSW explore a policy for reserving a 
percentage of India’s cargo for Indian shipping companies to reduce foreign 
dependence.  A formal framework should be developed for prioritizing PSU cargo 
transportation through SCI, ensur ing a steady flow of cargo.  The Ministry should 
facilitate long -term freight contracts between SCI and major Indian exporters in 
steel, petroleum, coal and agriculture sectors. 
 
(iii) Strengthening Global Competitiveness and Market Position 
SCI should actively participate in global trade lanes, expanding beyond its 
traditional routes to increase cargo share.  The Ministry should support SCI in 
negotiating competitive freight rates to attract Indian exporters who currently prefer 
foreign shipp ing lines.  SCI should leverage Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and 
global shipping alliances to expand its market reach. 
 
(iv) Enhancing Operational Efficiency and Digital Transformation 
SCI should invest in digital freight management systems to optimize cargo 
allocation, improve cost-efficiency and enhance service delivery.  Port infrastructure 
upgrades and reduced turnaround time at major Indian ports should be prioritized 
to make SCI more competitive.  A dedicated task force should be established within 

47 
 
SCI and MoPSW to monitor efficiency improvements and resolve operational 
bottlenecks. 
 
(v)  Regular Performance Monitoring and Target Tracking 
The Committee recommends quarterly performance reviews of SCI’s cargo 
volume expansion strategy, with MoPSW ensuring accountability and timely 
interventions.  A dedicated Monitoring Cell within MoPSW should track SCI’s 
progress towards the 30% target and p rovide strategic support in overcoming 
challenges.  Regular reporting in the Company’s Annual Report should be mandated 
to ensure transparent evaluation of SCI’s growth initiatives. 
 
By implementing the above measures, SCI can significantly enhance its cargo 
volume, strengthen India’s maritime trade presence and reduce foreign exchange 
outflow on shipping costs. The Committee urges MoPSW to ensure timely execution 
of these recommendati ons, with a clear implementation timeline and periodic 
reviews to achieve the 30% cargo volume target. 
 
9. Promoting Shipbuilding in India 
The Committee note that India's shipbuilding industry has significant 
strategic and economic potential but remains underdeveloped compared to global 
competitors such as China, South Korea and Japan. Despite India’s vast coastline 
and growing maritime trade, the Country continues to import a large percentage of 
its commercial vessels, leading to high foreign exchange outflow and dependency 
on foreign manufacturers. 
The Committee further observe that SCI and other Indian shipping companies 
primarily rely on foreign-built vessels, as domestic shipyards face high production 
costs, longer construction timelines and limited financial support.  The Make in India 
initiative aims to promote domestic shipbuilding, but policy interventions, financial 
incentives and infrastructure development are needed to make Indian shipyards 
globally competitive.  SCI, as India’s largest public sector shipping Company, can 

48 
 
play a key role in driving demand for indigenous shipbuilding by prioritizing 
domestic procurement and partnerships with Indian shipyards. 
 On the issue, SCI acknowledged the need for a strong domestic shipbuilding 
ecosystem but highlighted challenges such as high capital costs, lack of skilled 
labor and technological gaps in Indian shipyards.  SCI also expressed willingness 
to procure vessel s from Indian shipyards, provided they offer competitive pricing 
and meet international quality and safety standards.  Further, the Company 
suggested that the Government should offer financial incentives, tax benefits and 
policy support to make Indian -built ships cost-effective for SCI and other shipping 
companies. 
The MoPSW recognized the importance of strengthening domestic 
shipbuilding to achieve self-reliance in maritime infrastructure. Further,  attention of 
the Committee was also drawn to the three key focus areas for strengthening India's 
shipbuilding industry – (i) Strengthening Shipyards – Enhancing the capabilities and 
capacities of Indian shipyards to boost domestic ship production; (ii) Financial 
Assistance Policy – Addressing the 20% cost difference between ships built in India 
and those manufactured abroad through potential subsidies to encourage domestic 
manufacturing; and (iii) Proposal for a dedicated Maritime Development Fund to 
create a more supportive financing ecosystem – Tackling the lack of financing for 
shipbuilding in India, which is not classi fied as infrastructure. Unlike foreign 
markets where financing is available for up to 20 years at low interest rates, Indian 
shipbuilders face higher interest rates and shorter repayment periods (7 years). 
These three proposals are currently under examinat ion of the Ministry of 
Expenditure. Emphasis was also placed on the vast gap between India's and South 
Korea’s shipbuilding output (India: 100,000 GT vs. South Korea: 13 million GT 
annually) and MoPSW highlighted the urgent need for reforms to enhance Indi a's 
shipbuilding sector. The Ministry further highlighted ongoing efforts to develop 
shipbuilding clusters, upgrade port infrastructure and attract global shipbuilders to 
set up facilities in India.  Also, the MoPSW emphasized that policy measures such 
as subsidies, soft loans and priority Government procurement are under 
consideration to make domestic shipbuilding viable.   

49 
 
To promote shipbuilding in India and reduce dependence on foreign -built 
vessels, the Committee recommends the following policy, financial and operational 
measures: 
 
(i) Prioritizing Domestic Procurement by SCI and Other CPSUs 
SCI should actively collaborate with Indian shipyards by sharing the long term 
requirements well in advance and prioritize procurement of vessels built in India, 
subject to international quality standards. The MoPSW should issue Guidelines 
directing all Government-owned shipping companies to source a certain percentage 
of their fleet from domestic shipyards, thereby ensuring steady demand for Indian -
built vessels. 
 
(ii) Financial Incentives and Subsidies for Domestic Shipbuilding 
The Government should introduce a long -term financial package, including 
soft loans, interest subvention and tax exemptions for Indian shipyards to make 
them competitive against global counterparts. A dedicated Shipbuilding Fund 
should be created under MoP SW, providing low-cost financing options to support 
domestic ship production.  Customs duty exemptions on imported shipbuilding 
materials and technology should be considered to reduce production costs for 
Indian shipyards. 
 
(iii) Enhancing Technological Capabilities and Skilled Workforce 
MoPSW, in collaboration with SCI, should set up ship design and technology 
innovation centers to develop advanced shipbuilding techniques. The Ministry 
should also involve the representatives of the stakeholders in ship design and in the 
process of technol ogy innovation.  A National Shipbuilding Skill Development 
Program should be launched to train and certify workers, ensuring a skilled 
workforce for the industry.  The Government should facilitate technology transfer 
agreements with leading global shipbuil ders to upgrade Indian shipyard 
capabilities. 
 

50 
 
(iv) Expanding Shipbuilding Infrastructure and Global Partnerships 
Establishment of dedicated Shipbuilding Clusters with Special Economic 
Zone (SEZ) benefits should be prioritized to attract investment and lower production 
costs.  The MoPSW should promote joint ventures between Indian shipyards and 
leading international s hipbuilders like collaboration with South Korea to enhance 
expertise, improve production efficiency and gain access to global markets as part 
of global partnership strategy. 
 
(v) Strengthening Public-Private Collaboration and Policy Monitoring 
A Shipbuilding Promotion Task Force may be established within MoPSW  to 
coordinate between SCI, Indian shipyards and policymakers to track progress and 
resolve bottlenecks. The Committee recommend that SCI submit quarterly progress 
reports to MoPSW on the implementation of these recommendations and their 
impact on domestic shipbuilding growth. 
 
(vi) Roadmap for Developing a Competitive Shipbuilding Industry in India 
 To enhance its shipbuilding competitiveness, reduce dependence on imports 
and positioning India as a global leader in maritime manufacturing, the Committee 
recommend for (a) Launching a Shipyard Modernization and Capacity Expansion 
Scheme thereby providing financial and technological support to enhance shipyard 
infrastructure, adopt advanced manufacturing techniques and improve efficiency; 
(b) The existing Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy may be extended with an 
increased subsidy component, bridging the 20% cost gap to make Indian-built ships 
competitive with global markets. The policy should also include incentives for green 
and technologically advanced ship designs; and (c) The Government may consider 
classifying shipbuilding as ‘Infrastructure’ t o facilitate long -term and low -interest 
financing. Additionally, a dedicated Maritime Development Fund (MDF) may be 
established with an initial corpus supported by both public and private sector 
contributions. This fund should provide long -tenure, low -interest loans similar to 
global practices, ensuring a stable financing ecosystem. 
 

51 
 
Some of these suggestions have in fact been addressed in the Union Budget 
for the fiscal year 2025-26, which are subsequent developments after discussion on 
the subject by the Committee.   
 
By implementing the above measures, India can develop a globally 
competitive shipbuilding industry, reduce dependence on foreign-built vessels and 
position itself as a maritime manufacturing hub under the ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
 
 
 
  New Delhi;      BAIJAYANT PANDA 
  08_August, 2025               CHAIRPERSON 
  17Shravana, 1947(S) COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
  

52 
 
Appendix-I 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25)   
 
 
  MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, 5 December, 2024 at 1 545 hrs. to  
1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
          Shri Baijayant Panda   -    Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
11. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
12.   Shri Debashish Samantaray 
13.   Shri Arun Singh 
 
 

53 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
           1.   Shri Neeraj Semwal            -      Joint Secretary 
           2.   Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha    -      Director 
                     3.   Smt. Mriganka Achal          -      Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF SHIPPING CORPORATION OF INDIA (SCI) 
1. Capt. B.K. Tyagi - CMD 
2. Shri Atul Ubale - Director (B&T) 
3. Shri M.S. Saini - Director (P&A) 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS (MoPSW) 
1. Shri T. K. Ramachandran - Secretary 
2. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sinha - Additional Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES (DPE), MINISTRY OF 
FINANCE  
1. Shri Amardeep Singh Chowdhary - Pr. Advisor (Cost) 
2. Dr. Sumantra Pal - Economic Advisor 
3. Shri Lucas L. Kamsuan - Joint Secretary 
 
OFFICERS FROM OFFICE OF COMPTROLLER & AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA (CAG) 
1. Sh. Anand Mohan Bajaj - Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General 
(Commercial) 
2. Sh. Deepak Kapoor - Director General (Commercial) 
3. Shri Naveen Singhvi - Principal Director (Commercial) 
 
 

54 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways (MoPS&W), Shipping 
Corporation of India (SCI) and Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) to the sitting 
of the Committee convened to deliberate on Audit Para No. 9.2 of Audit Report No. 
13 of 2019 relating to Payment of Performance Related Pay in violation of DPE 
Guidelines relating to Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) Limited , which has been 
taken up by the Committee under the broader subject selected for examination ‘Audit 
Report(s)/Para(s) referred to the CoPU for final decision’.  
3. Hon’ble Chairperson, in his welcome address,  while drawing attention of the 
representatives to Direction 55(1) of the 'Directions by the Speaker' regarding 
maintaining confidentiality of the discussion held before the Parliamentary Committee, 
highlighted that the issue pertained to the interpretation and implementation of DPE 
guidelines concerning Performance Related Pay ( PRP) distribution based on core 
business profits. It was further brought to the notice that  while SCI had categorized 
certain income streams —such as profits from the sale of ships, i nterest from joint 
ventures, and other related sources—as part of its core business activities, Audit had 
contested this classification. The contention was that these income streams were 
recorded as "Other Income" in financial statements and did not align with DPE 
guidelines for calculating PRP.   
 
4. The Chairperson underlined that the divergence in interpretation has not only 
prolonged the settlement of this issue but has also brought to light systemic challenges 
in defining and adhering to ‘core business’ in the context of CPSUs. Further, emphasis 
was placed on seeking clarification on DPE Guidelines, Engagement of stakeholders 
and need for a time -bound resolution to ensure organizational stability at SCI and 
establish a reliable precedent for future cases. He invited the representatives of SCI 
to make their presentation on the matter. 
 
 
 

55 
 
5. Thereafter, CMD, SCI made a Power Point Presentation covering the following key 
aspects: 
i. SCI’s strategic importance in national security and energy security, 
including its role as the only Indian shipping  company for LNG 
transportation; 
ii. The rationale for treating certain income streams as part of SCI’s core 
business, inviting attention to the Memorandum of Association (MoA), which 
includes acquisition, operation and disposal of ships as core activities; 
iii. Deliberations held by SCI’s Board and Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways (MoPSW), which concurred with SCI’s interp retation of core 
business income; and 
iv. The hardship faced by SCI employees due to uncertainty over PRP 
payments and the potential legal challenges if recoveries were enforced. 
 
6. The Members of the Committee raised several queries, including:- 
i. The declining trend in SCI’s post-tax profit and its impact on MOU ratings; 
ii. The rationale behind considering the sale of ships as core business activity; 
iii. The necessity of clear guidelines from DPE on core versus non-core income 
classification; 
iv. SCI’s plans to expand its fleet and increase India’s share in global shipping 
tonnage; 
v. Steps taken by SCI and the Ministry to prevent similar disputes in the future; 
and 
vi. The justification for PRP payments to employees categorized as below-par 
performers. 
7. Responding to Members' concerns, the representatives of SCI and the MoPSW 
submitted as under:- 
i. SCI’s Board and the administrative Ministry had examined the matter in 
detail and had taken a stand that SCI’s interpretation should be accepted; 
ii. SCI actively working on fleet expansion, with 20 new vessels approved for 
procurement and negotiations at an advanced stage; 
iii. The administrative Ministry had proposed policy measures, including 
financial assistance schemes and regulatory support, to boost shipbuilding 
in India; and 
iv. On the issue of PRP for below-par employees, it was clarified that DPE had 
revised its guidelines, removing the mandatory application of the bell curve 
system. 

56 
 
8. While deliberating on DPE stand on the issue, the representatives of DPE 
submitted that as there are more than 400 CPSUs operating in 20 sectors each 
operating on specific parameters, it becomes difficult to frame the guidelines 
encompassing all CPSUs, lim itation of their uniform applicability and monitoring of 
every aspect of these guidelines.  Further, it was submitted that since DPE being non-
technical expert, the activities coming under core and non -core may be left with the 
concerned CPSU and their administrative Ministry. 
 
9. Hon’ble Chairperson reiterated the importance of resolving the matter 
expeditiously to prevent prolonged disputes that could demoralize employees and 
affect the functioning of SCI. The Committee desired that the MoPSW and DPE should 
work together to establish clear and uniform guidelines on core business income to 
prevent ambiguity in future cases. 
 
10. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of SCI, MoPSW and DPE 
and directed that in respect of points for which information was not readily available 
or if more information were required to be furnished, written replies thereon may be 
furnished to the Committee Secretariat within 10 days. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings transcripted from Audio recording has been 
kept on record.) 
----- 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, 26 June, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Extension to  Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda         -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. 
4. 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
5. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
6. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
7. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
8. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
9. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
11. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary  
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED  
 
1. Shri B.C. Pathak - CMD  
2. Shri V. Rajesh - Director 
3. Shri B.V.S. Sekhar - Executive Director  
4. Shri K.N. Babooraj - Executive Director 

58 
 
PART-A 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the three draft Reports. 
The Committee then considered and adopted the following three draft reports, without 
any changes/modifications, on the following three selected subjects: - 
 
(i) Audit Reports/Paras referred to COPU for final decision - Audit Para 
No. 9.2 of Audit Report No. 13 of 2019 relating to Payment of 
Performance Related Pay in violation of DPE Guidelines relating to 
Shipping Corporation of India (SCI) Limited;  
 
(ii) *  *  *  *  * 
 
(iii) *  *  *  *  * 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by C&AG ; concerned CPSUs and Ministries/ 
Departments and presenting the Reports during the upcoming session of Parliament.  
Then, the Committee took up another agenda of the day. 
 
 
 