23 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. 
(NICSI) 
 
 
PROCUREMENT OF HARDWARE/SOFTWARE ITEM TO 
THE TUNE OF RS.890.34 CRORES THROUGH STRATEGIC 
ALLIANCE  
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 6.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 03 OF 2021] 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2025-26) 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
 
ii 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE SERVICES INC. 
(NICSI) 
 
PROCUREMENT OF HARDWARE/SOFTWARE ITEM TO THE TUNE OF RS. 
890.34 CRORES THROUGH STRATEGIC ALLIANCE  
 
[BASED ON PARA NO. 6.1 OF C&AG REPORT NO. 03 OF 2021] 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the First Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021 of 
C&AG relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)]  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 December, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
 
 
iii 
 
CPU No. 1079 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs…… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok  Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
New Delhi- 110001. 
 
  

 
 
 
iv 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  v 
  INTRODUCTION  vi 
CHAPTER I      REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
5 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government Replies  
12 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
13 
CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies  
14 
 ANNEXURE  
I Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for PAC buying in NICSI-reg dated 
10.02.2023 
17 
II Office Memorandum No. 4(1)/2025- NICSI- Adm/24 dated 16.05.2025 20 
III Guidelines for issuing Proprietary Article Certificate (PAC) dated 29.05.2025 21 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I.  Minutes of the sitting held on 05.12.2025                                  24 
 
II.  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of Committee on 
Public Undertakings on Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG 
related to ‘ Procurement of hardware/software item to the tune of Rs.890.34 
Crores through strategic alliance ’ relating to  National Informatics Centre 
Services Inc. (NICSI)                                                                     
27 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
15. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Mriganka Achal - Director  
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Twenty-Third Report on Action Taken  by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings ( 18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement of hardware/software 
item to the tune of  Rs.890.34 Crores through strategic alliance ’ relating to 
National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI) ’ [Based on Para No. 6.1 of 
C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]. 
 
2. The First Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 
December, 202 4. The Action  taken Replies to all the 09 recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology on 21 July, 2025. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their 
sitting held on 05th December, 2025.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in 
Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee (18th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025                              Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S)      Committee on Public Undertakings 
  
   
 
 

 
 
 
1 
 
R E P O R T 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings related to audit Para No. 6.1 of Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG 
related to ‘procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores 
through strategic alliance relating to National Informatics Center Services Inc. (NICSI)’ , 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on  18.02.2025. It contained 09 
observations/recommendations. 
2.  Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect the 07 
of the  09 observations/recommendations of the Committee . The introductory 
paragraphs ( Sr. Nos. 1 and 2) were general observations, on which the Ministry did not 
offer specific comments. 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 07) 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Sl. No. Nil 
  (Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii)   
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration.    
Sl. No. Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total: 00) 
 
  (iv)   
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                      
Sl. Nos. 3 and 9. 
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total: 02) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire  the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) to furnish final Action Taken Notes/replies in respect of 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report.  The 
Committee further desire that the final replies in respect of  
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which only interim 
replies have been given by Government, should be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 

 
 
 
2 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of 
the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
GFR –APPLICABILITY  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
5. The Committee, in their First Report, had recommended the formation of a 
committee to clarify the applicability of GFRs to CPSEs: 
" The General Financial Rules (GFRs) are a compilation of rules and 
orders of Government of India to be followed by all while dealing with 
matters involving public finances. The Committee are of the opinion that 
GFRs as issued from time to time aim to provide a framework within which 
a Government Organisation manages its business in a financially prudent 
manner without compromising its flexibility required in varied situations. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology during the meeting 
submitted to the Committee that they were not clear about the applicability 
of GFRs on the Company. Both DoE and DPE, the Departments under the 
Ministry of Finance have submitted to the Committee that GFRs are not 
applicable to the CPSUs as they operate in a competitive environment, 
implying that GFRs are not applicable to NICSI. The Committee, find that 
NICSI in its objectives/functions have mentioned that procurement of ICT 
product and services for the Government sector is made following 
provisions of GFR completely and also guidelines issued by Department 
of Expenditure and CVC from time to time. Department of Expenditure 
(DOE) also advised NICSI to enter in Strategic Alliance under Rule 154 of 
GFR, 2005 subject to the condition that before placement of each order, 
PAC, as per rule may be provided by the Ministry/Department. Further, 
DoE has issued an order Rule 144(xi) of GFR, 2017 wherein certain 
restrictions have been imposed on Central Public Sector Enterprises. The 
Committee from the replies received, from NICSI, MeitY, DPE and DoE 
and from the observations of C&AG on this specific issue of applicability of 
GFR on NICSI, note that there is not much clarity amongst the various 
stakeholders regarding applicability of GFR on CPSEs. At one hand 
Ministry of Finance is stating that GFRs are not applicable to CPSEs, at 
another they are imposing restrictions on CPSEs by issuing order under 
GFR. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a Committee may be 
formed with representatives from Ministry of Corporate Affairs, DPE, 
Meity, DoE and all other stakeholders so as to decide the applicability or 
extent of applicability of GFR on CPSEs. For this, Meity should take up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).” 
 
  

 
 
 
3 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" NICSI has requested MeitY  (vide e File No.2025/14052025/CS dated 
16.5.2025) to constitute a Committee with representatives from Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology, Department of Expenditure and all 
other stakeholders so as to decide the applicability or extent of 
applicability of GFR on CPSEs. 
MeitY has further requested Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) to take further necessary action on the subject matter of 
formation of committee with respect to applicability o f GFR vide OM dated 
04.06.2025."  
 
7. The Committee note that MeitY, in response to the recommendation, has 
stated that they have  taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure) regarding the formation of a Committee to clarify all 
issues related to GFR and its applicability. The Committee, while emphasizing the 
importance of this matter, observed that the examination indicated some 
unclarity, with different wings of the Government offering varying interpretations. 
This has resulted in CPSEs such as NICSI operating with limited guidance on the 
financial framework, posing challenges to governance and increasing the risk of 
non-compliance for public enterprises. The Committee notes that while MeitY has 
completed its procedural steps, the core recommendations are still under 
consideration. It therefore suggests that MeitY should continue to engage with 
the Department of Expenditure to work towards a clear timeline for the 
constitution of a multi -stakeholder committee and the finalization of its report. 
The Committee looks forward to being apprised of further progress in this regard. 
  
INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISM AND THE ROLE OF MEITY 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
8. The Committee, in their Report, had observed the following regarding regional 
distribution of loans: 
" Meity has informed the Committee that they have recently engaged a 
leading global consulting firm with a view to make NICSI future -ready. The 
Ministry further informed the Committee that the overall objective of this 
organization restructuring exercise is to evaluate the effectiveness of 
NICSI’s organizational structure and management systems in the light of 

 
 
 
4 
 
its present responsibilities as well as emerging opportunities. The 
Committee, while appreciating the step taken by MeitY, would like to be 
informed about the salient findings and outcome of the said Study.” 
 
9.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" NICSI is a non -for-profit organization of NIC, MeitY. All officers are on 
deputation from NIC (which is a technical organization). NICSI has various 
divisions in place to meet its operational requirements. 
As suggested by committee, NICSI is carrying out study of similarly placed 
other CPSEs to arrive upon suitable organizational structure for NICSI, as 
per emerging scenario. This will help to create verticals and to hire domain 
expert as per the vertical/business model of NICSI and to make faster 
procurement process and for better service delivery."  
10. The Committee note from the reply of  the Ministry that NICSI has engaged 
in a study to determine an appropriate organizational structure  thereof, in line 
with other CPSEs . The Committee  however observe that the reply lacks clarity 
regarding the current status, as also the  outcome of the earlier engagement with 
a leading global consulting firm, which was intended to make NICSI future -ready. 
This raises concerns as to whether the original strategic roadmap has been 
modified or set aside. The Committee are of a considered view that a  well-defined 
organizational structure is paramount for NICSI to create specialized verticals and 
induct domain experts, which is essential for its future growth and efficiency.  
Further, given the lack of clarity on the restructuring study, the Committee 
recommend that MeitY provide a clear rationale for the change in approach 
regarding the restructuring exercise and submit a definitive roadmap with clear 
timelines for the completion of the current study alongwith the subsequent 
implementation of a new, vertical -based organizational structure. The Committee 
expect to be informed of the final approved structure in the subsequent replies. 
 
  

 
 
 
5 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1 and 2) 
OVERVIEW 
 
1. National Informatics Centre Service Inc. (NICSI) was established in 1995 as a 
Section-8 Company under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
for providing and procuring Information and Technology (IT) solutions for e -governance 
projects undertaken by National Informatics Centre (NIC), MeitY and other Government 
Departments and organizations (viz. Public Sector Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies 
etc.). Rule 160 of General Financial Rules 2005 (GFR 2005) stipulates that all 
government purchases should be made in transparent, competitive and fair manner so 
as to secure best value for money. Rule 141A was inserted in GFR with effect from 09 
August 2016 to provide for procurement on “Government e -Marketplace” (GeM) which 
has been established as a portal for online procurement of common use Goods and 
Services required by various Government Departments/ Organizations/ Public Sector 
Undertakings. Rule 149 of GFR 2005 provides three standard methods of obtaining bids 
for procurement including “Single Tender Enquiry”. Rule 154 ibid, mentions the 
circumstances under which procurement from a single source can be resorted such as 
where only a particular firm is the manufacturer of required goods, and/or for 
standardization of machinery or spare parts based on advice of a competent technical 
expert and approval of the competent authority, procurement from a particular form may 
be resorted. These purchases have to be supported by a “Proprietary Article Certificate” 
(PAC) provided by the Ministry/Department in prescribed format as mentioned in GFR. 
2.  The present Audit Para no. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021, examined by the 
Committee, relates to procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 
crore procured by National Informatics Center Services Inc. (NICSI) through strategic 
alliance (SA). In the case, NICSI undertook single source procurement through SA route 
between April 2014 and April 2017 with PACs as perfunctory compliance. Procurements 
prior to September 2015 using this route were not in accordance with Rule 154 of GFR 
and procurements, thereafter, undertaken based on PACs were also found lacking 
required details in test checked cases by the C&AG. Following audit objections and 
setting up GeM, the practice of SAs was discontinued by the Company after April 2017. 
The Committee, before finalizing their observations in their report heard the views of the 
officers from C&AG who conducted the Audit and also the views of the representatives 

 
 
 
6 
 
of NICSI and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. The Committee, for 
further clarifications took the written replies from the Department of Expenditure (DoE) 
and Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) of Ministry of Finance. The evidences of 
the stakeholders, the information and clarifications submitted by them and internal 
deliberations made by the members enabled the Committee to arrive at the conclusions 
and make suggestions as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
 “The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.” 
   [Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 4 
 
CLARITY ONSTRATEGICALLIANCE 
 
Audit had observed that NICSI procured hardware and software items costing Rs.890.34 
crore through" Strategic Alliance (SA)" route in contravention of GFRs 2005 and thus failed to 
ensure transparency and competitiveness in the procurement process. As procurement through 
Strategic Alliances was not covered under any rule/order issued by Ministry of Finance (DOE), 
NICSI in its 88th Board of Directors meeting (September 2014) decided to send a proposal 
through MeitY, to the Department of Expenditure (DoE) for inclusion of Strategic Alliance as a 
process of procurement in GFR 2005for providing ICT goods and services (including solutions). 
MeitY further in formed the Committee that, one write petition challenging the Notice inviting 
Tender (NIT), the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, vide its order dated 25.8.2014 in 
W.P.(C)4370/2014, directed that no further steps be taken pursuant to the tender in question. 
Against the backdrop of this order, since requests were being received from various 
Departments and organizations for implementing Performa Invoices already issued by NICSI 
under Strategic Alliance for various ongoing IT projects, the management approached the Board 
for approving implementation of such Performa invoices. Keeping in view the serious difficulty 
faced in procuring spare parts for maintenance of various existing IT installations at reasonable 
cost, the Board, in its meeting held on 26.9.2014, while extending the validity of the existing 
Strategic Alliances expiring before 31.1.2015 till they said date, advised that NICSI may take up 
the matter with the Government for recognition of the process of Strategic Alliances. 
Accordingly, Proposal for inclusion of SA in GFR was sent to Ministry of Finance .by NICSI. 
Ministry of Finance (DoE) while not specifically allowing incorporation of SAs in GFR, conveyed 
in August-2015 that, they have no objection if NICSI enters into Strategic Alliance under Rule 
154 of GFR 2005 subject to the condition that before placement of each order, Propriety Article 
Certificate (PAC) as per Rule 154 is provided by the Ministry/ Department'. The Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (Meity) advised NICSI to carefully examine the 
response of MoF (DoE), before its formal adoption as a process of procurement. NICSI 
construed the communication from DoE as approval for the system of SAs provide procurement 
was undertaken on the basis of PACs and decided to continue with the system. The Committee 
feels that, to avoid complications, NICSI should have carefully examined. 

 
 
 
7 
 
The advice of DOE as directed by Meity before further undertaking procurement through 
SA. Meity, too, should have ensured that their direction is complied with and therefore, the 
Committee desire that Meity should ensure that due importance is given to the advice rendered 
by them and DOE in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As an immediate measure, NICSI had discontinued the Strategic Alliance process after 
30.04.2017. NICSI shall ensure that they shall carefully examine the advice(s) of DoE in future 
for all matters including considering Strategic Alliances. A SOP was also issued on 10.02.2023 
(Annex-A) for procurements being carried out by NICSI.  
 
MeitY is following up on the matter/communication sent by them to NICSI to provide 
inputs as per directions. Further, the Audit Committee and Board of Directors meetings of NICSI 
are also chaired by JS&FA (MeitY) and Additional Secretary, MeitY respectively and  all 
procurements in NICSI is being carried out as per provisions of GFR and all relevant rules, 
procedures and directions issued by Department of Expenditure. 
 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
The Committee was informed that 25% of total procurement by NICSI was done 
through SA. However, the Committee note that this is not supported by figure furnished 
by NICSI. Total procurement by NICSI during the period 01.04.2005 till 31.03.2014 
amounts toRs.1906.61croreandout of thisRs.1016.33 crore of procurement equivalent to 
51.64 percent was done through SA. Similarly, during the period 01.04.2014 to 
30.09.2017, out of total procurement of Rs.2052.19 crore, 43.38 percent i.e. Rs.890.34 
crore of the total procurement was done through SA route these procurements were 
more than 25% of total procurement against the claimed of 25% by NICSI through SA. 
The Committee would like to know the reasons for this mismatch and therefore, advise 
NICSI to be careful in furnishing fact and figures to the Committee in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Mismatch in % of procurement through SA:  
 
Reference observations above, it is submitted that the matter has been examined 
thoroughly. The percentage figures communicated earlier regarding 25% of the procurement 
being carried out through strategic alliances was based on estimates. The actual percentage of 
total procurement through strategic alliances during the entire period (01.04.2005 to 
30.09.2017) is around 23.96%. The breakup is as below:- 
 

 
 
 
8 
 
S. No. Period of 
procurement 
Procurement 
through 
Strategic 
Alliance (Rs. in 
cr.)  
Total 
Procurement 
(Rs. in cr.) 
% of 
procurement 
through 
Strategic 
Alliance 
1 1.4.2005 
to31.3.2014 
1016.33 4786.35 21.23% 
2 01.04.2014 to 
30.09.2017 
890.34 3171.4 28.07% 
 Total 1906.67 7957.75 23.96% 
 
The reasons for the mismatch have been enquired into and it is found that till 
30.06.2017, NICSI was using TALLY application for day -to-day business activities. 
TALLY has some limitations in managing purchase orders (PO) and has limited ability to 
handle complex procurement workflows and supplier relationship. As part of 
upgradation, advance ERP (Electronic Business Suite) was implemented in NICSI w.e.f. 
01.07.2017. Due to this limitation, total procurement figures were not completely 
accurate. The same is regretted and NICSI shall ensure to take care in future while 
furnishing facts and figures to the Committee. 
 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
The Committee further note that NICSI had resorted to the method of SA more 
than it was needed, indicating that NICSI employed SA method not just as an exigency 
requirement but a as routine-ones. A stay was imposed by Delhi High Court (DHC), ona 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT)'in 2014,and for finding a way therefore, BOD asked NICSI 
to take recognition of the process from Ministry of Finance (DoE) by incorporating the 
provision of SA in GFR. Neither MeitY nor NICSI took any interest in the matter before 
this. Stay by DHC and rules were allowed to be flouted for more than a decade till the 
practice was discontinued in 2017, after the introduction of GeM. The Committee 
therefore, feel that NICSI should have taken the advice of DOE before initiating process 
of SA in2005 -06 itself, and would have devised their own set of financial rules. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons behind such omissions by NICSI and desire 
that financial rules and procedures for procurement may be framed by BOD of NICSI for 
transparent procurement. 
  

 
 
 
9 
 
Reply of the Government 
NICSI caters to requirements of central government, state governments, 
government organizations, judiciary, constitutional bodies, autonomous bodies and 
PSUs. All these users follow procurement manuals and GFR rules of Government of 
India. All officers in NICSI are on deputation from NIC. These officers typically are on 
deputation for 3 years. Process of Strategic Alliance (SA) was approved by board. 
However, while formulating the process for SA,  NICSI followed the procedures as 
approved by the Board, from time to time. The Board of Directors reviewed the 
arrangement with agency(ies) for SA on regular basis and it was directed in 2014 that 
NICSI should get the procurement through SA process recognized by Ministry of 
Finance (DoE) by incorporating the provision of SA in GFR. 
In addition, NICSI vide office memorandum no. 4(1)/2025 -NICSI-Admn/24 dated 
16.5.2025 (Annex -B) has constituted a committee for drafting of Procurement Manual 
for NICSI. The Committee is working towards framing rules and procedures for 
procurement. NICSI has taken necessary steps to ensure all procurement as per laid 
down rules and provisions of GFR. 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
VIOLATION OF RULE 154 OF GFR-2005-FAILURE IN OBTAINING OFPROPRIETY 
ARTICLE CERTIFICATES (PAC) 
The Audit had observed that NICSI didn't obtain the Propriety Article Certificates 
(PAC) as per the Rule 154 of GFR between the period April 2014 and September 2015 
for its procurements from single sources as advised by DOE. From September 2015, 
NICSI began obtaining PACs for purchases .made from single source as advised by 
DOE. 
However, a test check revealed that these were being furnished and used 
without mentioning clear, specific and cogent reasons as per the format prescribed in 
GFR, for procurement through a single source. The Audit had further stated that the 
main intent was thus, to only show perfunctory compliance with GFRs. The officials of 
NICSI did not examine whether the same was in order and in case of lacuna, did not 
find it fit to intimate concerned Ministry/Department to fulfill the requirement(s). The 
Committee, therefore, desire that such officials may be identified and responsibility be 
fixed. Further, the Company should remain more careful in future. 

 
 
 
10 
 
Reply of the Government 
NICSI is a non-for-profit organization of NIC, MeitY. All officers are on deputation 
from NIC (which is a technical organization). Officers  involved in procurement are 
technical by background in terms of qualification and experience. Officers typically are 
on deputation for 3 years. During the procurement process of aforesaid cases, PAC 
forms were taken from user Ministry/Departments. Complete approval cycle was 
followed during above said procurements.  However, this lapse happened because of 
lack of training and workload.  
Efforts have been made to train them on procurement processes. After this issue 
was discovered, office orders dated 10.02.2023 (Annex -C) and 29.05.2025 (Annex -D) 
have been issued to be careful in future. A separate division has been created by the 
name Tender & GeM division, to adopt a focused approach on procurement. Rotation of 
officer is also followed.  NICSI is committed to best efforts to further strengthening its 
procurement processes and record keeping. NICSI is also taking steps towards training 
of its officers for different domain such as Public Procurement, Contract Management, 
and Arbitration etc under the training program of Department of Public enterprises and 
the institutes like NIFM. 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
INTERNAL CONTROL MECHANISM AND THEROLE OF MEITY 
The Committee, during the meeting with the representatives of NICSI and Meity, 
came across the role of Internal Audit Department of the Company and oversight 
mechanism of the controlling Ministry i.e. Meity. The Committee, note that the 
representatives of NICSI, during the meeting categorically stated that Internal Audit 
Department of the Company had never raised any objections regarding the 
Procurement procedure followed by the Company. Further, MeitY, in a written response 
to the Committee, submitted that no internal audit of NICSI was done due to shortage of 
staff priorto2015-16andthere was absence of dedicated Internal Audit Wing in Ministry. 
Now Controller General of Accounts (CGA) has agreed to provide staff for the purpose. 
The Committee are strongly critical of above facts and urge both NICSI and MeitY to be 
more vigilant towards their duties. The Committee, therefore, recommends that internal 
audit system may be strengthened with suitable effective mechanism so that benefit of 
Audit may be harnessed and deficiencies may be rectified in time. 

 
 
 
11 
 
Reply of the Government 
MeitY audit team has started auditing NICSI. Last audit took place during 
03.10.2023 to 18.10.2023. The Audit Committee and Board of Directors meetings of 
NICSI are also chaired by JS&FA(MeitY) and Additional Secretary, MeitY respectively.  
Replies showing action taken on the observation/ Recommendations by the 
Government contained in the First report of the Committee on public Undertakings (18th 
Lok sabha) on Procurement of hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crore 
through strategic alliance relating to national informatics centre services inc (NICSI) 
based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG. 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
  

 
 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      - 
 
  
 
 
  

 
 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-     Nil      - 
 
  
 
  

 
 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
GFR-APPLICABILITY 
 
The General Financial Rules (GFRs) are a compilation of rules and orders of 
Government of India to be followed by all while dealing with matters involving public 
Finances. The Committee are of the opinion that GFRs as issued from time to time aim 
to provide framework within which a Government Organization manages its business in 
a financially prudent manner without compromising its flexibility required in varied 
situations. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology during the meeting 
submitted to the Committee that they were not clear about the applicability of GFRs on 
the Company. Both DoE and DPE, the Departments under the Ministry of Finance have 
submitted to the Committee that GFRs are not applicable to the CPSUs as they operate 
in a competitive environment, implying that GFRs are not applicable to NICSI. The 
Committee, find that NICSI in its objectives/function shave mentioned that procurement 
of ICT product and services for the Government sector is made following provisions of 
GFR completely and also guidelines issued by Department of Expenditure and CVC 
from time to time. Department of Expenditure (DOE) also advised NICSI to enter in 
Strategic Alliance under Rule 154 of GFR, 2005 subject to the condition that before 
placement of each order, PAC, asper rule may be provided by the Ministry/Department. 
Further, DoE has· issued an order Rule 144(xi) of GFR, 2017wherein certain restrictions 
have been imposed on  Central Public Sector Enterprises. The Committee from there 
plies received, from NICSI, MeitY, DPE and DoE and from the observations of C&AG on 
this specific issue of applicability of GFR on NICSI, note that there is not much clarity 
amongst the various stakeholders regarding applicability of GFR on CPSEs. At one 
hand Ministry of Finance is stating 'that GFRs are not applicable to CPSEs, at another 
they are imposing Restrictions on CPSEs by issuing order under GFR. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a Committee may be formed with representatives from 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, DPE, Meity, DoE and all other stakeholders so as to 
decide the applicability or extent of applicability of GFR on CPSEs. For this, Meity 
should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). 
 
 

 
 
 
15 
 
Reply of the Government 
NICSI has requested MeitY (vide e File No.2025/14052025/CS dated 16.5.2025) 
to constitute a Committee with representatives from Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
Department of Expenditure and all other stakeholders so as to decide the applicability or 
extent of applicability of GFR on CPSEs. 
MeitY has further requested Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to 
take further necessary action on the subject matter of formation of committee with 
respect to applicability of GFR vide OM dated 04.06.2025. 
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 07 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
Meity has informed the Committee that they have recently engaged leading 
global consulting firm with a view to make NICSI future -ready. The Ministry further 
informed the Committee that the· overall objective of this organization restructuring 
exercise is to evaluate the effectiveness of NICSl's  organizational structure and 
management systems in the light of its present responsibilities as well as emerging 
opportunities. The Committee, while appreciating the step taken by MeitY, would like to 
be informed about the salient findings and outcome of the said Study. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
NICSI is a non-for-profit organization of NIC, MeitY. All officers are on deputation 
from NIC (which is a technical organization). NICSI has various divisions in place to 
meet its operational requirements. 

 
 
 
16 
 
As suggested by committee, NICSI is carrying out study of similarly placed other 
CPSEs to arrive upon suitable organizational structure for NICSI, as per emerging 
scenario. This will help to create verticals and to hire domain expert as per the 
vertical/business model of NICSI and to make faster procurement process and for better 
service delivery.       
[Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology] 
(O.M. No.30(1)/2023-EG-II dated 21.07.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

 
 
 
17 
 
ANNEXURE- I  
 


 
 
 
18 
 
 


 
 
 
19 
 
 


 
 
 
20 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
21 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
 


 
 
 
22 
 
 


 
 
 
23 
 
 
  


 
 
 
24 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 202 5 from 1 000 hrs. to 1045 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘ 2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
 
25 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft 
Reports. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft reports, without 
any changes/modifications: - 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited  (SFCL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive 
Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs 
(Horizontal Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to flaring 
of High -pressure gas’ relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) 
Limited. (Audit Based Examination); 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Procurement of 
hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores through strategic 
alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)”  
[Based on Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Undue enrichment through 
recovery of turnover tax from consumer” relating to Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 
2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Design and Development 
(D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)”  [Based on Chapter-II of 
C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “ Reviewing timely 
submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG Paras/Reports 
(Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the twelfth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
 

 
 
 
26 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned 
CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the current 
session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 
 
 
 

 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings (18th LS) on “Para No. 6.1 of Report No. 03 of 2021 of C&AG 
related to ‘procurement of hardware/ software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 
Crores through strategic alliance relating to National Informatics Center 
Services Inc. (NICSI)”. 
 
I Total number of recommendations 09 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5,  6, 7 
and 8] 
Total - 07 
 
 
 
 
Percentage-77.78 % 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies.- Nil 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration. -
Nil 
Total -    00  
 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
V Observations/Recommendations to which 
the Government has furnished interim replies. 
Sl. Nos. 3 and 9. 
  
 
Total - 02 
 
 Percentage–22.22% 
 
 