35 
 
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
(NPCIL) 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii  
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2026-27) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
(NPCIL) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th 
Lok Sabha) on “Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL)”] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 August, 2026  
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Shravan, 1948(Saka)


iii  
 
 
CPU No. 1091 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 
 
 
  

iv  
CONTENTS 
   Page 
No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2026-27)  v 
 INTRODUCTION  vi 
CHAPTER I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observation/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 16 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies 
 42 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of Government had not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration 
 43 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the Government has furnished interim replies and 
final replies are still awaited 
 44 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the 13th Sitting of Committee on Public 
Undertakings (2026-27) held on 03 August, 2026 
 
 49 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings 
(18th Lok Sabha) on ‘ Nuclear Power Corporation of 
India Limited (NPCIL)’ 
 51 
 
  

v  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2026-27) 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
7. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
8. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
9. Shri Rajeev Rai 
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12. Prof. Sougata Ray 
13. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy   
  
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Dr. John Brittas 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
19. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. vacant 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
2. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri L. Shantikumar Singh - Executive Officer 
  
 
 Consequent upon the resignation of Shri Debashish Samantaray from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25 
May,2026 vide Rajya Sabha Builletin Part-II No. 66428 
 

vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2026 -27) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-
Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Nuclear Power Corporation of India 
Limited (NPCIL)’. 
2. The Twentieth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18 th Lok 
Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 
December, 2025. The Action taken Replies to all the Fourteen (14) 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received from the 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) on  08 July, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on       
03 August, 2026. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee (18 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix -II. 
 
   
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
03 August, 2026                                 Chairperson 
12 Shravan, 1948(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  

1  
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee 
on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on Nuclear Power Corporation of India 
Limited (NPCIL). It contained fourteen (14) Observations/Recommendations. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) and NPCIL in respect of all the fourteen (14) Observations/Recommendations. 
The introductory paragraph at Sl. No. 1 provides an overview and general 
observations, on which the Department and NPCIL have reiterated their structural 
commitments. The replies received have been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 & 13 
(Chapter II) 
 
 
(Total: 11) 
  
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
Nil 
(Chapter III) 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration    
 
Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
 
 
 
(Total: 00) 
 
  
(iv) 
  
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited   
 
Sl. Nos.  and 11, 12 & 14 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
(Total: 03) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and NPCIL 
to furnish final Action Taken Notes/ Replies in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter I of the Report.  The Committee further 
desire that the final replies in respect of  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter V for which only interim replies have been given by the 
Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 

2  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE AND CAPACITY AUGMENTATION 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee, in their Twentieth Report, had recommended the following with 
regard to operational performance and capacity augmentation: 
“The Committee note that the operational performance of NPCIL has generally 
been robust, demonstrating strong operational discipline, sound maintenance 
practices and commendable adherence to safety, quality and performance 
excellence standards. In addition, NPCIL’s PLF has remained consistently 
above global averages, with NPCIL reporting PLFs ranging between 84% and 
88% in recent years, compared to global averages of around 80%. The 
Committee observe that several nuclear power units achieved continuous 
uninterrupted operation for more than a year during FY 2024 -25, including 
Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS -3) (478 days) and Rajasthan Atomic 
Power Station (RAPS -6) (444 days), indicating robust maintenance and 
operational strategies. 
The Committee further observe that Unit -7 of Rajasthan Atomic Power Project 
(RAPP-7 & 8) commenced commercial operation in April 2025, and that the 
capacity under implementation is expected to progressively increase the 
installed capacity to over 22,000 MW by 2031-32, subject to timely execution of 
ongoing and sanctioned projects. The Committee are of the considered view 
that effective coordination between NPCIL, DAE, regulatory bodies and State 
agencies will be essential for ensuring that this implementation pipeline 
progresses without avoidable delays. However, while these performance 
indicators are strong, the Committee highlight that NPCIL’s contribution to 
national electricity generation remains modest in the context of India’s rising 
energy demand and clean base load requirements. The Committee observe 
that this limited contribution stems not from operational deficiencies, but from, 
relatively limited addition and need for timely implementation of new reactors, 
particularly those involving technology collaboration and high capital 
investment, thereby influencing the growth of nuclear power in the Country’s 
energy mix. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that NPCIL should accelerate capacity 
addition and enhance operational efficiency by strengthening project execution 
mechanisms, improving coordination for statutory clearances and expanding 
the domestic industrial and vendor ecosystem. To this extent, the Committee 
recommend creation of a National Nuclear Project Facilitation Mechanism 
within NPCIL to coordinate clearances, regulatory interactions, vendor 
readiness, skilled manpower deployment, and supply -chain scheduling for all 
reactors under construction. The Committee further recommend that NPCIL 
and State Governments jointly develop integrated township, transport corridor, 

3  
water supply and workforce housing plans, to ensure timely readiness of 
supporting infrastructure essential for smooth project execution. The 
Committee also recommend strengthening knowledge retention through 
structured training academies, ensuring transfer of operational experience from 
senior reactor specialists to upcoming project teams. The Committee further 
emphasize the need to ensure timely completion of upcoming reactors so that 
nuclear power can make a meaningful contribution to India’s clean energy 
goals and baseload requirements.” 
6. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have stated as follows: 
“NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL is continuously working towards accelerating capacity addition by 
expediting completion of ongoing projects and launching new projects in line 
with the Nuclear energy Mission by rigorous monitoring of progress of projects 
at multiple levels, and making necessary interventions to remove bottlenecks 
and ensure timely completion. Vendor / contractor development is vital for 
timely deliveries and therefore widening the base of vendors by developing 
new vendors, interacting with existing vendors to enhance their capacities and 
hand holding where essential are being carried out by NPCIL.  
NPCIL has already well established systems to coordinate clearances, 
regulatory interactions, vendor & skilled manpower deployment, supply -chain 
scheduling (procurement & execution of jobs) in all projects under construction. 
There is a directorate within NPCIL, headed by a board level director, which is 
responsible for speedy clearance for regulatory bodies like AERB, MoEFCC, 
etc., as well as supply chain management, vendor development etc. In view of 
the recommendation of Hon’ble Committee, NPCIL will further strengthen the 
group. 
NPCIL has developed coordination mechanisms with some states (like Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat etc.) for timely resolution of issues like land acquisition, R&R, 
water supply assurance and all related issues. The mechanisms, essentially 
consisting of committees meet as and when needed and resolve all pending 
issues. However, NPCIL will work with the union and state governments to set 
up and further strengthen these coordination mechanisms with all relevant 
states so that all issues – big and small can be addressed expeditiously, 
ensuring early completion of projects and smooth operation of stations on their 
commissioning. 
As regards human resources, NPCIL has a programme in place to recruit, train 
and license manpower for nuclear power plant operation. Necessary training 
infrastructure including simulators is in place at NPCIL’s training centres. A 
mechanism for mentoring and systematic knowledge transfer has also been 
institutionalized in alignment with international best practices in nuclear 
industry, as recommended by World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO) 
and other global agencies. 
DAE’s Reply: 

4  
The department is continuously working towards accelerating capacity addition 
by expediting completion of ongoing projects and launching new projects in line 
with the Nuclear energy Mission by rigorous monitoring of progress of projects 
at multiple levels, and making necessary interventions to remove bottlenecks 
and ensure timely completion. Vendor / contractor development is vital for 
timely deliveries and therefore widening the base of vendors by developing 
new vendors, interacting with existing vendors to enhance their capacities and 
hand holding where essential are being carried out. 
The department has already well established systems to coordinate 
clearances, regulatory interactions, vendor & skilled manpower deployment, 
supply-chain scheduling (procurement & execution of jobs) in all projects under 
construction. There is a directorate within, headed by a board level director, 
which is responsible for speedy clearance for regulatory bodies like AERB, 
MoEFCC, etc., as well as supply chain management, vendor development etc. 
In view of the recommendation of Hon’ble Committee, department will further 
strengthen the group. 
The department has developed coordination mechanisms with some states 
(like Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat etc.) for timely resolution of issues like land 
acquisition, R&R, water supply assurance and all related issues. The 
mechanisms, essentially consisting of committees meet as and when needed 
and resolve all pending issues. However, department will work with the union 
and state governments to set up and further strengthen these coordination 
mechanisms with all relevant states so that all issues – big and small can be 
addressed expeditiously, ensuring early completion of projects and smooth 
operation of stations on their commissioning. 
As regards human resources, department has a programme in place to recruit, 
train and license manpower for nuclear power plant operation. Necessary 
training infrastructure including simulators is in place at department’s training 
centres. A mechanism for mentoring and systematic knowledge transfer has 
also been institutionalized in alignment with international best practices in 
nuclear industry, as recommended by World Association of Nuclear Operators 
(WANO) and other global agencies.” 
 
7. The Committee appreciate the structured multi -tier project monitoring 
systems, vendor development strategies, and specialized training frameworks 
established by NPCIL and DAE. The institutionalization of mentoring systems 
aligned with international benchmarking networks like WANO is a welcome step 
towards operational maturity. The Committee are of the view that these 
foundational mechanisms are crucial to manage the upcoming pipeline aimed at 
increasing capacity to over 22,000 MW by 2031-32. 
 
8. However, the Committee note that while a dedicated board -level 
directorate coordinates regulatory clearances, the scale and pace of project 

5  
deployment must be expanded to fulfill India's clean energy ambitions and base 
load requirements. The Committee hope that the expanded state coordination 
framework m ust be rapidly extended to all S tates hosting upcoming projects 
(such as Rajasthan and Haryana) to ensure supporting infrastructure like 
transport corridors and water linkages are ready ahead of reactor 
commissioning. The Committee would like  updates on the expanded 
deliverables of the strengthened directorate at a later stage. 
 
 
ENHANCING NUCLEAR SAFETY FRAMEWORK AND REGULATORY OVERSIGHT 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended the following for enhancing 
nuclear safety framework and regulatory oversight: 
"The Committee note that NPCIL accords highest priority to nuclear safety 
across siting, design, construction, commissioning and operation, incorporating 
defence-in-depth features and redundancy as per Atomic Energy Regulatory 
Board (AERB) codes and guidelines. The Committee also observe that NPCIL 
operates a multi -tier safety review mechanism, internally at plant and 
headquarters level, and independently through AERB with continuous 
monitoring of radiation levels and operational performance. While 
acknowledging India’s impeccable safety record over 55 years with no incidents 
of radioactive release beyond permissible limits, the Committee recommend 
further strengthening of regulatory transparency through periodic publication of 
safety review findings, implementation of global peer -review mechanisms, and 
accelerated deployment of advanced safety technologies including digital 
instrumentation and control upgrades. The Committee desire that AERB 
capacity be enhanced for real-time surveillance and timely enforcement actions 
to ensure sustained compliance with evolving nuclear safety standards. To this 
extent, the Committee recommend developing centralized digital safety 
oversight platforms linking plant instrumentation systems with AERB and 
NPCIL safety monitoring centres for near real -time surveillance. The 
Committee further recommend strengthening internal safety culture audits, 
cross-site peer reviews, and emergency preparedness exercises involving 
district and State disaster response institutions. The Committee also 
recommend periodic evaluation of aging management programmes to extend 
safe reactor life cycles in compliance with regulatory conditions.” 
 
10. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have stated as follows: 
"NPCIL Inputs: 
Response on regulatory oversight may be provided by AERB/DAE. 

6  
For ensuring cyber security, plant instrumentation and control systems are 
isolated from all networks and an air gap is maintained. However, other 
mechanisms exist to monitor plant performance and safety oversight and these 
will be strengthened.    
Robust internal safety culture audits, cross -site peer reviews, and evaluation of 
aging management programmes are an ongoing activity in NPCIL.  The 
recommendations of these audits/reviews are implemented in new reactors and 
retrofitted in existing reactors.  Emergency preparedness exercises involving 
district and State disaster response institutions are also carried out periodically 
and improvements effected based on the feedback from various stakeholders.  
DAE’s Reply: 
AERB has its own independent multi -tier review system for safety review and 
assessment of Nuclear and Radiation Facilities. 
As per its mandate, AERB is following a high level of transparency and is 
publishing the important safety review findings and regulatory decisions 
through its annual reports and periodic newsletters. 
AERB has undergone international peer -review of its regulatory activities for 
nuclear power plants, by way of hosting the ‘Integrated Regulatory Review 
Service’ mission of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 2015. The 
IRRS is an international peer -review service provided by the IAEA that is 
entirely voluntary. 
Further, as part of the periodic Review Meetings under the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety (CNS), the safety status of the nuclear power plants and 
regulatory framework are peer reviewed by the Contracting Parties of CNS. 
The Government of India ratified this Convention on Nuclear Safety on March 
31, 2005 and the Indian National Reports are being presented for peer -review 
since 2008.   
AERB has currently deployed on -site observers to a number of nuclear power 
plant sites to enhance its capacity to make real time observations relevant to 
safety of the NPP as well as adherence to the regulatory requirements. 
While the real time surveillance capacity through this means could be helpful, 
extending such a facility, will require detailed study of feasibility, availability of 
relevant regulatory requirements, and implications related to sensitive data and 
cyber security, etc. 
In accordance with the regulatory requirements, Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) 
carry out Periodic Safety Reviews (PSRs) every ten years to assess the safety 
status against the current regulatory requirements. PSRs are carried out 
based on the AERB safety guide on ‘Periodic Safety Review of Nuclear Power 
Plants’ (AERB/NPP/SG/O-12), which is in line with the IAEA Safety Standard 
SSG-25. PSR includes evaluation of safety status of NPPs against fourteen 
safety factors, and ageing management programme is one such safety factor 

7  
evaluated in this process. Based on the evaluation, necessary improvements 
are implemented in the ageing management programmes of NPPs. 
Emergency preparedness exercises involving district and State disaster 
response institutions are also carried out periodically and improvements 
effected based on the feedback from various stakeholders.” 
 
11. The Committee appreciate India’s impeccable 55 -year safety record and 
acknowledge the paramount importance of preserving cyber security via 
network air-gaps for critical infrastructure. The Committee also note that AERB 
continues to maintain international transparency through compliance with the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety (CNS) and voluntary IAEA Integrated Regulatory 
Review Service (IRRS) missions. 
 
12. While the Committee accept the Government’s detailed technical 
justification regarding the absolute necessity of maintaining a secure "air gap" 
isolation for core plant instrumentation and control (I&C) systems to prevent 
devastating cyber -security vulnerab ilities, the Committee desire that the 
feasibility study proposed by the DAE regarding the extension of real -time 
surveillance capacities be fast -tracked with a definitive, time -bound execution 
plan. The Committee expect that the technological framework derived from this 
study will establish an advanced, cyber -secure digital safety dashboard 
connecting plant parameters directly with AERB and NPCIL safety monitoring 
centers. This will further elevate India's domestic regulatory framework to the 
highest global standards of near real -time transparency and emergency 
preparedness. 
 
SCALING DOMESTIC URANIUM OUTPUT DESPITE GEOLOGICAL 
CONSTRAINTS  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
13. The Committee, in their Twe ntieth Report, had recommended the following 
regarding scaling domestic uranium output despite geological constraints: 
“The Committee note that UCIL is mandated to mine and process uranium for 
India’s PHWR fleet, operating multiple underground and open -pit mines with 
processing plants in Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh, and sending uranium 
concentrate to National Fuel Complex (NFC) for fuel fabrication for NPCIL’s 
reactors. The Committee also observe that while Atomic Minerals Directorate 
for Exploration and Research (AMD) has established about 4,31,000 tonnes of 

8  
in-situ U3O8 (Uranium oxide) resources, only about 80,423 tonnes have been 
transferred to UCIL under MMDR/AMCR provisions, of which about 39.22% is 
already depleted, leaving about 60.78% presently available; at current 
production rates, these reserves can last about 40 years if no new reserves are 
added. Additionally, the Committee observe that new exploration and resource 
definition efforts by AMD in Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and 
Chhattisgarh are ongoing to support long-term supply sustainability.  
 
The Committee also note that UCIL has highlighted challenges such as ore 
body depth, low ore grades, land acquisition hurdles, public resistance and 
tailings management, which can affect production schedules. Recognising the 
criticality of ore grades in India (0.02 –0.045%) vis -à-vis much higher grades 
abroad, which raises costs and tailings burdens, the Committee underline the 
need to mitigate grade -related inefficiencies through technology upgrades and 
process intensification.  
 
The Committee recommend that UCIL streamline and upgrade its existing 
mines/mills and commission higher -capacity plants on firm timelines; deploy 
advanced ore -body knowledge (3D seismic, downhole geophysics), sensor -
based ore sorting and mine automation to improve head grades and reduce 
unit costs; expand brownfield capacity at Turamdih/Jaduguda/Tummalapalle 
while accelerating greenfield centres in Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh with 
clear stage gates for resource -to-reserve conversion with AMD; and adopt best 
available tailings and water management practices proportionate to low -grade, 
high-throughput conditions. The Committee believe that adoption of 
automation, digital mine planning, advanced geophysics, enhanced 
beneficiation processes and State-level facilitation in land and water access will 
be essential to support NPCIL’s long -term fuel assurance strategy. The 
Committee expect UCIL’s stated plan to double production by 2031 –32 to be 
placed under a quarterly milestone -based review with transparent disclosure to 
DAE/NPCIL, given UCIL’s pivotal role in fuelling the first stage of India’s nuclear 
programme and long-term energy security.” 
 
14. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have stated as follows: 
 “NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 
 
Uranium Corporation of India Ltd, Jaduguda has planned to double the 
production by enhancing the existing mine capacity as well as setting up 
uranium mining projects in Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. Details are 
as under: 
Sl. 
No. Project 
Proposed 
Throughput 
Capacity 
(TPD) 
Target Year of 
Commissioning Remarks 
1.  Rohil Uranium 
Project, 2500 2031 Letter of Intent (LoI) for 

9  
Rajasthan mining lease has been 
awarded by the Government 
of Rajasthan. ToR from 
MoEFCC has been granted 
and environmental baseline 
studies completed. EC from 
MoEFCC and other statutory 
clearances such as land 
acquisition from Govt of 
Rajasthan are under process. 
2.  
Mosaboni 
Uranium 
Recovery 
Plant , 
Jharkhand 
3000 2031 
Hindustan Copper Ltd.  (HCL) 
has restarted the mining 
operation in Jharkhan d. HCL 
has agreed to supply copper 
tailings to UCIL for uranium 
recovery. The proposal to 
restarting MURP project will 
be placed before the Board 
for in -principal approval. 
Preparation of revised DPR is 
in progress. 
3. 
New Ore 
Processing 
Plant with 
Tailings Pond 
in Jharkhand 
4500 2036 
Mill will be fed by Baglasai-
Mechua  and Narwapahar 
Deep Projects in Jharkhand. 
4. 
Jajawal 
Uranium 
Project, 
Chhattisgarh 
450 2036 
The application for mining 
lease has been submitted to 
the Mineral Resources 
Department, Government of 
Chhattisgarh in September 
2025. Grant of LoI is pending 
from State Govt. 
 
After implementation of the above projects, U 308 production capacity of UCIL 
will be doubled by 2036 i.e. 1160 metric (MT) of its present capacity of 580 MT, 
subject to statutory clearances. Lease extension beyond 10% of the area will 
be required to implement the Baglasai-Mechua and Narwapahar Deep Projects 
in Jharkhand to feed the proposed mill in Sr. No. 3 above.” 
 
15. The Committee welcome the concrete project roadmap provided by the 
DAE detailing the expansion across Rajasthan, Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh to 
double U 3O2 production capacity by 2036. The strategic collaboration with 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) to recover uranium from copper tailings at 
Mosaboni, Jharkhand  is an innovative resource -optimization measure.  
Nevertheless, the Committee note that the timeline for full realization stretches 

10  
to 2036, whereas NPCIL's massive capacity additions are front -loaded over the 
next decade. Any delay in the commissioning of these mining clusters will 
prolong the strategic sensitivity of relying on imported fuel lines. The 
Committee urge the DAE to institutionalize the suggested quarterly milestone -
based review of these four major projects. Close coordination must be 
maintained with the State Governments of Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh to fast -
track pending Letters of Intent (LoI) and Environmental Clearances (EC) so that 
these targets are achieved without schedule slippages. 
 
 
REGULATORY ENABLEMENT: LEASE-EXTENSION, SINGLE-WINDOW 
CLEARANCES AND STATE COORDINATION  
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
16. The Committee, in their Twe ntieth Report, recommended the following with 
regard to regulatory enablement: 
“The Committee note that newly identified or deeper extensions of ore bodies 
sometimes extend across existing lease boundaries, yet current statutes do not 
permit seamless lease -area extension, compelling separate leases and 
clearances which influence techno -economic viability, especially at depths 
beyond 600 metres, as highlighted for Narwapahar and other prospects. The 
Committee further observe that UCIL is required to follow multi -agency 
clearances (environment, forests, AERB, Directorate General of Mines Safety, 
Pollution Control Board, land and water permissions), along with social -license 
considerations and site -specific factors (such as tailings siting and water 
availability), which together can lengthen the process of initiating mining and 
ramping up capacity. The Committee observe that these multi -agency approval 
pathways can extend project timelines, with possible implications for fuel 
supply planning for PHWR reactors. 
The Committee believe that time -bound single-window clearance mechanisms, 
coordinated between Central and State authorities, and provision for 
contiguous lease extensions for strategic minerals, with due safeguards, will 
significantly improve project viability and uranium production reliability. The 
Committee recommend that the Government may consider to amend relevant 
provisions under the MMDR/associated rules to enable contiguous lease -
extension for strategic minerals like uranium when ore bodies extend beyond 
current boundaries, subject to stringent safety and environmental safeguards; 
operationalise a single -window clearance mechanism with statutory timelines 
for uranium mining/milling projects, integrating Central –State approvals and 
parallel processing of consents; institute a State -level facilitation framework 
covering land acquisition, PAP/R&R implementation, assured industrial water 
linkages, and offsite emergency planning; alongwith creating an inter -agency 
escalation platform chaired by DAE to resolve bottlenecks within defined 
service-level agreements.  

11  
The Committee believe that these reforms will meaningfully compress ‘permit -
to-production’ cycles and improve UCIL’s delivery reliability to NPCIL.”  
 
17. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have submitted the following: 
“NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendation of Hon’ble Committee is noted. 
The matter is being pursued with DAE for amendment in MMDR Act for 
exemption of one -time mining lease extension up to 10% of the existing lease 
area for uranium minerals.” 
 
18. The Committee appreciate the proactive initiation of legislative review to 
amend the MMDR Act for a one -time 10% lease -area extension, which is a 
critical necessity for deep-level mining operations like those at Narwapahar and 
Baglasai-Mechua. However, the current response presents an opportunity to 
further address the remaining dimensions of the recommendation, particularly 
the implementation of a time -bound, single -window clearance portal and the 
activation of a DAE -chaired inter-agency platform to proactively resolve cross -
departmental procedural alignment. The Committee are of the considered view 
that whilst the lease -extension amendment is an essential measure, sustained 
project progress also requires the refinement of multi -agency approval 
pathways to manage development cycles effectively.  The Committee, therefore, 
treat this as an interim reply and expect a definitive update covering the rollout 
of the parallel processing framework and the institutional mechanism designed 
to fast-track strategic mineral clearances.   
 
 
SECURING FUEL SUPPLY: PRICING, IMPORTS, OVERSEAS ASSETS AND 
STRATEGIC STOCKPILES 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
19. The Committee, in their Twentieth Report, recommended the following 
regarding securing fuel supply: 
“The Committee note that the Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC) ensures complete 
domestic fabrication of fuel assemblies for PHWRs using uranium concentrate 
supplied by UCIL or imports arranged under Government oversight. The 

12  
Committee observe that DAE has pursued long -term supply agreements with 
multiple international partners to ensure continuous fuel availability for 
safeguarded reactors. Also, as per NPCIL’s capacity expansion trajectory, 
PHWRs alone could require approximately 5,400 tonnes U3O8 per annum for 
about 25 GWe,  while UCIL currently estimates catering to about 30% of this 
need, implicating persistent import reliance unless domestic production 
accelerates and diversified supply lines are established. The Committee also 
observe that (a) imports presently originate from Kazakhstan, Russia, 
Uzbekistan and Canada, with an Uzbek long -term contract valid upto 2026; (b) 
the pricing for domestic concentrate is cost -plus under the Chief Adviser (Cost) 
methodology and does not reference international prices; and (c) UCIL is not 
involved in import logistics, which are coordinated by DAE/NFC, while a UCIL –
NTPC JV is being pursued to acquire overseas uranium assets to reduce 
exposure to market risks. The Committee believe that establishing strategic 
uranium stockpiles, calibrated to refueling cycles and outage risks, is essential 
to sustaining reactor operations during supply disruptions. While appreciating 
the Government’s careful stewardship of import contracts, the Committee 
recommend expediting the UCIL –NTPC JV with clear governance, due 
diligence protocols and sovereign -risk mitigation to acquire stakes in low -cost 
overseas mines; instituting a blended pricing and performance framework for 
UCIL that preserves cost transparency while benchmarking productivity 
(recovery, availability, unit costs) and incentivising efficiency gains; and 
finalising a policy pathway for Mine Developer -cum-Operator (MDO) 
participation under strict DAE oversight to augment domestic output where 
appropriate.” 
 
20. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have stated as follows: 
“NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted.” 
 
21. The Committee appreciate the Department of Atomic Energy's (DAE) 
ongoing management of India’s nuclear fuel supply chain through long -term 
international import agreements and the domestic fabrication of fuel assemblies 
by the Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC). The proposal for a joint venture between 
UCIL and NTPC to acquire stakes in overseas uranium assets is a constructive 
and encouraging step toward stabilizing long -term fuel costs and supporting 
the domestic nuclear fleet against market fluctuations  and uncertainties. While 
noting that the DAE and NPCIL have acknowledged the recommendation, the 
Committee feel that a more detailed operational strategy and definitive timelines 
would help address the long-term domestic supply objectives highlighted in the 

13  
report. Given that future PHWR expansions will require approximately 5,400 
tonnes of U3O8 per annum, and domestic output currently satisfies about 30% of 
this baseline, accelerating domestic production remains an essential priority for 
comprehensive fuel assurance.   
 
22. To further strengthen these arrangements, the Committee look forward to 
receiving updates on specific operational steps, including the approach for the 
long-term supply contract with Uzbekistan post -2026, the potential introduction 
of a productivity-linked blended pricing mechanism for UCIL, and a clear policy 
pathway for Mine Developer -cum-Operator (MDO) participation under DAE 
oversight. Also e stablishing strategic uranium stockpiles calibrated to reactor 
refuelling cycles also remains a vital measure to ensure continuous operations. 
Accordingly, the Committee desire that  DAE provide a comprehensive, 
progressive report detailing the finalized timelines for the UCIL -NTPC JV, 
sourcing strategies for future fuel requirements, and the framework for 
domestic MDO participation as well. 
 
 
STRENGTHENING NPCIL'S GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS AND INTERNATIONAL 
MARKET PRESENCE 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
23. The Committee, in their Twe ntieth Report, recommended the following with 
regard to strengthening NPCIL's global competitiveness and international market 
presence: 
 
“The Committee note that the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited 
(NPCIL) 
has emerged as a technologically capable organisation in the international 
nuclear 
power landscape, having built strong indigenous design, construction and  
operational capacities through sustained focus on domestic nuclear power  
development. The Committee also note that NPCIL has successfully developed 
and 
scaled its Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) technology from 220 MW 
to 
700 MW, in close collaboration with BARC and the Department of Atomic 
Energy, 
thereby establishing a credible technological foundation and a strong safety and  
performance record.  

14  
However, the Committee observe that NPCIL’s international footprint remains  
limited in comparison to major global nuclear vendors, especially in the context 
of 
larger capacity reactors and scaling up the power generation capacity.  
Additionally, the committee are of the considered view that continued reliance on  
domestic deployment alone may limit its ability to evolve as a globally 
competitive 
nuclear power company. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that NPCIL adopt a focused 
and 
time bound internationalisation strategy, by accelerating the development and  
commercialisation of indigenous Light Water Reactors (LWRs) and modular  
reactor technologies aligned with prevailing global market demand. The 
Committee 
further recommend that NPCIL strengthen strategic partnerships with established 
international nuclear vendors and actively participate in joint ventures and global  
supply chains to enhance credibility and market access. The Committee also  
encourage NPCIL to enhance project execution efficiency, strengthen cost  
competitiveness and explore suitable financing mechanisms for overseas 
projects. 
Further, the Committee recommend expanding collaboration with international  
regulatory and safety bodies and investing in advanced human resource  
development to enable NPCIL to attain global standards of excellence and  
competitiveness.” 
 
24. NPCIL and DAE, in their action taken replies, have stated as follows: 
“NPCIL Inputs: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted and NPCIL will make 
efforts to implement it appropriately. 
 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the department 
will make efforts to implement it appropriately.” 
 
25. The Committee reiterate its earlier suggestion that relying solely on 
domestic deployment may restrict NPCIL's evolution into a globally competitive 
nuclear enterprise. With global market paradigms shifting rapidly toward Small 
Modular Reactors (SMRs) for industrial decarbonization, NPCIL's mature 
operational footprint of running 25 reactors safely positions it uniquely to 
become an exporter of cost-effective, indigenous nuclear technology. 
 
26. The Committee desire that NPCIL, in active coordination with DAE and 
the Ministry of External Affairs, formalize a comprehensive Global Market 

15  
Access Roadmap within the next twelve months. This roadmap should explicitly 
identify and target emerging economies, while also establishing a standardized 
technical export profile (s) for the 220 MW/700 MW PHWR and the BSMR 
platforms, alongwith formulating innovative vendor -financing models to 
compete effectively against major international nuclear suppliers. 
 
 
  

16  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Overview 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited 
(NPCIL) is the sole nuclear power generating company in the Country and a wholly 
owned Central Public Sector Undertaking under the administrative control of the 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). Established in 1987, NPCIL plays a crucial role 
in India’s strategic energy programme by designing, constructing, operating and 
maintaining nuclear power reactors for civilian electricity generation. It is entrusted 
with ensuring that nuclear power contributes to India’s clean energy mix in a safe, 
reliable and environmentally responsible manner. 
 The Committee were further informed that NPCIL’s installed nuclear capacity 
has grown from only six operating reactors at formation to 25 reactors with 8780 MW 
capacity today, and 17 additional reactors totalling 13100 MW are in various stages of 
execution. NPCIL has consistently maintained profitability with the highest AAA credit 
ratings, supported by strong asset growth to ₹1,91,607 crore as on March 2025 and a 
net worth of ₹65,475 crore. In addition to the above, the Committee also note from the 
submissions made by NPCIL that the Company achieved its highest -ever electricity 
generation of 56,681 Million Units in FY 2024 -25, indirectly avoiding the release of 
approximately 49 million tonnes of CO ₂ equivalent. Further, NPCIL has maintained 
consistently high operational reliability, registering about 639 reactor -years of 
cumulative safe operation as of May 2025, demonstrating sustained excellence in 
plant operation and maintenance practices. These achievements indicate 
commendable organisational maturity and operational excellence.  
However, the Committee highlight that NPCIL’s contribution to national electricity 
generation is currently modest, with potential to play a greater role in advancing the 
nation’s clean energy ambitions and the broader goal of de -carbonization. Further, 
with strong performance indicators such as a Plant Load Factor (PLF) of 86.60%, the 
scale and pace of nuclear capacity addition needs enhancement when compared to 
renewable and thermal sectors of India’s power mix. The Committee note that NPCIL 
continues to rely significantly on imported uranium, posing a strategic sensitivity with 

17  
regard to stable fuel supply. The future expansion of the nuclear fleet is also closely 
linked with Uranium Corporation of India (UCIL)’s ability to increase domestic uranium 
production, an element that remains beyond NPCIL’s immediate purview. Additionally, 
the long gestation period of nuclear projects, issues related to regulatory and 
environmental clearances, public perception, scarcity of specialised manpower and 
high capital investment requirements further limit growth in nuclear power generation. 
The Committee also note that NPCIL is the sole nuclear power generator in 
India, implementing both indigenous Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) 
technology and Light Water Reactors, established with international cooperation. 
NPCIL continues to be the cornerstone of India’s nuclear energy programme, which is 
executing the first stage of India’s three -stage nuclear power programme, which is 
crucial for long -term sustainability in fuel supply and energy security ensuring high 
safety culture, operational excellence and adherence to national energy goals. The 
Committee further observe that NPCIL has entered into Joint Ventures, notably 
Anushakti Vidyut Nigam Limited (ASHVINI) with National Thermal Power Corporation 
(NTPC) for the development of the Mahi Banswara (4×700 MW) nuclear project, 
marking a significant step in expanding the nuclear power generation base through 
collaborative models. Therefore, the Government has set an ambitious national target 
of achieving 100 GW nuclear capacity by 2047, and NPCIL is expected to contribute 
nearly half of this capacity, reflecting its pivotal role in the country’s clean energy 
transition. Considering its critical role in clean energy transition, energy security and 
strategic technological independence, the Committee have carried out a detailed 
examination of NPCIL in this Report. The Committee express confidence that NPCIL 
will continue working to address the highlighted challenges and further enhance its 
performance, contributing to India’s vision for a sustainable and secured energy 
future. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL reiterates its commitment to addressing challenges and further 
enhancing its safety and operational performance, thereby contributing to India’s 
vision of Viksit Bharat and achieving net zero targets, towards a sustainable and 
secured energy future.  
 

18  
DAE’s Reply: 
The department reiterates its commitment to addressing challenges and further 
enhancing its safety and operational performance, thereby contributing to India’s 
vision of Viksit Bharat and achieving net zero targets, towards a sustainable and 
secured energy future.  
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Operational Performance and Capacity Augmentation 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the operational performance of NPCIL has generally 
been robust, demonstrating strong operational discipline, sound maintenance 
practices and commendable adherence to safety, quality and performance excellence 
standards. In addition, NPCIL’s PLF has remained consistently above global 
averages, with NPCIL reporting PLFs ranging between 84% and 88% in recent years, 
compared to global averages of around 80%. The Committee observe that several 
nuclear power units achieved continuous uninterrupted operation for more than a year 
during FY 2024-25, including Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS-3) (478 days) and 
Rajasthan Atomic Power Station (RAPS -6) (444 days), indicating robust maintenance 
and operational strategies. 
The Committee further observe that Unit -7 of Rajasthan Atomic Power Project 
(RAPP-7 & 8) commenced commercial operation in April 2025, and that the capacity 
under implementation is expected to progressively increase the installed capacity to 
over 22,000 MW by 2031 -32, subject to timely execution of ongoing and sanctioned 
projects. The Committee are of the considered view that effective coordination 
between NPCIL, DAE, regulatory bodies and State agencies will be essential for 
ensuring that this implementation pipeline progresses without avoidable delays. 
However, while these performance indicators are strong, the Committee highlight that 
NPCIL’s contribution to national electricity generation remains modest in the context of 
India’s rising energy demand and clean base load requirements. The Committee 
observe that this limited contribution stems not from operational deficiencies, but from, 
relatively limited addition and need for timely implementation of new reactors, 
particularly those involving technology collaboration and high capital investment, 
thereby influencing the growth of nuclear power in the Country’s energy mix. 

19  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that NPCIL should accelerate capacity 
addition and enhance operational efficiency by strengthening project execution 
mechanisms, improving coordination for statutory clearances and expanding the 
domestic industrial and vendor ecosystem. To this extent, the Committee recommend 
creation of a National Nuclear Project Facilitation Mechanism within NPCIL to 
coordinate clearances, regulatory interactions, vendor readiness, skilled manpower 
deployment, and supply -chain scheduling for all reactors under construction. The 
Committee further recommend that NPCIL and State Governments jointly develop 
integrated township, transport corridor, water supply and workforce housing plans, to 
ensure timely readiness of supporting infrastructure essential for smooth project 
execution. The Committee also recommend strengthening knowledge retention 
through structured training academies, ensuring transfer of operational experience 
from senior reactor specialists to upcoming project teams. The Committee further 
emphasize the need to ensure timely completion of upcoming reactors so that nuclear 
power can make a meaningful contribution to India’s clean energy goals and baseload 
requirements. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL is continuously working towards accelerating capacity addition by 
expediting completion of ongoing projects and launching new projects in line with the 
Nuclear energy Mission by rigorous monitoring of progress of projects at multiple 
levels, and making necessary interventions to remove bottlenecks and ensure timely 
completion. Vendor / contractor development is vital for timely deliveries and therefore 
widening the base of vendors by developing new vendors, interacting with existing 
vendors to enhance their capacities and hand holding where essential are being 
carried out by NPCIL.  
NPCIL has already well established systems to coordinate clearances, 
regulatory interactions, vendor & skilled manpower deployment, supply -chain 
scheduling (procurement & execution of jobs) in all projects under construction. There 
is a directorate within NPCIL, headed by a board level director, which is responsible 
for speedy clearance for regulatory bodies like AERB, MoEFCC, etc., as well as 
supply chain management, vendor development etc. In view of the recommendation 
of Hon’ble Committee, NPCIL will further strengthen the group. 

20  
NPCIL has developed coordination mechanisms with some states (like Madhya 
Pradesh, Gujarat etc.) for timely resolution of issues like land acquisition, R&R, water 
supply assurance and all related issues. The mechanisms, essentially consisting of 
committees meet as and when needed and resolve all pending issues. However, 
NPCIL will work with the union and state governments to set up and further strengthen 
these coordination mechanisms with all relevant states so that all issues – big and 
small can be addressed expeditiously, ensuring early completion of projects and 
smooth operation of stations on their commissioning. 
As regards human resources, NPCIL has a programme in place to recruit, train 
and license manpower for nuclear power plant operation. Necessary training 
infrastructure including simulators is in place at NPCIL’s training centres. A 
mechanism for mentoring and systematic knowledge transfer has also been 
institutionalized in alignment with international best practices in nuclear industry, as 
recommended by World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO) and other global 
agencies. 
 
DAE’s Reply: 
The department is continuously working towards accelerating capacity addition 
by expediting completion of ongoing projects and launching new projects in line with 
the Nuclear energy Mission by rigorous monitoring of progress of projects at multiple 
levels, and making necessary interventions to remove bottlenecks and ensure timely 
completion. Vendor / contractor development is vital for timely deliveries and therefore 
widening the base of vendors by developing new vendors, interacting with existing 
vendors to enhance their capacities and hand holding where essential are being 
carried out. 
 
The department has already well established systems to coordinate 
clearances, regulatory interactions, vendor & skilled manpower deployment, supply -
chain scheduling (procurement & execution of jobs) in all projects under construction. 
There is a directorate within, headed by a board level director, which is responsible for 
speedy clearance for regulatory bodies like AERB, MoEFCC, etc., as well as supply 
chain management, vendor development etc. In view of the recommendation of 
Hon’ble Committee, department will further strengthen the group. 
 
The department has developed coordination mechanisms with some states 
(like Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat etc.) for timely resolution of issues like land acquisition, 

21  
R&R, water supply assurance and all related issues. The mechanisms, essentially 
consisting of committees meet as and when needed and resolve all pending issues. 
However, department will work with the union and state governments to set up and 
further strengthen these coordination mechanisms with all relevant states so that all 
issues – big and small can be addressed expeditiously, ensuring early completion of 
projects and smooth operation of stations on their commissioning. 
 
As regards human resources, department has a programme in place to recruit, 
train and license manpower for nuclear power plant operation. Necessary training 
infrastructure including simulators is in place at department’s training centres. A 
mechanism for mentoring and systematic knowledge transfer has also been 
institutionalized in alignment with international best practices in nuclear industry, as 
recommended by World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO) and other global 
agencies. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 7 & 8 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Accelerated R&D for Capacity Enhancement of India’s Nuclear Reactors and 
Development of Scalable Nuclear Reactor Technologies 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee observe that although PHWRs have evolved to 700 MW unit 
sizes, reactor capacities in India remain modest compared to global trends where 
larger LWRs and advanced designs exceed 1000 MW, and this more gradual scale-up 
has influenced overall nuclear generation levels and may have implications for 
economic competitiveness. The Committee also note that NPCIL has achieved 
commendable technological progress in developing indigenous Light Water Reactors 
(LWRs) such as the Bharat Small Modular Reactor (BSMR) of 220 MW and design 
evolution toward 900–1000 MW reactors. The Committee further note that while large 
capacity LWRs of 1000, 1200 and 1730 MW are being pursued through foreign 
cooperation, however, sustained dependence on external technology may not align 
with India’s strategic objective of technological autonomy. The evidence furnished 
indicates that BSMR is intended not merely as a standalone modular reactor but as a 

22  
prototype platform for progressive scaling to 300 MW, 500 MW, and eventually 1000 –
1200 MW indigenous reactors, with R&D primarily done in NPCIL’s laboratories. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Government should 
accord high national priority status to indigenous nuclear reactor R&D programmes, 
with clearly earmarked long -term funding and time -bound milestones for the 
development of scalable large capacity Indian LWR technologies beyond 700 MW. 
The Committee further recommend the establishment of dedicated advanced reactor 
design and testing facilities, accelerated prototyping of the BSMR platform for rapid 
scale-up moving towards higher capacity. Additionally, the Committee urge that a 
national roadmap for next -generation reactor technologies including that of larger 
capacity, aligned with fuel sustainability and the three -stage programme, be 
periodically reviewed at the highest level to ensure timely indigenisation, global 
competitiveness, and strategic self-reliance in nuclear power. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
As main R&D of advanced reactor technologies is being carried out by BARC 
and other R&D institutions of DAE, a response in this regard may be framed by DAE.  
NPCIL is already working in tandem with R&D institutions of DAE for 
development of BSMR and will work for development of Indian Light Water Reactors 
in future. NPCIL has also established an R&D facility at Tarapur, where focused R&D 
for improvement of safety & performance and indigenization of components and 
systems is being carried out. NPCIL R&D facility houses certain testing facilities for 
vital equipment. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The department is already working in tandem with R&D institutions of DAE for 
development of BSMR and will work for development of Indian Light Water Reactors 
in future. In this direction, at BARC: 
  Major developmental activities being pursued towards of technologies for light 
water reactor are mentioned below:   
1. BARC has successfully developed nuclear grade low alloy steel, termed 
APURVA, required for manufacturing of reactor pressure vessel (RPV) of 
pressurised water reactor (PWR) nuclear power plants in collaboration with a 
domestic industrial partner.  
 

23  
2. Large forgings made from this special grade alloy has been qualified through 
extensive metallurgical and mechanical testing.  
       The above development effort has made it possible to manufacture RPVs 
required for indigenous small modular reactor plants (SMRs) without depending 
on imported steels forgings.  
3. Further to the above, recently BARC has launched contract for development 
manufacturing technology of RPVs for larger indigenous PWRs. 
 
4. BARC also successfully developed reactivity control rod drive mechanisms, a 
critical component, for indigenous SMRs. 
 BARC has also established an R&D facility at Tarapur, where focused R&D for 
improvement of safety & performance and indigenization of components and systems 
is being carried out. The department R&D facility houses certain testing facilities for 
vital equipment. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
 
Strengthening Indigenous Reactor Technology and Advancing Self-Reliance 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
  
The Committee note that NPCIL has successfully developed and commercialized 
indigenous Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) technology, progressively 
scaling unit sizes from 220 MW to 700 MW, incorporating enhanced safety features 
and operational efficiencies. The Committee further appreciate NPCIL’s capability 
enhancement across multiple reactor technologies, including experience gained in 
Boiling Water Reactors TAPS-1&2) and Light Water Reactors (Kudankulam Units with 
Russian cooperation), as well as the ongoing initiatives for developing Bharat Small 
Modular Reactor (BSMR) and evolving 900 –1000 MW Indian Light Water Reactor 
(LWR) designs, which are essential for future deployment and technological 
competitiveness. The Committee also recognize that these technological 
advancements form a critical component of India’s long -term three -stage nuclear 
power programme to ensure fuel sustainability and strategic autonomy.  
However, the Committee are of the opinion that India’s overall installed nuclear 
capacity remains modest compared to leading global nuclear nations, primarily due to 
historical technology denial regimes and slower scale -up of indigenous advanced 
reactor designs. The Committee observe that although PHWR technology remains the 

24  
backbone of the nuclear programme, there is an opportunity to steadily advance 
towards higher-capacity reactors, gradually reducing reliance on foreign collaborations 
for LWRs, and encourage the development of next -generation reactors, in support of 
the nuclear energy expansion target of 100 GW by 2047.  
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that NPCIL, in coordination with 
DAE and BARC, should fast -track indigenous development of advanced reactor 
technologies including Indian LWR designs, BSMR deployment, and future reactors 
aligned with India’s three -stage programme. Moreover, indigenisation of nuclear 
equipment manufacturing should be aggressively expanded through technology 
transfer, vendor development, certification frameworks, and creation of multiple supply 
chain sources for critical components. The Committee further recommend that a well -
defined technology advancement roadmap should be established with clear 
milestones, benchmarking against global standards, and periodic review to ensure 
sustained innovation and competitiveness. Human resource development in advanced 
nuclear technologies should also be prioritized through enhanced collaborations with 
academic and R&D institutions, long -term skill development programmes and 
international knowledge exchange through platforms such as World Association of 
Nuclear Operators (WANO), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and CANDU 
(Canadian deuterium uranium) Owners Group (COG). 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
As main R&D of advanced reactor technologies is being carried out by BARC 
and other R&D institutions of DAE, a response in this regard may be framed by DAE. 
NPCIL will work closely with BARC and other R&D institutions of DAE in this context. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted.  
           As recommended by the Committee, Based on BARC’s experience and 
expertise garnered during design and development of indigenous small PWRs, 
projects aimed towards establishment of indigenous SMRs based on PWR technology 
have been initiated i.e. BSMR -200 and SMR-55 under the Nuclear Energy Mission of 
the Government of India. These SMRs are specifically designed to serve as captive 
power plants for the domestic heavy energy intensive industries.  Various nuclear 

25  
equipment and components required for these reactors will be developed, 
manufactured and delivered by the domestic nuclear vendors strengthening self -
reliance in PWR technology. 
          BARC has robust programme to create a highly skilled workforce in nuclear 
science and technology through its flagship schemes, Orientation Course for 
Engineering Graduates and Science Post Graduates (OCES) and DAE Graduate 
Fellowship Scheme (DGFS) at BARC training School.  
           India being member state of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
participates regularly in technical events organised by IAEA for knowledge sharing. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Financial Sustainability and Capital Investment Strategy 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that NPCIL has consistently demonstrated sound financial 
performance, with capital expenditure showing an upward trend and reaching its 
highest-ever level of ₹17,984 crore in FY 2024 -25, reflecting strong project 
implementation momentum and the ability to mobilize significant financial resources 
from the market to support an estimated ₹2.6 lakh crore capital outlay for 17 reactors 
under implementation. In addition to this, the Committee note from the submissions of 
NPCIL that the Company has maintained a AAA credit rating over several years, 
reflecting strong financial fundamentals and lender confidence. Further, NPCIL has 
been complying with SEBI (LODR) requirements as a High Value Debt Listed Entity, 
ensuring public disclosure of quarterly results and adherence to corporate governance 
norms.  
While this reflects financial stability and lender confidence in NPCIL’s long -term 
business model, the Committee underline the value of resolving ongoing tax matters 
related to decommissioning funds, R&D and renovation funds, which have been 
subjected to extended litigation across multiple assessment years. The Committee 
further note that some of these matters remain pending for considerable periods, 
including a refund from IT authorities, resolution of which could help improve liquidity 
and financial efficiency. Therefore, NPCIL may conduct periodic financial risk scenario 

26  
analysis covering exchange-rate variations, interest rate exposure, project delays and 
cost escalation risks to maintain financial stability.  
Additionally, the Committee recommend that DAE should expeditiously resolve 
the ambiguity regarding ownership and accounting responsibility of the 
decommissioning fund by formally confirming the liability position, in order to settle the 
ongoing taxation disputes and avoid undue financial burden on NPCIL. Moreover, 
NPCIL should pursue timely recovery of pending refunds and continue to strengthen 
financial governance by closely monitoring contingent liabilities and litigation -linked 
financial exposures.  
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL is continuously pursuing and following up with DAE and relevant tax 
authorities to resolve the pending issues and ensure NPCIL’s financial stability. NPCIL 
is also carrying out periodic financial risk scenario assessment and including it in the 
Risk Management report, which is reviewed by the sub -committee of the Board on 
Risk Management. 
DAE may reply appropriately. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The department is continuously pursuing and following up with NPCIL and 
relevant tax authorities to resolve the pending issues and ensure financial stability. 
The department is also carrying out periodic financial risk scenario assessment and 
including it in the Risk Management report, which is reviewed by the sub -committee of 
the Board on Risk Management. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Enhancing Nuclear Safety Framework and Regulatory Oversight 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that NPCIL accords highest priority to nuclear safety across 
siting, design, construction, commissioning and operation, incorporating defence -in-
depth features and redundancy as per Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) 
codes and guidelines. The Committee also observe that NPCIL operates a multi -tier 
safety review mechanism, internally at plant and headquarters level, and 

27  
independently through AERB with continuous monitoring of radiation levels and 
operational performance. While acknowledging India’s impeccable safety record over 
55 years with no incidents of radioactive release beyond permissible limits, the 
Committee recommend further strengthening of regulatory transparency through 
periodic publication of safety review findings, implementation of global peer -review 
mechanisms, and accelerated deployment of advanced safety technologies including 
digital instrumentation and control upgrades. The Committee desire that AERB 
capacity be enhanced for real -time surveillance and timely enforcement actions to 
ensure sustained compliance with evolving nuclear safety standards. To this extent, 
the Committee recommend developing centralized digital safety oversight platforms 
linking plant instrumentation systems with AERB and NPCIL safety monitoring centres 
for near real -time surveillance. The Committee further recommend strengthening 
internal safety culture audits, cross -site peer reviews, and emergency preparedness 
exercises involving district and State disaster response institutions. The Committee 
also recommend periodic evaluation of aging management programmes to extend 
safe reactor life cycles in compliance with regulatory conditions. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
Response on regulatory oversight may be provided by AERB / DAE. 
For ensuring cyber security, plant instrumentation and control systems are 
isolated from all networks and an air gap is maintained. However, other mechanisms 
exist to monitor plant performance and safety oversight and these will be 
strengthened.    
Robust internal safety culture audits, cross -site peer reviews, and evaluation of 
aging management programmes are an ongoing activity in NPCIL. The 
recommendations of these audits / reviews are implemented in new reactors and 
retrofitted in existing reactors.  Emergency preparedness exercises involving district 
and State disaster response institutions are also carried out periodically and 
improvements effected based on the feedback from various stakeholders.  
DAE’s Reply: 
For ensuring cyber security, plant instrumentation and control systems are 
isolated from all networks and an air gap is maintained. However, other mechanisms 

28  
exist to monitor plant performance and safety oversight and these will be 
strengthened.    
            Robust internal safety culture audits, cross -site peer reviews, and evaluation 
of aging management programmes are an ongoing activity in department. The 
recommendations of these audits/reviews are implemented in new reactors and 
retrofitted in existing reactors.   
        AERB has its own independent multi -tier review system for safety review and 
assessment of Nuclear and Radiation Facilities. 
        As per its mandate, AERB is following a high level of transparency and is 
publishing the important safety review findings and regulatory decisions through its 
annual reports and periodic newsletters. 
        AERB has undergone international peer -review of its regulatory activities for 
nuclear power plants, by way of hosting the ‘Integrated Regulatory Review Service’ 
mission of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 2015. The IRRS is an 
international peer-review service provided by the IAEA that is entirely voluntary. 
       Further, as part of the periodic Review Meetings under the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety (CNS), the safety status of the nuclear power plants and regulatory framework 
are peer reviewed by the Contracting Parties of CNS. 
        The Government of India ratified this Convention on Nuclear Safety on March 31, 
2005 and the Indian National Reports are being presented for peer-review since 2008.   
           AERB has currently deployed on -site observers to a number of nuclear power 
plant sites to enhance its capacity to make real time observations relevant to safety of 
the NPP as well as adherence to the regulatory requirements. 
           While the real time surveillance capacity through this means could be helpful, 
extending such a facility, will require detailed study of feasibility, availability of relevant 
regulatory requirements, and implications related to sensitive data and cyber security, 
etc. 
            In accordance with the regulatory requirements, Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) 
carry out Periodic Safety Reviews (PSRs) every ten years to assess the safety status 
against the current regulatory requirements. PSRs are carried out based on the AERB 
safety guide on ‘Periodic Safety Review of Nuclear Power Plants’ (AERB/NPP/SG/O -
12), which is in line with the IAEA Safety Standard SSG -25. PSR includes evaluation 

29  
of safety status of NPPs against fourteen safety factors, and ageing management 
programme is one such safety factor evaluated in this process. Based on the 
evaluation, necessary improvements are implemented in the ageing management 
programmes of NPPs.   
 
Emergency preparedness exercises involving district and State disaster 
response institutions are also carried out periodically and improvements effected 
based on the feedback from various stakeholders.  
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 & 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Strengthening Radiation Monitoring, Environmental Protection and Community 
Confidence  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee take note of the comprehensive environmental monitoring 
system including Environmental Survey Laboratories (ESLs) covering up to 30 km 
radius, and strict compliance with (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) and State Pollution Control Board norms on discharges. In 
addition, the Committee note that ESLs located at all nuclear power stations 
continuously monitor air, water, soil, marine life and agricultural produce in the 
surrounding areas, and data has consistently shown radiation levels to be well below 
regulatory limits.  
The Committee appreciate that radiation dose levels around NPCIL plants 
remain significantly lower than the AERB limit of 1000 μSv (micro sieverts)/year 
across all sites between 2018 -2022. However, recognising public apprehensions 
regarding marine ecology, agriculture and fisheries, the Committee recommend 
expansion of independent, publicly -accessible reporting on environmental indicators 
and increased involvement of scientific institutions in continuous thermo -ecological 
and radiological studies. Additionally, the Committee recommend installation of public-
facing real -time radiation and environmental monitoring display boards at prominent 
locations in plant -adjacent communities. The Committee further place importance on 

30  
effective emergency preparedness frameworks, periodic multi -agency exercises with 
community participation and improved stakeholder engagement to bolster public 
confidence in nuclear safety and environmental protection. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has been placing all Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
documents of nuclear power projects in the public domain on its website. The Atomic 
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) in its annual reports publishes the radiation dose at 
various nuclear power plant sites which are in the public domain. NPCIL appreciates 
the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation on public -facing real -time radiation and 
environmental monitoring display boards at prominent locations in plant -adjacent 
communities and will explore setting up the same. 
NPCIL is enhancing its public outreach activities to bolster public confidence in 
nuclear safety and environmental protection. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The department has been placing all Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
documents of nuclear power projects in the public domain on its website. The Atomic 
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) in its annual reports publishes the radiation dose at 
various nuclear power plant sites which are in the public domain. It appreciates the 
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation on public -facing real -time radiation and 
environmental monitoring display boards at prominent locations in plant -adjacent 
communities and will explore setting up the same. 
 
The Environmental Survey Laboratories (ESLs) of Bhabha Atomic Research 
Centre, established at Nuclear Power Plants (NPP) regularly monitor different 
environmental matrices around NPP sites and demonstrate compliance of regulatory 
limits stipulated by Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), ensuring safe operation 
of NPPs. The ESL reports are submitted to AERB. The outcome of the reports is 
published annually by AERB and is available on their public website and is published 
in the annual report of AERB as well. 
          AERB has promulgated the requirements (AERB Safety Code, Management of 
Nuclear and Radiological Emergencies, AERB/NRF/SC/NRE) for establishing 
emergency preparedness and response framework and conduct of periodic 
emergency exercises involving all stakeholders including district level authorities. The 

31  
framework for NPPs is established and detailed in Emergency Preparedness and 
Response (EPR) plan prepared by the plant management and reviewed & approved 
by AERB. These EPR plans detail the roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders 
along with other necessary resources and infrastructure for protection of the public. 
District Disaster management Plan (DDMP) are prepared by the district authorities 
and are reviewed by AERB prior to approval by NDMA. Further, to test the plan and 
the established emergency response framework, various types of emergency 
exercises involving all the responsible agencies with emphasis on decision making, 
command & control functions and field actions are required to be conducted at 
periodic intervals. These exercises are observed and reviewed by AERB & NDMA. 
Regular public awareness programmes are conducted for villagers and educational 
instututions by District Authorities and the ESLS of NPP in the vicinity of the nuclear 
power plant in compliance to the regulatory requirements. 
The department is enhancing its public outreach activities to bolster public 
confidence in nuclear safety and environmental protection. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Improving Waste Management Practices and Advancing Closed Fuel Cycle 
Technologies 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee note that India follows a closed -fuel cycle wherein spent fuel is 
treated as a resource and wastes generated in nuclear stations are immobilized and 
stored in certified engineered structures with AERB oversight. Further, reprocessing 
and waste management activities are undertaken at Trombay, Tarapur and 
Kalpakkam, which have demonstrated sustained operational performance excellence. 
The Committee also acknowledge that discharges from the nuclear plants remain well 
within regulatory limits with no adverse impacts recorded on public health or 
agricultural productivity. While appreciating these measures, the Committee 
recommend that NPCIL expedite long-term strategies for deep geological repositories, 
strengthen tracking of radioactive waste throughout its lifecycle and integrate 
advanced volume reduction and vitrification technologies. The Committee also desire 
closer coordination with BARC and global research partners to enhance reprocessing 
efficiency and minimize environmental footprint, thereby reinforcing nuclear power as 

32  
a safe and sustainable contributor to India’s net -zero commitments and future energy 
requirements. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
As reprocessing and related waste management activities are being carried out 
by BARC and institutions of DAE, a response in this regard may be framed by BARC / 
DAE. NPCIL will work closely with BARC and other R&D institutions of DAE in this 
context. 
 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted.  
             India has its nuclear power program based on a Closed Fuel Cycle, wherein 
spent fuel is considered as a resource and not a radioactive waste. The spent fuel 
generated from nuclear power plants of NPCIL are safely stored in water -cooled pool 
near power plant till they are transported to BARC site for further processing.  Spent 
fuel is reprocessed and recycled to recover useful fissile material for use as fuel in fast 
breeder reactors, and reduction in quantity and radio -toxicity of waste generated. 
Small amount of high level radioactive liquid waste (HLLW) is generated during spent 
fuel reprocessing.  
               Based on the indigenously developed separation processes adopted for 
reprocessing, several valuable radioisotopes (Cs -137, Sr -90, Ru -106, etc.) are 
recovered from HLLW and deployed for various medical and societal applications. The 
remaining part of the HLLW is vitrified in suitable glass matrix and stored in interim 
storage under constant surveillance at par with international practices following the 
guidelines of International Atomic Energy Agency.  
               Recent advancement in actinide partitioning technology has led to significant 
reduction in the vitrified waste volume enabling reduction in the footprint of waste 
storage facility. Furthermore, research and development activities are also in progress 
towards incineration of long-lived actinides using high energy accelerators.  
  Nuclear wastes generated at the nuclear power stations during their operation 
are of low & intermediate activity level and are managed at the site itself. These 
wastes are treated, concentrated, compacted, immobilized in solid materials like 
cement and disposed/stored in specially constructed structures such as reinforced 

33  
concrete trenches/tile holes, located at the site near to nuclear power plant. These 
specially constructed structures are located in access - controlled areas and are 
designed based on multi barrier principle for ensuring effective containment of the 
radioactivity. The areas where the disposal structures are located are kept under 
constant surveillance with the help of bore -wells laid out in a planned manner by 
routinely monitoring the underground water and soil samples to confirm effective 
confinement of radioactivity present in the disposed waste. The practice is at par with 
international practices following the guide lines of International Atomic Energy Agency. 
Till date, the surveillance of the disposal areas at different sites has confirmed the 
high degree of effectiveness of the disposal system for the containment of disposed 
wastes. There has been no incident of release of radioactivity from such disposed 
wastes. No effect of radiation from disposed wastes on the public or the environment 
has been observed. 
Improving Waste Management Practices and Advancing Closed Fuel Cycle 
Technologies 
             ‘Recycle and Reuse’ is being practiced at each stage of nuclear fuel cycle for 
optimal utilization of nuclear energy. Residue of radioactive material contains various 
useful radioisotopes, which are being deployed for societal benefits. High -level liquid 
waste is immobilized into an inert glass matrix through  vitrification and stored in 
dedicated facilities with continuous surveillance. Research is ongoing into "partitioning 
and transmutation" to incinerate long -lived radioactive components, potentially 
eliminating the need for deep geological repositories.  
             Highest priority is accorded to safety in all aspects of nuclear fuel cycle, 
following a defence -in-depth approach, in line with codes and guides of regulatory 
body which are on par with international safety principles. As a waste management 
philosophy, no waste in any physical form is released / disposed to the environment 
unless the same is cleared, exempted or excluded from regulations. The treated 
liquids and gases are diluted and discharged under continuous monitoring, ensuring 
that the discharges are well within the limits set by regulatory body. A large public 
awareness and outreach programme based on a structured multipronged approach is 
implemented to spread awareness and address the apprehensions of the people in a 
credible and easy to understand manner. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 

34  
Accelerating Policy Reforms and Strategic Enablers for Nuclear Capacity 
Expansion  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that NPCIL continues to face certain policy and regulatory 
requirements, including multi -stage reviews and clearances for repeat design  
projects as well as varied procedures for environmental consents, which may at  
times contribute to schedule extensions and additional project costs. The Committee 
also observe that NPCIL has sought enhanced delegation of financial and 
administrative powers to its Board—similar to Maharatna PSUs—to expedite decision-
making, alongside restoration of mega -project concessions/GST waivers, and 
inclusion of nuclear power within national green taxonomy and financial incentive 
frameworks at par with renewable energy. Furthermore, the Committee recognise the 
need for strengthened participation of State Governments across the full lifecycle of 
nuclear plants, especially in land acquisition, local engagement and facilitation of 
critical infrastructure, water supply and emergency planning.  
Additionally, the Committee note that pre -project activities, including land 
acquisition, environmental clearances and public consultations, are underway at 
Kaiga, Gorakhpur, Chutka and Mahi Banswara, and timely State -level support is 
critical for their progress. The Committee believe that strengthening State coordination 
mechanisms, ensuring timely water and infrastructure provisioning, and integrating 
nuclear power into national clean energy finance frameworks will accelerate 
commissioning timelines and enhance energy security outcomes.  
While appreciating the initiatives undertaken by NPCIL to expand indigenous 
nuclear capacity, the Committee recommend that the Government establish a 
streamlined, single -window regulatory clearance system for repeat reactor designs 
and environmental approvals, revisit fiscal incentives to restore competitive project 
economics. The Committee desire that the Government may explore options to 
consider empowering NPCIL’s Board with greater autonomy in financial sanctioning of 
equity-funded projects. The Committee further desire that mechanisms be developed 
for proactive resolution of State -level issues, enhanced nuclear liability insurance 
availability, and stronger frameworks supporting local employment, women’s 
participation and welfare of Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The Committee believe 
that these reforms will accelerate the timely commissioning of new nuclear projects 
and bolster India’s march towards energy security and net-zero commitments. 

35  
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
As the recommendation mainly relates to policy and is directed at the 
Government, response may be finalised by DAE. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted.  
Establishing streamlined single window regulatory clearance system: 
              Regulatory approval/licensing being provided by the Department/AERB are in 
the process of being integrated with centralized national portals to establish a 
streamlined, single window regulatory clearance and approvals system as part of 
reforms being undertaken for ease of doing business.  
Exploration of options to consider empowering NPCIL’s board with greater autonomy 
in financial sanctioning of equity-funded projects: 
In the scenario of the extensive capacity expansion envisaged towards 
generation of 100GW of nuclear energy for Viksit Bharat by the year 2047, it is highly 
desirable that the Board of Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited is empowered 
with greater financial autonomy.  
Mechanisms for proactive resolution of State-level issues: 
             The government is actively engaging with the state governments at various 
levels for productive resolution of issues related to land acquisition, environmental 
clearances and public consultations and for continued support to ensure smooth 
operation of power plants through strengthening State coordination mechanisms, 
ensuring timely water and infrastructure provisioning. 
Availability of enhanced nuclear liability insurance: 
             The liability for nuclear damage is based on no -fault liability and prompt 
compensation.  The landmark SHANTI 2025 Act aligns India's nuclear liability regime 
with the international liability regime. The operator's liability for nuclear damage has 
been graded based on the type of nuclear installation. Details of the graded liability 
regime are: For Reactors > 1200 MWth: ₹3,000 crore, Reactors > 500 MWth to 1200 
MWth: ₹1,500 crore, Reactors > 250 MWth to 500 MWth: ₹750 crore, Reactors > 50 
MWth to 250 MWth: ₹300 crore, Reactors up to 50 MWth & Fuel Cycle Facilities: ₹100 

36  
crore. Operators must obtain and continuously maintain an insurance policy or other 
approved financial security covering their specific liability cap before commencing 
operations. For installations owned by the Central Government the liability arising out 
of nuclear damages is borne by the central government. Once the operator's liability 
cap is exhausted, the Central Government bears the remaining liability up to the total 
ceiling. India's accession to the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for 
Nuclear Damage (CSC) allows the country to draw from an international 
compensation pool if an incident exceeds domestic caps.  
Local employment, women’s participation and welfare of Project Affected Persons 
(PAPs): 
           The department has a well -structured program for engaging with the local 
population through extensive public awareness and Corporate Social Responsibility 
programs. The department’s nuclear power projects at various locations have 
generated significant local employment opportunities and has resulted in general 
upliftment of the local population. The department also follows a systematic policy for 
empowerment of women and encourages active participation of women in all its 
programs. The department remains fully cognizant of its social responsibility while it 
implements the projects.  The department thrives to attain a judicious, fair and 
compassionate Rehabilitation and Resettlement for the Project Affected Persons.  
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Scaling Domestic Uranium Output Despite Geological Constraints 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that UCIL is mandated to mine and process uranium for 
India’s PHWR fleet, operating multiple underground and open -pit mines with 
processing plants in Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh, and sending uranium 
concentrate to National Fuel Complex (NFC) for fuel fabrication for NPCIL’s reactors. 
The Committee also observe that while Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration 
and Research (AMD) has established about 4,31,000 tonnes of in -situ U3O8 
(Uranium oxide) resources, only about 80,423 tonnes have been transferred to UCIL 
under MMDR/AMCR provisions, of which about 39.22% is already depleted, leaving 
about 60.78% presently available; at current production rates, these reserves can last 

37  
about 40 years if no new reserves are added.  Additionally, the Committee observe 
that new exploration and resource definition efforts by AMD in Jharkhand, Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh are ongoing to support long -term supply 
sustainability.  
The Committee also note that UCIL has highlighted challenges such as ore body 
depth, low ore grades, land acquisition hurdles, public resistance and tailings 
management, which can affect production schedules. Recognising the criticality of ore 
grades in India (0.02 –0.045%) vis -à-vis much higher grades abroad, which raises 
costs and tailings burdens, the Committee underline the need to mitigate grade -
related inefficiencies through technology upgrades and process intensification.  
The Committee recommend that UCIL streamline and upgrade its existing 
mines/mills and commission higher-capacity plants on firm timelines; deploy advanced 
ore-body knowledge (3D seismic, downhole geophysics), sensor -based ore sorting 
and mine automation to improve head grades and reduce unit costs; expand 
brownfield capacity at Turamdih/ Jaduguda/ Tummalapalle while  accelerating 
greenfield centres in Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh with clear stage gates for 
resource-to-reserve conversion with AMD; and adopt best available tailings and water 
management practices proportionate to low -grade, high -throughput conditions. The 
Committee believe that adoption of automation, digital mine planning, advanced 
geophysics, enhanced beneficiation processes and State -level facilitation in land and 
water access will be essential to support NPCIL’s long -term fuel assurance strategy. 
The Committee expect UCIL’s stated plan to double production by 2031 –32 to be 
placed under a quarterly milestone -based review with transparent disclosure to 
DAE/NPCIL, given UCIL’s pivotal role in fuelling the first stage of India’s nuclear 
programme and long-term energy security.  
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 

38  
            Uranium Corporation of India Ltd, Jaduguda has planned to double the 
production by enhancing the existing mine capacity as well as setting up uranium 
mining projects in Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. Details are as under: 
Sl. 
No. Project 
Proposed 
Throughput 
Capacity (TPD) 
Target Year of  
Commissioning Remarks 
1.  
Rohil Uranium 
Project, 
Rajasthan 
2500 2031 
Letter of Intent (LoI) for 
mining lease has been 
awarded by the 
Government of Rajasthan. 
ToR from MoEFCC has 
been granted and 
environmental baseline 
studies completed. EC 
from MoEFCC and other 
statutory clearances such 
as land acquisition from 
Govt of Rajasthan are 
under process. 
2.  
Mosaboni 
Uranium 
Recovery Plant, 
Jharkhand 
3000 2031 
Hindustan Copper Ltd.  
(HCL) has restarted the 
mining operation in 
Jharkhand. HCL has 
agreed to supply copper 
tailings to UCIL for 
uranium recovery. The 
proposal to  restarting 
MURP project will be 
placed before the Board 
for in -principal approval. 
Preparation of revised 
DPR is in progress. 
3. 
New Ore 
Processing 
Plant with 
Tailings Pond in 
Jharkhand 
4500 2036 
Mill will be fed by 
Baglasai-Mechua  and 
Narwapahar Deep 
Projects in Jharkhand. 
4. 
Jajawal Uranium 
Project, 
Chhattisgarh 
450 2036 
The application for mining 
lease has been submitted 
to the Mineral Resources 
Department, Government 
of Chhattisgarh in 
September 2025. Grant of 
LoI is pending from State 
Govt. 
 
After implementation of the above projects, U 308 production capacity of UCIL 
will be doubled by 2036 i.e. 1160 metric (MT) of its present capacity of 580 MT, 

39  
subject to statutory clearances. Lease extension beyond 10% of the area will be 
required to implement the Baglasai-Mechua and Narwapahar Deep Projects in 
Jharkhand to feed the proposed mill in Sr. No. 3 above.   
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Enhancing Corporate Governance, Board Effectiveness and Risk Oversight at 
NPCIL 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that NPCIL has an established Board structure comprising 
Functional Directors, Government (Part -Time) Directors and Independent Directors, 
with 17 Members presently in position against a sanctioned strength of 18, and that 
the process is underway to fill the vacant post of Director (Finance). The Committee 
also observe that NPCIL follows AEC -approved governance guidelines aligned with 
strategic considerations of the nuclear sector, and the Company regularly undergoes 
corporate governance audits, including compliance with DPE Guidelines and 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Listings Obligations and Disclosure 
Requirements (SEBI LODR) requirements as a high -value debt-listed entity, with no 
current legal or regulatory disputes reported. While appreciating initiatives like 
establishment of key Board committees including Audit, Nomination & Remuneration, 
Risk Management, and Stakeholders Relationship Committees and operational 
policies such as Whistle Blower protection and Code of Conduct adherence, the 
Committee recommend that NPCIL further strengthen governance transparency and 
risk oversight by expediting timely appointments to all Board -level positions, 
enhancing capacity of independent Directors to scrutinize management decisions in 
line with expanding nuclear ambitions, and instituting more rigorous monitoring of 
audit findings and risk mitigation actions. Additionally, Committee observe that the 
Risk Management Committee is supported by a Chief Risk Officer and mandated 
quarterly reporting to the Board. The Committee also note that NPCIL has 
implemented Whistle Blower and Vigil Mechanisms, as well as employee 

40  
communication and welfare initiatives. The Committee desire that the Company, in 
view of the large -scale expansion target of adding 54 GW nuclear capacity by 2047, 
adopt globally benchmarked practices on disclosure, stakeholder engagement 
including public perception and employee feedback mechanisms and digital 
governance systems to ensure accountability, financial prudence and ethical 
compliance across its rapidly growing operational footprint.  
The Committee further recommend strengthening Board -level project 
monitoring dashboards covering cost, schedule, safety compliance and procurement 
risks, establishment of structured stakeholder engagement and employee feedback 
frameworks, ensuring transparent and responsible organizational growth. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL is already following the regulatory and other guidelines on corporate 
governance. Efforts are underway to adopt global best practices in various areas 
consistent with the national regulatory practices. Towards digital governance, NPCIL is 
in the process of implementing an across the company Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system.  
There is already a Board level project monitoring committee in NPCIL which 
regularly monitors progress of NPCIL projects. Additionally, in each Board meeting, 
overall status of the company since the last meeting, which includes projects, 
operating stations etc. are presented to the Board, before taking up the agenda. 
However, the recommendation of the Hon’ble committee to set up Board level project 
monitoring dashboards will be explored.  
DAE’s Reply: 
The department is already following the regulatory and other guidelines on 
corporate governance. Efforts are underway to adopt global best practices in various 
areas consistent with the national regulatory practices. Towards digital governance, it 
is in the process of implementing an across the company Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) system.  
 
There is already a Board level project monitoring committee in the department 
which regularly monitors progress of projects. Additionally, in each Board meeting, 
overall status of the company since the last meeting, which includes projects, 
operating stations etc. are presented to the Board, before taking up the agenda. 

41  
However, the recommendation of the Hon’ble committee to set up Board level project 
monitoring dashboards will be explored.  
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

42  
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

43  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  

44 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Regulatory Enablement: Lease-Extension, Single-Window Clearances and State 
Coordination 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that newly identified or deeper extensions of ore bodies 
sometimes extend across existing lease boundaries, yet current statutes do not permit 
seamless lease -area extension, compelling separate leases and clearances which 
influence techno -economic viability, especially at depths beyond 600 metres, as 
highlighted for Narwapahar and other prospects. The Committee further observe that 
UCIL is required to follow multi -agency clearances (environment, forests, AERB, 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Pollution Control Board, land and water 
permissions), along with social -license considerations and site-specific factors (such as 
tailings siting and water availability), which together can lengthen the process of 
initiating mining and ramping up capacity. The Committee observe that these multi -
agency approval pathways can extend project timelines, with possible implications for 
fuel supply planning for PHWR reactors. 
The Committee believe that time -bound single -window clearance mechanisms, 
coordinated between Central and State authorities, and provision for contiguous lease 
extensions for strategic minerals, with due safeguards, will significantly improve project 
viability and uranium production reliability. The Committee recommend that the 
Government may consider to amend relevant provisions under the MMDR/associated 
rules to enable contiguous lease-extension for strategic minerals like uranium when ore 
bodies extend beyond current boundaries, subject to stringent safety and environmental 
safeguards; operationalise a single -window clearance mechanism with statutory 
timelines for uranium mining/milling projects, integrating Central –State approvals and 
parallel processing of consents; institute a State -level facilitation framework covering 
land acquisition, PAP/R&R implementation, assured industrial water linkages, and 
offsite emergency planning; alongwith creating an inter -agency escalation platform 
chaired by DAE to resolve bottlenecks within defined service-level agreements.  

45 
 
The Committee believe that these reforms will meaningfully compress ‘permit -to-
production’ cycles and improve UCIL’s delivery reliability to NPCIL.  
 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 
           The matter is being pursued with DAE for amendment in MMDR Act for 
exemption of one-time mining lease extension up to 10% of the existing lease area for 
uranium minerals.  
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Securing Fuel Supply: Pricing, Imports, Overseas Assets and Strategic 
Stockpiles 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee note that the Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC) ensures complete 
domestic fabrication of fuel assemblies for PHWRs using uranium concentrate supplied 
by UCIL or imports arranged under Government oversight. The Committee observe that 
DAE has pursued long -term supply agreements with multiple international partners to 
ensure continuous fuel availability for safeguarded reactors. Also, as per NPCIL’s 
capacity expansion trajectory, PHWRs alone could require approximately 5,400 tonnes 
U3O8 per annum for about 25 GWe,  while UCIL currently estimates catering to about 
30% of this need, implicating persistent import reliance unless domestic production 
accelerates and diversified supply lines are established. The Committee also observe 
that (a) imports presently originate from Kazakhstan, Russia, Uzbekistan and Canada, 
with an Uzbek long -term contract valid upto 2026; (b) the pricing for domestic 

46 
 
concentrate is cost -plus under the Chief Adviser (Cost) methodology and does not 
reference international prices; and (c) UCIL is not involved in import logistics, which are 
coordinated by DAE/NFC, while a UCIL–NTPC JV is being pursued to acquire overseas 
uranium assets to reduce exposure to market risks. The Committee believe that 
establishing strategic uranium stockpiles, calibrated to refueling cycles and outage 
risks, is essential to sustaining reactor operations during supply disruptions. While 
appreciating the Government’s careful stewardship of import contracts, the Committee 
recommend expediting the UCIL –NTPC JV with clear governance, due diligence 
protocols and sovereign -risk mitigation to acquire stakes in low -cost overseas mines; 
instituting a blended pricing and performance framework for UCIL that preserves cost 
transparency while benchmarking productivity (recovery, availability, unit costs) and 
incentivising efficiency gains; and finalising a policy pathway for Mine Developer -cum-
Operator (MDO) participation under strict DAE oversight to augment domestic output 
where appropriate.  
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
NPCIL has no specific inputs. 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee are noted. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 21 & 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Strengthening NPCIL’s Global Competitiveness and International Market 
Presence 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL)  
has emerged as a technologically capable organisation in the international nuclear  
power landscape, having built strong indigenous design, construction and  
operational capacities through sustained focus on domestic nuclear power  

47 
 
development. The Committee also note that NPCIL has successfully developed and  
scaled its Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) technology from 220 MW to  
700 MW, in close collaboration with BARC and the Department of Atomic Energy,  
thereby establishing a credible technological foundation and a strong safety and  
performance record.  
However, the Committee observe that NPCIL’s international footprint remains  
limited in comparison to major global nuclear vendors, especially in the context of  
larger capacity reactors and scaling up the power generation capacity.  
Additionally, the committee are of the considered view that continued reliance on  
domestic deployment alone may limit its ability to evolve as a globally competitive  
nuclear power company. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that NPCIL adopt a focused and  
time bound internationalisation strategy, by accelerating the development and  
commercialisation of indigenous Light Water Reactors (LWRs) and modular  
reactor technologies aligned with prevailing global market demand. The Committee  
further recommend that NPCIL strengthen strategic partnerships with established  
international nuclear vendors and actively participate in joint ventures and global  
supply chains to enhance credibility and market access. The Committee also  
encourage NPCIL to enhance project execution efficiency, strengthen cost  
competitiveness and explore suitable financing mechanisms for overseas projects.  
Further, the Committee recommend expanding collaboration with international  
regulatory and safety bodies and investing in advanced human resource  
development to enable NPCIL to attain global standards of excellence and  
competitiveness. 
Reply of the Government 
NPCIL Inputs: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted and NPCIL will make 
efforts to implement it appropriately. 
 
 
 

48 
 
DAE’s Reply: 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the department will make 
efforts to implement it appropriately. 
[Department of Atomic Energy] 
(OM No. 3/3(8)/2025-Parl./7957 Dated: 8th July 2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25 & 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          BAIJAYANT PANDA 
03 August, 2026                                 Chairperson 
 12 Shravan, 1948(S)             Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2026-27) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3rd August, 2026 from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
                      Shri Baijayant Panda         -        Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Rajeev Rai 
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
10. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
11. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. John Brittas 
13. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
14 Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
2. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the six draft Reports. 
The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft report s, without any 
changes/modifications: - 
(i)    xxx              xxx                xxx                   xxx        
(ii)   xxx              xxx                xxx                   xxx         
(iii)   xxx              xxx                xxx                   xxx         

50 
 
(iv)    xxx              xxx                xxx                   xxx        
(v)  Action Taken Report based on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL)”; and  
(vi)    xxx              xxx                xxx                   xxx        
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned CPSUs/Ministry/  
Department/C&AG and presentation of the Reports to Parliament soon.   
 
(The Committee, then, took up another agenda for the day) 
/-------/ 
 
  

51 
 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (18 TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘NUCLEAR 
POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (NPCIL)’ 
I. Total number of recommendations  14 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, &13 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
11 
 
78.57% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
00 
 
00.00% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: 
 
NIL 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
00 
 
00.00% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies 
are still awaited: 
 
Sl. Nos.11, 12 & 14 
 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
03 
 
21.43% 
 