 
 
 
INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
(IFCI LIMITED) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
      (2025-26)  
    
         TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
25 


ii 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED 
(IFCI LIMITED) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE) 
[Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of 
the Committee on Public Undertakings (1 8th Lok Sabha) on IFCI 
Limited] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11, December 2025  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11, December 2025 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947(Saka) 
 
 
 


iii 
 
 
CPU No. 1081 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs...... 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER I     REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
27 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration 
28 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are still 
awaited 
29 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) held 
on 5th December, 2025 ................................................................................      38 
 
      II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations   
contained in the Ninth Report of Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on 
IFCI Limited……………………………… .........................................................  40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda - Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri Lalji Verma 
5. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi 
6. Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18. Dr. John Brittas 
19. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22. Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Fifth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Industrial Finance Corporation 
Limited (IFCI Limited)’. 
 
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok Sabha) was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 March, 2025. The Action taken Replies 
to all the 21 recommendations contained in the Report were received from the Department of 
Financial Services, Ministry of Finance on 16 July, 2025. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on, 
05th December, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee (18th Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

1  
R E P O R T 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Public 
Undertakings on “Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited (IFCIL)”, which was pre sented 
to Lok Sabha on 27.03.2025. It contained 21 observations/recommendations. 
2.  Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect the 19 of the 21 
observations/recommendations of the Committee. The introductory paragraphs (Sr. Nos. 1 and 
2) were general observations, on which the Ministry did not offer specific comments. 
 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1,2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 17 
(Chapter II) 
(Total: 12) 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies.                        
Sl. No. Nil 
   (Chapter III) 
(Total: 00) 
 
(iii)   
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration.    
Sl. No. Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
(Total: 00) 
 
  (iv)   
 
Observations/Recommendations to which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited.                                                      
Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 11,12, 18,19, 20, and 21. 
 
(Chapter V) 
(Total: 09) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to 
furnish final Action Taken Notes/replies in respect of observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report. The Committee further desire that the final replies in 
respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which only interim 
replies have been given by Government, should be furnished to the Committee 
expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 

2  
 
SANCTION & DISBURSEMENTS OF LOANS  
(Recommendation No. 3 -Lending Practices and Strategy) 
5. The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended an overhaul of IFCI’s lending 
strategy and portfolio management as under: 
"The Committee observe that IFCI’s lending process and portfolio management are 
governed by its General Lending Policy (GLP) guidelines which are being, updated 
regularly with the approval of Risk Management Committee and Board's approval. 
Despite this, the  company has faced substantial losses, with many loans turning 
into NPAs to the tune of Rs,6515 from the year 2011 -12 to 2021 -22. During FY 
2020-21, IFCI adopted a cautious approach and refrained from sanctioning new 
loans due to macroeconomic conditions and regulatory constraints. The Reserve 
Bank of India’s “Scale -Based Regulation” framework further restricts IFCI from 
granting new loans or investments due to its negative Net Owned Funds (NOF). 
The Committee also note IFCI’s substantial exposure to large  corporate groups 
such as Reliance ADAG, Jaiprakash, Videocon, Amtek, Alok, IL&FS, Essel, and 
IVRCL, were severely affected by the RBI’s Asset Quality Review (AQR) in 2015. 
These exposures significantly contributed to IFCI’s rising NPAs, underscoring the 
inadequacies in its credit risk assessment during that period. In view of this 
Committee recommend that IFCI should continue to suspend lending during its 
restructuring phases. The Committee further desire that the Company must 
prioritize the followings to prevent similar losses in the future: 
(i) overhauling its credit appraisal and monitoring frameworks, 
(ii) enhanced due diligence processes, 
(iii) stricter exposure limits, and 
(iv) Institution of robust stress-testing mechanisms 
Additionally, in future IFCI should diversify its portfolio and focus on lending to only 
resilient sectors with lower default risks. The Company should also adopt a cautious 
approach toward lending to large corporate groups, ensuring such exposures are 
backed by robust guarantees and securities.” 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" It is informed that lending remains suspended as on date.  
As regards the way forward for the IFCI Group, an Independent Committee of 
Experts appointed by Department of Financial Services (DFS), chaired by Shri 
Challa Sreenivasulu Setty (Presently SBI Chairman) recommended “Consolidation 
of IFCI Group” from a multi stakeholder’s perspective with a focus on safeguarding 
shareholder’s interest.   
The same was communicated by DFS to IFCI Ltd on November 22, 2024. Pursuant 
to the said communication, IFCI appointed M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited as 
Transaction Advisor/consultant for consolidation/way forward of the IFCI Group. 
The same entails prepar ation of a robust Business Plan, which shall address the 
observations of the COPU alongside. The consultant shall assess the lending 
landscape along with IFCI’s past experience and expertise; on the basis of which 
sectoral exposures shall be proposed. The consultant shall also review / formulate 
policies / SOP based on business requirements, applicable Regulatory / Statutory 
framework and best industry practices. IFCI shall be guided by the said plan."  
 

3  
SANCTION & DISBURSEMENTS OF LOANS  
(Recommendation No. 4 - Regional Distribution of Loans) 
7. The Committee, in their Report, had observed the following regarding regional 
distribution of loans: 
‘’ The Committee note a highly skewed regional pattern in IFCI’s loan 
disbursements. Maharashtra and Delhi alone accounted for approximately 65% of 
total disbursements, while states like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya 
Pradesh, and Andhra Pradesh received less than 0.5% each. The Committee after 
analysing the regional pattern of distribution observe that loans were disbursed to 
the following 
States in the decreasing order as: Maharashtra (33.54%); Delhi (31.02%); 
Telangana (9.96%); Tamil Nadu (7.17%); Karnataka (6.68%); West Bengal 
(6.20%); Gujarat (3.32%); Rajasthan (.5%); Uttar Pradesh (.48%); Chandigarh 
(.42%); Madhya Pradesh (.34%); Orissa  (.23%); Kerala (.11%); Chhattisgarh 
(.06%); Andhra Pradesh (.03%) and Bihar (.03%). Maharashtra and Delhi combined 
got around 65% of total loans disbursed by the Company amounting to Rs. 28,315 
crores since 2011-12 and the States such as Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh etc. all received less than 50% percent of total loan 
disbursements. This regional disparity contradicts the principles of equitable 
financial development and inclusion. The Committee strongly recommends th at 
IFCI adopt a more balanced approach to regional loan distribution upon resuming 
its lending operations. The Committee further advise that efforts should be made to 
channel resources toward underserved states by promoting targeted schemes, 
identifying vi able projects, and collaborating with local enterprises. Establishing 
regional offices in low-access areas and designing incentives for projects in these 
regions would ensure that IFCI’s operations contribute to inclusive national 
development.” 
 
8.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" Noted for suitable consideration, if found viable as part of the business plan being 
formulized by IFCI."  
SANCTION & DISBURSEMENTS OF LOANS  
(Recommendation No. 5 - Sectoral Analysis of Loan Disbursements) 
9. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended the following regarding sectoral 
distribution of loans: 
" The Committee observe sectoral concentration in IFCI’s loan disbursements. IFCI 
has disbursed loans amounting to ₹11,515.65 crore to projects in various sectors, 
majorly Infrastructure (49.27%), Manufacturing (15.42%) and Real Estate (13.85%) 
etc., other s ectors included Retail, NBFC, EPC Construction etc. Manufacturing 
accounted for over a quarter of the total loans disbursed since 2011-12, followed by 
energy infrastructure and real estate. Conversely, critical sectors such as Social & 
Commercial Infrast ructure, Communication Infrastructure, Retail & Trading, and 
Mining & Explorations received less than 2% of total disbursements combined, 
amounting to ₹2,588 crores. Furthermore, IFCI’s exposure to large corporate 
groups in the manufacturing sector was adv ersely impacted by the RBI’s Asset 
Quality Review (AQR) in 2015, leading to significant credit losses. Despite this, 

4  
manufacturing loans have remained resilient compared to other sectors. The 
Committee recommend that once IFCI resumes lending, it should prioritize sectoral 
diversification. Greater attention must be given to underfunded but high -potential 
sectors such as Communication Infrastructure, Retail, and Social Infrastructure, 
which align with the principles of financial inclusion and long -term economic 
development.” 
 
10.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" Noted for suitable consideration, if found viable as part of the business plan 
being formulized by IFCI."  
11. The Committee in its original report had pointed out that IFCI had incurred 
substantial losses, with many of the loans turning into NPAs amounting to Rs. 6515 crore 
from 2011-12 to 2021-22. Further, the Committee observed that this was despite the IFCI’s 
lending process and portfolio management being governed by General lending policy 
(GLP) guidelines. To this extent, the Committee had recommended overhauling of IFCI’s 
credit appraisal and monitoring framework, enhanced due diligence process, stricter 
exposure limits including institution of robust stress -testing mechanisms, while IFCI 
continue to keep its lending activity in suspension during its restructuring phase. Further, 
the Committee had also pointed out the issues regarding uneven regional pattern al ong 
with sectoral concentration visible in IFCI’s loan disbursement approach. In this context, 
the committee noted that regional disparities do not align with the broader goals of 
equitable financial development and inclusion. Accordingly, it encouraged IFCI to consider 
a more balanced strategy, with greater emphasis on sectoral diversification, as it resumes 
its lending activities. The Committee note that lending operations remain suspended while 
the core revival strategy shall revolve around the formulati on of a new Business Plan by 
an appointed consultant. Accordingly, the respective plan is also expected to take 
cognizance of the Committee's concerns regarding credit appraisal, risk management, and 
issues such as regional and sectoral diversification. Since a substantial part of the entire 
future lending strategy is contingent on the finalization of this Business Plan, the 
Committee treat this reply as interim. The Committee, therefore, expect that the new plan 
will incorporate not only stringent risk mit igation frameworks, but also a clear and 
equitable strategy for balanced regional and sectoral lending. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the key features of the approved Business Plan, as and when the same is 
available. 
NON-PERFORMING ASSETS (NPAs) AND THEIR RECOVERY 
(Recommendation No. 6) 

5  
12. The Committee, in their Report, had noted the status of Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) 
and recommended: 
" The Committee observe that during the past decade, IFCI sanctioned and 
disbursed loans totalling ₹40,199 crore, of which ₹13,188 crore (32.8% of total 
disbursements) were downgraded to non -performing account (NPA) status. IFCI 
managed to recover ₹4,338 cro re from such NPAs, but as of March 31, 2022, the 
Gross NPAs still stand at ₹6,515 crore, reflecting a significant burden on the 
company's financial health. The Committee note that IFCI’s NPA ratio has increased 
significantly from 11.4% in FY 2011 -12 to 90. 67% as of FY 2021 -22, reflecting a 
sharp deterioration over the past decade. This is also to be seen in the context of 
the banking sector, which witnessed a decline in Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) in 
the last decade. This increase is attributed to its inability to disburse fresh loans and 
the necessity to sell standard assets alongside NPA recovery efforts to maintain 
liquidity. Additionally, IFCI’s interest income is negative, with annual interest 
payments on borrowings amounting to ₹600 crore. This has re sulted in a vicious 
cycle, with IFCI holding only 10% conventional assets while over 90% of its portfolio 
is comprised of non -performing loans. Despite these challenges, the Committee 
note that IFCI has been proactive in maintaining consistent debt repayme nts. By 
leveraging cash generated from NPA recoveries and prepayments of standard 
assets, IFCI collected ₹725.46 crore in FY 2020–21 through recoveries from NPAs 
and Security Receipts (SRs). Furthermore, IFCI repaid ₹3,151.74 crore in rupee -
denominated debt and ₹32.4 crore in foreign -currency debt without any delays or 
defaults. The Committee appreciate IFCI's diligent efforts in securing projects that 
are expected to generate approximately ₹312 crore in fee -based income from 
advisory services over the next 6 to 8 years. These achievements underscore IFCI's 
potential for revenue diversification and resilience in difficult financial 
circumstances. To strengthen IFCI’s recovery strategies and improve financial 
performance, the Committee recommend several measu res aimed at addressing 
the challenges posed by high levels of NPAs and optimizing the recovery process. 
Firstly, IFCI should conduct comprehensive and periodic analyses of NPAs. These 
analyses must focus on identifying trends, underlying causes, and emerg ing 
patterns. Secondly, the Committee emphasize the importance of risk segmentation. 
IFCI should classify NPAs based on factors such as severity, recovery potential, 
and prevailing industry trends. By segmenting NPAs, the Company can prioritize 
recovery ef forts for accounts with high financial recovery potential or significant 
portfolio impact, ensuring resources are allocated effectively. Thirdly, the 
Committee emphasize the need to strengthen legal frameworks, mechanisms like 
the NCLT and SARFAESI Act pla y a critical role in recovering NPAs. IFCI should 
enhance its legal capabilities by investing in a robust legal team, expediting case 
closures, and coordinating effectively with external legal experts. Additionally, IFCI 
should focus on expanding its asset base through synergies with external investors. 
Lastly, the Committee recommend biannual reporting of IFCI’s NPA status. These 
updates should provide a comprehensive overview of recovery progress, legal 
resolutions, and strategic adjustments in NPA management.” 
 
13.       The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" IFCI undertakes comprehensive and quarterly review of entire NPA portfolio and 
places it to the Board of Directors for information and direction. Recently, during the 
Board meeting dated May 15, 2025, the Board was apprised of the NPA portfolio 

6  
as on March 31, 2025.  
As regards emerging patterns / trends of NPAs, it is submitted that IFCI has not 
taken fresh exposures since December 2020 and the Gross NPA of IFCI has been 
declining since FY 2019. Standard accounts have been either closed / prepaid and 
the proceeds have been utilised towards IFCI’s debt servicing obligations. 
As regards segmenting of NPAs, it is submitted that as on March 31, 2025, IFCI’s 
portfolio of NPA has Standalone, Consortium & Multiple Banking Accounts which 
comprise 8%, 24% and 68% of the portfolio respectively. Further, 69% of the NPA 
accounts are unde r IBC while 31% of the NPAs are non -IBC. As regards the 
prioritising of recovery efforts from these accounts, it is submitted that IFCI has been 
focusing on resolution of stressed assets/NPAs by adopting multi -pronged 
approaches. These routes through which IFCI pursues recovery include: 
 
       •  Settlements 
       •  Assignments 
       •  Restructuring 
       •  Insolvency Resolution through NCLT 
       •  Personal Insolvency against guarantors 
       •  Enforcement of security under SARFAESI Act, 2002 
       •  DRT/OL/other legal proceedings 
 
Recovery from NPAs has been a major means of augmenting the liquidity of IFCI 
over the past few years, which has aided in the company’s debt servicing. 
Since FY 2019, IFCI has recovered ₹6,746 crore from NPAs through the following 
modes of recovery: 
 
 
Recovery 
Modes  FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY 
2023 
FY 
2024 FY2025 Total 
Assignment           12              0              7          127            97          414  58 715 
SRs         555            47            27          257            74            50  59 1,069 
Follow Up         187          283          204          421          162            73  57 1,387 
SARFAESI, 
DRT, OL             8            91            59              3            24            92  59 336 
NCLT         448          222            73          123          185          161  250 1,462 
Settlement         553          202          147          449          172          158  97 1,778 
Total NPA     1,762          845          516      1,381          714          948  580 6,746 
  
As regards the legal capabilities and robustness of the legal team, it is submitted that 
as on March 31, 2025, IFCI has 117 employees which comprises 16 Officers with 
legal qualification and expertise. Accordingly, ~14% of the officers of IFCI have legal 
expertise.   
As regards, expanding the assets base through synergies with external investors, it 
is submitted that once the contours of the business plan are finalised, IFCI shall 
explore collaboration with external investors.  
IFCI undertakes comprehensive and quarterly review of entire NPA portfolio and 
places it to a sub -committee of Board for review and to the Board of Directors for 
information and direction. As advised by COPU, IFCI shall report the same on 
biannual basis."  

7  
 
14. The Committee take positive note of IFCI's proactive and multi-pronged 
approach to NPA management, which has resulted in swift resolution of 
stressed assets/ NPAs and augmenting liquidity of IFCI alongwith significant 
recovery of ₹6,746 crore since FY 2019 . The Committee further note that 
detailed and mode-wise recovery data demonstrates a diligent and persistent 
effort to resolve all lingering issues. The Committee are content to note that 
IFCI has readily accepted their recommendation for biannual rep orting of its 
NPA status. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that such actions reflect 
a strong commitment of the Government and IFCI towards improving financial 
health and transparency, and therefore urge IFCI to continue such effective 
recovery efforts. 
 
FINANCIAL DECLINE – NEGATIVE NET OWNED FUND (NOF) 
 (Recommendation No. 11) 
15. The Committee, in their Report, had noted the negative net owned fund of the Company 
and recommended: 
" The Committee observe that IFCI’s Net Owned Fund (NOF) has drastically 
declined from ₹2,623.43 crore in FY 2017 to a negative ₹2,874.66 crore as of FY 
2022. This significant decline has resulted in IFCI being ineligible to operate as a 
Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) under Section 45-IA of the RBI Act, 1934. 
Moreover, IFCI’s loan portfolio has also shrunk from ₹14,530 crore in FY 2013 to 
₹7,339.90 crore in FY 2022, reflecting its inability to sanction new loans since FY 
2019-20, further compounded by  the growing NPAs, which stood at ₹6,515 crore 
as of FY 2022.The sharp decline in IFCI’s NOF, coupled with its growing NPAs and 
shrinking loan portfolio, signals a deepening financial crisis that is restricting the 
company’s ability to maintain solvency. W hile the loss of regulatory eligibility to 
operate as an NBFC has severely impacted IFCI's core lending operations, the 
Committee acknowledge that IFCI's role as an NBFC has historically been vital to 
its capacity to raise funds, access capital markets, an d contribute to national 
development projects. The Company’s expertise in project financing, advisory 
services, and government scheme implementation remains significant, even amid 
its financial challenges. The Committee recommend that the Government should  
reassess the feasibility of maintaining IFCI’s NBFC status, even with the current 
negative NOF, due to its strategic importance and the potential benefits it offers to 
the broader financial ecosystem. IFCI’s long -standing role in providing financial 
services, including project financing and government scheme support, is crucial to 
its ability to attract funding from various sources, including bond markets, 
institutional investors, and development finance initiatives. Maintaining NBFC status 
will allow the Company to continue accessing these funding avenues and support 

8  
the government’s development agenda. By retaining its NBFC status, IFCI can 
ensure its presence an integral part of the government’s development initiatives. 
Finally, the Committee believe that IFCI should retain its NBFC status, despite the 
current challenges posed by the negative Net Owned Funds (NOF). The Company’s 
long-standing role as an NBFC provides it with essential access to capital markets 
and funding channels that are critical to sustaining its operations and supporting 
national growth initiatives. The Committee would again recommend that the Ministry 
work with IFCI to explore avenues for restoring the company’s NOF and regulatory. 
compliance, while maintaining its NBFC status, so that it can continue playing a key 
role in the country’s financial ecosystem. The Committee expect to be informed of 
the actions taken in response to these recommendations and look forward to the 
implementation of a strategic framework that ensures IFCI’s long-term viability and 
continued contribution to India’s development.” 
 
16.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" As regards the augmentation of Net owned fund of IFCI it may be noted that GoI 
has infused ₹2,100 crore as equity share capital between FY 2018 and FY 2025. 
While the NOF of IFCI as on March 31, 2025 is negative ₹811 crore (Net -worth of 
₹1,736 crore), the  business plan formulated by the consultant/TA shall factor 
compliance with the regulatory requirements within a specified timeframe 
acceptable to the Regulator.  
The aspects mentioned alongside such as IFCI’s long term viability, role in the 
country’s financial ecosystem, maintaining NBFC status, assessing funding 
avenues and supporting the Government’s development initiatives shall be 
comprehensively covered as pa rt of the Business plan being formulated by the 
consultant."  
 
EXPLORING GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR REVIVAL 
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
17. The Committee, in their Ninth Report, stressed upon the need for a sustainable revival 
plan and recommended: 
" The Committee have been informed that the Government has already provided 
substantial capital support to IFCI, with an emphasis on evaluating further options 
for revival. Additionally, a consultant has been hired to explore possible strategies 
for IFCI’s r evival. The government is involved in actively reviewing these options 
and is looking into ways to continue supporting the company’s recovery. Over the 
years, government capital infusion has been necessary to maintain the company’s 
solvency, especially giv en its significant challenges related to Non -Performing 
Assets (NPAs) and a declining loan portfolio. As mentioned above, IFCI's Net 
Owned Fund (NOF) stands at negative ₹2,874.66 crore, down from ₹2,623.43 crore 
in FY 2017. Furthermore, IFCI's loan portfolio has shrunk significantly, from ₹14,530 
crore in FY 2013 to ₹7,339.90 crore as of March 31, 2022, reflecting the company’s 
inability to sanction new loans due to poor financial health. The Gross NPAs as of 
March 31, 2022, stand at ₹6,515 crore, with ₹13, 188 crore (32.8%) of total 
disbursed loans having been downgraded to NPA status. While Government 
support has been crucial for IFCI’s survival, there is a pressing need to assess the 
long-term sustainability of such support. The reliance on continuous capital infusion, 
without clear strategies for improving IFCI's financial health, could result in a 

9  
recurring dependency on government funding. This reliance could undermine the 
company's ability to recover autonomously, making it vulnerable to financial 
instability in the future. The interest expenses on borrowings have been around 
₹600 crore annually, which exacerbates the company’s financial pressure, as it 
struggles to generate enough income to cover its liabilities. This cycle of borrowing 
to pay off interest creates a challenging financial environment for IFCI, hindering its 
ability to resume lendin g activities and limiting its potential for growth. The 
Committee recommend that any future Government support be conditional on IFCI 
demonstrating a clear and sustainable financial recovery plan. This plan should 
include strategies for improving revenue s treams, such as expanding its advisory 
and consultancy roles in Government schemes, which can generate fee -based 
income. The Company should also focus on monetizing non-core assets to improve 
liquidity. The funds raised from asset monetization can be used to repay outstanding 
liabilities and improve IFCI’s capital base, which currently suffers from its negative 
Net Owned Funds. Furthermore, the Committee suggest that IFCI explore strategic 
partnerships with private investors and financial institutions to di versify its sources 
of capital, ensuring that the Company is not solely reliant on government support. 
The Government’s capital infusion should be part of a broader, long -term strategy 
for stabilizing and revitalizing the company, with clear milestones for financial health 
improvement.” 
 
18.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" As detailed in response to COPU recommendation 7 and 11."  
 
19. The Committee while taking cognizance of the steps such as appointment of 
consultant, capital infusion, proposal for a comprehensive business plan etc. by the 
Government, are still concerned regarding the persistent negative Net Owned Fund (NOF), 
alongside other ongoing issues which affects IFCI's normal functioning and regulatory 
status as a NBFC. Further, the Committee while acknowledging the assurance given by the 
Ministry expounding that the forthcoming Business Plan addresses the issue of restoration 
of NOF, While the response offers general direction, a more defined and time -sensitive 
strategy could enhance its impact. The Committee, therefore, treat this as an interim reply 
and strongly urge the Ministry to ensure that the final Business Plan encompasses a clear 
and time bound roadmap for resolving all issues along with making the NOF positive. The 
Committee further desire that any future Government support be aligned to the successful 
implementation of this roadmap. 
 
ROLE OF IFCI AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 
 (Recommendation No. 18) 
20. The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended a detailed review and 
restructuring of the IFCI group: 
" In light of the diverse performance outcomes across its subsidiaries, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry focus on strengthening and 

10  
expanding the core businesses of subsidiaries that have shown consistent growth 
and profitability, such as SHCIL, IIDL, and select subsidiaries of IFIN. For 
subsidiaries with negative net worth or losses, such as IFL, SDMS, SSIL, and some 
IFIN subsidiaries, IFCI should consider divesting from non -performing or non-core 
subsidiaries, provided it is in the best interest of IFCI and its stakeholders. The 
proposed consolidation of IFIN and SHCIL should be evaluated carefully to assess 
synergies and challenges that may arise from merging these two entities. IFCI must 
ensure that the consolidation process is well -structured and will lead to greater 
operational efficiency and improved financial outcomes for the company. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommend the establishment of a regular monitoring 
and review mechanism for all subsidiaries, in collaboration with the Ministry. This 
mechanism should be designed to communicate IFCI’s strategy, goals, and 
performance expectations clearly to all subsidiaries, ensuring a u nified approach 
towards growth and financial stability. Regular reviews will help in assessing the 
subsidiaries’ progress and ensuring their financial health in the increasingly 
competitive market environment. Finally, the Committee observes that a detaile d 
review of the operations and strategies of IFCI and its subsidiaries is necessary to 
turn around the performance of underperforming entities or consider the 
consolidation of the entire IFCI group. The Committee expects that the independent 
committee’s report will provide insights into the way forward for IFCI, and it would 
like to be informed of the actions taken based on this report at the next stage.” 
 
21.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
" As regards the way forward for the IFCI Group, an Independent Committee of 
Experts appointed by Department of Financial Services (DFS), chaired by Shri 
Challa Sreenivasulu Setty (Presently SBI Chairman) recommended “Consolidation 
of IFCI Group” from a multi stakeholder’s perspective with a focus on safeguarding 
shareholder’s interest.   
The same was communicated by DFS on November 22, 2024. Pursuant to the said 
communication, IFCI has appointed M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited as a 
consultant/Transaction Advisor for consolidation /way forward of the IFCI 
Group.  The same entails preparatio n of a robust Business Plan, which shall 
address the observations alongside. 
As advised by COPU, once the contours of the business plan / way forward are 
finalized, the same shall be informed.” 
 
 
ROLE AND RELEVANCE OF IFCI 
 (Recommendation No. 19 and 20) 
22. The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended the following regarding the role 
and relevance of IFCI: 
" The Committee acknowledge that IFCI has played a pioneering role in 
development financing since its establishment in 1948, as India’s first Development 
Financial Institution (DFI). Over the decades, IFCI has not only been instrumental 
in direct financing but has also co -promoted key institutions that have significantly 
strengthened India’s financial and capital markets, including the National Stock 
Exchange of India Limited (NSE), ICRA, and StockHolding Corporation of India 
Limited (SHCIL). These institutions have played vital roles in deepening financial 

11  
inclusion, improving market efficiency, and enhancing the overall functioning of 
India’s financial markets. The Committee appreciate these contributions and 
underscores IFCI’s continued importance in shaping India’s financial landscape. 
Additionally, the C ommittee note that IFCI’s extensive experience in project and 
corporate finance has positioned the company as a skilled project appraisal agency. 
It has effectively utilized this expertise in roles such as acting as a Project Monitoring 
Agency for several significant Government schemes, including the Performance 
Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes. These schemes aim to bolster manufacturing 
capacity, promote job creation, and enhance India’s industrial capabilities in critical 
sectors. The Committee further reco gnize IFCI’s appointment as a Verification 
Agency for claims under the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS) 
and its role in the India Semiconductor Mission (ISM), which supports the 
government's focus on 
promoting domestic manufacturing and technological advancements. These 
responsibilities align well with India’s growth strategy, positioning IFCI as a key 
contributor to the country's future development, especially in fostering domestic 
capabilities in ele ctronics and IT hardware, medical devices, and other strategic 
sectors. The Committee also take note of IFCI’s subsidiaries, such as Stock Holding 
Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL) and IFCI Venture Capital Funds Limited 
(IVCF), which significantly contr ibute to the digital economy. SHCIL’s services, 
including e - stamping, depository participation, and central record -keeping, have 
facilitated seamless and efficient financial transactions, enhancing the integrity and 
transparency of the financial system. Furthermore, SHCIL’s role in the social sector 
through initiatives like managing venture capital funds for Scheduled Castes (VCF- 
SC) and Backward Classes (VCF -BC) demonstrates IFCI's commitment to 
promoting entrepreneurship and economic empowerment among m arginalized 
sections of society. These initiatives are vital for fostering inclusive growth and 
supporting the government’s agenda of financial inclusion and entrepreneurship 
development. The Committee is also well aware of IFCI's involvement in Sugar 
Development Fund (SDF) projects and its contributions to job creation and 
economic growth through schemes in sectors such as sugar, electronics, IT 
hardware, medical devices, automobiles, and textiles. The Committee commend 
IFCI for its continued efforts to co ntribute to critical sectors of the economy, which 
align with national priorities and have a lasting impact on job creation and sectoral 
growth. 
  Despite these contributions, the Committee acknowledge the significant 
challenges faced by IFCI. Among the foremost challenges is honoring scheduled 
liability payments amid liquidity constraints. While the government’s equity capital 
infusion has provided  some support, the Committee understands that managing 
liquidity and monetizing assets will be critical for IFCI’s survival. Moreover, as IFCI 
transitions from a traditional lending institution to an advisory role, the retention and 
effective deployment of its skilled professionals will be key to generating profitable 
revenue streams that enhance long-term sustainability. The Committee recommend 
that IFCI should explore corporate restructuring to leverage synergies within its 
group and address underperform ing subsidiaries. This restructuring should focus 
on divesting from non-profitable ventures, reducing organizational complexity, and 
creating a leaner organization with a stronger bottom line. The Committee suggest 
that IFCI prioritize expanding its advisory services, a sector that offers a significant 
opportunity for revenue enhancement. Expanding advisory business across 
multiple sectors will not only diversify income streams but also reduce reliance on 

12  
rental income, thus ensuring that IFCI can meet its liability repayments and sustain 
its operations. The Committee also acknowledge that IFCI has already signed a 
revenue contract of ₹500 crore with the Government of India. This contract, along 
with IFCI’s transformation into an advisory entity, positions the company uniquely 
within India’s financial landscape. With its rich history, expertise in project appraisal, 
and continued involvement in critical government initiatives, IFCI remains a vital 
player in shaping India’s economic and commercial development. By addressing its 
challenges, capitalizing on emerging opportunities, and effectively managing its 
core strengths, IFCI can continue to play a prominent role in the country’s growth 
trajectory. In light of these considerations, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Ministry and IFCI jointly assess and implement a balanced strategy for the 
company’s long -term sustainability. This strategy should not rely on ad -hoc 
solutions but should involve a comprehensive restructuring of IFCI’s operations and 
processes. The restructuring process must be aligned with the recommendations of 
the independent consultant’s report and consistent with the Ministry’s policy 
directions.” 
 
23.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
“The aspects mentioned alongside shall be comprehensively covered as part of the 
Business plan being formulated by the consultant.” 
 
MANPOWER 
 (Recommendation No.21) 
24. The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended the following regarding the 
human resource management in the Company: 
" The Committee note that the present staff strength of 117 regular employees at 
IFCI is the lowest in the last 13 years and manpower strength of regular employees 
has been coming down in IFCI for various reasons such as superannuation 
voluntary retirements, resignations, deaths etc. The Committee believe that working 
with limited human capital is very challenging thus retaining the skilled personnel is 
of key importance for the Company. The Committee note that in order to keep skilled 
and professional personnel, IFCI have taken many steps such as cross -functional 
Working Groups job rotation, job enrichment etc. But at the same time Committee 
are aware of the fact that recovery of unresolved and chronic NPA cases, is of 
utmost importance for IFCI, and to ach ieve this objective, versatile, skilled and 
professional manpower is required. The Committee, though have observed that the 
Company has taken steps towards retaining skilled manpower but due to its 
depleting human resources and the Company’s foray into various new fields it may 
feel resource crunch. Therefore, the Committee would like to recommend that to 
the controlling Ministry and IFCI management to strengthen recruitment process 
with robust mechanism and take appropriate steps to invite required skills to deal 
with Company’s professional need in current situation. The Committee has further 
observed from the reply of the Ministry that Government of India becoming major 
shareholder in IFCI, Staff Accountability Policy was formulated in the year 2014 
which has been amended from time to time. After the Staff Accountability policy was 
put in place, staff accountability was examined in 163 non -performing accounts. In 
4 loan accounts, irregularities/lapses were attributed to the staff. In 3 such accounts, 

13  
major penalty was imposed in respect of 6 officers, out of which 1 officer was 
removed from service. Major penalty was also imposed on 1 more officer as a result 
of Staff Accountability exercise. The Committee hope that the policy will strengthen 
staff/officers accountability towards the Company and will result into less NPAs and 
lapses on Company’s part.” 
 
25.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
 
“As part of the business plan, the consultant shall map the skill set / knowledge base 
of resources across IFCI Group, post which need based recruitment shall be taken 
up.  ” 
 
26. The Committee note that the strategic way forward, as recommended by an 
Independent Committee of Experts, is the "Consolidation of the IFCI Group" . This is a 
significant decision that addresses the Committee's recommendations for a 
comprehensive review, restructuring, and future manpower planning. However, as the 
detailed Business Plan for this consolidation is currently being formulated by the 
appointed consultant and is yet to be finalized, the Committee consider this reply to be 
interim. The Committe e urge that the final plan address not only the corporate and 
subsidiary structure but also the critical need for retaining and recruiting skilled 
manpower to execute the new strategy effectively. The Committee look forward to being 
apprised of the final consolidation and manpower plan. 
  

14  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
NON-PERFORMING ASSETS (NPAs) AND THEIR RECOVERY 
Recommendation (No. 6) 
 
1. The Committee observe that during the past decade, IFCI sanctioned and disbursed 
loans totaling ₹40,199 crore, of which ₹13,188 crore (32.8% of total disbursements) were 
downgraded to non-performing account (NPA) status. IFCI managed to recover ₹4,338 crore 
from such NPAs, but as of March 31, 2022, the Gross NPAs still stand at ₹6,515 crore, 
reflecting a significant burden on the company's financial health. The Committee note that 
IFCI’s NPA ratio has increased significantly from 11.4% in FY 2011 -12 to 90.67% as of FY 
2021-22, reflecting a sharp deterioration over the past decade. This is also to be seen in the 
context of the banking sector, which witnessed a decline in Non -Performing Assets (NPAs) 
in the last decade. This increase is attributed to its inabi lity to disburse fresh loans and the 
necessity to sell standard assets alongside NPA recovery efforts to maintain liquidity. 
Additionally, IFCI’s interest income is negative, with annual interest payments on borrowings 
amounting to ₹600 crore. This has res ulted in a vicious cycle, with IFCI holding only 10% 
conventional assets while over 90% of its portfolio is comprised of non -performing loans. 
Despite these challenges, the Committee note that IFCI has been proactive in maintaining 
consistent debt repaymen ts. By leveraging cash generated from NPA recoveries and 
prepayments of standard assets, IFCI collected ₹725.46 crore in FY 2020 –21 through 
recoveries from NPAs and Security Receipts (SRs). Furthermore, IFCI repaid ₹3,151.74 
crore in rupee-denominated debt and ₹32.4 crore in foreign-currency debt without any delays 
or defaults. The Committee appreciate IFCI's diligent efforts in securing projects that are 
expected to generate approximately ₹312 crore in fee-based income from advisory services 
over the next 6 to 8 years. These achievements underscore IFCI's potential for revenue 
diversification and resilience in difficult financial circumstances. To strengthen IFCI’s 
recovery strategies and improve financial performance, the Committee recommend several 
measures aimed at addressing the challenges posed by high levels of NPAs and optimizing 
the recovery process. Firstly, IFCI should conduct comprehensive and periodic analyses of 
NPAs. These analyses must focus on identifying trends, underlying causes, and emergi ng 
patterns. Secondly, the Committee emphasize the importance of risk segmentation. IFCI 
should classify NPAs based on factors such as severity, recovery potential, and prevailing 
industry trends. By segmenting NPAs, the Company can prioritize recovery eff orts for 
accounts with high financial recovery potential or significant portfolio impact, ensuring 
resources are allocated effectively. Thirdly, the Committee emphasize the need to strengthen 
legal frameworks, mechanisms like the NCLT and SARFAESI Act play  a critical role in 
recovering NPAs. IFCI should enhance its legal capabilities by investing in a robust legal 
team, expediting case closures, and coordinating effectively with external legal experts. 
Additionally, IFCI should focus on expanding its asset base through synergies with external 

15  
investors. Lastly, the Committee recommend biannual reporting of IFCI’s NPA status. These 
updates should provide a comprehensive overview of recovery progress, legal resolutions, 
and strategic adjustments in NPA management. 
Reply of the Government 
“IFCI undertakes comprehensive and quarterly review of entire NPA portfolio and places it to the 
Board of Directors for information and direction. Recently, during the Board meeting dated May 
15, 2025, the Board was apprised of the NPA portfolio as on March 31, 2025.  
As regards emerging patterns / trends of NPAs, it is submitted that IFCI has not taken fresh 
exposures since December 2020 and the Gross NPA of IFCI has been declining since FY 2019. 
Standard accounts have been either closed / prepaid and the proceeds have  been utilised 
towards IFCI’s debt servicing obligations. 
As regards segmenting of NPAs, it is submitted that as on March 31, 2025, IFCI’s portfolio of NPA 
has Standalone, Consortium & Multiple Banking Accounts which comprise 8%, 24% and 68% of 
the portfolio respectively. Further, 69% of the NPA accounts are unde r IBC while 31% of the 
NPAs are non -IBC. As regards the prioritising of recovery efforts from these accounts, it is 
submitted that IFCI has been focusing on resolution of stressed assets/NPAs by adopting multi -
pronged approaches. These routes through which IFCI pursues recovery include: 
       •  Settlements 
       •  Assignments 
       •  Restructuring 
       •  Insolvency Resolution through NCLT 
       •  Personal Insolvency against guarantors 
       •  Enforcement of security under SARFAESI Act, 2002 
       •  DRT/OL/other legal proceedings 
Recovery from NPAs has been a major means of augmenting the liquidity of IFCI over the past 
few years, which has aided in the company’s debt servicing. 
Since FY 2019, IFCI has recovered ₹6,746 crore from NPAs through the following modes of 
recovery: 
Recovery 
Modes  FY2019 FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY 
2023 
FY 
2024 FY2025 Total 
Assignment           12              0              7          127            97          414  58 715 
SRs         555            47            27          257            74            50  59 1,069 
Follow Up         187          283          204          421          162            73  57 1,387 
SARFAESI, 
DRT, OL             8            91            59              3            24            92  59 336 
NCLT         448          222            73          123          185          161  250 1,462 
Settlement         553          202          147          449          172          158  97 1,778 
Total NPA     1,762          845          516      1,381          714          948  580 6,746 
  
As regards the legal capabilities and robustness of the legal team, it is submitted that as on March 
31, 2025, IFCI has 117 employees which comprises 16 Officers with legal qualification and 
expertise. Accordingly, ~14% of the officers of IFCI have legal expertise.   
As regards, expanding the assets base through synergies with external investors, it is submitted 

16  
that once the contours of the business plan are finalised, IFCI shall explore collaboration with 
external investors.  
IFCI undertakes comprehensive and quarterly review of entire NPA portfolio and places it to a 
sub-committee of Board for review and to the Board of Directors for information and direction. As 
advised by COPU, IFCI shall report the same on biannual basis.” 
 
                    [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]   
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Fresh Lending Ceased Since FY 2020-21 
Recommendation (No. 7) 
 
2. The Committee observe that IFCI, due to significant asset -liability mismatch (ALM) 
issues, ceased its fresh lending operations starting from FY 2020 -21. Committee understand 
that the cessation of fresh lending was a necessary step to address the severe ALM  issues. 
However, this has halted the company’s ability to generate new income from lending, thereby 
exacerbating its financial strain. The Committee note that this decision has limited IFCI’s 
operational flexibility and future growth prospects. The Commit tee suggest that, while the 
pause in lending was necessary for financial stability, IFCI should now focus on restructuring 
its ALM and exploring alternative sources of revenue. This could include expanding its advisory 
services, leveraging existing infrast ructure, and enhancing the effectiveness of its project 
financing capabilities. The Committee also emphasize that IFCI should continue assessing the 
feasibility of resuming lending once its financial position stabilizes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“IFCI has been augmenting its revenue streams by expanding its advisory services. As on 
March 31, 2025, IFCI is serving as Project Management Advisor (PMA) / consultant to GoI 
for 21 schemes mentioned as under: 
 
S.No. Scheme 
  Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
1 SPECS 
2 PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics 
Manufacturing 
3 Scheme for Semiconductor Fab 
4 Scheme for Display Fab 
5 Scheme for Compound Semiconductor/ ATMP 

17  
Scheme 
6 PLI Scheme – IT Hardware 
7 Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS)  
  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
8 Medical Device Parks 
9 PLI – KSM / DI / API (Bulk Drugs) 
10 PLI – Medical Devices 
11 Bulk Drugs Parks 
  Ministry of Heavy Industries 
12 PLI – Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
13 PLI – Automobiles & Auto Components 
14 The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid & 
Electric Vehicles (FAME II) 
15 Scheme to Promote Manufacturing of Electric 
Passenger Cars (SMEC) 
16 PM E-DRIVE 
  Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
17 PLI – White Goods 
  Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
18 PLI – Food Processing 
  Ministry of Textiles 
19 PLI – Textile 
  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
20 PLI – Drone & Drone Components 
  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
21 Sugar Development Fund 
  
IFCI has also ventured into advisory services to State Government. Further, IFCI has been 
leveraging its project financing capabilities by rendering advisory services to Corporates 
including large PSUs. These include Power Grid Corporation of India Limited , NTPC 
Limited, Shakti Sugars Limited, Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL), Technology 
Development Board, etc.    
During FY 2025 IFCI has earned ~₹68.56 crore through advisory services. Over the past 
three years, revenue from advisory services increased substantially from ~₹43.24 crore for 
FY 2022 to ~₹68.56 crore for FY 2025.   
It may also be noted that IFCI has set up an ESG Department and has developed a 
comprehensive ESG Dashboard for banks and corporates for 21 sectors, in collaboration 
with TERI-SAS. The dashboard has been deliberated by Management Committee of Indian 
Banks' Association (IBA), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Banks such as SBI, IDBI, Union Bank of India, HDFC Bank. 
IFCI is at an advanced stage of discussion with few banks for procurement of the 

18  
application. 
As regards leveraging infrastructure, it is submitted that IFCI has taken steps for optimal 
utilization of its real estate assets and has earned rental income of ₹44.17 crore during FY 
2025. Further, monetization of surplus assets shall form part of the Bu siness plan being 
formulated by the Consultant. Simultaneously, IFCI is exploring monetization of 
underutilized real estate assets. The proceeds of monetization shall be utilized to augment 
liquidity for debt servicing and new business. 
It may be noted that on analysing IFCI’s lending portfolio, the Transaction advisor noted 
IFCI’s expertise in financing renewable energy projects, particularly in Solar and Wind, with 
no delinquencies - all accounts were fully repaid or prepaid. Given Indi a’s ‘Net Zero’ 
emission targets and the substantial funding needs of the renewable energy sector, the 
Transaction advisor suggested that IFCI revive its lending operations post-merger, focusing 
on renewables with a strategic growth plan. This would also align with IFCI’s ESG initiatives. 
Accordingly, the Transaction Advisor has proposed that the merged entity, comprising IFCI 
Limited and SHCIL, may continue NBFC operations i.e. lending along with advisory 
business.” 
 
                    [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]   
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
 
Leveraging Project Appraisal Expertise 
Recommendation (No. 8) 
3.           The Committee note that IFCI has been acting as the Project Monitoring Agency 
(PMA) for 11 of the 15 awarded Performance Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes, and as the 
Verification Agency for the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS). These 
roles highlight IFCI’s deep expertise in project financing and monitoring. The Committee 
believe that Company’s experience in evaluating projects under Government schemes 
positions it as a valuable player in national development projects, even if its core lending 
function has been paused. The Committee commend IFCI for its proactive approach in 
diversifying its activities and leveraging its strengths. The Committee recommend that 
IFCI continue to strengthen its position as a PMA and verification agency and explor e 
additional government schemes where its expertise can be applied. Additionally, IFCI 
should increase collaboration with other government and private sector entities to expand 
its advisory role, ensuring a broader portfolio of projects and enhancing fee -based 
income. 
Reply of the Government 
 
“IFCI has been augmenting its revenue streams by expanding its advisory services. As on 
March 31, 2025, IFCI is serving as Project Management Advisor (PMA) / consultant to GoI 
for 21 schemes mentioned as under: 
  

19  
 
S.No. Scheme 
  Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
1 SPECS 
2 PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics 
Manufacturing 
3 Scheme for Semiconductor Fab 
4 Scheme for Display Fab 
5 Scheme for Compound Semiconductor/ ATMP 
Scheme 
6 PLI Scheme – IT Hardware 
7 Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS)  
  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
8 Medical Device Parks 
9 PLI – KSM / DI / API (Bulk Drugs) 
10 PLI – Medical Devices 
11 Bulk Drugs Parks 
  Ministry of Heavy Industries 
12 PLI – Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
13 PLI – Automobiles & Auto Components 
14 The Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid & 
Electric Vehicles (FAME II) 
15 Scheme to Promote Manufacturing of Electric 
Passenger Cars (SMEC) 
16 PM E-DRIVE 
  Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
17 PLI – White Goods 
  Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
18 PLI – Food Processing 
  Ministry of Textiles 
19 PLI – Textile 
  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
20 PLI – Drone & Drone Components 
  Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 
Distribution 
21 Sugar Development Fund 
  
IFCI has also ventured into advisory services to State Government. Further, IFCI has been 
leveraging its project financing capabilities by rendering advisory services to Corporates 
including large PSUs. These include Power Grid Corporation of India Limited , NTPC 
Limited, Shakti Sugars Limited, Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL), Technology 

20  
Development Board, etc.    
During FY 2025 IFCI has earned ~₹68.56 crore through advisory services. Over the past 
three years, revenue from advisory services increased substantially from ~₹43.24 crore for 
FY 2022 to ~₹68.56 crore for FY 2025.   
It may also be noted that IFCI has set up an ESG Department and has developed a 
comprehensive ESG Dashboard for banks and corporates for 21 sectors, in collaboration 
with TERI-SAS. The dashboard has been deliberated by Management Committee of Indian 
Banks' Association (IBA), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Banks such as SBI, IDBI, Union Bank of India, HDFC Bank. 
IFCI is at an advanced stage of discussion with few banks for procurement of the 
application. 
As regards leveraging infrastructure, it is submitted that IFCI has taken steps for optimal 
utilization of its real estate assets and has earned rental income of ₹44.17 crore during FY 
2025. Further, monetization of surplus assets shall form part of the Bu siness plan being 
formulated by the Consultant. Simultaneously, IFCI is exploring monetization of 
underutilized real estate assets. The proceeds of monetization shall be utilized to augment 
liquidity for debt servicing and new business. 
It may be noted that on analysing IFCI’s lending portfolio, the Transaction advisor noted 
IFCI’s expertise in financing renewable energy projects, particularly in Solar and Wind, with 
no delinquencies - all accounts were fully repaid or prepaid. Given Indi a’s ‘Net Zero’ 
emission targets and the substantial funding needs of the renewable energy sector, the 
Transaction advisor suggested that IFCI revive its lending operations post-merger, focusing 
on renewables with a strategic growth plan. This would also align with IFCI’s ESG initiatives. 
Accordingly, the Transaction Advisor has proposed that the merged entity, comprising IFCI 
Limited and SHCIL, may continue NBFC operations i.e. lending along with advisory 
business.” 
 
                    [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]   
  (O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
 
TECHNO-FINANCIAL APPRAISAL FOR INDIA SEMICONDUCTOR MISSION (ISM) 
Recommendation (No. 9) 
 
4. The Committee note that IFCI has been appointed to perform techno -financial appraisals 
and due diligence for three critical schemes under the India Semiconductor Mission (ISM), 
including setting up semiconductor fabs, display fabs, and ATMP facilities. The  India 
Semiconductor Mission is a strategic initiative aimed at strengthening India's capabilities in 
semiconductor manufacturing, which is vital for the nation’s technology and electronics sectors. 
The Committee recommend that IFCI expand its role in such  national initiatives by proactively 
identifying additional strategic sectors where it can provide techno-financial support. These efforts 
align with the government’s development agenda and offer opportunities for IFCI to enhance its 

21  
financial position through service fees and advisory roles. The Committee would also suggest 
that IFCI explore partnerships with global players in these sectors to maximize its expertise and 
resources. 
 
 
        Reply of the Government 
 
“In addition to schemes detailed at response to COPU recommendation 7 above, IFCI has been 
actively working with other Ministries to identify and support additional sectors in line with national 
missions such as National Critical Mineral Mission, Net Zero emi ssion by 2070 etc. IFCI 
collaborates with Sector/Industry Experts for assessment of various schemes. In the case of India 
Semiconductor Mission (ISM), the Ministry / ISM has constituted a Techno Financial Advisory 
Group (TFAG) comprising of experts in t he fields of semiconductor technology and finance to 
screen all the applications and give in -principle clearance before IFCI takes up the applications 
for detailed appraisal. IFCI is undertaking Techno Financial appraisal for the ISM scheme to this 
effect, it is also exploring partnerships with other global agencies such as Semiconductor 
Equipment and Materials International (SEMI) and Dun & Bradstreet.” 
                                                    [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]   
               (O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
ROLE AS NODAL AGENCY FOR SUGAR DEVELOPMENT FUND (SDF) 
Recommendation (No.10) 
 
5. The Committee note that since 1984, IFCI has been the Nodal Agency for monitoring loans 
under the Sugar Development Fund (SDF), which supports modernization, co - generation, and 
ethanol production, creating 20 lakh jobs and supporting 1 crore farmers and w orkers. The 
Committee observe that IFCI’s long -standing role in the SDF underscores its deep expertise in 
managing sector-specific development funds, contributing significantly to rural employment and 
economic stability. While recognizing IFCI’s substantia l contribution to national development 
through the SDF program, the Committee recommend that IFCI continue to focus on managing 
such funds while exploring ways to expand its involvement in other industry -specific funds. 
Additionally, IFCI should consider for establishing dedicated units for managing sectoral funds to 
improve operational efficiency and attract more business from government and private sectors. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
“IFCI through its subsidiary i.e.  IFCI Venture Capital Funds Limited (IVCF) has floated Alternative 
Investment Funds (AIF) which play a socially relevant role in uplifting the marginalised sections 
of society.  
IFCI Venture manages the Venture Capital Fund for Scheduled Castes (VCF -SC), Ambedkar 
Social Innovation Incubation Mission (ASIIM) and Venture Capital Fund for Backward Classes 
(VCF-BC). The aim of VCF-SC & VCF-BC is to promote entrepreneurship amongst SCs and BCs 
whereas the aim for ASIIM is to facilitate innovations amongst SC youth. 
The total corpus of the Venture Capital Funds dedicated for SC and BC community is ₹908.85 

22  
crore which has been sanctioned to 244 companies having majority stake by SC/BC. The major 
industries being supported are manufacturing, services, industrial products, and food processing. 
IFCI Venture also manages SAGE Venture Fund with a target corpus of ₹106 crore (present 
corpus is ₹21.52 crores). The scheme encourages startups providing innovative solutions and 
services for senior citizens in India.  
IFCI Venture also manages the Venture Capital Fund for Scheduled Tribes (VCFST), with a target 
corpus of ₹50 crore.  The scheme promotes entrepreneurship amongst scheduled tribes.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]           
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
 
STAKEHOLDER PROTECTION IN DISINVESTMENT 
 
Recommendation (No.13) 
 
6. The Committee observe that the disinvestment or sale of IFCI will directly or indirectly 
impact the interests of 5.5 lakh public shareholders, 92,000 retail bondholders, and 1,400 
provident, gratuity, retirement, and pension funds invested in IFCI. Given t he large number of 
stakeholders involved, the disinvestment process must be carried out transparently and equitably 
to ensure no investor suffers financial loss. The Committee highlight the importance of protecting 
the interests of retail investors and public shareholders, who may be disproportionately impacted 
by the sale. The Committee recommend that any disinvestment or sale of IFCI be conducted with 
a transparent, well-documented process that ensures fair value for all stakeholders. The valuation 
process should account for both the company’s financial health and its strategic role in national 
development. Furthermore, the Government should ensure that safeguards are in place to protect 
small investors and prevent any unfair loss of investment. 
          
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“Divestment is currently not envisaged as a way forward for IFCI Limited. As per the 
recommendation of the Independent Committee of Experts, Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) has accorded in-principle approval for “Consolidation of IFCI Group”. As regards, investors 
of the debentures of IFCI, it is submitted that IFCI has been regular in servicing its debt obligations 
on due dates. Further, the business plan is being formulated by the consultant and the same shall 
focus on safeguarding the interest of maximum stakeholders. ” 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]           
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
 
ROLE OF IFCI AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 
 
Recommendation (No.14) 
 
7.  The Committee observe that IFCI and its 13 subsidiaries/step -down subsidiaries serve a 

23  
broad range of sectors and play a significant role in various financial and developmental functions. 
Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL), for example, is a leader in the custodial 
services sector, holding the position of the country’s premie r custodian in terms of assets under 
custody. SHCIL also serves as a Central Record Keeping Agency (CRKA) for the collection of 
stamp duty, e -court fees, and e -registration across various states and union territories. The 
company has shown consistent growth in net worth and has a strong presence in the custodian 
and stock broking businesses, providing critical infrastructure for the financial sector. The 
Committee recognize SHCIL’s robust position, and recommends that IFCI continue to support 
and expand SHCIL’s operations, ensuring it remains a key player in the custodial services market. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“IFCI has informed that SHCIL has taken various measures to expand the services offerings 
under the custody segment.  
The SHCIL’s Management has been undertaking various measures and strategies which are 
being implemented to improve the performance of the custody business and a quarterly update 
is submitted to the Board for information and guidance. Further, SHCIL has revamped its trading 
platform encouraging paperless client onboarding and also onboard all corporates to NPS 
digitally. SHCIL has also launched a Digidoc system to enable seamless online document 
execution by citizens.” 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
ROLE OF IFCI AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES 
Recommendation (No.15) 
 
8. IFCI Infrastructure Development Ltd. (IIDL) has also demonstrated steady net worth growth 
over the years, with a profit of ₹8.32 crore in FY 2021 -22. IIDL’s involvement in real estate and 
infrastructure projects further highlights its potential for revenue generation, which is crucial in the 
ongoing economic recovery. The Committee suggest that IFCI should continue to capitalize on 
IIDL's growth prospects by expanding its footprint in the infrastructure sector, especially in 
emerging urban development projects. Another important subsidiary, IFCI Venture Capital Funds 
Ltd. (IVCF), manages specialized funds like the Venture Capital Fund for Scheduled Castes 
(VCF-SC) and Venture Capital Fund for Backward Classes (VCF -BC), aiming to promote 
entrepreneurship among deprived segments of society. While IVCF’s net worth has remained 
consistent, its role in promoting entrepreneurship through concessional finance is of immense 
social value. The Committee recommend that IFCI should continue to support IVCF’s initiatives,  
ensuring it is adequately capitalized to maintain its focus on funding startups and small 
businesses in underserved communities. 
 
  

24  
Reply of the Government 
 
“IFCI through its subsidiary i.e.  IFCI Venture Capital Funds Limited (IVCF) has floated Alternative 
Investment Funds (AIF) which play a socially relevant role in uplifting the marginalised sections 
of society.  
IFCI Venture manages the Venture Capital Fund for Scheduled Castes (VCF -SC), Ambedkar 
Social Innovation Incubation Mission (ASIIM) and Venture Capital Fund for Backward Classes 
(VCF-BC). The aim of VCF-SC & VCF-BC is to promote entrepreneurship amongst SCs and BCs 
whereas the aim for ASIIM is to facilitate innovations amongst SC youth. 
The total corpus of the Venture Capital Funds dedicated for SC and BC community is ₹908.85 
crore which has been sanctioned to 244 companies having majority stake by SC/BC. The major 
industries being supported are manufacturing, services, industrial products, and food processing. 
IFCI Venture also manages SAGE Venture Fund with a target corpus of ₹106 crore (present 
corpus is ₹21.52 crores). The scheme encourages startups providing innovative solutions and 
services for senior citizens in India.  
IFCI Venture also manages the Venture Capital Fund for Scheduled Tribes (VCFST), with a target 
corpus of ₹50 crore.  The scheme promotes entrepreneurship amongst scheduled tribes.” 
 
 
           [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
Recommendation (No.16) 
9. IFCI Financial Services Ltd. (IFIN) provides a wide range of financial products and services. 
Although its performance has been mixed, it is planning to consolidate its businesses with SHCIL. 
The Committee believe that the consolidation of IFIN and SHCIL's  businesses should be further 
evaluated, considering potential synergies and challenges. If executed effectively, this 
consolidation could lead to a more streamlined operation and improved financial performance. 
The Committee urge IFCI and the Ministry to conduct a detailed feasibility study of this 
consolidation, assessing both the risks and benefits, and to explore how the combined entity can 
better serve the financial sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
‘’The Independent Committee of Experts appointed by Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
chaired by Shri Challa Sreenivasulu Setty (Presently SBI Chairman), inter-alia, observed that 
subsidiaries of IFCI have a mix of offerings which overlap with other subsidiaries. Therefore, the 
Committee recommended that IFCI may optimize the value by consolidation of subsidiaries with 
similar or complementary offerings. Accordingly,  the Committee recommended consolidation of 
IFIN with StockHolding Services Limited.  
IFCI Limited has informed that there is an overlap in the capital market businesses segments of 
StockHolding Services Limited and IFCI Financial Services Limited and these businesses would 
continue in the merged entity while exploring rationalization of branches and resources.” 
 [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]           
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 

25  
 
Recommendation (No.17) 
10. On the other hand, IFCI Factors Ltd. (IFL) has faced significant challenges, including negative 
net worth in recent years. Despite its role in providing factoring services, it is crucial for IFCI to 
address the issue of negative net worth and explore avenu es for recovery. The Committee 
recommend that IFCI develop a restructuring or turnaround plan for IFL, including operational 
improvements and potential capital infusion, to restore its financial health. Similarly, Stock Holding 
Document Management Services  Ltd. (SDMS) has faced substantial financial difficulties, 
reflected in its negative reserves and ongoing losses. The Committee believe that SDMS’s 
performance needs to be addressed urgently, and it suggests that IFCI critically assess its viability 
in the current market conditions. The Committee recommends that strategies be devised to either 
revive SDMS or, if necessary, consider its divestment. Stock Holding Securities IFSC Ltd. (SSIL) 
has had a positive net worth but has faced losses in recent years. Th e Committee advise that 
IFCI develop strategies to ensure sustainable growth for SSIL, with a focus on cost reduction, 
market diversification, and service innovation. It is crucial to address operational inefficiencies 
that may be affecting SSIL’s profitability. MPCON Ltd. (MPCON) has shown an increase in its net 
worth and contributes positively to entrepreneurship development and MSME support, operating 
in a developmental role. The Committee support the continued operations of MPCON and 
recommends that IFC I explore further opportunities for expansion in the MSME and industrial 
development sectors, which are vital to India’s economic growth. Other subsidiaries such as IFIN 
Securities Finance Ltd., IFIN Credit Ltd., and IFIN Commodities Ltd. have shown mixed financial 
performances. While some have faced losses and challenges, others have continued to operate 
within the financial services industry. The Committee recommend a detailed performance review 
of these subsidiaries and suggest that IFCI should focus on those with consistent profitability, 
while critically evaluating and potentially divesting from those with sustained financial difficulties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“ As per DFS communication dated November 22, 2024, the consultant is examining the 
consolidation of IFL with IFCI. 
The business challenges and performance aspects of SDMS continue to be assessed from time 
to time and the Company has been reviewing its service offerings and taking various measures 
to customise the services and also to enhance the operational efficiency. 
As a result of the initiatives undertaken during 2019- 2021, performance of SDMS has improved 
as under:                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                  Rs. Crore 
Particulars F.Y 2022-23 F.Y 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
Income  85 100 100 
Profit After Taxes 
(PAT) 
5 8 8  
  
IFCI through SHCIL will continue to review its performance and business opportunities and devise 
suitable strategies in line to improvise the business performance. 

26  
SSIL is based at GIFT IFSC, Gift City, Gandhinagar. It offers Trading, Clearing and Depository 
Services at the International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), Gift City, Gujarat and is regulated 
by the IFSCA. 
The Union Government has over the last few budgets have taken various measures to develop 
the jurisdiction with various tax provisions to support the business environment at GIFT IFSC. 
Similarly, the regulators have been closely co -ordinating for developme nt of the products and 
enhancing the attractiveness of IFSC as a jurisdiction to market participants. 
SSIL has enabled itself with requisite business licenses to offer services across diverse and 
permissible business segments across all the three exchanges.  
SSIL was the first entity to be registered as a Segregated Nominee Account Provider at Gift 
IFSC.  Recently, along with 2 other banks (HDFC & IDFC), SSIL has obtained its registration with 
the IFSCA for distribution of Insurance Products. 
Way forward for MPCON shall form part of the Business plan being formulated by the Consultant. 
As per DFS communication dated November 22, 2024, the consultant is examining the 
consolidation of IFIN, IFIN Credit Limited and IFIN Commodities Limited with StockHolding 
Services Ltd.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]           
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
  

27  
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
 
 
  

28  
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
-     Nil      -  

29  
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Lending Practices and Strategy 
Recommendation (No. 3)  
1. The Committee observe that IFCI’s lending process and portfolio management are governed 
by its General Lending Policy (GLP) guidelines which are being, updated regularly with the approval 
of Risk Management Committee and Board's approval. Despite this, the  company has faced 
substantial losses, with many loans turning into NPAs to the tune of Rs,6515 from the year 2011 -
12 to 2021 -22. During FY 2020 -21, IFCI adopted a cautious approach and refrained from 
sanctioning new loans due to macroeconomic conditions and regulatory constraints. The Reserve 
Bank of India’s “Scale-Based Regulation” framework further restricts IFCI from granting new loans 
or investments due to its negative Net Owned Funds (NOF). The Committee also note IFCI’s 
substantial exposure to large corporate groups such as Reliance ADAG, Jaiprakash, Videocon, 
Amtek, Alok, IL&FS, Essel, and IVRCL, were severely affected by the RBI’s Asset Quality Review 
(AQR) in 2015. These exposures significantly contributed to IFCI’s rising NPAs, underscoring the 
inadequacies in its credit risk assessment during that period. In view of this Committee recommend 
that IFCI should continue to suspend lending during its restructuring phases. The Committee 
further desire that the Company must prioritize the followings to prevent similar losses in the future: 
(i) overhauling its credit appraisal and monitoring frameworks, 
(ii) enhanced due diligence processes, 
(iii) stricter exposure limits, and 
(iv) Institution of robust stress-testing mechanisms 
 Additionally, in future IFCI should diversify its portfolio and focus on lending to only resilient 
sectors with lower default risks. The Company should also adopt a cautious approach toward 
lending to large corporate groups, ensuring such exposures are backed by robust guarantees 
and securities. 
Reply of the Government 
“It is informed that lending remains suspended as on date. As regards the way forward for the IFCI 
Group, an Independent Committee of Experts appointed by Department of Financial Services (DFS), 
chaired by Shri Challa Sreenivasulu Setty (Presently SBI Chairman) recommended “Consolidation of 
IFCI Group” from a multi stakeholder’s perspective with a focus on safeguarding shareholder’s 
interest.   
The same was communicated by DFS to IFCI Ltd on November 22, 2024. Pursuant to the said 
communication, IFCI appointed M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited as Transaction Advisor/consultant 
for consolidation/way forward of the IFCI Group. The same entails preparation of a robust Business 
Plan, which shall address the observations of the COPU alongside. The consultant shall assess the 
lending landscape along with IFCI’s past experience and expertise; on the basis of which sectoral 

30  
exposures shall be proposed. The consultant shall also review / formulate policies / SOP based on 
business requirements, applicable Regulatory / Statutory framework and best industry practices. IFCI 
shall be guided by the said plan.” 
 
             [Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services]           
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Regional distribution of Loans 
Recommendation (No. 4)  
 
2. The Committee note a highly skewed regional pattern in IFCI’s loan disbursements. Maharashtra 
and Delhi alone accounted for approximately 65% of total disbursements, while states like Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, and Andhra Pradesh r eceived less than 0.5% each. 
The Committee after analysing the regional pattern of distribution observe that loans were disbursed to 
the following 
States in the decreasing order as: Maharashtra (33.54%); Delhi (31.02%); Telangana (9.96%); Tamil 
Nadu (7.17%); Karnataka (6.68%); West Bengal (6.20%); Gujarat (3.32%); Rajasthan (.5%); Uttar 
Pradesh (.48%); Chandigarh (.42%); Madhya Pradesh (.34%); Orissa  (.23%); Kerala (.11%); 
Chhattisgarh (.06%); Andhra Pradesh (.03%) and Bihar (.03%). Maharashtra and Delhi combined got 
around 65% of total loans disbursed by the Company amounting to Rs. 28,315 crores since 2011 -12 
and the States such as Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh etc. all 
received less than 50% percent of total loan disbursements. This regional disparity contradicts the 
principles of equitable financial development and inclusion. The Committee strongly recommends that 
IFCI adopt a more balanced approach to regional loan distribution upon resuming its lending 
operations. The Committee further advise that efforts should be made to channel resources toward 
underserved states by promoting targeted schemes, identifying vi able projects, and collaborating with 
local enterprises. Establishing regional offices in low-access areas and designing incentives for projects 
in these regions would ensure that IFCI’s operations contribute to inclusive national development. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for suitable consideration, if found viable as part of the business plan being formulised by IFCI. 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31  
SECTORAL ANALYSIS OF LOAN DISBURSEMENTS 
Recommendation (No. 5)  
  
3. The Committee observe sectoral concentration in IFCI’s loan disbursements. IFCI has disbursed 
loans amounting to ₹11,515.65 crore to projects in various sectors, majorly Infrastructure (49.27%), 
Manufacturing (15.42%) and Real Estate (13.85%) etc., other s ectors included Retail, NBFC, EPC 
Construction etc. Manufacturing accounted for over a quarter of the total loans disbursed since 2011 -
12, followed by energy infrastructure and real estate. Conversely, critical sectors such as Social & 
Commercial Infrastructure, Communication Infrastructure, Retail & Trading, and Mining & Explorations 
received less than 2% of total disbursements combined, amounting to ₹2,588 crores. Furthermore, 
IFCI’s exposure to large corporate groups in the manufacturing sector was adver sely impacted by the 
RBI’s Asset Quality Review (AQR) in 2015, leading to significant credit losses. Despite this, 
manufacturing loans have remained resilient compared to other sectors. The Committee recommend 
that once IFCI resumes lending, it should prio ritize sectoral diversification. Greater attention must be 
given to underfunded but high -potential sectors such as Communication Infrastructure, Retail, and 
Social Infrastructure, which align with the principles of financial inclusion and long -term economi c 
development. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“Noted for suitable consideration, if found viable as part of the business plan being formulised by IFCI.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
FINANCIAL DECLINE – NEGATIVE NET OWNED FUND (NOF)  
Recommendation (No. 11)  
 
4. The Committee observe that IFCI’s Net Owned Fund (NOF) has drastically declined from 
₹2,623.43 crore in FY 2017 to a negative ₹2,874.66 crore as of FY 2022. This significant decline has 
resulted in IFCI being ineligible to operate as a Non-Banking Financial Company (NBFC) under Section 
45-IA of the RBI Act, 1934. Moreover, IFCI’s loan portfolio has also shrunk from ₹14,530 crore in FY 
2013 to ₹7,339.90 crore in FY 2022, reflecting its inability to sanction new loans since FY 2019 -20, 
further compounded by t he growing NPAs, which stood at ₹6,515 crore as of FY 2022.The sharp 
decline in IFCI’s NOF, coupled with its growing NPAs and shrinking loan portfolio, signals a deepening 
financial crisis that is restricting the company’s ability to maintain solvency. While the loss of regulatory 
eligibility to operate as an NBFC has severely impacted IFCI's core lending operations, the Committee 
acknowledge that IFCI's role as an NBFC has historically been vital to its capacity to raise funds, access 
capital markets, and contribute to national development projects. The Company’s expertise in project 
financing, advisory services, and government scheme implementation remains significant, even amid 
its financial challenges. The Committee recommend that the Government should r eassess the 

32  
feasibility of maintaining IFCI’s NBFC status, even with the current negative NOF, due to its strategic 
importance and the potential benefits it offers to the broader financial ecosystem. IFCI’s long-standing 
role in providing financial services, including  project financing and government scheme support, is 
crucial to its ability to attract funding from various sources, including bond markets, institutional 
investors, and development finance initiatives. Maintaining NBFC status will allow the Company to 
continue accessing these funding avenues and support the government’s development agenda. By 
retaining its NBFC status, IFCI can ensure its presence an integral part of the government’s 
development initiatives. Finally, the Committee believe that IFCI should retain its NBFC status, despite 
the current challenges posed by the negative Net Owned Funds (NOF). The Company’s long-standing 
role as an NBFC provides it with essential access to capital markets and funding channels that are 
critical to sustaining its op erations and supporting national growth initiatives. The Committee would 
again recommend that the Ministry work with IFCI to explore avenues for restoring the company’s NOF 
and regulatory. compliance, while maintaining its NBFC status, so that it can conti nue playing a key 
role in the country’s financial ecosystem. The Committee expect to be informed of the actions taken in 
response to these recommendations and look forward to the implementation of a strategic framework 
that ensures IFCI’s long-term viability and continued contribution to India’s development. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“ As regards the augmentation of Net owned fund of IFCI it may be noted that GoI has infused ₹2,100 
crore as equity share capital between FY 2018 and FY 2025. While the NOF of IFCI as on March 31, 
2025 is negative ₹811 crore (Net -worth of ₹1,736 crore), the business plan formulated by the 
consultant/TA shall factor compliance with the regulatory requirements within a specified timeframe 
acceptable to the Regulator.  
The aspects mentioned alongside such as IFCI’s long term viability, role in the country’s financial 
ecosystem, maintaining NBFC status, assessing funding avenues and supporting the Government’s 
development initiatives shall be comprehensively covered as part of the Business plan being formulated 
by the consultant.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
EXPLORING GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR REVIVAL 
Recommendation (No. 12)  
5. The Committee have been informed that the Government has already provided substantial 
capital support to IFCI, with an emphasis on evaluating further options for revival. Additionally, a 
consultant has been hired to explore possible strategies for IFCI’s revival. The government is involved 
in actively reviewing these options and is looking into ways to continue supporting the company’s 
recovery. Over the years, government capital infusion has been necessary to maintain the company’s 
solvency, especially giv en its significant challenges related to Non -Performing Assets (NPAs) and a 
declining loan portfolio. As mentioned above, IFCI's Net Owned Fund (NOF) stands at negative 
₹2,874.66 crore, down from ₹2,623.43 crore in FY 2017. Furthermore, IFCI's loan portfolio has shrunk 
significantly, from ₹14,530 crore in FY 2013 to ₹7,339.90 crore as of March 31, 2022, reflecting the 

33  
company’s inability to sanction new loans due to poor financial health. The Gross NPAs as of March 
31, 2022, stand at ₹6,515 crore, with ₹13,188 crore (32.8%) of total disbursed loans having been 
downgraded to NPA status. While Government support has been crucial for IFCI’s survival, there is a 
pressing need to assess the long-term sustainability of such support. The reliance on continuous capital 
infusion, without clear strategies for improving IFCI's financial health, could result in a recurring 
dependency on government funding. This reliance could undermine the company's ability to recover 
autonomously, making it vulnerable to financial instability in the future. The interest expenses on 
borrowings have been around ₹600 crore annually, which exacerbates t he company’s financial 
pressure, as it struggles to generate enough income to cover its liabilities. This cycle of borrowing to 
pay off interest creates a challenging financial environment for IFCI, hindering its ability to resume 
lending activities and li miting its potential for growth. The Committee recommend that any future 
Government support be conditional on IFCI demonstrating a clear and sustainable financial recovery 
plan. This plan should include strategies for improving revenue streams, such as expanding its advisory 
and consultancy roles in Government schemes, which can generate fee-based income. The Company 
should also focus on monetizing non -core assets to improve liquidity. The funds raised from asset 
monetization can be used to repay outstandin g liabilities and improve IFCI’s capital base, which 
currently suffers from its negative Net Owned Funds. Furthermore, the Committee suggest that IFCI 
explore strategic partnerships with private investors and financial institutions to diversify its sources  of 
capital, ensuring that the Company is not solely reliant on government support. The Government’s 
capital infusion should be part of a broader, long -term strategy for stabilizing and revitalizing the 
company, with clear milestones for financial health improvement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“ As regards the augmentation of Net owned fund of IFCI it may be noted that GoI has infused ₹2,100 
crore as equity share capital between FY 2018 and FY 2025. While the NOF of IFCI as on March 31, 
2025 is negative ₹811 crore (Net -worth of ₹1,736 crore), th e business plan formulated by the 
consultant/TA shall factor compliance with the regulatory requirements within a specified timeframe 
acceptable to the Regulator.  
The aspects mentioned alongside such as IFCI’s long term viability, role in the country’s financial 
ecosystem, maintaining NBFC status, assessing funding avenues and supporting the Government’s 
development initiatives shall be comprehensively covered as part of the Business plan being formulated 
by the consultant.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
ROLE OF IFCI AND ITS SUBSIDARIES  
Recommendation (No. 18)  
 
6.  In light of the diverse performance outcomes across its subsidiaries, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry focus on strengthening and expanding the core businesses of subsidiaries 
that have shown consistent growth and profitability, such as S HCIL, IIDL, and select subsidiaries of 
IFIN. For subsidiaries with negative net worth or losses, such as IFL, SDMS, SSIL, and some IFIN 
subsidiaries, IFCI should consider divesting from non -performing or non-core subsidiaries, provided it 

34  
is in the best interest of IFCI and its stakeholders. The proposed consolidation of IFIN and SHCIL 
should be evaluated carefully to assess synergies and challenges that may arise from merging these 
two entities. IFCI must ensure that the consolidation process is well-structured and will lead to greater 
operational efficiency and improved financial outcomes for the company. Furthermore, the Committee 
recommend the establishment of a regular monitoring and review mechanism for all subsidiaries, in 
collaboration with the Ministry. This mechanism should be designed to communicate IFCI’s strategy, 
goals, and performance expectations clearly to all subsidiaries, ensuring a unified approach towards 
growth and financial stability. Regular reviews will help in assess ing the subsidiaries’ progress and 
ensuring their financial health in the increasingly competitive market environment. Finally, the 
Committee observes that a detailed review of the operations and strategies of IFCI and its subsidiaries 
is necessary to turn around the performance of underperforming entities or consider the consolidation 
of the entire IFCI group. The Committee expects that the independent committee’s report will provide 
insights into the way forward for IFCI, and it would like to be informed of the actions taken based on 
this report at the next stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“ As regards the way forward for the IFCI Group, an Independent Committee of Experts appointed by 
Department of Financial Services (DFS), chaired by Shri Challa Sreenivasulu Setty (Presently SBI 
Chairman) recommended “Consolidation of IFCI Group” from a mu lti stakeholder’s perspective with a 
focus on safeguarding shareholder’s interest.   
The same was communicated by DFS on November 22, 2024. Pursuant to the said communication, 
IFCI has appointed M/s SBI Capital Markets Limited as a consultant/Transaction Advisor for 
consolidation /way forward of the IFCI Group.  The same entails preparation of a robust Business Plan, 
which shall address the observations alongside. 
As advised by COPU, once the contours of the business plan / way forward are finalized, the same 
shall be informed.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
ROLE AND RELEVANCE OF IFCI 
 
Recommendation (No. 19) 
7. The Committee acknowledge that IFCI has played a pioneering role in development financing 
since its establishment in 1948, as India’s first Development Financial Institution (DFI). Over the 
decades, IFCI has not only been instrumental in direct financing b ut has also co -promoted key 
institutions that have significantly strengthened India’s financial and capital markets, including the 
National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE), ICRA, and StockHolding Corporation of India 
Limited (SHCIL). These institutions have played vital roles in deepening financial inclusion, improving 
market efficiency, and enhancing the overall functioning of India’s financial markets. The Committee 
appreciate these contributions and underscores IFCI’s continued importance in shaping India’s financial 
landscape. Additionally, the Committee note that IFCI’s extensive experience in project and 

35  
corporate finance has positioned the company as a skilled project appraisal agency. It has effectively 
utilized this expertise in roles such as acting as a Project Monitoring Agency for several significant 
Government schemes, including the Performance Link ed Incentive (PLI) schemes. These schemes 
aim to bolster manufacturing capacity, promote job creation, and enhance India’s industrial capabilities 
in critical 72 sectors. The Committee further recognize IFCI’s appointment as a Verification Agency for 
claims under the Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M -SIPS) and its role in the India 
Semiconductor Mission (ISM), which supports the government's focus on  promoting domestic 
manufacturing and technological advancements. These responsibilities align well with India’s growth 
strategy, positioning IFCI as a key contributor to the country's future development, especially in 
fostering domestic capabilities in ele ctronics and IT hardware, medical devices, and other strategic 
sectors. The Committee also take note of IFCI’s subsidiaries, such as StockHolding 
Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL) and IFCI Venture Capital Funds Limited (IVCF), which significantly 
contribute to the digital economy. SHCIL’s services, including e- stamping, depository participation, and 
central record-keeping, have facilitated seaml ess and efficient financial transactions, enhancing the 
integrity and transparency of the financial system. Furthermore, SHCIL’s role in the social sector 
through initiatives like managing venture capital funds for Scheduled Castes (VCF- SC) and Backward 
Classes (VCF-BC) demonstrates IFCI's commitment to promoting 
entrepreneurship and economic empowerment among marginalized sections of society. These 
initiatives are vital for fostering inclusive growth and supporting the government’s agenda of financial 
inclusion and entrepreneurship development. The Committee is al so well aware of IFCI's involvement 
in Sugar Development Fund (SDF) projects and its contributions to job creation and economic growth 
through schemes in sectors such as sugar, electronics, IT hardware, medical devices, automobiles, 
and textiles. The Commi ttee commend IFCI for its continued efforts to contribute to critical sectors of 
the economy, which align with national priorities and have a lasting impact on job creation and sectoral 
growth. 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The aspects mentioned alongside shall be comprehensively covered as part of the Business plan 
being formulated by the consultant.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (No. 20) 
8. Despite these contributions, the Committee acknowledge the significant challenges faced by 
IFCI. Among the foremost challenges is honoring scheduled liability payments amid liquidity 
constraints. While the government’s equity capital infusion has provided some support, the Committee 
understands that managing liquidity and monetizing assets will be critical for IFCI’s survival. Moreover, 
as IFCI transitions from a traditional lending institution to an advisory role, the retention and effective 
deployment of its skilled professionals will be key to generating profitable revenue streams that enhance 
long-term sustainability. The Committee recommend that IFCI should explore corporate restructuring 
to leverage synergies within its group and address underperformin g subsidiaries. This restructuring 
should focus on divesting from non -profitable ventures, reducing organizational complexity, and 
creating a leaner organization with a stronger bottom line. The Committee suggest that IFCI prioritize 
expanding its advisory services, a sector that offers a significant opportunity for revenue enhancement. 

36  
Expanding advisory business across multiple sectors will not only diversify income streams but also 
reduce reliance on rental income, thus ensuring that IFCI can meet its liability repayments and sustain 
its operations. The Committee also acknowledge that IFCI has already signed a revenue contract of 
₹500 crore with the Government of India. This contract, along with IFCI’s transformation into an advisory 
entity, positions the company uniquely within India’s financial landscape. With its rich history, expertise 
in project appraisal, and continued involvement in critical government initiatives, IFCI remains a vital 
player in shaping India’s economic and commercial development. By addressing its challenges, 
capitalizing on emerging opportunities, and effectivel y managing its core strengths, IFCI can continue 
to play a prominent role in the country’s growth trajectory. In light of these considerations, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry and IFCI jointly assess and implement a balanced 
strategy for the company’s long-term sustainability. This strategy should not rely on ad -hoc solutions 
but should involve a comprehensive restructuring of IFCI’s operations and processes. The restructuring 
process must be aligned with the recommendations of the indepe ndent consultant’s report and 
consistent with the Ministry’s policy directions. 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The aspects mentioned alongside shall be comprehensively covered as part of the Business plan 
being formulated by the consultant.” 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
MANPOWER 
Recommendation (No. 21) 
9. The Committee note that the present staff strength of 117 regular employees at IFCI is the lowest 
in the last 13 years and manpower strength of regular employees has been coming down in IFCI for 
various reasons such as superannuation voluntary retirements,  resignations, deaths etc. The 
Committee believe that working with limited human capital is very challenging thus retaining the skilled 
personnel is of key importance for the Company. The Committee note that in order to keep skilled and 
professional person nel, IFCI have taken many steps such as cross -functional Working Groups job 
rotation, job enrichment etc. But at the same time Committee are aware of the fact that recovery of 
unresolved and chronic NPA cases, is of utmost importance for IFCI, and to achie ve this objective, 
versatile, skilled and professional manpower is required. The Committee, though have observed that 
the Company has taken steps towards retaining skilled manpower but due to its depleting human 
resources and the Company’s foray into various new fields it may feel resource crunch. Therefore, the 
Committee would like to recommend that to the controlling Ministry and IFCI management to strengthen 
recruitment process with robust mechanism and take appropriate steps to invite required skills to  deal 
with Company’s professional need in current situation. The Committee has further observed from the 
reply of the Ministry that Government of India becoming major shareholder in IFCI, Staff Accountability 
Policy was formulated in the year 2014 which ha s been amended from time to time. After the Staff 
Accountability policy was put in place, staff accountability was examined in 163 non -performing 
accounts. In 4 loan accounts, irregularities/lapses were attributed to the staff. In 3 such accounts, major 
penalty was imposed in respect of 6 officers, out of which 1 officer was removed from service. Major 

37  
penalty was also imposed on 1 more officer as a result of Staff Accountability exercise. The Committee 
hope that the policy will strengthen staff/officers accountability towards the Company and will result into 
less NPAs and lapses on Company’s part. 
 
Reply of the Government 
“As part of the business plan, the consultant shall map the skill set / knowledge base of resources 
across IFCI Group, post which need based recruitment shall be taken up.“ 
 
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services] 
(O.M. No. 15/19/2021-IF-I Dated 16th July, 2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
------------ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Baijayant Panda 
08 December, 2025 Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana, 1947(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 

38  
APPENDIX I 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 5th December, 2025 from 1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. ‘2’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda            -           Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
4. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
5. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
6. Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
8. Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
9. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
10. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. John Brittas 
12. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
16. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members on the Eleven draft Reports. The Committee then 
considered and adopted the following draft reports, without any changes/modifications: - 
i. Sagarmala Finance Corporation Limited (SFCL) (Comprehensive Examination);  
ii. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC Limited) (Comprehensive Examination);  
iii. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) (Comprehensive Examination);  
iv. Review of Performance of Petroleum & Natural Gas Sector CPSUs (Horizontal Examination); 
v. “Para No. 2.4 of C&AG Report No. 14 of 2021 regarding ‘Loss due to flaring of High -pressure gas’ 
relating to Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limited. (Audit Based Examination); 

39  
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the First 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Procurement of hardware/software item to the tune of Rs. 890.34 Crores 
through strategic alliance” relating to National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)”  [Based on 
Audit Para No. 6.1 of C&AG Report No. 03 of 2021]; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Third 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “ Undue enrichment through recovery of turnover tax from consumer” 
relating to Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) [Based on Audit Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 
14 of 2021]; 
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited (IFCI ltd)”; 
ix. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Design and Development (D&D) in Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)” 
[Based on Chapter-II of C&AG Report No. 18 of 2023]; 
x. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “Reviewing timely submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on C&AG 
Paras/Reports (Commercial) by the Ministries/Departments”; and 
xi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the twelfth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on “IREL (India) Limited”. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports on the basis of factual verification 
as suggested by the concerned CPSUs/Ministry/Department/C&AG and presentation of the same during the 
current session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
/-------/ 
 

40  
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th LS) on  
“IFCI Limited” 
 
I Total number of recommendations 21 
lI Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government [vide 
Recommendations 
[vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
13, 14, 15, 16 and 17] 
Total - 12 
 
 
 
 
Percentage- 57.14% 
lII Observations/Recommendation which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies.- Nil 
Total - 00 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and need reiteration. - 
Nil 
Total -    00 
 
 
 
Percentage–0.00% 
V Observations/Recommendations to which 
the Government has furnished interim replies.  
[ vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 11,12, 
18,19, 20, and 21] 
 
Total - 09 
 
 Percentage–42.86% 
 