 
  
 
  
8 
    
 
 
OIL INDIA LIMITED 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
  


 
  
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
OIL INDIA LIMITED  
 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-first Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Oil India Ltd.] 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Presented to Lok Sabha on    18 December, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   18 December, 2024  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946(Saka) 


 
  
CPU No. 1061 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs......  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 
 
 
  

i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)             Ii 
INTRODUCTION Iii 
CHAPTER  I    REPORT 1 
CHAPTER II   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
  22 
CHAPTER III    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do   not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government Replies 
  53 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration 
  54 
CHAPTER V      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government has 
furnished interim replies and final replies are still awaited 
  58 
 
ANNEXURES  
*Annexures I to V  
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) held  
on 16th December, 2024….. …………………………….. …………………………………..………60 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations  
            contained in the Twenty-first Report of Committee on Public Undertakings  
            (17th Lok Sabha) on Oil India Limited…….…………………………………………….…………… 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________________________________
*To be appended at the time of Printing 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
 
       
 COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -        Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri R.K. Chaudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
6.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
7.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
8.    Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
10.   Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.   Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
13.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
14.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
15.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Rajya Sabha 
16.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
17. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
18.   Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
19.   Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal      -         Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha      -         Director  
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal            -          Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Smita Khade                -           Executive Officer 

iii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2024-25) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Oil India Ltd ( OIL)’.  
 
2. The Twenty-first Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17 th Lok Sabha) was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya  Sabha on 12 December, 2023. The 
Action taken Replies to all the 16 recommendations contained in the Report were received from 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on  14 October, 2024. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at thei r sitting held on                               
16 December, 2024.  The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix-I. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -first Report of the C ommittee (17th Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix -II. 
 
 
 
 
 
  New Delhi;                 Baijayant Panda     
  16 December, 2024        Chairperson 
   25  Agrahayana, 1944(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
 
  
 
 

1 
 
R E P O R T 
 
CHAPTER   I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Public Un dertakings (2023-24) on “Oil India Limited (OIL)”  
which was presented to Parliament on 12 December, 2023. It contained Sixteen 
observations/recommendations.  
 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the sixteen 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II) 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15                               (Total 13)                               
        
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies         (Chapter III)  
            
NIL                                                                          (Total 00)                                                                       
            
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration              
          (Chapter IV) 
  
Sl. Nos. 7 and 9                                                                                  (Total 02)   
           
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished interim replies 
and final replies are still awaited                  (Chapter V) 
                                                   
 Sl. No. 16                                                                         (Total 01)  
    
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to furnish Action 
Taken Notes/ Replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter 
I of the Report. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which only interim replies 
have been given by Government, should be furnished to the Committee expeditiously. 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
{ Shifting of Corporate Office } 
 
5. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report, had observed and recommended as follows:- 
" The Committee note that OIL had an operational Corporate Office (CO) earlier at New 
Delhi from 1981 and thereafter at NOIDA from 2007 -08 and the Registered Office (RO) 
and Field Head Quarter (FHQ)  at Duliajan in Assam.  Additionally, the Company also has 
a Pipeline Headquarter (PHQ)  at Guwahati.  It is learnt that after the Baghjan blow -out 
incident, OIL was asked to relocate its Headquarter/Corporate Office to Guwahati to 
increase the operational and execution capability; have close supervision and oversight 
of its operation in North-East; and make active interaction with the State Government and 
local community.  Consequently, the Govt. of Assam allotted a plot of land in Guwahati 
for setting-up the office and foundation stone has been laid in June, 2022.  In this context, 
the Commi ttee also note that apart from North -East States, OIL’s Domestic Acerage 
(Operated) spreads to five other States/UT in the Country and 10 projects in seven other 
Countries.  Moreover, as part of its diversification strategy, it has taken-up the projects of 
City Gas Distribution (CGD) business in the States of Haryana and Maharashtra.  The 
Committee note that as a reputed E&P Company OIL, having its base and maximum 
production (the Company during 2021-22 made 99 % of its crude oil production and 90.58 
% gas production) from the State of Assam, has proved its mettle with the existing set-up 
of Corporate Office-Headquarter set-up at NCR(NOIDA)-Dulaijan combination acting as 
an important link in coordination, prompt decision making and linking of North -East with 
the Ministry’s Headquarter in New Delhi. The Committee, therefore, opine that the present 
land allotted in Guwahati to OIL may be developed and strengthened by positioning key 
Board Members having E&P expertise to supervise and look after the operations a nd 
business in North -East States which may act as an important link between Dulaijan, 
Assam (RO and FHQ) and NOIDA.  The Committee, therefore, in view of OIL’s pan-India 
and global presence, desire that the MoPNG may review their earlier decision of shifti ng 
Corporate Office to Assam. This will help OIL in improving their business and give an 
opportunity in interacting with all concerned conveniently in quickest possible time..” 

3 
 
 
6. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The earlier decision of relocating of OIL's Headquarter/Corporate Office to Guwahati has 
since been reviewed and the Competent Authority has approved the continuation of OIL’s 
existing Headquarter/Corporate Office at Noida and not to relocate the office to Guwahati. 
Compliant to observations and being a Maharatna CPSE, now OIL has redefined its vision 
as an integrated company with business outlook to engage actively in E&P activity Pan 
India including offshore exploration efforts. 
In view of above, OIL has now revisited the earlier approach and planning to develop an 
OIL complex at Guwahati comprising of the following facilities: 
• State of the art training institute for OIL’s executives and employees. 
• A Centre of Excellence for Energy Studies’ (CoEES) which will facilitate innovative 
studies in the Energy Domain including E&P. 
• A skill development Institute (SDI) for the benefit of youths of entire NE Region 
with residential facility. 
Preparation of revised building design including site investigation, if any f or above 
facilities is being planned and on finalization of the same, construction of the complex will 
be taken up by OIL.”  
 
7.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that OIL had a historical 
operational structure with its Corporate Office (CO) in earlier at New Delhi and thereafter 
at NOIDA, while the Registered Office(RO), Field Head Quarter (FHQ) and Pipeline Head 
Quarter (PHQ) having operations rooted in Assam. In the background of Baghjan blowout, 
the Company was asked to relocate its Headquarters/Corporate Office to Guwahati that 
could strengthen operational oversight in the North -East. However, based on (a) the 
remarkable performance achieved by the Company with the existing set-up of Corporate 
Office-Headquarter set-up at NOIDA-Dulaijan combination acting as an important link in 
coordination, prompt decision making and linking of North -East with the Ministry’s 
Headquarter in New Delhi; and (b) the Company’s pan -India and global presence, the 
Committee had recommended for reviewing the relocation decision, suggesting that 
developing the Guwahati office with key Board Members would effectively balance 
regional and n ational interests without shifting the Corporate Office.  The Committee 
further were of the view that this arrangement could help the Company to improve their 

4 
 
business, giving it an opportunity to interact with all concerned conveniently in shortest 
possible time. 
The Ministry, in their reply has submitted that the decision to shift OIL's Corporate 
Office to Guwahati has been reviewed, and it has now been decided to retain the CO in 
NOIDA. Further, OIL plans to develop a comprehensive complex in Guwahati, w ith (i) A 
state-of-the-art training institute; (ii) A Centre of Excellence for Energy Studies (CoEES); 
(iii) A Skill Development Institute (SDI) with residential facilities to benefit the youth of the 
North-East for which revised designs are being prepared  to commence the complex 
construction. 
The Committee are happy to note that the recommendation of the Committee has 
been accepted in right perspective and hope this link of NOIDA -Assam should bring 
synergy and best performance of the Company in future.  The enhanced coordination by 
retaining the CO at Noida, OIL should strengthen its liaison structure for seamless 
interaction between the Guwahati office, Duliajan operations and the Ministry in Delhi.  
The Committee, reemphasise on positioning key Board Members with E&P expertise to 
supervise operations and business in North-East States and further recommend that OIL 
should provide a time-bound action plan for developing the proposed Guwahati complex 
with periodic monitoring for timely execution.   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
{Norms for Board Meetings} 
 
8. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report had observed and recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that Estimate Committee, one of the Financial Committee had 
examined OI L in 1967 -68 and had recommended that except under exceptional 
circumstances, all the Board meetings should invariably be held at the Company’s 
Registered Office in Assam i.e., Duliajan.  Subsequently, Company  then decided that at 
least one-third of its Board meetings will be held at its Registered Office. Now, after the 
fire incident at one of oil fields at Baghjan in Tinsukia district of Assam, the Government 
of India has directed the Company to shift its corporate office to Guwahati.  In this context, 
the Committee sought information on whether the stipulated numbers of Board meetings 
were held at Registered office in Duliajan. The Committee find that the Company has 
been evasive in their reply in following the norm to hold one -third Board meetings at it s 

5 
 
Registered Office.  As evident from physical performance, the Company during 2021 -22 
made 99 % of its crude oil production and 90.58 % gas production from the State of 
Assam.  On scrutiny of  last 10 years data on number of Board level meetings held each 
at Registered, Corporate and Regional Offices, the Committee are dismayed to find that 
only 7% of these meetings took place at Registered Office as against 72 % meetings held 
at Corporate Office and remaining 21% at various Regional Offices. The Company’s  
stand that seeking convenience of all the Directors for finalization of date, time and venue 
for Board/Committee Meetings as reason for delay is not convincing.  The Committee are 
of the opinion that Registered Office being located in the main operational  area of the 
Company at present, should get its due monitoring and supervision, as conducting Board 
meeting at this office will reinvigorate the Registered Office’s energy, preparedness and 
responsibility. The Committee, therefore, desire that OIL should fulfill the norm for having 
at least one -third meeting more specifically, the Quarterly Board meetings, at their 
designated Main Offices in North-East States (Dulaijan and Guwahati) in letter and spirit, 
till they have majority production from the Blocks/Fi elds and projects running in North -
East States..”  
 
9. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The Companies Act, 2013, and SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 have not prescribed 
minimum number of Board / Committee Meetings to be held at the Registered Office / 
Main Office of the Company. However, as per the suggestions of the Committee, the 
Company will endeavour to increase the frequency of Board Meetings at the designated 
Main Offices in North-East States (Duliajan and Guwahati).” 
 
10. The Committee observed that OIL has consistently failed to meet its commitment 
of holding one -third of its Board meet ings at its Registered Office (RO) in Duliajan, 
Assam. It emphasized the importance of conducting these meetings in the main 
operational area to enhance oversight, reinforce the RO’s energy, preparedness and 
responsibility while maintaining focus on North-East operations. The Committee in their 
Twenty-first Report (2023-24) had recommended strict adherence to the norm, especially 
for quarterly Board meetings, in Duliajan and Guwahati. 

6 
 
The Ministry, in their reply has stated that the Companies Act, 2013, and  SEBI 
(LODR) Regulations, 2015, do not mandate Board meetings at specific locations. 
However, it has assured that OIL would strive to increase the frequency of such meetings 
at its main offices in North-East states, namely Duliajan and Guwahati, in alignment with 
the Committee's recommendations. 
The Committee does not accept the response furnished by the Ministry citing 
Companies Act and SEBI Regulations not mandating OIL to hold meetings at specific 
locations. The Committee are of the opinion that since it is the prerogative of the Board 
to decide the location of the meeting it would be better to hold them at locations where 
maximum number of operations are taking place, to avoid accidents.  The spirit of the 
Committee’s recommendation to have atleast quarterly Board meetings in Dualiajan and 
Guwahati, may have been missed by the Ministry in right context having emphasized on 
the major contribution coming from the Main Producing Area (MPA) and the Company’s 
growth trajectory being directly dependent on performance of this area, at present and in 
near future.  Further :- 
 (A) The provisions of Companies Act does not limit a CPSU in holding its Board 
meeting only at Corporate Office, based on convenience of Board Members. (i ) The 
Committee find that although Section 173 of Companies Act does not specify on location 
specific Board meetings, but increasing the frequency of Board meetings at main 
operational areas shall come in long way ensuring strategic alignment in key operational 
areas adhering to the spirit of efficient governance outlined in the Act;  (ii) Further, as per 
Section 174 of Companies Act, the quorum requirement of physical presence of a 
minimum number of Directors for valid meetings, placing key Directors, especially those 
responsible for regional operations, shall enhance accountability at operational centres 
like Duliajan; and (iii) Infact, the Companies Act provides for Board meetings to be 
conducted in accordance with the Articles of Association (AoA) of the CPSU and it serves 
as the internal rules or regulations that govern the management and operation of the 
company. These rules are meant to guide the conduct of its affairs, including the 
procedure for holding Board meetings. Hence, Board meetings must be c onducted in 
accordance with the AoA of the CPSE, meaning that the procedures, roles, and 
responsibilities outlined in the AoA must be followed during the meeting.  The Committee 
are of the view that OIL may look into amendment in its AoA, as per the relevant rules and 

7 
 
provisions, to include operational and governance requirements that reflect their unique 
circumstance and hold atleast quarterly Board meetings in line with the Committee’s 
recommendation made earlier.   
(B) Further, as per SEBI (LODR) Regulat ion, (i) Regulation 17(2) and 17(3) 
emphasizes the necessity of atleast four board meetings to discharge governance 
responsibilities effectively and periodic review compliance with laws aligning with 
regulatory principle respectively; and (ii) Although the  Regulations may not mandate 
location-specific meetings, having quarterly Board meetings in North -East may help to 
support the principle of aligning governance with stakeholder interest and operational 
focus as specified under Regulation 4.  
In view of the  above, the Committee are of the opinion that the enhanced role of 
Registered Office located in main operational areas shall certainly help in decision 
making.  Also, regular board activities at such locations could ensure compliance with 
the intent of rob ust oversight and local engagement.  The Committee's views about the 
frequency and location of meetings suggest an intent to improve transparency and 
strategic decision -making with on -ground realities including addressing regional 
concerns and operational performance. The Committee, therefore, wish to reiteriate its 
earlier stand and desire that OIL may not only increase frequency of its Board meeting in 
its main operational area but also have atleast quarterly Board meetings in North -East 
particularly Duli ajan and Guwahati.  The Committee are hopeful that the steps would 
ensure oversight of production performance, given 99 % of OIL’s crude oil and 90.58 % 
of gas are produced from the MPA. In adherence to this effect, OIL should disclose the 
location of Board meetings in its Annual Report to ensure transparency and compliance 
with the recommended norms.  
{ Safety- Incidents/Accidents, Causalities and Compensation –  
Take-away from Baghjan incident} 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
11. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee while going into the specific details of blowout in Baghjan Well#5 that 
started on 27 May, 2020 and finally kicked, capped and abandoned on 3 December, 2020, 

8 
 
note that the incident resulted in a total loss of 47,837 MT of crude oil and 129 MMSCM 
of Natural Gas resulting in Rs. 20 crore estimated loss of production from the date of 
incident till the diversion of natural gas production.  Besides this, OIL had to make 
payment of Rs.147.92 crore (R s.102.74 crore as compensation and Rs.45.18 crore for 
relief & rehabilitation) to the people affected in the incident.  Besides, the Company had 
to shell out Rs.449.03 crore (Rs.51.30 crore to Domestic and Rs.203.30 crore to 
International Companies) for engaging outside Companies to cap the blowout of the well. 
The Committee note that a High Level Committee (HLC) was set -up by the Government 
of India headed by Secretary, MoPNG to investigate the Baghjan blowout incident. To 
monitor status of implementation of recommendations made in the HLC Report, OISD 
has been assigned to review the same with the stakeholders including revision in 
standards for internal and external safety audits.  The Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) has prepared guidance documents for training and capacity building 
for the same. The Committee agree with the opinion of HLC that Companies engaged in 
oil & natural gas business should develop its own Crisis Management Team (CMT) to 
deal with any emergency and, therefore, recommend th at taking cue from the incidents 
taken place in the past in Oil & Natural Gas sector, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, in consultation with Disaster Management Authority, should develop an exclusive 
National level CMT involving experts from major  oil Companies in the field to deal with 
any catastrophic situation for annihilating/minimising loss of life and damage to the 
ecosystem. The Committee further desire that the best professional training may also be 
imparted to persons engaged in such tasks   to gain expertise in dealing with any 
calamity/disaster and further reduce dependency on external assistance.  The self -
sufficiency of CMT (another sphere of Atma Nirbhar Bharat) will not only enhance the 
Nation’s credibility at global level but also min imize the dependency on assistance from 
international agencies to deal with incidences of greater magnitude like blowout such as 
in Baghjan Well.  Further, the other recommendations of HLC should be implemented in 
letter and spirit.” 
 
12. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“Blow out control by Crisis Management Team (CMT) is very specific to E&P sector only 
and as such other institutions will not be of much help. ONGC has established dedicated 
teams to effectively manage eme rgency scenarios associated with blowouts or 

9 
 
uncontrolled flow from oil and gas wells, as well as to handle related emergency 
situations. At the central level, ONGC has a Central Crisis Management Team (CMT), 
which oversees and coordinates emergency respon se efforts across the organization. 
Additionally, Regional CMTs are established at key locations including Rajahmundry, 
Vadodara, Mumbai, and Sivasagar, enabling swift and localized responses to 
emergencies within their respective regions. 
Recently, Cairn Oil & Gas, Vedanta Limited, has signed a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) with ONGC to collaborate on Crisis Management Teams (CMTs). This partnership 
aims to enhance emergency response capabilities and ensure effective management of 
crisis situations in the upstream onshore sector.  
DGH has taken lead in conducting meeting between private operators and major E&P 
operators like ONGC and OIL to facilitate agreement for collaboration on crisis 
management. 
Recommendations of the HLC are being monitored by OISD on quarterly basis from E&P 
operators. The quarterly data is being analysed by OISD and a report is submitted to 
MoPNG. 
Oil India Limited is currently in the process of developing its own fully fledged Crisis 
Management Team. Post Baghjan blowout, OIL’s CMT has been strengthened in terms 
of Manpower, equipment, training and collaboration as below,    
Manpower: All the sanctioned Executive posts are filled up. Total no. of executives at 
CMT department as on date is 4 and all 13 nos. unionized employees dep loyed in CMT 
department.  
Equipment: Procurement and Commissioning of basic well control equipment have been 
completed. Some of this major equipment are:. 
 13.5/8-inch X10 M single RAM BOP – 2 No  
 7.1/16-inch X10 M double RAM BOP–1 No  
 60 feet Athey Wagon – 1 No   
 Bulldozer (324HP)- 1 No  
 4000 GPM fire water pump: - 2 No  
 Ultra slim hydraulic torque wrench – 1 Set  
 External casing cutter- 1 Set  

10 
 
 Atlas Copco Air compressor- 1 No  
 Exothermic Lance Cutter with accessories- 1 No  
 7.1/16-inch X10 M HCR valve – 1 No  
Training: CMT Executives have been undergoing mandatory training/certification program at 
International Well Control Forum (IWCF), Drilling and Well Intervention & Pressure Control 
training. All the newly joined work persons have been imparted statutory and mandatory training 
like MVT, First aid,  Jigyasa, Basic life support &First responder,  Gas testing, Basic and 
Advanced firefighting etc. Also work persons have been sent for skill development training at 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) f acility of M/s Worldwide Oilfield Machine - Pune for 
BOP training & M/s BEML- Bangalore for Bulldozer training.  
Collaboration: OIL has signed two MOU for on call crisis management services with i) M/s Cudd 
pressure control, Inc. Newcastle, Oklahoma and ii) M/s Wild Well Control, Inc.  Houston, Texas 
for any eventuality.” 
 
13.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted significant losses from the 
Baghjan blowout including production loss, compensation paid and costs for external 
assistance. They ha d emphasized the need for oil companies to establish self -reliant 
Crisis Management Teams (CMTs) and proposed a national -level CMT with expert 
collaboration across major oil companies to deal with any catastrophic situation thereby 
annihilating/minimizing loss of life and damage to the ecosystem. The Committee had 
further recommended for implementing High -Level Committee’s (HLC’s) suggestions, 
providing advanced training to personnel and reducing dependency on external 
agencies, promoting Atma Nirbhar Bharat in crisis management. 
 The Ministry in their submission has highlighted steps taken to strengthen crisis 
management including ONGC establishing a dedicated Central and Regional CMTs and 
Cairn Oil & Gas has partnered with ONGC to enhance emergency response.  Further, Oil 
India Limited (OIL) has been developing its own fully -fledged CMT with focused areas 
addressing manpower, equipment, training and collaboration with global crisis 
management firms like Cudd Pressure Control and Wild Well Control. It has be en also 
submitted that the recommendations of the HLC are being monitored quarterly by the 
OISD, and DGH is fostering collaboration among private and public E&P operators for 
crisis management. 

11 
 
 The Committee, while acknowledging the steps taken so far by the Company, 
would like to reiterate their view for establishment and formalized functioning of a 
centralized CMT involving experts from major oil companies, under direct supervision of 
the Ministry/OISD, which will help in real -time reporting, monitoring and quick recovery 
response from catastrophic incidents across oil companies.  Adding to this, the 
Committee further desire that a dedicated advanced training center for oil and gas crisis 
management may be set -up, offering simulation -based learning for co mplex scenarios 
like blowout. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
14. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended as follows:- 
" The Committee note that post blowout at Baghjan, a Committee, under Justice (Retd) B 
P Katakey, was formed by National Green Tribunal to undertake the task of assessing 
the environmental damage caused by the Baghjan incident and to suggest restorative 
measures.  Lateron, the Committee was also reconstituted by the Supreme Court.  The 
Committee find  that prior to this unfortunate Blowout, the Company had not been 
penalized to pay damages for violating environmental norms or causing damage to the 
environment.  The Committee further note that post Blowout, the Company had engaged 
organizations/agencies (M/s ERM India Pvt. Limited, Assam agriculture University, TERI, 
CSIR and IIT, Guwahati) that carried out Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Assessment & Remediation of the quality of soil and vegetation in the vicinity of the 
blowout area.  The re ports submitted by the reputed organizations have not pointed to 
any adverse permanent effect on the surrounding areas including the blowout site.  The 
Committee find that as directed by Hon’ble Supreme Court to constitute a Committee, the 
Company is adhering and implementing the bio -remediation in the entire affected area. 
The Committee opine that since livelihood of the people living nearby blowout area is 
dependent on the natural resources available in that area, Oil India Limited must 
implement the recommendations of the Committee(s) for Assessment & Remediation of 
the environment, in letter and spirit for successful rehabilitation of the area.  The 
Committee further desire that the Company may adopt some villages around Baghjan 
blowout for their all rou nd development. This step will ensure continuous vigil and 
monitoring of the area by the Company and returning of flora, fauna for the livelihood for 

12 
 
the people living in that area.  The Committee also desire that the same may annually be 
reviewed in its Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Committee and in the Board.” 
 
15. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 “In line with the recommendations of the learned Committee to review Health, Safety and 
Environment (HSE), OIL has taken initiatives christened as “KAVACH” for mitigation measures. 
Similarly, OIL has also revised the old “HSE Policy “ policy has been revised. Brief on both i.e. 
Initiatives and Revised Policy has been appended below: 
Project KAVACH: 
OIL accords highest co mmitment to Health and Safety of all the stakeholders along with the 
preservation of the Environment in its operational area across all spheres and community at 
large. HSE is deeply ingrained as a core value for Oil India Limited, and is focused towards 
continual improvement embracing advancements in regulatory regimes, Integrating new 
technology etc, demonstrate company’s commitment to the well -being of its employees, the 
protection of the environment, and the overall safety in every facet of our operation s aligning 
with company’s vision and values.  
In alignment with Company’s commitment towards HSE, OIL has launched Project KAVACH 
(Key to Awareness, Value Creation, and Change) to  strengthen and transform the existing 
Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) Management System of the company. The project aims 
to adopt  best practices by benchmarking its installations and processes against global 
standards through ISO certification. The comprehensive endeavour encompasses ten strategic 
goals, each designed to e levate HSE performance and sustainability practices. The initiative 
entails strengthening the HSE Management System, conducting HSE Culture assessments, 
establishing a comprehensive HSE audit universe & asset integrity management, benchmarking 
HSE Paramete rs against national and international best practices and standards, integrating 
technology to enhance the HSE Management System, establishing an Emergency Response 
Centre, achieving Net Zero and conducting an Occupational Health Survey. Project KAVACH 
serves as a catalyst for positive transformation within Company, reinforcing a robust HSE 
framework and fostering responsible business practices in alignment with global standards. 
 
 

13 
 
Revised HSE Policy: 
In response to the dynamic and evolving Health, Safety, a nd Environmental (HSE) ecosystem, 
OIL has undertaken an initiative to review and revise its HSE Policy. The decision is propelled 
by multifaceted factors, which includes (i) critical recommendations from the High -Level 
Committee on the Baghjan incident, (ii) insights gained from an External Safety Audit of OIL, (iii) 
evolving regulatory guidelines and (iv) observations noted in the Joint Working Group 
report.Additionally, the imperative for change is due to transformative shift in the vision statement 
of the company, necessitating a realignment of its operational principles. 
The transformative journey of OIL into a dynamic and integrated energy player, in line with its 
redefined vision and values, necessitates a corresponding evolution in its Health, Safety,  and 
Environment (HSE) policy.  
OIL’s redefined vision is “Be a leading and future ready integrated energy company committed 
to sustainable energy security of India through performance excellence 
Oil India Limited has taken a note of all the recommendation s of Committee(s) for Assessment 
& Remediation of the environment for successful rehabilitation of people living nearby Baghjan 
blowout area. OIL has paid necessary compensation towards Rehabilitation, Resettlement and 
Compensation to the local villagers via District Administration as directed by the Committees(s). 
At the highest level, there are two committees that review and take stock of HSE matters of the 
company, viz. the Apex level committee comprising of CMD & Directors and the HSE committee 
comprising of Functional Directors and Independent Directors. All HSE matters are reviewed 
biannually by both the committees and annually by the Board.” 
 
16. The Committee while acknowledging the efforts of OIL and other agencies in 
assessing and mitigating the environmental damage caused by the Baghjan blowout 
emphasized strict adherence to remediation recommendations had urged OIL to adopt 
the surrounding aff ected villages for holistic development, ensuring livelihoods and 
environmental restoration. They had also suggested that these initiatives be reviewed 
annually by the Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) Committee and the Board. 
 The Ministry in their re ply has provided with information on  measures taken by 
OIL viz. (i)  Project KAVACH - A comprehensive initiative aimed at improving HSE systems 
through global benchmarking, advanced technology, and strategic goals like establishing 
an Emergency Response Centre and achieving Net Zero targets; (ii) Revised HSE Policy 

14 
 
- Aligned with OIL’s new vision as an integrated energy company, it incorporates 
recommendations from the Baghjan High -Level Committee, safety audits and evolving 
regulatory standards; and (iii)  Rehabilitation and Compensation - Necessary payments 
for rehabilitation and resettlement have been made with regular HSE reviews at both apex 
and Board levels to ensure compliance. 
 The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken under Project KAVACH 
are of the opinion that the Company may enhance monitoring mechanism by carrying out 
third-party audits of environmental restoration efforts annually, with findings made part 
of the Annual Report.  The Committee desire that a structured development plan may be 
developed for adopted villages, focusing on healthcare, education, and sustainable 
livelihoods, whose progress may be reviewed quarterly by the Board.  The Committee 
further recommend that an independent review may be carried out by engaging external 
experts for periodic evaluation of OIL’s HSE performance under Project KAVACH and 
revised policies to ensure alignment with global standards. 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 11) 
{ Efforts to improve women participation in E&P Sector} 
 
17. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee, during the course of evidence, were surprised to find that a Company 
like OIL, a  E&P major, have been able to engage only 409 women executives in the 
Company that constitutes less than 7 % of their present strength of 6256 employees as 
against an average women participation of 9.35% of total women employees in CPSEs. 
The response of the Company and the Ministry that they encourage gender equality in 
the recruitment pro cesses and also give emphasis to induct women employees in 
technical and non -technical fields and familiarize them about the best practices and 
facilities available, does not reflect true picture of women participation in Companies 
engaged in Oil & Natural gas.  They all have less than 10% women participation in their 
respective Companies as is evident from the data furnished to the Committee, ONGC 
(7.5%), GAIL (6.46%), IOCL (8.77%) and HPCL(9.7%),. The Committee observe that an 
exception to this is only th e EIL, an Engineering Consultancy & EPC Company under 
MoPNG, which has 11.75 % of women employees engaged in the Company.  The 
submission by OIL in this regard that in Companies engaged in E&P, women are less 

15 
 
likely to prefer drilling and other activities that are field-oriented having night-shifts, is not 
convincing. The Committee is aware that today women are participating in every field 
including challenging sectors like Defence/Aviation/Medical and hence desire that efforts 
should be made by the Compani es to recruit more women employees in Oil & Natural 
Gas Companies.  The Ministry should also work with Indian Institute of Petroleum, 
Dehradun and other Institutes for the purpose.” 
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“ Oil India Limited is committed to prioritizing gender inclusivity, creating an environment 
where women are treated with respect and provided protection in the workplace. Our 
dedication to fostering a conducive work environment for female employees extends to a 
strong emphasis on health and safety aspects. At OIL, we hold the dignity of women in 
high regard, reflecting our legacy and a culture of maintaining a positive and progressive 
attitude towards women. 
     Women Representation in OIL  
Year Total Employees Women Employees 
2020-21 6190 403 
2021-22 6256 409 
2022-23 6759 489 
  
The overall representation of women along the corporate hierarchy is on the rise due to 
focused interventions by the Company. It is noteworthy that, given the structure of the Oil 
and Gas industry, the participation of women in employee cadres has historic ally lagged 
behind that of men. Challenges posed by remote, geographically difficult, and socially 
backward areas where much of the value chain activities occur have exacerbated efforts 
to increase women's representation at the ground level. However, targeted interventions 
in the executive workforce over the past few years are yielding positive results. Currently, 
women constitute approximately 13% of the total executive strength, with an even more 
encouraging representation of around 16% in entry -level exe cutive grades (in grades 
B,C& D)—significantly higher than the industry average of 9.35% as given in this report. 

16 
 
To keep up our progress towards gender parity in the workforce, it may also be mentioned 
here that to ensure fairness in selection process, a lady officer is invariably associated in 
the Selection committee whenever women candidates are involved. 
It is essential to acknowledge the Company's numerous focused initiatives toward 
achieving gender parity in its workforce. Nevertheless, achieving incr eased women 
representation across corporate hierarchies requires a concerted, sustained, and holistic 
effort from all stakeholders in society. Parents, teachers, community leaders, academic 
institutions, lawmakers, government, and corporate leaders each ha ve a role to play in 
enhancing women's representation —an integral driver of economic prosperity and 
structural well-being in society.” 
19.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted the underrepresentation of 
women in Oil India Limited (OIL) and o ther E&P companies, with less than 10% 
participation compared to the average 9.35% in CPSEs. The Committee had rejected OIL's 
justification that field -oriented roles deter women and urged Companies to actively 
recruit more women, including collaborating wi th institutes like the Indian Institute of 
Petroleum, Dehradun to promote gender inclusivity. 
 The Ministry, in their reply, has highlighted OIL's commitment to gender inclusivity 
through targeted interventions and workplace safety measures. It reported a steady 
increase in women employees, from 403 in 2020 -21 to 489 in 2022 -23, with women 
comprising 13% of the executive strength and 16% in entry-level grades. The Ministry has 
also emphasized the inclusion of women in selection committees and attributed 
challenges to the nature of operations in remote and difficult areas. 
 The Committee, desire that to expedite gender inclusivity in the sector, OIL and 
other Companies in this sector may focus on targeted recruitment drive by setting 
measurable targets to inc rease women’s participation to at least 15% within five years, 
especially in technical and leadership roles.  Further, the Companies can offer incentives 
for women in field roles by offering additional allowances, mentorship programs and 
flexible work arrangements to encourage them to take up field assignments. In addition 
to this, innovative approach by partnering with STEM-focused universities and institutes 
to create scholarships, internships and awareness programs aimed at attracting women 
to the E&P sector may be undertaken by the Companies in collaboration with educational 
institutions. The Committee are of the view that an investment in field accommodations 
and facilities tailored to ensure the safety and comfort of women employees in remote 

17 
 
locations should add to the genuine efforts of inclusivity. Further, the Ministry may 
mandate all E&P companies to publish annual reports on gender parity highlighting 
progress and outlining further initiatives. 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 13)  
{Diversification Initiatives – Renewable Energy, Green Hydrogen and City Gas 
Distribution} 
 
20. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that as per ‘OIL Strategic & Corporate Plan 2011 -20’, City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) has bee n selected by the Company as an emerging area to provide 
an alternate, clean and efficient fuel to the consumers.  Accordingly, OIL has ventured 
into City Gas Distribution (CGD) projects to diversify into non -E&P energy value chain 
and embark on next phase of growth. The Committee observe that OIL has invested Rs. 
222 crore in different Joint Ventures for CGD Network for 7 Geographical Areas in various 
parts of the Country.  The Committee further note that after completion of 11A bidding 
round, 297 Geographical Areas (GAs) covering about 98% of the population and 88% of 
total geographical area spread over around 776 districts in 28 States & UTs have been 
authorized by Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB) for development 
of City Gas Distribution  (CGD) projects in India. The Committee find that the main 
challenges faced in this downstream sector are non -availability of smart meters & 
ancillary equipment and shortage of skilled manpower.  The Committee are well aware 
that targeted skill development  programs would be essential for successful 
implementation and expansion of City Gas Distribution (CGD) projects in India and 
observed that to address this, GAIL with support of seven oil and gas CPSUs (ONGC, 
OIL, IOCL, HPCL, BPCL, EIL & Balmer Lawrie) has  formed a society to run the Skill 
Development Institute (SDI) at Raebareli under MoPNG directives.  Apart from gas 
CPSUs partnering with local Industrial Training Institute (ITI), a Hydrocarbon Sector Skill 
Council (HSSC) has also been set -up under the ae gis of MoPNG with a vision to meet 
diverse skill requirements of the Hydrocarbon Industry and enhance employability and 
opportunities, locally and globally.   
 Since OIL have set -up an exclusive Skill Development Institute at Guwahati in 
2017, the Committee desire that they get developed the training modules in coordination 

18 
 
with Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) and Industrial Training Centres (ITCs) to build a 
pool of the required qualified trainers and skilled workforce for spreading the network of 
CGD as per the commitment made in Paris Convention by Government of India to 
increase the share of natural gas in India’s energy mix from 6.5% to 15% by 2030.  This 
step, the Committee feel, would in turn help to accelerate the pace and spread of CGD 
network in the allocated GAs and reach to the last mile person in the form of benefits 
accrued from the web of CGD availability i.e., PNG and CNG for the designated 
consumers.” 
 
21. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“ The training module for CGD is already available in the Skill curriculum of ‘National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC)’. It falls under the specific HSSC (Hydrocarbon Sector 
Skill Council). SDI -Guwahati has already chalked out a plan to implement training  
programme for Pipe Fitter and Welder suitable for CGD works. The pertaining course on 
CGD yet to commence at SDI, Guwahati as the laying of CGD networks, commissioning 
and supply of Gas through these networks in different GAs not yet completed. Coinciding 
with the implementation stage of these Networks the training programmes are planned to 
be commenced so that the trained apprentices get opportunity be absorbed.” 
22. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted OIL’s diversification into City 
Gas Di stribution (CGD) projects and its investments in joint ventures for seven 
geographical areas. The Committee had emphasised the need for targeted skill 
development programs to address manpower shortages and enhance CGD expansion 
and recommended collaboration with ITIs and ITCs to develop training modules to build 
a skilled workforce for the CGD sector, aligning with India’s commitment to increase 
natural gas in the energy mix from 6.5% to 15% by 2030. 
 The Ministry, in their reply, has informed that the training module for CGD is already 
part of the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) curriculum under the 
Hydrocarbon Sector Skill Council (HSSC). The Skill Development Institute (SDI) in 
Guwahati has plans to initiate training programs for pipe fitter s and welders for CGD 
works. However, these courses have not commenced yet, as CGD network 
implementation in the identified geographical areas is still ongoing. The training 

19 
 
programs are planned to coincide with the network rollout, ensuring job opportunities for 
trained apprentices. 
 The Committee are of the view that the Company may initiate and accelerate the 
Skill Program Rollout and start skill development programs ahead of CGD network 
completion to prepare a ready workforce, ensuring smooth and timely  execution of 
projects. The Company may also take a lead and collaborate with industry leaders and 
partner with CGD operators across the Country and stakeholders to provide on -the-job 
training opportunities during network implementation stages.  The Compan y may also 
think for inclusion of advanced modules by including updated training curriculums to 
include advanced modules on smart metering, network monitoring and ancillary 
equipment handling to address skill gaps. To spread the CGD network at speed in the  
Country, the Ministry can also focus on development of such training institutes by major 
oil and gas Companies with industry-specific curriculum to fulfil ground training and also 
providing on-site internship exposures to the trainees. Further, OIL may take an intiative 
towards promotion of gender inclusivity by encouraging women’s participation in CGD -
related training programs to promote diversity in the workforce. 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 16) 
{ Levy of Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED) on E&P Companies} 
 
23. The Committee in their Twenty-first Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee observe that E&P Companies pay royalty on production of crude oil and 
natural gas to the Central Government for production from offshore fields and to the State 
Governments for production from onshore fields respectively. Further, a Special 
Additional Excise Duty (SAED) of Rs.23,250/MT has been levied by the Government of 
India on the production of crude oil w.e.f. 1 July, 2022 which has been further reduced to 
Rs.17000/MT. The Committee are of the view that this statutory duty is significant ly 
impacting the revenue of the Company. The Committee also note that OIL has 
represented to MoPNG for review of levy and MoPNG, which in turn has also taken up 
the matter with Ministry of Finance requesting that SAED may not be made applicable on 
blocks o r fields falling under the contractual regime (Production Sharing Contracts - 
PSCs) and on contractors under Production Enhancement Contracts, till the Companies 
reach the production levels of 2 million barrels.  The Committee are in agreement with the 
MoPNG’s submission that the additional levy of SAED, besides having a cascading effect, 

20 
 
may trigger reduction in future exploration investments by existing contractors under 
various regime and discourage new players/bidders from participation in E&P 
assignments in Indian Basins.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to 
appropriately consider the MoPNG’s request regarding levy of SAED on E&P Companies 
so as to encourage exploration in the oil and gas fields with minimal effect on the 
Company’s growth and profit.” 
24. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
“ Government of India vide its Notification No. 05/2022 – Central Excise dated 
30.06.2022, has levied a Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED) of Rs. 23,250/ MT on 
production of crude oil. SAED is a levy which adds to cost of petroleum at the gross level. 
The additional levy of SAED besides having a cascading effect may trigger reduction in 
future exploration investments by existing contractors under various regimes and 
discourage new players /bidders from participation in E&P assignments in Indian Basins. 
MoPNG vide D.O. letters dated 12.08.2022 and 28.02.2023 has taken up this matter with 
Ministry of Finance and requested that SAED shall not be applicable on blocks or fields 
falling under the contractual regime (PSCs/RSCs) and SAED shall not be applicable on 
contractors under Production Enhancement Contracts, till they reach the production 
levels of 2 million barrels. Recently, a presentation has also been made to Se cretary, 
Department of Revenue on 28.05.2024 in this regard.” 
25. The Committee, in their Original Report, had observed that the imposition of a 
Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED) on crude oil production significantly impacts the 
revenues of Exploration and Production (E&P) companies. They noted that the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) has requested the Ministry of Finance to exempt 
blocks under Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs), Revenue Sharing Contracts (RSCs) 
and Production Enhancement  Contracts from SAED until production levels of 2 million 
barrels are reached. The Committee had agreed that SAED could discourage exploration 
investments and urged the Ministry of Finance to reconsider the levy to foster growth and 
profitability in the sector. 
 The Ministry, in their reply, has submitted that SAED, levied at Rs. 23,250/MT in 
June 2022 (later reduced to Rs. 17,000/MT), increases the cost of crude oil production and 
may deter investment in exploration. In this regard, MoPNG  has repeatedly approached 
the Ministry of Finance, advocating for exemptions for PSC/RSC blocks and contractors 

21 
 
under Production Enhancement Contracts and a presentation to the Department of 
Revenue was made in May 2024 to reinforce this request. 
 The Com mittee are of the view that Ministry of Finance should conduct a time -
bound review of SAED’s impact on the profitability and competitiveness of E&P 
companies. To expedite conclusion on the matter, an Inter -Ministerial Group/Task Force 
may be formed between  MoPNG and the Ministry of Finance to evaluate SAED’s 
implications on sectoral growth and accordingly align fiscal policies with energy security 
goals.  The MoPNG may also seek approval for d ynamic exemption criteria  for high -
potential blocks until they ac hieve economic viability.  Also, to e ncourage investment, 
introducing alternative fiscal incentives or reduced SAED rates for new exploration 
projects may help to attract investments and ensure basin development.  Further, 
International benchmarking should  encourage India’s fiscal regime for E&P with global 
standards to ensure competitiveness and attract foreign players. 
 
********* 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
OIL- OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 1. The Committee note that Oil India Limited (OIL) has a rich heritage, having its origin 
dating back to discovery of crude oil at Digboi , Assam in 1889 to its present status as a fully 
integrated National Exploration and Production (E&P) Company having earned the recognition 
as India’s second largest National E&P Company.  OIL was incorporated as a Joint Venture 
Company between Burmah Oil Company and Government of India on 18 February, 1959 and 
became a fully owned GoI undertaking in 1981. The Company's equity shares were listed on 
NSE and BSE in 2009, the year it celebrated its Golden Jubilee and in 2010, the Company was 
awarded the “Navratna” status. OIL became the first crude oil and natural gas Company to get 
listed its Bond in International Securities Market, London Stock Exchange.  On 4 August, 2023, 
joining the league of “Maharatna” status Companies, Oil India Limited has been declared as the 
13th Maharatna Company by the Government of India. The Committee note that the authorized 
capital of the Company is Rs. 2000 crore and the paid -up capital is Rs. 1084.41 crore.  At 
present, GoI’s shareholding in OIL is 56.66 % of the paid-up equity share capital and the balance 
43.34% is held by Public and others including Bodies Corporate, Mutual funds, Banks, FPIs, 
Resident Individuals. The Committee further find that OIL’s Market Share in Crude Oil and 
Natural Gas Production vis -à-vis Nation’s t otal Domestic Production were 10.88% and 9.20% 
respectively with 3.176 MMT of Crude Oil and 3.180 BCM of Natural Gas production during 
2022-23. 
(ii) The Committee are pleased to note that OIL as the second -largest public sector E&P 
Company has strong finan cial standing, a solid operational track record of six decades with 
steady and sustainable growth.  The Committee note that OIL having large prospect of E&P 
acreage has pioneered in pipeline transportation and diversified into new areas while 
maintaining a  core focus on E&P. The core upstream focus areas are Exploration & 
Development and Production of Crude oil, Natural Gas and LPG while midstream area includes 
Transportation of Crude oil & Refined products through pipelines.    The Company has its 
domestic presence in 5 North -Eastern States (Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Tripura, 
and Nagaland) and 4 other States/UT viz. Rajasthan, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Puducherry.  

23 
 
Besides these, OIL has ventured into offshore water in Krishna Godavari (KG), Andam an and 
Kerala-Konkan basins thereby operating in 59 Blocks with 57,982 Sq. Km.  The Company has 
its presence in 7 Countries (Russia, Libya, Venezuela, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Mozambique and 
Gabon) working on total  
10 projects in an area of 44,300 Sq. Km.  Further, OIL has 7 Subsidiaries, 1 Associate and 12 
Joint Ventures Companies. The Committee note that OIL’s net worth as on  
31st March, 2023 stands at Rs. 31,601.41 crore and during the Financial Year 2022-23, the total 
income of the Company was Rs. 24,757.85 crore with net Profit After Tax (PAT) of  
Rs. 6,810.40 crore.  The Company also transported 6.18 MMT of crude oil and 1516 MMT of 
petroleum products during the year 2021-22 as also has a total installed capaci ty of 188.1 MW 
renewable energy projects/plants. The Committee record its appreciation for these financial and 
operational accomplishments achieved by the Company. 
 (iii) It was further informed to the Committee that the Company’s Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) initiatives are directed towards the social economic development of people and 
community at large and it has spent Rs.163.74 crore (Rs. 65 crore made towards PM Cares 
Fund) in FY-2021-22 as against the mandatory two percent (Rs.25.91crore) of average net profit 
(Rs.1295.56 crore) of the Company under Section 135(5) of the Companies Act. For the year 
2022-23 as against the sanctioned expenditure of Rs.32.93 crore, the Company spent Rs.98.21 
crore towards CSR activity. 
 The Committee are of the v iew that the Company has sound business performance over the 
years and has retained its dominance in Exploration and Production of crude oil and natural gas 
and Transportation of petroleum products. It has also diversified itself in Renewable Energy (RE) 
and City Gas Distribution (CDG) sectors over the years. The Committee are pleased on the 
performance delivered by the Company so far, however, in the succeeding paras of the Report, 
the Committee have contemplated over prominent and contemporary issues that  may need 
timely redressal for the Company to continue its growth trajectory in coming years. Some of them 
are, concerns on decline in production of crude oil and natural gas from its Main Producing Area; 
shifting of existing Corporate Office from NOIDA; n orms for holding the Board Level meetings; 
safety related issues; and Women participation in E&P sector.  The Committee hope that the 
Company would make earnest efforts for implementation of the observations/ recommendations 
in this Report to augment their overall performance. 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.” 
   [Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
Vacancies in Board of Directors  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
2. The Committee observed that as against the sanctioned strength of 14 Members in the 
Board of Directors (BoD), the Company, except during 2019 -20, never had actual strength in 
BoD.  The shortfall in vacancy positions ranged from 3 to as many as 8 in years ranging from 
2015-17. The Committee note that these vacancies were mainly observed in the category of 
Independent Directors. For example, in the year 2016 -17, Independent Directors were NIL 
against the sanctioned strength of  7. The Companies Act, 2013 came into force on 30 August, 
2013, with penal clause on the Companies which are unable to fill -in the vacancy in the Board.  
The Committee observed that from the years 2018 -19 to 2021-22, the Company was imposed 
fine totaling a pprox. Rs.47.35 lakh for non -compliance of SEBI/Corporate Governance 
Guidelines by the Stock Exchanges that was later waived off by the Exchanges on the 
Company’s request.  The Committee find that even though the fine(s) imposed were eventually 
waived-off, but the Company had the liability to make the provision for the amount towards 
payment of fine in its balance sheets.  The Committee noticed that as on 31 May, 2023, as 
against the sanctioned strength of 14 Members in the Company’s Board of Directors (BoD), only 
9 Members (5 Executive Directors including Chairman & Managing Director; 1 Government 
Nominee Director and 3 Independent Directors) are present in the BoD. The Committee are 
dismayed to find that even as on 31.05.23, OIL is having 5 vacancies in th eir BoD. The 
Committee note that the power to appoint/nominate Directors vests with the Government of India 
and they are not being timely appointed/nominated by the Government. Hence, CPSU 
concerned cannot be held responsible for inaction by the Government .  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the administrative Ministry may take -up the matter with Public Enterprise 
Selection Board (PESB) and Department of Public Enterprises to expedite the process of 
selection and recommendation for being considered by t he Appointment Committee of Cabinet 
(ACC) and finalization of appointment of Members in the BoD for smooth functioning of OIL and 
other CPSUs.  In no case, CPSU concerned should be held responsible for vacancy in BoD. 

25 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
“The Directors on the Board of the Company are appointed by the President of India through the 
Administrative Ministry (Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas - MoP&NG), and Department of 
Public Enterprises. The matter of appointment of BoD in CPSUs under the administrative control 
of this Ministry are taken up with Public Enterprise Selection Board (PESB) and Department of 
Public Enterprises in a time bound manner. The recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted for compliance in future.” 
   [Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Physical and Financial Performance 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3) 
3. The Committee note that during 2022 -23, OIL made production of Crude Oil of 3.176 
MMT, Natural Gas production at 3.180 MM BCM and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) at 32.140 
TMT. The Committee also observe that there is an increase of 5.5% and 4.4% in producti on of 
crude oil and natural gas respectively during the year 2022 -23 over FY 2021 -22. As far as 
physical performance regarding other items is concerned, the Committee note that the Company 
also transported 6.18 MMT of crude oil and 1.516 MMT of petroleum p roducts during the year 
2021-22 and had a total installed capacity of 188.1 MW renewable energy projects/plants. 
Further, the Company carried out 1333.32 LKM of 2D and 680.05 SKM of 3D seismic survey 
and drilled 16 Exploratory Wells and 29 Development Well s and made 1 Discoveries during 
2022-23.  
The Committee find that during the 5 years (2016 -17 to 2020 -21), Company’s major drilling 
activities were confined in the limited acreages in the States of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, 
which has reached maturity after years of exploration activities thus resulting in reduced number 
of oil and gas discoveries.  However, with the medium to long -term focus, the Company has 
significantly expanded its domestic acreage with 25 awarded Open Acreage Licensing Policy 
(OALP) blocks and have identified key areas for fast -track developments. The Committee note 
that the Company has also started drilling its first OALP well during 2021 -22 and the Company 
is hopeful about the notable discoveries in other OALP blocks which are expec ted to provide 

26 
 
future growth impetus.  The total investment requirement for carrying out the committed 
exploration work programme in the 25 OALP blocks is 725 million USD (INR 5438 crore) of which 
OIL has incurred an expenditure of INR 704.35 crore (as on 31st March, 2021).  The Committee 
expect that the investment plans of OIL in OALP Blocks shall deliver the anticipated results for 
the Company’s future growth and hope that almost 50% of the OALP Blocks (12 out of 25 Blocks) 
in the North-Eastern States will bring the required benefit to the Company due to its dominance 
and vast experience in this topographical area and existing operational logistics set -up.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire a systematic and planned field development activities by the 
Company on fast -track basis to augment production in the short to medium term for the 
development of the OALP Blocks. Since the OALP blocks are currently at initial stage, all out 
effort may be made in exploration, discovery and appraisal for fueling the Company’s growth.  
Reply of the Government 
“Oil India Limited (OIL) has carried out extensive hydrocarbon exploration activities in different 
states of India. The Company is currently carrying out exploration activities in 27 nos. of OALP 
blocks covering 50,331 SQKM of areas under OALP bidding Rounds I to VII under Hydrocarbon 
Exploration Licensing Policy (HELP), out of which 16 nos. of blocks are in North-east India (4 in 
Assam, 3 in Tripura, 1 in Nagaland & 8 nos. of blocks spread across both Assam & Arunachal 
Pradesh), 5 in Rajasthan, 5 in Odisha, 2 in Andaman shallow offshore, and 1 in Kerala Konkan 
shallow offshore. The blocks are in initial stages of exploration activities wherein seismic & 
drilling campaigns are currently under progress.  
OIL has recently ( on 3rd January) signed the RSC contract for block AS -ONHP-2022/1 of 
2057.63Sq. KM for which also planning for exploration will be chalked out. 
As per the Committed Work Programme, OIL commenced the Seismic Surveys in the blocks as 
and when awarded. As of 20th December, 2023, OIL has completed Seismic survey in 23 nos. 
of blocks and has acquired 18,009 LKM of 2D and 3560 Sq. Km of 3D Seismic data and drilled 
7 nos. of wells (4 nos. in Rajasthan, 2 nos. in Mahanadi and 1 no. in Assam). Further, the 
Company carried out 378.72 LKM of 2D and 248.73 Sq. Km. of 3D seismic surveys during FY 
2023-24. The company has plan to drill suitable nos. wells to bring the exploration campaign in 
the OALP blocks a logical conclusion. 
In the ongoing exploration campaign in the OA LP blocks falling in Category -II Mahanadi & 
Andaman basins, Category-III Kerala-Konkan basin and even in Category-I basin in Rajasthan, 
OIL is the process of engaging industry experts to comprehensively analyse all the available 

27 
 
geoscientific datasets to evaluate the potential and hydrocarbon prospectivity of the basin with 
special emphasis in the OALP acreages of OIL.  
OIL’s exploration activities are: 
1. Mahanadi Basin: For the OALP Blocks of OIL in Mahanadi Basin, OIL is in process of 
carrying out a comprehensive basin analysis and evaluation of hydrocarbon potential of 
entire Mahanadi Basin. The study area is around 256,000 Sq.km. The study result shall 
help to chart out the current exploration activities in the OALP blocks and shall also enable 
in formulating a strategy for future road map for OIL in the Mahanadi basin- both offshore 
and onshore. 
2. Bikaner Nagaur Basin: OIL is currently in the process to hire consultancy  firm to carry 
out basin analysis and hydrocarbon potential evaluation of the entire Bikaner Nagaur sub 
basin in Rajasthan. The study area will be for around 70,000 Sq.km. The outcome of the 
study shall facilitate OIL to draw the outline of the exploration strategy in the current OALP 
block and other open acreages areas. 
3. Kerala-Konkan Basin: Process has been initiated to outsource a study to evaluate the 
exploration potential and hydrocarbon prospectivity  in the OIL’s OALP block in Kerala -
Konkan shallow offshore through analysing all available Geoscientific data in the area for 
chalking out play-based exploration strategy. 
4. Andaman Basin: Process has been initiated to carry out a G&G study for comprehensive 
evaluation of the entire basin including DGH carved out 4 blocks covering an area of 
around 53,100 Sq.km. 
 
OIL’s production Performance: 
The production of Crude oil, Natural Gas and LPG by OIL during the period from 2020 -21 to 
2023-24 are as under: 
Production 
Parameters 
2020-
21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Crude Oil (MMT) 2.964 3.010 3.176 3.359 
Natural Gas (BCM) 2.642 3.045 3.180 3.182 
LPG (TMT) 33.910 33.240 32.100 31.550 
 

28 
 
During the FY 2022-23, OIL successfully discovered and monetized a new ‘Discovery’ in Sesabil 
area in the Dibrugarh District of Assam.” 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
4. The Committee are glad to know that the Company has been able to earn an income of 
Rs. 16,427.65 crore in 2021-22 as against Rs. 10,561.4 crore in the previous year and also has 
registered higher Profit After Tax (PAT) of Rs . 3,887.31 crore during the financial year against 
Rs. 1,741.59 crore in the previous year. The Committee also observed that during the Financial 
Year 2022-23, the total income of the Company was  
Rs. 24,757.85 crore with net Profit After Tax (PAT) of Rs. 6,810.40 crore which is highest ever 
in second consecutive year. The Company also made contribution of Rs. 7855.99 crore and Rs. 
4478.07 crore to Exchequer of Centre and States respectively. The Committee note that the 
revenue from the sale of crude oil an d natural gas of the Company is dynamically linked to 
International oil and gas prices. Thus, while finalizing the revenue targets, the production targets 
are finalized considering all the relevant factors associated with production performance.  The 
Committee further note that the Company has drawn a plan to augment its oil production by 25% 
moving from 3 MMT to  
4 MMT and for natural gas from 3 BCM to 5 BCM in the next three years, and in this direction 
they have identified five thrust areas to implement field development activities with fast -track 
approach.   The Committee while applauding the above ambitious plan of the Company to 
augment its production, desire OIL to make all out efforts to increase its domestic market share 
in comparison to existing co mpetitors and achieve enhanced revenue targets. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in achieving the desired production targets in the 
next three years as envisaged in the Company’s augmentation plan and also furnish details of 
revenue targets and production targets thus achieved.  
Reply of the Government 
OIL has taken up the following Short Term and long-Term Initiatives for the enhancing production 
of Crude oil and natural gas: 

29 
 
Short term initiatives: 
 Fast-track development of identified fields  
 Early Monetization of discoveries. (The Company has monetized 6 out of 8 discoveries 
since 2018 -19). 2HP-HT discoveries (NG) have been relinquished since economically 
non feasible. 
 Improving Recovery Factor through implementation of IOR and EOR techniques. 
 Infill drilling of wells. 
 Quick monetization of sick wells through technology support. 
 Recovery from the missed opportunities, production from the untested zones in existing 
old wells. 
 Upgradation of surface infrastructure for oil/gas production. 
 Induction of suitable technologies on selective fields.  
 Engagement of Production Enhancement Contracts (PEC) for enhancing production from 
various established structures. 
 Taking up resource build-up exercise, viz. increase Workover rig resourc e, replacement 
of existing Drilling rigs with VFD Technology, increasing the artificial lifting capabilities 
etc. 
 OIL has been putting all efforts in improving its drilling activities and with the acquiring of 
new blocks OIL plans to increase the contribution towards production enhancement from 
new wells. The wells drilled in last five years and planned to be drilled up to 2024 -25 is 
shown in the table below:   
                                        Last 5 Years                Target  
Drilling 
Performance 
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24* 2024-25 
Exploratory 
Wells 
15 11 12 7 16 21 34 
Development 
Wells 
22 25 24 31 29 44 44 
  
Total Wells 
(Nos) 
37 36 36 38 45 65 78 
*During the current year till 31.01.2024, OIL has completed drilling of 47 wells, 33 Development 
and 14 Exploratory wells. 
 

30 
 
Long term initiatives: 
 In line with the Government of India's vision to intensify exploration in Indian sedimentary 
basins and increase domestic oil and gas production, OIL has significantly expanded its 
domestic acreages by actively participating in various bid rounds under Ope n Acreage 
Licensing Policy (OALP). So far, OIL has been awarded a total of 29 blocks covering a 
total area of 53,859 sq km and 3 DSF blocks of 207.8 sqkm area. OIL has promptly started 
exploration activities in OALP blocks. The blocks are presently in initial exploration phase. 
 Step up production to 4+ MMT from the level 3 MMT is one the major vision of the 
company in forthcoming years. In this direction, OIL has already earmarked many field 
development activities in its nominated blocks and 29 OALP blocks and 3 DSF blocks for 
carrying out extensive exploration and development program in the country. 
 OIL has successfully implemented Cyclic Steam Stimulation in 2019 -20 at Baghewala 
field, Rajasthan which yielded 168% increase in production of Heavy crude oil during 
2019-20. Implementation of this technology is expected to further contribute to oil 
potential of the company. 
 Alongside north-east, OIL is pursuing exploration in non-producing basins (Category-II & 
III) viz. Mahanadi, Andaman, Kerala -Konkan Basins and also in shallow -water offshore 
blocks. 
IOR/EOR Planned: 
The various IOR/EOR methods being implemented as referred earlier planned by OIL for 
enhancing production by OIL are as follows:  
Hydraulic Fracturing of Fracking  to improve the flow capacity of t he reservoir rock in the near -
well vicinity.   
 Matrix Acidization job to clean the pores of sandstones.  
 Artificial Lifting of well fluid. Techniques used in Artificial lift are  
 Sucker-rod pump  
 Electrical submersible progressive cavity pump (ESPCP)   
 Gas lift and intermittent gas lift  

31 
 
 Plunger Assisted lift  
 Progressive cavity pumps (PCP)  
 Secondary Recovery techniques such as water flooding, CO2 injection, polymer injection. 
 CSS (Cyclic Steam Simulation) Country’s first initiatives to enhance production of heavy 
crude oil from the Field of Baghewala has shown positive result with almost doubling the 
of production from this difficult field. 
The production targets as per BE & Indicative by OIL for 2024 -25 to 2025 -26,                                   
2026-27(standalone) are as under: 
 
 
Revenue targets: 
RS IN CRORE 
PARTICULARS 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
INCOME       
CRUDE OIL 15668 17010 17955 
NATURAL GAS 5377 6461 7603 
LPG, TRANSPORTATION etc. 800 800 800 
TOTAL TURNOVER 21846 24272 26358 
 
  [Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Main Producing Area (MPA) – concerns on decline in production of  
crude oil and natural gas 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
5. The Committee note that OIL in its domestic portfolio has produced 15.606 MMT of crude 
oil and 14.533 BCM of Natural gas during the period from 2018 -19 to 2022-23 (including OIL’s 
JV share of production). About 99.7% of entire crude oil and about 93 % of i ts natural gas 
production has been from its aging and mature fields in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. The 
Production Parameters 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 
Crude Oil (MMT) 3.958 4.196 3.952 
Natural Gas (BCM) 3930 4770 4750 
LPG (TMT) 29,000 30,000 30,000 

32 
 
Committee further note that only about 0.3% of crude oil and 7% of natural gas production comes 
from its fields located in the western Rajasthan.  The C ommittee observe that Company itself 
has admitted that most of their oilfields located in Main Producing Area (MPA) are highly matured 
and are in natural decline phase and, therefore, maintaining the current level of production in 
present production fields  will be a major challenge for the Company. Besides this, nationwide 
lockdown due to COVID 19 and other restrictions imposed also impacted production related 
activities of OIL. The Blowout at Baghjan and related environmental issues also contributed to 
the decline in 2020 -21 apart from earlier reported local factors like bandhs, blockades, unrest 
and miscreant activities in MPA, etc.  The Committee, though, find the decline from MPA a 
distressing factor that may severely hamper the growth prospectus of the Company, however, 
are relieved to know that the Company has already adopted advanced technology (water 
injection and other EOR/IOR (Enhanced Oil Recovery /Increased Oil Recovery) to maintain 
production at a near constant level from the old and mature fields and have also identified thrust 
areas in MPA for fast-track development which is expected to enhance its level of production in 
near future.   
The Committee hope that with the combination of use of advance technology and meticulous 
management strategies adopted by OIL in MPA, the Company will be able to maintain and 
deliver its sterling performance in the future.  The Committee, further, desire that the Company 
should carry out a holistic R&D to deal with natural decline of MPA in coordination with other oil 
companies and internationally accredited agencies in this field.  
Reply of the Government 
“OIL has its major producing oilfields in the Upper Assam Basin including two of the oldest oil 
fields of India i.e. Naharkatiya and Moran. Around 70% of the total oil production of the company 
comes from the fields that have been discovered more than 20 years back. Structured approach 
towards intensification and integration of geo -scientific studies has led to sustained crude oil 
production of around 3 MMT annuall y since more than 6 decades. OIL has been continuously 
scouting for various reservoir management practices including IOR/EOR opportunities, new fit -
for-purpose technologies to be tested in the producing fields for production enhancement and 
arresting of field decline. Further, Oil has recently signed a number of MoUs with various national 
and international organisations/academic institutions of repute for collaborative studies with a 
view to enhance production from its matured fields. The various activities  towards arresting 
production decline are given below: 

33 
 
 
 
1. Low salinity Water Injection 
Low salinity Water Injection (LSWI) technique was introduced in Naharkatiya oil field during 
1966. Till date, a total of 31 reservoirs with STOIIP ~ 341 MMKLS (~40% of STOIIP) have been 
subjected to LSWI and currently this technique is being executed in eithteen (18) no. of 
reservoirs. Due to favourable viscosity ratio of oil and water in reservoir conditions (lower mobility 
contrast), water injection works out to be th e best EOR technique techno -economically for our 
oilfields. Additionally, the injected fresh water has very low amount of dissolved solids (30 -300 
ppm), which further increases the recovery by lowering the residual oil saturation. LSWI has 
been established worldwide as an EOR technique working on the principles of ion exchange, 
IFT reduction and changes in reservoir wettability. Currently, around ~5800 klpd of water is being 
injected through 26 injection wells. In most of the reservoirs, which have been sub jected to a 
fairly long duration of LSWI schemes, oil recovery has been in the range of 30 -50%, far 
exceeding the recovery estimated from primary depletion. The improvement in oil recovery factor 
over the primary depletion for most of the reservoirs has be en of the order of 10 -15%. 
Contribution from LSWI has been ~5% of the total OIL’s production, whereas the global average 
EOR production stands at 2-3% of the world oil production. Review of the ongoing projects are 
being made and new reservoirs are identif ied depending upon suitability as a continuous 
process. Text Table-1 below shows contribution of IOR/EOR during the last 05 years for OIL. 
IOR/EOR contribution for OIL 
Parameter/Year 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Oil production from LSWI 
(MMSKL) 0.2162 0.1934 0.1743 0.1599 0.1604 
Oil production from 
Infill/horizontal well drilling 
(MMSKL) 
0.9537 0.8858 0.8865 0.8954 0.9154 
Oil production from WO of wells 
(MMSKL) 0.1288 0.0869 0.0770 0.1169 0.1156 
Total (MMSKL) 1.2987 1.1661 1.1378 1.1722 1.1914 
 

34 
 
 
2. Enhanced Oil Recovery in OIL 
Several IOR/ EOR processes have been implemented by OIL since mid -sixties depending on 
the requirement and suitability of the reservoir/field. The EOR history of OIL takes us back to 
1965 when the first gas injection was implemented in Nahorkatiya oilfield. Subsequently, it was 
extended to a number of reservoirs which resulted in pressure maintenance as well as 
production enhancement. Polymer flood was also implemented for the first time in India in 1975 
in NHK027 Block which has resulted in significant rec overy enhancement. A number of EOR 
projects are also being identified, which are on various stages of field implementation at MPA in 
addition to LSWI, which are discussed below. 
 Pilot Polymer Flooding in NHK011D+018 Block 
In order to enhance the recovery from its matured fields, OIL is in the process of field execution 
of the polymer flood pilot in NHK Main Barail 3 rd Sand (NHK011D+018 Block) reservoir. As per 
the study, incremental recovery by implementing Pilot Polymer Flood is around 0.09 MMT over 
the Waterflood Case. Two inverted 5 spot pattern have been identified in NHK011D+18 Block, 
for which two injectors have already been drilled (NHK651 and NHK652). Based on the 
performance of the two pilot areas, full field Polymer Flood implementation will be carried out.  
For the EOR execution, contract has been awarded to M/s Jaybee Energy Private 
Limited.Polymer injection started from 25.03.2023 and currently injecting around 630 m3/day of 
polymer through the 2 injector wells.  
 CO2 EOR in NHK079D Block  
OIL initiated feasibility study of CO 2 EOR in NHK Main Barail 3rd Sand (NHK079D Block) in 
2018 in collaboration with University of Houston. One inverted 5 spot pattern have been identified 
through laboratory and Simulation study of the reservoir. The recommended case/pattern 
requires drilling of one injector well and yields around 0.27 MMm3 of additional oil over the Base 
Case. 
Water injection is designed to be initiated from 2022 to 2027 to jack up the reservoir pressure 
close to MMP of 211 KSC followed by CO 2 injection from 2027 onwards at a rate of around 67 
TPD. The injector well has already been drilled and is injecting water since last one year. 

35 
 
During the lead time to CO2 injection, a Feasibility Study for surface/subsurface facilities to 
address design issu es and operational challenges associated with the pilot implementation is 
planned to be carried out. 
 CWI in Dikom LK+TH Sand (Well NHK438 Block) 
After carrying out a JIP Study with Heriot Watt University, UK in which laboratory results showed 
10%-12% additional hydrocarbon recovery by Carbonated Water Injection (CWI) over normal 
water flood, it has been planned to implement the technology in Dikom oilfield of OIL. CWI has 
many advantages over other secondary and tertiary EOR methods (require lesser CO 2, safe 
CO2 storage in the reservoir). 
Five wells (DKM007, 008, 010, MDK002 and MDK003) have been identified for conversion into 
water injector in Diko m Field. Presently, well DKM007 and MDK003 are on continuous water 
injection @ 260 klpd each. Tentative requirement of CO 2 shall be around 70 TPD (for 5 wells) 
for around 10 years period which is planned to be sourced from BCPL, Dibrugarh. A pre -feed 
study involving EIL for facility considerations is also presently in progress. 
 Reservoir Simulation for identification of bypassed oil 
Comprehensive reservoir rejuvenation studies are carried out as a continuous process through 
static and dynamic modelling stud ies with an objective of identifying undrained/bypassed oil. 
Presently OIL is having models for most of the reservoirs in the MPA area and maximum effort 
is being made to build models for new prospective reservoirs which helps in maximizing crude 
oil production from the fields. Simulation models helps in reservoir management by providing a 
basis for informed decision making considering the various uncertainties, risks and the dynamic 
nature of the reservoirs.  
Rejuvenation studies of the matured reservoirs are also being carried out engaging reputed 
Consultants having relevant experience on a time-to-time basis. Presently, a consultancy study 
is underway for Nahorkatiya field where recommendations for measures to enhance production 
from this ageing field is expected.  
3. Other Efforts towards Reservoir Management 
 New technology Implementation 

36 
 
Various technology related to Matured field production enhancement have been employed in 
OIL to arrest the decline of the reservoirs. Following new technology induction have been carried 
out in OIL 
i. Radial Drilling: Tested as a Pilot in about 16 wells with a potential gain of 65 klpd in Moran, 
Jorajan and Tinali Areas 
ii. Microbial Enhanced oil recovery (MEOR): Eight Pilot MEOR jobs were executed in 
Naharkatiya and Jorajan fields  in two phases. Some of the wells have shown a 40% 
incremental rate post MEOR job. MEOR jobs avebee taken up inhouse in Moran that 
have shown a considerable increment in oil rate. 
iii. Hydrofrac Job: Tested as a Pilot in 9 wells with a potential gain of around 150 klpd mostly 
in Bhogpara and Kusijan area. Further, well have been identified for next phase of 
Hydrofrac jobs. 
iv. Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) tools are also implemented in the MPA 
area to maximize the recovery from the fields.  
Monitoring of producing wells 
In a mature oil field that has been producing for over 30 years, declining reservoir pressure and 
increasing water -cut are the two major factors that are affecting oil production rates. 
Implementation of rigorous field surveillance programs like regular well testing, fluid sampling 
and pressure -production monitoring is carried out to collect critical data for reservoir 
performance assessment. This comprehensive surveillance aids in identifying under performing 
wells and implementing corrective measures promptly. With production from matured Field's and 
related issue of declining pressure, artificial lift, optimization studies have also helped to sustain 
and optimize production in a vast majority of the wells  
Studies related to well a nd reservoir level monitoring for water cut increase and production 
decline is carried out continuously and following remedial measures are undertaken wherever 
feasible.  
i. Shutting off the water producing zone in the wells with logging and plugging  
ii. Adding perforations to the existing sand and/or a different reservoir, 
iii. Water shut off measures, 
iv. Gravel pack in sand prone areas, 

37 
 
v. Hydro frac in tight reservoirs, 
vi. Radial drilling to enhance the flow area etc. 
Collaborations with renowned Institutions 
OIL has entered into MoU/collaborations with renowned academia/institutions for various studies 
related to production enhancements along with mapping of new areas for exploration of 
hydrocarbon in the vicinity of MPA. Some of the major collaborations are given below: 
i. JIP Study with Heriot Watt University, UK for carbonated water injection evaluation in 
Core samples. 
ii. EOR and field development studies in collaboration with University of Houston, USA. 
iii. Litho-structural analysis and identification of potential zones of petrol eum seepages in 
parts of the Naga Schuppen Belt, Assam -Arakan Basin: A Remote Sensing and Field 
Techniques Approach with Gauhati University. 
iv. Outcrop sequence stratigraphy in the Naga Schuppen Belt and Inner Fold -Belt of 
Nagaland and Manipur   with Gauhati University. 
v. Study of sedimentology, lithofacies association, geological mapping of the Mio -Pliocene 
sedimentary sequence in parts of the Tripura Fold Belt: A Remote Sensing and Field 
Techniques Approach with Gauhati University. 
vi. Stratigraphical evaluation a nd geological mapping of the Paleogene sedimentary 
sequence of South Garo Hills region, Meghalaya: a study based on geological fieldwork 
and satellite image analysis with Gauhati University. 
vii. Geological Mapping by GIS & Remote Sensing, Hydrocarbon Source Po tential and 
Sedimentation History of the Gondwana Group of Rocks in Parts of Kameng& Siang 
Districts of Arunachal Pradesh  with Dibrugarh University. 
viii. Geological mapping and identification of oil and gas seepages in the Inner Fold Belt of 
Manipur with Manipur University. 
ix. Geological mapping and identification of oil and gas seepages in the Naga Schuppen Belt 
with Nagaland University. 
x. Geological Mapping and Provenance study of the Gondwana Group of Rocks in Parts of 
Kameng& Siang Districts of Arunachal Pradesh  with Rajiv Gandhi University, Arunachal 
Pradesh. 

38 
 
xi. Biostratigraphic Analysis of the sub -surface samples of Exploratory /Development wells 
of Oil India Limited with Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences. 
xii. Evaluation of Oil Shale Resource Potential and Deta iled Characterization in North -
Eastern State of India    with CSIR – CIMFR. 
xiii. Annual training programme on Geological mapping in sedimentary terrain for OIL 
executives at FTC, Kuju, with Geological Survey of India. 
xiv. Geological Mapping in prioritised areas in the Assam -Arakan Basin of Northeastern 
Region of India to establish the lithostratigraphy and sedimentary basin evolution and to 
explore the hydrocarbon potential of the areas with Geological Survey of India. 
Conclusion : 
New discoveries of oil and gas reserves have become very scarce and most of the production 
of oil and gas is from matured and ageing fields. Therefore, with the increase in global and 
domestic consumption of oil and gas, various structured IOR/EOR practices have been adapted 
to arrest the decline, increase production and thereby exploiting the reservoirs optimally. With 
sound reservoir management activities, OIL has been successful to sustain crude oil/gas 
production along with continuous pursuit for induction of new technologies.” 
 
   [Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
 
Shifting of Corporate Office  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
6. The Committee note that OIL had an operational Corporate Office (CO) earlier at New 
Delhi from 1981 and thereafter at NOIDA from 2007-08 and the Registered Office (RO) and Field 
Head Quarter (FHQ) at Duliajan in Assam.  Additionally, the Company also has a  Pipeline 
Headquarter (PHQ) at Guwahati.  It is learnt that after the Baghjan blow -out incident, OIL was 
asked to relocate its Headquarter/Corporate Office to Guwahati to increase the operational and 
execution capability; have close supervision and oversig ht of its operation in North -East; and 
make active interaction with the State Government and local community.  Consequently, the 
Govt. of Assam allotted a plot of land in Guwahati for setting-up the office and foundation stone 

39 
 
has been laid in June, 2022.  In this context, the Committee also note that apart from North-East 
States, OIL’s Domestic Acerage (Operated) spreads to five other States/UT in the Country and 
10 projects in seven other Countries.  Moreover, as part of its diversification strategy, it h as 
taken-up the projects of City Gas Distribution (CGD) business in the States of Haryana and 
Maharashtra.  The Committee note that as a reputed E&P Company OIL, having its base and 
maximum production (the Company during 2021-22 made 99 % of its crude oil production and  
90.58 % gas production) from the State of Assam, has proved its mettle with the existing set-up 
of Corporate Office -Headquarter set -up at NCR(NOIDA) -Dulaijan combination acting as an 
important link in coordination, prompt decision making an d linking of North -East with the 
Ministry’s Headquarter in New Delhi. The Committee, therefore, opine that the present land 
allotted in Guwahati to OIL may be developed and strengthened by positioning key Board 
Members having E&P expertise to supervise and look after the operations and business in North-
East States which may act as an important link between Dulaijan, Assam (RO and FHQ) and 
NOIDA.  The Committee, therefore, in view of OIL’s pan -India and global presence, desire that 
the MoPNG may review their earlier decision of shifting Corporate Office to Assam. This will help 
OIL in improving their business and give an opportunity in interacting with all concerned 
conveniently in quickest possible time. 
Reply of the Government 
“The earlier decision of relocating of OIL's Headquarter/Corporate Office to Guwahati has since 
been reviewed and the Competent Authority has approved the continuation of OIL’s existing 
Headquarter/Corporate Office at Noida and not to relocate the office to Guwahati. 
Compliant to observations and being a Maharatna CPSE, now OIL has redefined its vision as 
an integrated company with business outlook to engage actively in E&P activity Pan India 
including offshore exploration efforts. 
In view of above, OIL has now revisited the earlier ap proach and planning to develop an OIL 
complex at Guwahati comprising of the following facilities: 
 State of the art training institute for OIL’s executives and employees. 
 A Centre of Excellence for Energy Studies’ (CoEES) which will facilitate innovative studies 
in the Energy Domain including E&P. 

40 
 
 A skill development Institute (SDI) for the benefit of youths of entire NE Region with 
residential facility. 
Preparation of revised building design including site investigation, if any for above facilities is 
being planned and on finalization of the same, construction of the complex will be taken up by 
OIL.” 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Safety- Incidents/Accidents, Causalties and Compensation – Take-away  
from Baghjan incident 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
7. The Committee note that there were about 38 minor/serious/fatal accidents (Non -
fire/Personnel Loss) during 2016 -17 to 2021-22.  Further, data as furnished to the Committee 
reveal that only 103 Pre Work over Safety Audit were conducted during the year 2020 -21 as 
against 127 for 2019-20. Similarly, significant decline had been noticed in Fire Safety Audit (84 
in 2020-21 as against 115 in 2019-20) and Surprise Safety Inspection (140 in 2020-21 as against 
211 in 2019-20). The Company has attributed the reasons in decline in number of safety audits, 
to Covid-19 pandemic in the year 2020 -21 and also to the Baghjan (Blowout) crisis in Assam 
from 27 May, 2020 to 15 November, 2020 (Capping of the Well) as many of the Health Safety 
and Environment (HSE) personnel were  engaged in managing the crisis situation.  The 
Committee find that although OIL had 4 -tier Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Committee 
to address issues at various levels [Board level; Field level; Mine/Departmental Level and Pit 
Level] and Safety Audits are carried out at regular intervals by external agencies  like Directorate 
General of Mines Safety (DGMS), Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) along with 
National/Government agencies empanelled under Ministry of Labour & Employment and Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas, still the Company had to encounter incident of the magnitude of 
Baghjan Blowout.  The Committee hope that the Company must learn lessons from the above 
incidents and take pro -active steps towards increasing frequency of various Sa fety Audits 

41 
 
ensuring strict implementation of concerned SOPs in this regard. The Committee further desire 
that compliance of the same should also be monitored by OISD, a technical Directorate set up 
in 1986 to deal with safety related matters in oil and ga s industry, and administrative Ministry 
(MoPNG) should also work for compliance of safety norms and prevent such serious incidents 
in future. 
Reply of the Government 
• “Recommendations of the HLC are being monitored by OISD on quarterly basis from E&P 
operators. The quarterly data is being analysed by OISD and a report is submitted to MoPNG. 
• Safety Council, chaired by Secretary, MoPNG also reviews the compliance by E&P 
operators against HLC recommendation once every year. Last such review was done on 30th  
June 2023.  
• Review meeting chaired by Joint Secretary (Exp.) is also held periodically with all major 
E&P operators, OISD and DGH to review the compliance status of HLC recommendations. Last 
such meeting was held on 10th October 2023.  
• External Safety audits (ESA) are being conducted regularly by OISD. Detailed checklists 
have been developed for these audits, which is revised annually, to incorporate new 
requirements emanating from changes in legislation/ OISD standards/ accident investigations 
recommendations including HLC. OISD has also started carrying out audit at the organizational 
level as per recommendation of the HLC. 
• OISD performance in terms of audits have increased substantially as shown below:   
 
Year Overall audits done by OISD  Audit done for onshore 
upstream 
2019-20 189 59 
2020-21 206 76 
2021-22 268 102 
2022-23 317 110 
2023-24 322 115 
TOTAL 1302 462 
 OISD has revised following OISD standards incorporating the recommendations: 
o OISD-GDN-206 on Safety Management System  
o OISD-STD-227 on Emergency response preparedness inoil & gas industry 

42 
 
o OISD-STD-176 on HSE training for exploration & production industry 
 OISD is also disseminating the knowledge and case studies on accidents to the industry 
through webinar ‘Suraksha Samwad’ , workshops/ seminars and in -house publication 
“Suraksha Chetna’. 
 A Report on Lessons learned from Baghjan incident has been prepared by OIL with the 
inputs from various departments directly involved at the ground zero to bring the blowout 
under control as  well as from the supporting departments who were involved in 
mobilizing/fabricating/testing all the required equipment and machineries from Field 
Headquarters, Duliajan as well as from other parts of the country and abroad. (Report 
attached as Annexure-I) 
 Moreover, a Report on improvements made post lessons learnt from Baghjan Incident 
has been prepared by OIL depicting the progress made so far after the Baghjan Blowout 
incident. (Report attached as Annexure-II) 
 Necessary pro-active measures have been init iated by the Management for increasing 
the frequency of Safety Audits (The comparison chart may be seen below). Moreover, to 
meet the requirement of recommendations of Organizational Audit and Advisory from 
Senior Management, Internal Multi-disciplinary Safety Audits in line with OISD -STD-145 
requirements through Company Officials has been initiated from 05.12.2023 and as on 
date a total of 104 Nos. audits (at FHQ, Duliajan) has been carried out. 
 
 


43 
 
 OISD has prepared and issued a system of Standard Operating Practices (SOP) as per 
the HLC recommendation. In this regard, OIL has reviewed a total of 2115 Nos. in this 
regard. (The list of revised SOPs is attached as Annexure-III) 
 Organisational Audit of OIL by OISD team was carried out from 28.11.2022 to 02.12.2022. 
(Report attached as Annexure-IV) 
 OIL had set-up a Special Task Force consisting of officers from Operations and HSE to 
monitor the compliance of HLC recommendations and a total of 116 Nos. Aud its were 
carried out by this team.  
 The status of the compliance of recommendations of HLC constituted by MoPNG in 
compliance to NGT order on Baghjan Incident is monitored by OISD on quarterly basis. 
The updated status is attached as Annexure-V.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
8. The Committee note that post blowout at Baghjan, a Committee, under Justice (Retd) B 
P Katakey , was formed by National Green Tribunal to undertake the task of assessing the 
environmental damage caused by the Baghjan incident and to suggest restorative measures.  
Lateron, the Committee was also reconstituted by the Supreme Court.  The Committee find that 
prior to this unfortunate Blowout, the Company had not been penalized to pay damages for 
violating environmental norms or causing damage to the environment.  The Committee further 
note that post Blowout, the Company had engaged organizations/agencies (M/s ERM India Pvt. 
Limited, Assam agriculture University, TERI, CSIR and IIT, Guwahati) that carried out 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Assessment & Remediation of the quality of soil 
and vegetation in the vicinity of the blowout area.  The re ports submitted by the reputed 
organizations have not pointed to any adverse permanent effect on the surrounding areas 
including the blowout site.  The Committee find that as directed by Hon’ble Supreme Court 
constituted Committee, the Company is adhering and implementing the bio -remediation in the 
entire affected area. The Committee opine that since livelihood of the people living nearby 
blowout area is dependent on the natural resources available in that area, Oil India Limited must 
implement the recommen dations of the Committee(s) for Assessment & Remediation of the 
environment, in letter and spirit for successful rehabilitation of the area.  The Committee further 
desire that the Company may adopt some villages around Baghjan blowout for their all round 

44 
 
development. This step will ensure continuous vigil and monitoring of the area by the Company 
and returning of flora, fauna for the livelihood for the people living in that area.  The Committee 
also desire that the same may annually be reviewed in its Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) 
Committee and in the Board. 
Reply of the Government 
“In line with the recommendations of the learned Committee to review Health, Safety and 
Environment (HSE), OIL has taken initiatives christened as “KAVACH” for mitigation measures. 
Similarly, OIL has also revised the old “HSE Policy “ policy has been revise d. Brief on both i.e. 
Initiatives and Revised Policy has been appended below: 
Project KAVACH: 
OIL accords highest commitment to Health and Safety of all the stakeholders along with the 
preservation of the Environment in its operational area across all sphe res and community at 
large. HSE is deeply ingrained as a core value for Oil India Limited, and is focused towards 
continual improvement embracing advancements in regulatory regimes, Integrating new 
technology etc, demonstrate company’s commitment to the we ll-being of its employees, the 
protection of the environment, and the overall safety in every facet of our operations aligning 
with company’s vision and values.  
In alignment with Company’s commitment towards HSE, OIL has launched Project KAVACH 
(Key to Aw areness, Value Creation, and Change) to strengthen and transform the existing 
Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) Management System of the company. The project aims 
to adopt best practices by benchmarking its installations and processes against global standards 
through ISO certification. The comprehensive endeavour encompasses ten strategic goals, each 
designed to elevate HSE performance and sustainability practices. The initiative entails 
strengthening the HSE Management System, conducting HSE Culture as sessments, 
establishing a comprehensive HSE audit universe & asset integrity management, benchmarking 
HSE Parameters against national and international best practices and standards, integrating 
technology to enhance the HSE Management System, establishing an Emergency Response 
Centre, achieving Net Zero and conducting an Occupational Health Survey. Project KAVACH 
serves as a catalyst for positive transformation within Company, reinforcing a robust HSE 
framework and fostering responsible business practices in alignment with global standards. 
 
Revised HSE Policy: 
In response to the dynamic and evolving Health, Safety, and Environmental (HSE) ecosystem, 
OIL has undertaken an initiative to review and revise its HSE Policy. The decision is propelled 
by multifacet ed factors, which includes (i) critical recommendations from the High -Level 
Committee on the Baghjan incident, (ii) insights gained from an External Safety Audit of OIL, (iii) 
evolving regulatory guidelines and (iv) observations noted in the Joint Working Group report. 

45 
 
Additionally, the imperative for change is due to transformative shift in the vision statement of 
the company, necessitating a realignment of its operational principles. 
The transformative journey of OIL into a dynamic and integrated energy p layer, in line with its 
redefined vision and values, necessitates a corresponding evolution in its Health, Safety, and 
Environment (HSE) policy.  
• OIL’s redefined vision is “Be a leading and future ready integrated energy company 
committed to sustainable energy security of India through performance excellence 
Oil India Limited has taken a note of all the recommendations of Committee(s) for 
Assessment & Remediation of the environment for successful rehabilitation of people living 
nearby Baghjan blowout area . OIL has paid necessary compensation towards 
Rehabilitation, Resettlement and Compensation to the local villagers via District 
Administration as directed by the Committees(s). 
• At the highest level, there are two committees that review and take stock of HSE matters 
of the company, viz. the Apex level committee comprising of CMD & Directors and the HSE 
committee comprising of Functional Directors and Independent Directors. All HSE matters 
are reviewed biannually by both the committees and annually by the Board.” 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Efforts to improve women participation in E&P Sector 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
9. The Committee, during the course of evidence, were surprised to find that a Company 
like OIL, a  E&P major, have been able to engage only 409 women executives in the Company 
that constitutes less than 7 % of their present strength of 6256 employees as against an average 
women participation of 9.35% of total women employees in CPSEs. The response of the 
Company and the Ministry that they encourage gender equality in the recruitment processes and 
also give emphasis to induct women employees in tech nical and non -technical fields and 
familiarize them about the best practices and facilities available, does not reflect true picture of 
women participation in Companies engaged in Oil & Natural gas.  They all have less than 10% 
women participation in their respective Companies as is evident from the data furnished to the 
Committee, ONGC (7.5%), GAIL (6.46%), IOCL(8.77%) and HPCL(9.7%),. The Committee 
observe that an exception to this is only the EIL, an Engineering Consultancy & EPC Company 
under MoPNG, whi ch has 11.75 % of women employees engaged in the Company.  The 
submission by OIL in this regard that in Companies engaged in E&P, women are less likely to 
prefer drilling and other activities that are field-oriented having night-shifts, is not convincing. The 

46 
 
Committee is aware that today women are participating in every field including challenging 
sectors like Defence/Aviation/Medical and hence desire that efforts should be made by the 
Companies to recruit more women employees in Oil & Natural Gas Companie s.  The Ministry 
should also work with Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun and other Institutes for the 
purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
“Oil India Limited is committed to prioritizing gender inclusivity, creating an environment where 
women are treated  with respect and provided protection in the workplace. Our dedication to 
fostering a conducive work environment for female employees extends to a strong emphasis on 
health and safety aspects. At OIL, we hold the dignity of women in high regard, reflecting  our 
legacy and a culture of maintaining a positive and progressive attitude towards women. 
 
 
 
Women Representation in OIL  
 
Year Total Employees Women Employees 
2020-21 6190 403 
2021-22 6256 409 
2022-23 6759 489 
 
The overall representation of women along the corporate hierarchy is on the rise due to focused 
interventions by the Company. It is noteworthy that, given the structure of the Oil and Gas 
industry, the participation of women in employee cadres has historic ally lagged behind that of 
men. Challenges posed by remote, geographically difficult, and socially backward areas where 
much of the value chain activities occur have exacerbated efforts to increase women's 
representation at the ground level. However, targe ted interventions in the executive workforce 
over the past few years are yielding positive results. Currently, women constitute approximately 
13% of the total executive strength, with an even more encouraging representation of around 
16% in entry-level executive grades (in grades B,C& D) —significantly higher than the industry 
average of 9.35% as given in this report. 

47 
 
To keep up our progress towards gender parity in the workforce, it may also be mentioned here 
that to ensure fairness in selection process, a lady officer is invariably associated in the Selection 
committee whenever women candidates are involved. 
It is essential to acknowledge the Company's numerous focused initiatives toward achieving 
gender parity in its workforce. Nevertheless, achieving increased women representation across 
corporate hierarchies requires a concerted, sustained, and holistic effort from all stakeholders in 
society. Parents, teachers, community leaders, academic institutions, lawmakers, government, 
and corporate leaders each ha ve a role to play in enhancing women's representation —an 
integral driver of economic prosperity and structural well-being in society.” 
  
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Diversification Initiatives – Renewable Energy, Green Hydrogen and City Gas 
Distribution  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
10. The Committee note that OIL began its foray into the Alternative (Renewable) Energy 
Sector from the year 2012 and has so far established renewable energy projects of 188 MW 
comprising of 174 MW Wind and 14MW solar of commercial nature with a total investme nt of 
Rs.1,230.73 Crore. The Committee note that total revenue generated from Renewable Energy 
projects till 2021-22 has been Rs. 870 Crore.  The Committee also note that the RE initiatives of 
the Company have been limited to few Indian States of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat.  
Although, OIL has its core business in E&P of crude oil and natural gas but given that the RE 
business increasingly becoming competitive and complex, the Committee desire that OIL should 
formulate a foolproof strategy for establishing large scale projects in RE field.  
Reply of the Government 
“OIL had started diversifying into low carbon & green energy space organically since 2012 with 
the development of 174MW of wind, 14MW of solar and 100KW Green Hydrogen capacities. 
OIL is now planning to diversify into green and alternate energy businesses not just for captive 
consumption, but to emerge as a well-diversified integrated energy player. 

48 
 
To address the above, OIL has formulated a Strategy to dedicatedly focus on green and 
Alternate Energy business and has accordingly decided to form a Wholly Owned Subsidiary 
(WoS)-OIL-Green Energy Limited to manage the green and Alternate Energy business. As per 
the adopted Strategy, OIL plans to have a 5-7% non-fossil energy in its total energy portfolio by 
2030 and 12-15% of non-fossil energy by 2040. The Company is having a target to achieve the 
Green and Alternate Energy capacity of 3.5 to 4.0 MMTOE by 2040. 
The WoS would cover Biofuels, Green H2, Renewable Energy, CCUS, Methanol and 
Geothermal and other opportunities directly or indirectly supporting decarbonization and energy 
transition. The market attractiveness and strategic fit for each of the above energy domains has 
been assessed and recommended along with the detailed strategy formulat ion exercise taking 
into consideration various parameters such as, industry overview, key success factors, cost and 
return and market share etc.” 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
11. The Committee note that as per ‘OIL Strategic & Corporate Plan 2011 -20’, City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) has been selected by the Company as an emerging area to provide an 
alternate, clean and efficient fuel to the consumers.  Accordingly, OIL has ventured into City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) projects to diversify into non -E&P energy value chain and embark on next 
phase of growth. The Committee observe that OIL has invested Rs. 222 crore in different Joint 
Ventures for CGD Network fo r 7 Geographical Areas in various parts of the Country.  The 
Committee further note that after completion of 11A bidding round, 297 Geographical Areas 
(GAs) covering about 98% of the population and 88% of total geographical area spread over 
around 776 dist ricts in 28 States & UTs have been authorized by Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board (PNGRB) for development of City Gas Distribution (CGD) projects in India. 
The Committee find that the main challenges faced in this downstream sector are non-availability 
of smart meters & ancillary equipment and shortage of skilled manpower.  The Committee are 
well aware that targeted skill development programs would be essential for successful 
implementation and expansion of City Gas Distribution (CGD) projects in India and observed 
that to address this, GAIL with support of seven oil and gas CPSUs (ONGC, OIL, IOCL, HPCL, 
BPCL, EIL & Balmer Lawrie) has formed a society to run the Skill Development Institute (SDI) 
at Raebareli under MoPNG directives.  Apart from gas CPSUs partnering with local Industrial 
Training Institute (ITI), a Hydrocarbon Sector Skill Council (HSSC) has also been set -up under 
the aegis of MoPNG with a vision to meet diverse skill requirements of the Hydrocarbon Industry 
and enhance employability and opportunities, locally and globally.   

49 
 
 Since OIL have set-up an exclusive Skill Development Institute at Guwahati in 2017, the 
Committee desire that they get developed the training modules in coordination with Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) and  Industrial Training Centres (ITCs) to build a pool of the required 
qualified trainers and skilled workforce for spreading the network of CGD as per the commitment 
made in Paris Convention by Government of India to increase the share of natural gas in India’s 
energy mix from 6.5% to 15% by 2030.  This step, the Committee feel, would in turn help to 
accelerate the pace and spread of CGD network in the allocated GAs and reach to the last mile 
person in the form of benefits accrued from the web of CGD availabi lity i.e., PNG and CNG for 
the designated consumers. 
Reply of the Government 
“The training module for CGD is already available in the Skill curriculum of ‘National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC)’. It falls under the specific HSSC (Hydrocarbon Sector Skill 
Council). SDI-Guwahati has already chalked out a plan to implement training programme for 
Pipe Fitter and Welder suitable for CGD works. The pertaining course on CGD yet to commence 
at SDI, Guwahati as the laying of CGD networks, commissioning and su pply of Gas through 
these networks in different GAs not yet completed. Coinciding with the implementation stage of 
these Networks the training programmes are planned to be commenced so that the trained 
apprentices get opportunity be absorbed.” 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Acquisition of Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
12. The Committee note that as part of its diversification strategy, the Company has acquired 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) as a material subsidiary and holds 73.27% stake in NRL. 
Govt. of Assam and Engineers India Limited hold 22.88% and 3.85% stake in NRL respectively. 
OIL is the promoter and has management control of NRL.The Committee have been informed 
that since then NRL has embarked on a major integrated refinery expansion project to augment 
its capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA at an estimated investm ent of more than Rs. 28,000 
Crore, one of the highest in the region including setting up of a Crude Oil Import Terminal at 
Pardeep Port in Odisha and laying of about 1640 KM of pipelines for transportation of imported 
Crude Oil to Numaligarh.  The Company is also laying a 130 KM long and 1.0 MMTPA capacity 
product pipeline from Siliguri in West Bengal to Parbatipur in Bangladesh - namely the Friendship 
Pipeline.  The Committee are glad to know that Numaligarh refinery Limited (NRL) has reported 
highest profit after tax of Rs. 3,561.56 crore for the Financial Year 2021 -22. With OIL having 

50 
 
majority stake in NRL, the Committee hope that this venture will not only help the Company to 
complete vertical integration in the oil and gas value chain but will also crea te the expected 
synergy that will help consolidate business plans of both the entities and achieve required 
sustainable growth. The Committee are also in agreement with OIL that with the massive refining 
capacity enhancement project of NRL and aggressive e xploration plans of OIL in existing and 
new hydrocarbon blocks in North East, OIL-NRL will be able to contribute immensely in ensuring 
energy security of the nation and achieve the targets set by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas under North East H ydrocarbon Vision 2030. OIL acknowledging presence of EIL in the 
consortium is expected to boost the technical expertise required for the expansion plan of NRL 
and to augment its capacity from 3 MMTPA to 9 MMTPA.  Since, EIL is one of the stakeholder 
in NRL, the Committee further desire that NRL may steer the pioneering initiatives and safety 
measures by engaging expertise of EIL, to the highest standards.  
Reply of the Government 
“EIL’s presence in the consortium is helping NRL through their technical expertise. For the 
purpose of safety and efficient Refinery operation, EIL has been engaged by NRL for providing 
consultancy services in the area of Inspection and Troubleshooting and also for providing 
training on safety and process integrity. 
EIL is also  engaged in Numaligarh Refinery Expansion Project (NREP) through their EPCM 
services for the Paradip Numaligarh Crude Oil Pipeline and Crude Oil Import Terminal at Odisha. 
EIL is also the Licensor cum EPCM contractor for revamp of Delayed Coker Unit. EIL i s also 
providing Technology License for the Sulphur Recovery Block, a part of NREP. 
Additionally, NRL is also taking up the following studies : 
• Execution of Aqueous Ammonia project in deposit work basis. 
• Preparation of Pre-feasibility report for: 
o Production of Di-Methylamine from Methanol 
o Coal Gasification Project 
o 2G Ethanol Plant at Meghalaya 
NRL, through its JV company Assam Bio Refinery Pvt. Limited is executing a 186 KLPD 2 G Bio 
Refinery where in EIL has been engaged as EPCM for the project.”  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Performance of Subsidiaries/Joint Ventures/Associate  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 

51 
 
13. The Committee note that out of six subsidiaries of OIL, apart from NRL, four are under 
the process of winding up or in the process of liquidation/divesting the assets. From the 
remaining, the only subsidiary making regular profit is Oil India International Pte. Limited. During 
the FY 2021-22, from this subsidiary, OIL received one of the highest ever dividend at SPV level 
in Singapore from its share of investment in two Russian Assets with dividend amount of USD 
143.6 Million.  The Oil India Sweden AB, a su bsidiary is inundated with geopolitical situations.   
 The Committee also note that OIL has 12 JVs engaged in upstream and downstream 
activities and one Associate Company with 10% equity share capital in Brahmaputra Crackers 
& Polymers Limited.  Since the JV’s share in production of crude oil and natural gas has been 
very low, not exceeding 0.03 MMT of crude oil and  
153 MMSCM of Natural Gas, the Committee desire that OIL may take appropriate call on the 
continuation and existence of the JVs and Subsidiarie s vis-à-vis their past performance and 
future prospect so that these do not have a dragging effect of the consolidated performance of 
the Company. The Committee further desire that a methodical due diligence exercise should be 
undertaken before entering into joint venture by PSUs like OIL particularly in foreign Countries 
to safeguard their financial interest. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Company 
should devise appropriate regulatory and oversight mechanism in consultation with 
administrative Ministry to safeguard the interest of the PSUs in joint ventures. 
Reply of the Government 
“The creation of overseas Wholly Owned Subsidiaries and formation of JVs are driven by the 
need for channelising investments into overseas E&P assets on business, ta x efficiency and 
investment protection considerations.  Detailed due diligence is carried out by third party 
independent consultants before formation of such WoS/JV. 
Based on the changing business environment and performance, the company assesses 
relevance of the subsidiaries from time to time.  Factors such as, status of the project for which 
the Subsidiary/JV has been set-up, impact of geopolitical conditions and changes in international 
fiscal and regulatory environment are considered before taking appro priate actions to wind -up 
the subsidiaries. As a result of such assessments, the company has already wound-up Oil India 
International Limited, Oil India (USA) Inc and Oil India Cyprus Ltd. Evaluation/studies are being 
carried out for other overseas investm ents based on which appropriate decisions will be taken 
in respect of the WoS/JVs incorporated in Singapore/Netherland either to wind up the entity or 
to relocate to a better jurisdiction. 
Appropriate vigilance mechanism has been set in place for these sub sidiaries/JVs as per 
guidelines issued in this regard. 
Though the contribution in way of production of crude oil and natural gas by JVs of OIL namely 
M/s HOEC and Geo-enpro is low , however formation of JVs  with smaller Companies have been 

52 
 
a part of production strategy of OIL in smaller fields with lower yields. OIL makes every effort to 
contribute towards GOI’s mandate for reducing import dependencies on hydrocarbon and going 
for JVs is a part of it. OIL is constantly monitoring the efforts taken by its J Vs for augmenting 
production and with the planned well interventions and drilling programmes productions 
expected to rise from 2024-25 onwards.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
--------- 
 
  

53 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-     Nil      -  
 
  

54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Norms for Board Meetings  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
1. The Committee note that Estimate Committee, one of the Financial Committee had 
examined OIL in 1967-68 and had recommended that except under exceptional circumstances, 
all the Board meetings should invariably be held at the Company’s Registered Office in A ssam 
i.e., Duliajan.  Subsequently, Company  then decided that at least one-third of its Board meetings 
will be held at its Registered Office. Now, after the fire incident at one of oil fields at Baghjan in 
Tinsukia district of Assam, the Government of Ind ia has directed the Company to shift its 
corporate office to Guwahati.  In this context, the Committee sought information on whether the 
stipulated numbers of Board meetings were held at Registered office in Duliajan. The Committee 
find that the Company ha s been evasive in their reply in following the norm to hold one -third 
Board meetings at its Registered Office.  As evident from physical performance, the Company 
during 2021-22 made 99 % of its crude oil production and 90.58 % gas production from the State 
of Assam.  On scrutiny of  last 10 years data on number of Board level meetings held each at 
Registered, Corporate and Regional Offices, the Committee are dismayed to find that only 7% 
of these meetings took place at Registered Office as against 72 % meet ings held at Corporate 
Office and remaining 21% at various Regional Offices. The Company’s stand that seeking 
convenience of all the Directors for finalization of date, time and venue for Board/Committee 
Meetings as reason for delay is not convincing.  The  Committee are of the opinion that 
Registered Office being located in the main operational area of the Company at present, should 
get its due monitoring and supervision, as conducting Board meeting at this office will 
reinvigorate the Registered Office’s e nergy, preparedness and responsibility. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that OIL should fulfill the norm for having at least one -third meeting more 
specifically, the Quarterly Board meetings, at their designated Main Offices in North-East States 
(Dulaijan and Guwahati) in letter and spirit, till they have majority production from the 
Blocks/Fields and projects running in North-East States. 
 
 

55 
 
Reply of the Government 
“The Companies Act, 2013, and SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 have not prescribed minimum 
number of Board / Committee Meetings to be held at the Registered Office / Main Office of the 
Company. However, as per the suggestions of the Committee, the Company will endeavour to 
increase the frequency of Board Meetings at the designated Main Offices in No rth-East States 
(Duliajan and Guwahati).”  
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
2. The Committee while going into the specific details of blowout in Baghjan Well#5 that 
started on 27 May, 2020 and finally kicked, capped and abandoned on 3 December, 2020, note 
that the incident resulted in a total loss of 47,837 MT of crude oil and 129 MM SCM of Natural 
Gas resulting in Rs. 20 crore estimated loss of production from the date of incident till the 
diversion of natural gas production.  Besides this, OIL had to make payment of Rs.147.92 crore 
(Rs.102.74 crore as compensation and Rs.45.18 crore for relief & rehabilitation) to the people 
affected in the incident.  Besides, the Company had to shell out Rs.449.03 crore (Rs.51.30 crore 
to Domestic and Rs.203.30 crore to International Companies) for engaging outside Companies 
to cap the blowout of the well. The Committee note that a High Level Committee (HLC) was set-
up by the Government of India headed by Secretary, MoPNG to investigate the Baghjan blowout 
incident. To monitor status of implementation of recommendations made in the HLC Report, 
OISD ha s been assigned to review the same with the stakeholders including revision in 
standards for internal and external safety audits.  The Directorate General of Hydrocarbons 
(DGH) has prepared guidance documents for training and capacity building for the same . The 
Committee agree with the opinion of HLC that Companies engaged in oil & natural gas business 
should develop its own Crisis Management Team (CMT) to deal with any emergency and, 
therefore, recommend that taking cue from the incidents taken place in the past in Oil & Natural 
Gas sector, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, in consultation with Disaster 
Management Authority, should develop an exclusive National level CMT involving experts from 
major oil Companies in the field to deal with any catastrophic situation for annihilating/minimising 

56 
 
loss of life and damage to the ecosystem. The Committee further desire that the best 
professional training may also be imparted to persons engaged in such tasks  to gain expertise 
in dealing with any calamity/d isaster and further reduce dependency on external assistance.  
The self-sufficiency of CMT (another sphere of Atma Nirbhar Bharat) will not only enhance the 
Nation’s credibility at global level but also minimize the dependency on assistance from 
international agencies to deal with incidences of greater magnitude like blowout such as in 
Baghjan Well.  Further, the other recommendations of HLC should be implemented in letter and 
spirit. 
Reply of the Government 
“Blow out control by Crisis Management Team (CMT) is very specific to E&P sector only and as 
such other institutions will not be of much help. ONGC has established dedicated teams to 
effectively manage emergency scenarios associated with blowouts or uncontrolled flow from oil 
and gas wells, as well as to  handle related emergency situations. At the central level, ONGC 
has a Central Crisis Management Team (CMT), which oversees and coordinates emergency 
response efforts across the organization. Additionally, Regional CMTs are established at key 
locations inc luding Rajahmundry, Vadodara, Mumbai, and Sivasagar, enabling swift and 
localized responses to emergencies within their respective regions. 
Recently, Cairn Oil & Gas, Vedanta Limited, has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with ONGC to collaborate on Crisis Management Teams (CMTs). This partnership aims to 
enhance emergency response capabilities and ensure effective management of crisis situations 
in the upstream onshore sector.  
DGH has taken lead in conducting meeting between private operators and major E&P operators 
like ONGC and OIL to facilitate agreement for collaboration on crisis management. 
Recommendations of the HLC are being monitored by OISD on quarterly basis from E&P 
operators. The quarterly data is being analysed by OISD and a report is submitted to MoPNG. 
Oil India Limited is currently in the process of developing its own fully fledged Crisis Management 
Team. Post Baghjan blowout, OIL’s CMT has been strengthened in terms of Manpower, 
equipment, training and collaboration as below,    
Manpower: All the sanctioned Executive posts are filled up. Total no. of executives at CMT 
department as on date is 4 and all 13 nos. unionized employees deployed in CMT department.   

57 
 
Equipment: Procurement and Commissioning of basic well control equipment have been 
completed. Some of this major equipment are: 
 13.5/8-inch X10 M single RAM BOP – 2 No  
 7.1/16-inch X10 M double RAM BOP–1 No  
 60 feet Athey Wagon – 1 No   
 Bulldozer (324HP)- 1 No  
 4000 GPM fire water pump: - 2 No  
 Ultra slim hydraulic torque wrench – 1 Set  
 External casing cutter- 1 Set  
 Atlas Copco Air compressor- 1 No  
 Exothermic Lance Cutter with accessories- 1 No  
 7.1/16-inch X10 M HCR valve – 1 No  
Training: CMT Executives have been undergoing mandatory training/certification program at 
International Well Control Forum (IWCF), Drilling and Well Intervention & Pressure Control 
training. All the newly joined work persons have been imparted statutory and mandatory training 
like MVT, First aid,  Jigyasa, Basic life support &First responder,  Gas testing, Basic and 
Advanced firefighting etc. Also work persons have been sent for skill development training at 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) facility of M/s Worldwide Oilfield Machine - Pune for 
BOP training & M/s BEML- Bangalore for Bulldozer training.  
Collaboration: OIL has signed two MOU for on call crisis management services with i) M/s Cudd 
pressure control, Inc. Newcastle, Oklahoma and ii) M/s Wild Well Control, Inc.  Houston, Texas 
for any eventuality.” 
 
[Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024)  
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 

58 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES AND REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Levy of Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED) on E&P Companies 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
1. The Committee observe that E&P Companies pay royalty on production of crude oil and 
natural gas to the Central Government for production from offshore fields and to the State 
Governments for production from onshore fields respectively. Further, a Special A dditional 
Excise Duty (SAED) of Rs.23,250/MT has been levied by the Government of India on the 
production of crude oil w.e.f. 1 July, 2022 which has been further reduced to Rs.17000/MT. The 
Committee are of the view that this statutory duty is significantl y impacting the revenue of the 
Company. The Committee also note that OIL has represented to MoPNG for review of levy and 
MoPNG, which in turn has also taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance requesting that 
SAED may not be made applicable on blocks or  fields falling under the contractual regime 
(Production Sharing Contracts - PSCs) and on contractors under Production Enhancement 
Contracts, till the Companies reach the production levels of 2 million barrels.  The Committee 
are in agreement with the MoPNG’s submission that the additional levy of SAED, besides having 
a cascading effect, may trigger reduction in future exploration investments by existing 
contractors under various regime and discourage new players/bidders from participation in E&P 
assignments in Indian Basins.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to 
appropriately consider the MoPNG’s request regarding levy of SAED on E&P Companies so as 
to encourage exploration in the oil and gas fields with minimal effect on the Company’s growth 
and profit. 
Reply of the Government 
“Government of India vide its Notification No. 05/2022 – Central Excise dated 30.06.2022, has 
levied a Special Additional Excise Duty (SAED) of Rs. 23,250/ MT on production of crude oil. 
SAED is a levy which adds to cost of petroleum at the gross level. The additional levy of SAED 
besides having a cascading effect may trigger reduction in future exploration investments by 

59 
 
existing contractors under various regimes and discourage new players /bidders from 
participation in E&P assignments in Indian Basins. MoPNG vide D.O. letters dated 12.08.2022 
and 28.02.2023 has taken up this matter with Ministry of Finance and requested that SAED shall 
not be applicable on blocks or fields falling under the contractual regime (PSC s/RSCs) and 
SAED shall not be applicable on contractors under Production Enhancement Contracts, till they 
reach the production levels of 2 million barrels. Recently, a presentation has also been made to 
Secretary, Department of Revenue on 28.05.2024 in this regard.” 
 [Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas] 
(F. No. Expl-12023(11)/2/2020-EXPL-II-PNG dated 14.10.2024) 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see paras 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
------------ 
 
 
  New Delhi;                 Baijayant Panda     
  16 December, 2024        Chairperson 
  25 Agrahayana, 1944(S) Committee on Public Undertakings 
  

60 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS  
(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th December, 202 4 from 1 530 hrs. onwards in 
Committee Room No. ‘1’, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Tariq Anwar        -          Convenor 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2.  Shri R K Chaudhary 
3.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4.  Shri Shankar Lalwani 
5.  Smt. Poonamaben Hematbhai Maadam 
6.  Shri Sukhinder Singh Randhawa 
7.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
8.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
9.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
10.  Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
11.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Neeraj Semwal - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Director 
3. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

61 
 
 
PART A 
2. The Hon’ble Convenor briefly apprised the Members on the draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report 
of the Committee on Public Undertakings (17th Lok Sabha) on “  Oil India Limited (OIL)” . The 
Committee then considered and adopted the draft report, without any changes/modifications.  
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson /Convenor to finalize the draft Report on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned Ministry/Department and presenting 
the Report during the ongoing session of Parliament.   
The Committee, then, adjourned to take-up next agenda item of the sittings. 
/-------/ 
  

62 
 
APPENDIX  II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
(17th LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2023-24) ON 
 “OIL INDIA LIMITED (OIL)” 
 
I Total number of recommendations:         16 
 
II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government  
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 
 
 
       Total- 13 
Percentage- 81.25 
 
III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
 
     Total- NIL 
Percentage- NA 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and need reiteration: 
Sl. Nos. 7 and 9 
 
 
 
        Total- 02 
Percentage- 12.5 
 
V Observations/Recommendations to which the Government 
has furnished interim replies  and final replies are still 
awaited: 
Sl. No. 16 
 
 
        Total- 01 
Percentage- 06.25 
 
 