 
 
16 
 
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LIMITED 
(BHEL) 
 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
BHARAT HEAVY ELECTRICALS LIMITED 
(BHEL) 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th 
Lok Sabha) on Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  


iii 
 
CPU No. 1072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New 
Delhi- 110001. 
 
  

iv 
 
CONTENTS 
   Page No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  v 
 INTRODUCTION  vi 
CHAPTER I REPORT  1 
CHAPTER II Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 45 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 48 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are still 
awaited 
 49 
 
ANNEXURE 
A Major Contributions of BHEL in Strategic Sectors  54 
B CVC vide OM reference no. 022/HVI/004/543610 dated 31.03.2023 
advised initiation of minor penalty against the following 02 
employees which was intimated to Director (Power and HR -
additional charge) for further necessary action. 
 57 
B1 Reference no. AA: VIG:3080 dated 23 December 2022 was sent to 
Director (Power and HR -additional charge) by CVO for issuance of 
suitable advisory. 
 59 
B2 In compliance of it, a circular was issued by ED (HR), Corporate 
Office reference no. AA/HR/IR/481 dated 16 January 2023 for 
compliance with regard to provisions of Purchase/Works Policy. 
 60 
C Pending CAG Audit Para  61 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the sitting held on 01.08.2025  66 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report of 
Committee on Public Undertakings on BHARAT HEAVY 
ELECTRICALS LIMITED (BHEL) 
 68 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Baijayant Panda    -   Chairperson   
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.  Shri Chandra Prakash Joshi  
5.  Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
6.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
7.  Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8.  Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
9.  Shri B.Y. Raghavendra 
10.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
11.  Shri Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa 
12.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
13.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
14.  Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
15.  Shri Lalji Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16.  Dr. John Brittas 
17.  Shri Neeraj Dangi 
18.  Shri Milind Murli Deora 
19.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
21.  Shri Debashish Samantaray 
22.  Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Director  
3. Shri Dhruv - Under Secretary  
4. Shri Chandan Kumar - Assistant Executive Officer  
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Public Undertakings (2025-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixteenth Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) on ‘Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited (BHEL)’. 
2. The Second Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public Undertakings 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 
2024. The Action Taken Replies to all the 44 Recommendations contained in the 
Report were received from the Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) on 19 June, 
2025.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 
01st August, 2025. The Minutes of the sitting are given in Appendix- I  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee (18th Lok Sabha) 
is given in Appendix -II.  
 
 
New Delhi:  
08 August, 2025  
17 Sravana, 1947(S)                                                                  
BAIJAYANT PANDA 
Chairperson, 
Committee on Public Undertakings 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observation/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings on “Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)” 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2024.  It contained Forty-Four 
observations/recommendations.  
2. Action Taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the Forty-Four observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observation/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:  
SI. Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18-21, 22, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31-33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 
and 44. 
 
 
 
(Total: 36) 
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Sl. Nos. 34 and 35. 
 
 
(Total: 02) 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government had not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:  
Sl. No. 9.  
 
 
 
(Total: 01) 
(Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies 
are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 12, 23 and 24.  
 
 
(Total: 05) 
(Chapter V) 
 
3. The Committee desire the Ministry of Heavy Industries to furnish final 
Action Taken Notes/Replies in respect of observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter I of the Report.  They further desire that a final and 
comprehensive action taken Notes/Replies may also be furnished within 3 
months on those Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V on 
which the Government have given interim/incomplete information.  

2 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Filling up of Vacancies in the Board of Directors 
Recommendation (SI. No. 6 and 7) 
5. The Committee, in their Second Report, had expressed concern regarding the 
vacancies on BHEL's Board of Directors: 
“The Committee note that the vacancies in various posts in the Board of Directors 
(BoD) of BHEL is a matter of concern. As of July 6, 2023, the actual strength of the 
BoD stands at 10 out of a sanctioned strength of 16. Notably, there are significant gaps 
in the representation of Part-time Non-official (Independent) Directors, which is critical 
for ensuring corporate governance and independent decision-making. The Committee 
note that the post of Director ‘Human Resources’ was laying vacant since 1.2.2022.  
For this post the interview was held on 10.11.2022. The Director joined the Board of 
Directors on July 2023.  During the vacant period for this post the Director was holding 
additional charge of the post of Director Human Resources. The inordinate delay in 
filling of the vacancies is a matter of concern. This under-representation of 
independent directors is a regulatory compliance of SEBI, BSE and NSC. Non-
compliance of such regulatories leads to imposition of substantial fines by stock 
exchanges (BSE and NSE) and SEBI from September 2018 to March 2023. Although 
the fines have been partially waived by the stock exchanges, they raise questions 
about adherence to regulatory norms and governance practices. BHEL faced financial 
penalties amounting to Rs. 17,003,800 over this period due to these violations. The 
Committee observe that the Company has taken steps to address this issue by 
inducting independent directors, however, the Committee wish to recommend that 
BHEL should ensure timely action for the compliances and should give top priority for 
maintaining governance standards.” 
 
6.   The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“BHEL had received notices along with fine from Stock Exchanges due to non-
compliance with provision of Regulation 17 (1) of the SEBI (LODR) Regulations i.e. 
Composition of Board due to non-appointment of requisite number of Independent 
Directors.  In this regard, it has been submitted to the Stock Exchanges (SEs) that the 
Company should not be held liable to pay the fine as the non-compliance with regard 
to composition of the Board is not due to any negligence / default by the Company as 
the same is not under the control of the Company. Accordingly, BHEL requested SEs 
to waive off the fine imposed w.e.f. quarter ending September-2022. It may be 
appreciated that in earlier instances of non-compliance of similar nature, SEs had 
already waived fine imposed earlier on BHEL on the similar ground.  It is pertinent to 
mention here that BHEL being a Govt. Company, the power to appoint Directors 
including Independent Directors, lies with the Govt. of India/Administrative Ministry 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries) by following the laid down guidelines of the Govt. of India 
and after obtaining approval of the Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC).” 
7. The Committee in subsequent recommendation No.7 had recommended the 
following: 

3 
 
“The Committee are well aware of the fact that vacant positions in the Board can 
adversely impact the effective functioning of any Company. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the administrative Ministry should take up the matter with 
DPE for seriously looking into the issue of abnormal delay in appointment of Directors 
on the Board. The Committee further recommend that the controlling Ministry and DPE 
should anticipate the future vacancies for various posts in the Board of Directors and 
initiate the required actions and complete the process of the filling up the vacancies 
well before the end of the term of the outgoing Directors.” 
8. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“As on 01.05.2025, there are 5 vacancies of Independent Directors. As such, BHEL is 
regularly taking up with the Administrative Ministry requesting for appointment of 
requisite number of Independent Directors so as to ensure compliance with Corporate 
Governance norms enunciated under SEBI Listing Regulations as well as the 
Companies Act. The matter of filling up of these vacancies is under process at the end 
of Ministry of Heavy Industries, Government of India. 
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries is regularly pursuing the matter of filling the vacant posts 
of both Functional and Independent Directors. Presently, all the posts of Functional 
Director on the Board of BHEL have been filled. In March, 2025, based on the 
recommendation of the DPE Search Committee and approval by the Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC), two (02) nos. Independent Directors have been 
appointed on the Board of BHEL. Further, MHI is regularly pursuing the matter of filling 
up of vacant posts of Independent Directors with DPE.” 
 
9. The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry in filling all posts 
of Functional Directors and the recent appointment of two Independent 
Directors. However, the Committee expresses it serious concern that five 
positions of Independent Directors remain vacant as of May 2025. This non-
compliance with SEBI regulations not only undermines the principles of 
corporate governance but also exposes the ‘Maharatna’ company to financial 
penalties. The Committee, therefore, consider the reply as interim and strongly 
reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry must take urgent and time-
bound action to fill all vacant Director posts. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the complete constitution of the Board in the next Action Taken 
Report. 
 
 
 

4 
 
Representation of Women in Workforce 
Recommendation (SI. No. 9) 
10. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended setting goals to increase 
the representation of women: 
"The Committee note that the strength of female employees of BHEL has declined 
from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1746 in the year 2023. The Committee note that to 
enhance the representation of women in the Company is a continuous focus area for 
which various steps/ initiatives are being taken. The Committee hope that these steps 
will yield desired results in the coming years and BHEL should will be able to achieve 
a certain percentage increase in the number of female employees each year and 
increase the percentage of women in leadership roles, too. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that BHEL should set goals, aiming to increase the 
representation of women within the workforce. This will not only align with global best 
practices but also enhances creativity and innovation within the organization, 
contributing the long-term success of Company.”  
11. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“It is submitted that, BHEL experienced a decline in total manpower strength from 
35,471 in 2019 to 27,800 in 2025 and thus a proportionate decline was observed in 
women employees also i.e. from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1617 in the year 2025. As 
an engineering and manufacturing organization, BHEL receives a significantly lower 
number of applications from female candidates for its regular positions, which are 
primarily in Mechanical, Electrical and Civil Engineering. However, enhancing the 
representation of women in the Company remains a continuous focus area, and 
various steps and initiatives are being undertaken to address this, such as reaching 
out to candidates on Social Media platforms like LinkedIn, Twitter etc. and online 
portals like Company’s own website, National career Service Portal etc. 
 
BHEL’s recruitment at key induction levels—such as Engineer Trainees and 
Supervisor Trainees—is conducted through a highly competitive process with 
selection based strictly on comparative merit. BHEL’s Recruitment Policy is fully 
aligned with the government’s directives on non-discriminatory recruitment practices, 
ensuring fairness and equal opportunity irrespective of gender, caste, disability, or 
religion. 
 
BHEL fosters a diverse and inclusive work environment and is an equal opportunity 
employer. L&D at BHEL holds special focus programs for women to develop their 
leadership and mentor them to excel in their careers. It is worth mentioning that BHEL 
is currently having a women functional director in the board of the company. Also, 
many key portfolios including responsibility of Chief Risk Officer (CRO) and Chief 
Investment Relations Officer (CIRO) are being held by women executives.” 
  
12. The Committee note BHEL’s commitment to being an equal opportunity 
employer and its various initiatives to foster an inclusive work environment. 
However, the reply of the Ministry does not address the Committee's core 

5 
 
recommendation to set specific, measurable goals for increasing the 
representation of women, particularly in leadership roles. Simply stating that the 
decline is proportionate to overall attrition is not a corporate strategy to address 
the gender imbalance. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply and 
reiterate its recommendation that BHEL, as a leading ‘Maharatna’ CPSU, should 
set tangible year-on-year targets to improve its gender diversity ratio. This is 
essential for aligning with global best practices and enhancing organizational 
innovation. The Committee would like to see a concrete action plan in this 
regard. 
 
Development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology 
Recommendation (SI. No. 12) 
13. The Committee, in their Report, had recommended expediting the AUSC 
technology project: 
“The Committee have been apprised that the Power Sector’s Current Thermal Fleet 
has a significant proportion of older plants. with ~13% of coal-based plants (~28 GW) 
aged more than 30 years, out of which ~5 GW of plants are aged more than 40 years. 
Further, ~18 GW plants are expected to cross 30 years of age in the next decade and 
>130 GW of plants will cross this age by 2047. Notably, most of these plants are 
subcritical in nature, which have lesser efficiencies (~10% lower) and higher carbon 
emitter (10-20% higher) than the newer supercritical power plants.  The representative 
of BHEL have acknowledged that it is imperative to have a Policy Driven Mechanism 
for retirement of these older plants. The Committee applaud the fact that to address 
the issue of aging power plants, BHEL has initiated the development of Advanced Ultra 
Super Critical (AUSC) technology, aiming to enhance efficiency and reduce emissions. 
The Ministry of Heavy Industries, along with other stakeholders, such as BHEL, 
IGCAR has provided funding and technical support for this project. A Technology 
Demonstration Plant (TDP) of 1X800 MW capacity based on AUSC technology is 
planned under the Ministry of Power.  A budgetary provision of Rs. 900 crore has been 
envisioned.  A MoU was signed 3 years back but till date the approval is pending. The 
Committee recommend that BHEL should collaborate with the Government to expedite 
approvals and render adequate financial support for the development of Advanced 
Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology which will improve the efficiency and 
environmental performance of India's thermal power plants. This will boost the orders 
of BHEL for replacing older thermal power plants with AUSC technology.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this direction.”  
14. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“With guidance and support from MHI and NITI Aayog, BHEL is making concerted 
efforts and move ahead in establishment of technology demonstration plant for 
Advanced Ultra-Super Critical (AUSC) technology. Progress made so far is as below: 

6 
 
 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs had earlier approved R&D Project for 
development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal 
power plants on a mission mode.  
 The project was envisaged to be executed in two phases, with Phase-I focusing 
on technology development while Phase-II targets for setting up the Technology 
Demonstration Plant (TDP) leading to the establishment of this technology. 
 BHEL has successfully completed the R&D phase (i.e. Phase-I) of development 
of this technology in Dec’20, jointly with NTPC Ltd. and Indira Gandhi Centre 
for Atomic Research (IGCAR). 
 Phase-II: In Union Budget for FY 2024-25, Hon’ble Finance Minister announced 
that a joint venture between NTPC and BHEL will set up a full scale 800 MW 
commercial plant using AUSC technology. The government will provide the 
required fiscal support. Subsequent, to the budget announcement, follow-up 
meetings were held at NITI Aayog in August’ 24 and December’ 24. The major 
actions taken are: 
 Project site has been identified as NTPC Korba, Chhattisgarh for setting up 
1x800MW AUSC TDP (Technology Demonstration Plant). 
 The project will be implemented by an existing joint venture company of 
NTPC and BHEL called NTPC BHEL Power Projects Private Limited 
(NBPPL). 
 A committee was constituted by NITI Aayog to oversee finalization of total 
cost estimates of the proposed 800 MW AUSC TDP under the chairmanship 
of Dr. V.K. Saraswat (Member, NITI Aayog). Meetings of the cost committee 
held in Feb’25 and March’25 
 Based on the decisions of the Cost Committee meeting held in March’25, 
draft Public Investment Board (PIB) note for approval of GOI is submitted to 
MoP by NTPC with project details.” 
 
15. The Committee appreciate the concrete steps taken towards the 
establishment of the 800 MW AUSC Technology Demonstration Plant, including 
the identification of the project site and implementing Joint Venture, and the 
submission of the draft Public Investment Board (PIB) note. However, the final 
approval from the Government is still awaited which is crucial for the project to 
move forward. The Committee, therefore, consider this an interim reply and 
urges the Ministry of Heavy Industries to vigorously follow up with the Ministry 
of Power and other relevant Ministries/Departments to secure the final approval 
at the earliest. The Committee would like to be informed of the final sanction 
and the project's commencement timeline in the replies. 
 
  

7 
 
Financial Performance and Profitability 
Recommendation (SI. No. 15) 
16. The Committee, in their Report, had commented on BHEL’s financial 
turnaround and suggested measures for improvement: 
“The Committee observe a fluctuating financial performance for BHEL over the last 
few years. There was a negative trend with losses of Rs. 1,473 crore in 2019-20 and 
Rs. 2,717 crore in 2020-21. However, there has been a positive turnaround in the last 
two years, with a profit after tax of Rs. 448 crore in the recent fiscal year (2022-23). 
BHEL's financial position in 2022-23 is characterized by total assets of Rs. 59,804 
crore and total liabilities of Rs. 32,542 crore, with revenue from operations reaching 
Rs. 23,365 crore. The Committee further note that BHEL's total assets have shown a 
declining trend over the years, decreasing from Rs. 63,764 crore in 2017-18 to Rs. 
56,708 crore in 2021-22. The Committee are happy to note that BHEL has made a 
remarkable turnaround from losses in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to a profit after tax of Rs. 
448 crore in 2022-23. This recovery is commendable, but Committee are still wary of 
the fact that profit margin remains relatively modest when compared to total revenue.  
The Committee, therefore, suggest that BHEL should  prioritize strategic sourcing, 
establish vendor partnerships, explore cost-effective alternatives, collaborate with 
local suppliers, negotiate bulk discounts,  assess its pricing strategy, explore options 
to improve profit margins, enhance operational efficiency, control overhead costs,  
adopt lean practices, diversify into higher-margin products/services, explore 
international markets etc. to mitigate the impact of rising material costs and increasing 
profit. To improve its financial stability, BHEL should also actively engage with 
customers to negotiate more balanced payment terms for ensuring a consistent cash 
flow.” 
17. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
“BHEL acknowledges the committee’s feedback on its financial performance and 
agrees that there were concerns during the difficult years of FY 2019-20 and 2020-21, 
mainly due to market challenges and project delays. However, BHEL has followed the 
growth trajectory and registered strong growth in its physical and financial 
performance. Company’s Profit After Tax (PAT) ascended to Rs. 513 Cr. for FY-25 from 
Rs. 260 Cr. in FY-24 while Revenue from Operations (RFO) soared by 19% to Rs. 
28339 Crores in FY-25 vis-à-vis Rs. 23893 Crores in FY-24.  
Company has adopted various structural reforms and initiatives for enhancing 
profitability and financial strength which have started yielding positive results. 
Company’s cash collection in FY-25 stood at Rs. 37,881 crores which is ~37 % 
increase from FY-24. Material cost has also started to reduce in recent past thereby 
supporting bottom-line of the company. It is worth mentioning that Material Cost (as % 
of Gross Turn Over) has witnessed a reduction of 3% from 72% in FY-24 to 69% in 
FY-25. However, consistent efforts are underway for enhancing cash collection and 
further reduction in material costs. Some of the prominent strategic initiatives taken by 
the company aiming at reducing material costs and enhancing profit margins are as 
below: 
1. Efficient sourcing and vendor management: 

8 
 
 Uniformity and standardization in tendering process 
 Focus on vendor enhancement for increasing competitiveness 
 Leveraging benefits of bulk purchasing (bulk discounts), streamlined 
decision-making, and enhanced efficiency.  
 Focused on rationalizing material specifications and negotiating improved 
terms and conditions with suppliers.  
2. Unified Supplier Development Cell (USDC) - Better Vendor Management: 
 Strengthening long-term vendor ties  
 Expanding vendor base including MSMEs to improve delivery times and 
reduce costs. 
 Tracking the development of new suppliers, particularly for items with limited 
sources or previously imported, where indigenous development is required. 
 
3. Suvidha Portal – Supplier Dashboard: 
 User-friendly, single-point dashboard made available by BHEL for suppliers 
to seamlessly track the status of their invoices from submission to payment, 
with detailed visibility into deductions.  
 Provides a grievance lodging mechanism, enabling suppliers to address 
issues promptly.  
 
4. BHEL SAMVAAD: 
 BHEL’s flagship initiative for engaging with domestic industry, BHEL 
SAMVAAD, serves as an interactive platform to drive the indigenization of 
imported items.  
 During these forums, BHEL’s engineering experts share detailed 
specifications and requirements for such items, enabling potential suppliers 
to align their development efforts with BHEL’s needs.  
 This initiative has been instrumental in expediting the development process 
and reducing import dependencies. Latest BHEL SAMVAAD 4.0 was held 
at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi on 25-11-2024. 
 
5. Improved Pricing and Margins: 
 Reviewing pricing strategies for better risk management. 
 Ensuring timely claims and better payments terms in upcoming project. 
 
6. Policy Reforms for Enhanced Competition: 
 
To remain at the forefront of industry standards, BHEL constantly updates its 
procurement policies in line with the latest Department of Expenditure (DoE) 
manuals and globally recognized best practices. BHEL has undertaken a 
comprehensive overhaul of its policies which includes introduction of a 
Development Policy with several supplier-friendly provisions, like: 
 
 Prioritization of indigenous development. 
 Relaxations in tenders for new suppliers. 
 Sufficient order quantities for development efforts. 
 Exemption from penalties during the development phase. 
 Milestone-based payment terms to encourage participation. 
 

9 
 
7. Stronger Cash Flow and Client Coordination 
 Renegotiating payment terms to get funds earlier in the project cycle. 
 Improving billing and follow-up to ensure timely payments. 
 Updating the credit and risk framework to handle delays and strengthen 
contracts.” 
18. The Committee are appreciative of BHEL's remarkable financial 
turnaround, noting with satisfaction the continued growth in Profit After Tax to 
₹513 Crore in FY 2024-25 and the 19% surge in revenue. The proactive measures 
detailed by the company, such as the Unified Supplier Development Cell (USDC), 
the ‘Suvidha Portal’ for suppliers, and the ‘BHEL SAMVAAD’ initiative, are 
commendable steps towards reducing costs and enhancing profit margin and 
also enhancing vendor relationships. The Committee encourage BHEL to 
continue its rigorous implementation of these strategic initiatives to sustain and 
further improve its profitability and financial stability. 
 
Challenges Due to Procurement Restrictions 
Recommendation (SI. No. 23 and 24) 
19. The Committee, in their Second Report, had urged the Ministry to address 
procurement restrictions affecting BHEL: 
“The Committee find that BHEL is grappling with challenges related to Land Border 
Sharing and Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) restrictions. These challenges have had a 
cascading effect on project timelines, causing delays of 5-6 months and, in certain 
instances, up to 9 months. These delays result in adverse consequences for the 
Company, including missed business opportunities, postponed deliveries, project 
setbacks, and the imposition of liquidated damages (LDs) for tardiness. Moreover, due 
to the constraints on procuring from nations sharing land borders with India, BHEL has 
incurred significant additional costs for the acquisition of crucial components. BHEL 
has made multiple appeals to the administrative ministry regarding these concerns 
who have taken the matter with M/o Finance to have a level playing field for BHEL. 
However, the Ministry has done nothing substantial yet. Besides, BHEL has organized 
a series of workshops called BHEL SAMVAAD since December 2020, engaging with 
the domestic industry to cultivate to mitigate the challenges posed by Land Border 
Sharing and Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) restrictions. The Committee, therefore 
desire that MHI should vigorously take up the matter with M/o Finance for removal of 
restrictions and providing level playing field to BHEL.  Further, BHEL should also 
develop a network of local suppliers which will reduce delays, minimize additional 
procurement costs, and enhance supply chain resilience.” 
20. The Committee in subsequent recommendation No.24 had recommended the 
following: 

10 
 
“The Committee are surprised to know that these restrictions are applicable only to 
public sector entities, not the private sector, however, nothing else has been divulge 
in support of this condition except national security.  Therefore, the Committee urge 
that both the Ministry of Heavy Industries and BHEL should continue with their efforts 
to advocate for removal or modification of GTE and land border sharing restrictions 
that adversely affect its operations.  The Committee expect that the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries would take up vigorously the issue with the concerned Government 
authorities and Ministries which is crucial to address these challenges effectively for 
providing a level playing field to CPSUs particularly BHEL.  Simultaneously, BHEL 
should keep maintaining open lines of communication and collaboration with the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and other relevant Government bodies for the sake of 
facilitating a better understanding of BHEL’s needs and concerns.”  
21. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows: 
"Based on the request of BHEL, MHI has communicated to DoE, Ministry of Finance 
on 28-08-2024 to provide GTE exemption for BHEL for 95 identified items in the 
various categories like castings and forgings, Special Steel - Tubes and Pipes, Sheets/ 
Plates, electrical steel, Electric Insulating Materials, Electronic Components, Current 
insulated, Hybrid, Rivet less and Anti Friction Bearings, etc. While there has been no 
response from DoE, BHEL is following up with all concerned stakeholders in GoI 
through MHI viz. MoP, MoS, DPIIT, Cab Sec, etc. for providing relief to BHEL so that 
deliverables in projects of National importance are not affected. 
 
BHEL has been constantly following up with DPIIT as well as Ministry of Power and 
Ministry of Steel, through MHI since Sep’ 2022, that there are certain items like alloy 
steel seamless pipes and tubes (required for Boilers), IP outer casings (required for 
turbines), Gypsum De-watering System, etc. where the sources are predominantly 
from countries sharing Land Borders with India and it is in interest of the country to 
bring down the cost to nation. We request suitable directions to DPIIT, Ministry of 
Power and Ministry of Steel to permit registration of bidders representing countries 
sharing Land Borders with India especially in materials where no electronic controls 
are involved.  
 
As regards development of local suppliers, BHEL has intensified the efforts of vendor 
development by creating USDC (Unified Supplier Development Cell) for proactively 
scouting industry for capable sources and examining imports for indigenization using 
provisions of PPP-MII, DoE guidelines, etc.  
 
Furthermore, BHEL organizes its flagship event BHEL SAMVAAD every year wherein 
suppliers across India are invited to discuss potential business opportunities in the 
coming years.  The details of this initiative have already been mentioned at reply no. 
15.   
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries has brought to the notice of the Appropriate Authority in 
the Government the constraints faced by BHEL. Various initiatives taken by the 
Government has increased the domestic availability of several goods which were 
previously imported by BHEL. MHI also facilitates all CPSEs under its administrative 
control including BHEL, for timely procurement of items that are not domestically 
available ensuring that they do not lose their competitive edge over its competitors.” 

11 
 
 
22. The Committee acknowledge that the Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) 
has taken up the issue of procurement restrictions with the Department of 
Expenditure. However, the Committee are concerned to note that there has been 
no response from the Department of Expenditure, and these restrictions, which 
BHEL claims apply only to public sector entities, continue to hamper project 
timelines and competitiveness. This issue of a non-level playing field is a 
serious impediment. The Committee, therefore, consider this reply as interim 
and strongly reiterate that MHI must pursue this matter with the Ministry of 
Finance and other highest levels of Government with greater vigour to find a 
resolution. The Committee desire to be apprised of a definitive outcome in this 
matter. 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
BHEL-OVERVIEW 
Recommendation (SI. No.1 to 3) 
The Committee note that Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) is a 
‘Maharatna’ public sector undertaking which was established in 1964. It is one of the 
leading contributors towards building of Atmnirbhar Bharat. During the long and ardous 
journey, BHEL has been serving in the areas of Power (thermal, hydro, gas, nuclear 
and solar), Power Transmission, Transportation, Defence, Aerospace including Oil & 
Gas, e-mobility, energy storage, etc.  The 53% share of India's total installed capacity 
of utility power segment excluding renewables is commanded by BHEL.  The 
worldwide installed base of power generating equipment supplied by BHEL exceeds 
1,96,000 MW. The Committee further note that BHEL is primarily involved with coal-
based power sector companies and it executes the engineering and manufacturing 
segment of this sector. The Company earns 75 percent of the revenue from this sector.  
The Company has set its long- term aspirational targets of 50% of order-book from 
Non-fossil sector for period financial year 2023-27. The organization has turned its 
focus towards increasing market share majorly in Transportation and Systems 
Business, Defence and Aerospace business, Renewable Energy (RE) and Nuclear 
segment. BHEL has secured the order for supply and maintenance of Vande Bharat 
express trains. BHEL has been involved in international projects and collaborations in 
various countries and had executed projects in around 89 countries.  The Committee 
are happy to know that BHEL has played an important role in nation building and serve 
the nation around six decades.  
and 
2. The Committee observe that the total assets of the Company are Rs. 59,804 
crore and the total liabilities are Rs. 32,542 crore in the year 2022-23.  The revenue 
from operations of the Company are Rs. 23,365 crore for the period.  At present 
Government of India hold the share of 63.17 percent of the Company and rest of the 
shares are held by others including Banks, Foreign Institutional Investors and 
Individuals.  In 2021-22, BHEL secured orders for 4,700 MW, aggregating to Rs.17,931 
crore, amidst intense competition and a limited pipeline of orders.  
and 
3. The Committee have made a comprehensive examination of the BHEL as an 
organization and touched upon many issues such as physical performance, financial 
performance, order book status, subsidiaries, etc.  The Committee, after examination 
of various aspects of the functioning of BHEL, have made observations and 
recommendations in succeeding paragraphs and are hopeful that these will be 
implemented by the BHEL and the Government in right perspective so as to bring 
about needed improvement in the functioning and growth of the Company. 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the Committee and suggested measures thereon have been 
duly noted and have also been communicated across the decision makers within the 
organization for implementation.  
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Vision of BHEL 
Recommendation (SI. No.4 to 5) 
4. The Committee note that BHEL is committed to the requirement of changing 
market dynamics by focusing on profitable growth and diversification of the Company. 
In this regard, BHEL is emphasizing on strengthening its technology base and 
exploring opportunities in Rail transportation, Defence & Aerospace, and Oil & Gas 
sectors demonstrates a proactive approach to leverage emerging trends and 
Government initiatives. BHEL is also recognizing the need to reduce reliance on coal-
based power generation and invest in cleaner energy sources aligns with the global 
imperative of addressing climate change. The intent of BHEL to form strategic 
partnerships with global Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) shows its 
willingness to tap the external expertise and resources.  
and 
5. The Committee also appreciate the Ministry's assertion that BHEL needs to 
redefine its strategy in light of environmental shifts and reduce coal-based power 
business while expanding into new areas. This paradigm shift will be critical for BHEL's 
relevance and competitiveness, not only in India but also on a global scale. The 
aspiration for order for Vande Bharat Train Set and efforts in defence, nuclear, and 
hydrogen sectors reflect a forward-looking vision. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Company should promptly adapt to Industry’s trend, make strategic 
collaborations with due diligence and effectively execute the projects in a time bound 
manner for sustainability of the Company. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The committee’s observations reaffirm company’s resolve towards enhancing 
business from non-fossil areas. Though, focusing on evolving market scenario, one of 
the most significant shifts in the Indian power sector is the revival of thermal business 
which is also expected to grow in 5-6 years. Positioning itself in line with the 
Government’s announcement of adding 80 GW thermal capacity by 2032, BHEL has 
secured thermal plant orders of 9.6 GW in FY23-24 and 14.6 GW in FY24-25.  
 
Going forward with a long term organizational and national perspective, BHEL 
is focused on maintaining profitable growth from its diversified product portfolio by 
targeting opportunities across wide spectrum of products and services in varied 
sectors viz. Transportation, Nuclear Power, Defence and Aerospace, Hydro power etc. 
Recognizing the Government’s paradigm shift of focus towards renewables, BHEL has 
also stressed upon capitalizing the opportunities arising out of the need for greener 
utilization of coal besides strengthening its technology base and exploring strategic 
partnerships.  Some of the initiatives worth noting include: 
 
1. Coal Gasification: Indigenously developed by BHEL the Pressurized 
Fluidized Bed Gasification (PFBG) technology is best-suited technology for 
gasification of high-ash Indian coal and lignite. The Syngas thus produced 

14 
 
from coal gasification can be utilized for producing high-end chemicals like 
Ammonium Nitrate, Ammonia, etc. 
Aiming commercialization of this technology and to harness opportunities 
emerging out of the National Coal Gasification Mission, BHEL entered into 
JV agreement with Coal India Limited (CIL) and formed Bharat Coal 
Gasification and Chemicals Limited (BCGCL) to develop a Coal-to-
Ammonium Nitrate Plant. 
 
2. Nuclear Power:  
 License and Technology Transfer Agreement (LTTA) for 700 MWe Steam 
Turbine for PHWR based Nuclear Power Plants with General Electric 
Technology GmbH, Switzerland.  
 Small Modular Reactor (SMR): BHEL and EDF have signed a Memorandum 
of Cooperation (MoC) in Nov’23 to explore larger collaboration for the 
European Pressurized Reactors (EPRs) and for the NUWARD SMR (Small 
Modular Reactor). 
 
3. Transportation: BHEL is focussed on timely execution of the order for 80 
Nos Vande Bharat Trainsets. Further, to enhance our footprint in the sector, 
BHEL is developing indigenous advance signalling system (KAVACH- Train 
Collision Avoidance System) in collaboration with M/s HIMA, Middle East 
FZE. BHEL is also exploring partnerships to develop solutions for new age 
rolling stock like high horsepower locomotives, Hydrogen powered 
trains/locomotives, battery operated trains, IoT solutions for remote 
monitoring and maintenance and track machines.  
 
4. Defence: Furthering the contribution in Defence and Aerospace segment, 
BHEL has extended its agreement with M/s Leonardo, Italy for providing 
product upgrades for SRGM which has enabled BHEL to secure orders for 
38 nos upgraded SRGMs. BHEL has also participated in the RFQ (Request 
for Quotation) for Air Defence Guns for the Indian Army for which prototype 
development is underway for participation in ‘No-Cost-No-Commitment 
(NC-NC)’ trials. BHEL has also participated in RFP (Request for Proposal) 
for development of Gas Turbine and Generator (1.25 MW) for Ship Hotel 
Load for Indian Navy which is under evaluation. Further, BHEL is in 
discussion with various OEMs for extending product offerings viz Electric 
Propulsion System, 30mm Naval Surface Guns, Future Ready Combat 
Vehicle etc. and is also executing development orders from Aeronautical 
Development Agency (ADA) for Li Ion battery and Heat Exchangers for 
Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft (AMCA). 
 
5. Gas Turbines: Technical Assistance and License Agreement (TALA) with 
General Electric (GE) GmbH Switzerland for Gas Turbines. 
Thus, the Company remains committed to ensuring its long-term 
sustainability and contribution to India's self-reliance and growth. 
Company is also making concerted efforts for adhering to project 
timelines and has also taken following initiatives in project execution to 
support the nation’s efforts in energy security:  
 Timely appointment of Project Directors fully empowered to make faster 
decisions. 

15 
 
 Focus on efficient procurement and expansion of vendor base 
 Online systems for monitoring of projects 
 Policy amendments to enable vendors for faster site execution. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Human Resources 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
6. The Committee observe that the composition and changes in BHEL's workforce 
over the last five years reveal a noticeable decline in total manpower strength. The 
total workforce has decreased from 35,471 in the year 2019 to 29,536, in the year 
2023.The Committee are aware that the Manpower requirement in the Company is 
analyzed regularly taking into account factors like business environment new 
opportunities / future business outlook, new projects, market conditions, attritions, 
superannuation etc. Due to subdued business environment, the available outstanding 
order book of the Company has gone down gradually over the years.  The Committee 
further note that BHEL has taken various steps, including induction of high technology 
production facilities, induction of domain experts and providing skill development and 
training programs for fresh inductees, aiming to bridge technology gaps and enhance 
employee capabilities. However, the Committee feel that there is a need of taking 
further initiatives to improve productivity and increase business through technology 
adoption and employees training for which adequate number of dedicated employees 
are required. Further, keeping in mind the business environment, new opportunities 
and diversifications the Committee hope and desire that the shortage may be fulfilled 
promptly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
To improve productivity and increase business through technology adoption 
and employee training, BHEL has already initiated steps to strengthen its workforce 
and address skill gaps. Specifically, BHEL is undertaking the recruitment of: 
 
 150 Engineer Trainees to infuse fresh talent and technical expertise, 
 250 Supervisor Trainees to enhance operational efficiency,  
 33 Lateral Engineering Professionals to bridge skill gaps in traction equipment, 
Transportation Systems and strengthen domain-specific capabilities, 
 
This strategic recruitment drive aims to ensure that BHEL has dedicated 
employees to meet current and future business requirements, drive innovation, and 
sustain long-term growth. 
 
Furthermore, BHEL is intensifying reskilling and cross-skilling initiatives in 
present business domains for its employees. As a learning initiative, artisans at 
Haridwar and Bhopal have been given training in trades other than their current area 
of working for aligning them with future business needs and diversification 
endeavours.  
 
Through its Learning & Development (L&D) wing, leadership pipeline is also 
being given competency-based behavioural/managerial inputs at all levels of 
Executives, Supervisors and Artisans. This shall help them to be future ready and also 
improve the overall employee engagement. Furthermore, efforts are underway for 

16 
 
integrating digital learning platforms, skill/competency assessments, and simulation-
based training to enhance employee efficiency and drive diversification. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Representation of Women in Workforce 
Recommendation (SI. No. 9) 
7. The Committee note that the strength of female employees of BHEL has 
declined from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1746 in the year 2023. The Committee note 
that to enhance the representation of women in the Company us a continuous focus 
area for which various steps/ initiatives are being taken. The Committee hope that 
these steps will yield desired results in the coming years and BHEL should will be able 
to achieve a certain percentage increase in the number of female employees each 
year and increase the percentage of women in leadership roles, too. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that BHEL should set goals, aiming to increase the 
representation of women within the workforce. This will not only align with global best 
practices but also enhances creativity and innovation within the organization, 
contributing the long-term success of Company.”  
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that, BHEL experienced a decline in total manpower strength from 
35,471 in 2019 to 27,800 in 2025 and thus a proportionate decline was observed in 
women employees also i.e. from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1617 in the year 2025. As 
an engineering and manufacturing organization, BHEL receives a significantly lower 
number of applications from female candidates for its regular positions, which are 
primarily in Mechanical, Electrical and Civil Engineering. However, enhancing the 
representation of women in the Company remains a continuous focus area, and 
various steps and initiatives are being undertaken to address this, such as reaching 
out to candidates on Social Media platforms like LinkedIn, Twitter etc. and online 
portals like Company’s own website, National career Service Portal etc. 
 
BHEL’s recruitment at key induction levels—such as Engineer Trainees and 
Supervisor Trainees—is conducted through a highly competitive process with 
selection based strictly on comparative merit. BHEL’s Recruitment Policy is fully 
aligned with the government’s directives on non-discriminatory recruitment practices, 
ensuring fairness and equal opportunity irrespective of gender, caste, disability, or 
religion. 
 
BHEL fosters a diverse and inclusive work environment and is an equal opportunity 
employer. L&D at BHEL holds special focus programs for women to develop their 
leadership and mentor them to excel in their careers. It is worth mentioning that BHEL 
is currently having a women functional director in the board of the company. Also, 
many key portfolios including responsibility of Chief Risk Officer (CRO) and Chief 
Investment Relations Officer (CIRO) are being held by women executives. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 12 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 

17 
 
Physical Performance of the Company 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
8. The Committee observe that BHEL operates in two primary business segments: 
Power and Industry and these segments are fueled by three business sectors: Power 
Sector, Industry Sector, and International Operations. The Power segment 
encompasses a wide range of power plant businesses, including thermal, gas, hydro, 
and nuclear, as well as the spares and services business. The industry segment 
focuses on supplying major equipment and providing Engineering, Procurement, and 
Construction (EPC) services for various sectors, such as transportation, transmission, 
defence, renewables and more. The Committee further note that the power sector in 
India is characterized by diverse energy sources, including coal, renewable, hydro, 
gas, and nuclear. BHEL significantly contributes to the generation of electricity in India, 
particularly through coal and lignite-based utility sets, accounting for 59.4% of the 
country's total electricity generation. Despite its historical market leadership in thermal 
power equipment manufacturing, an additional challenge for BHEL is the aging of 
thermal power plant fleet in India, where a substantial proportion of coal-based plants, 
approximately 13% (28 GW), are over 30 years old. These older plants have lower 
efficiencies and higher carbon emissions compared to newer supercritical power 
plants.   Higher Carbon emission are having climatic concern. Besides, there are other 
factors, like disruption of supply chain from both within and outside the country, low 
orders inflow for execution, sporadic export market rate manpower shortage and 
COVID- 19 pandemic contributed to decline in orders to BHEL. The utility power 
segment witnessed a sharp decline in orders fructifying in the domestic market. BHEL 
has also been witnessing lower capacity utilization in respect of major products 
(allocated across various manufacturing units) due to incessant transition in energy 
sector directly impacting the nature of the product mix of the Company. BHEL is 
making concerted efforts for enhancing capacity utilization which majorly include: 
 In light of ageing of facilities and changes in the product mix, the company is 
reviewing the production capacity of various equipment at its manufacturing 
units 
 Initiatives are being taken for addressing new opportunities across wide 
spectrum of products & services viz. Nuclear Power, Defence and Aerospace, 
Coal Gasification, developing new systems / solutions for Railways, Hydro 
power, Downstream Oil & Gas, Energy storage, etc.  
 Focus on technology leadership and strengthening diversification initiatives. 
The Committee trust and hope that these remedial steps will reflect rise in the 
production graphs of BHEL in the coming years and they may be apprised of the Action 
Taken Replies.  The Committee feel that investing in renewable energy projects may 
be viable strategies for which BHEL needs to promote research and development 
(R&D) to produce state-of-the-art equipment for conventional and renewable energy 
sectors like solar and wind. The Committee desire utmost priorities to R&D which can 
help address the changing dynamics in the power sector. 
The Committee have been informed that our country is not having hydrocarbon 
and oil gas. India is having coal with high ash content. The Ministry of Heavy Industries 
is working on 2-3 Projects to deal with the challenges. The Ministry has acknowledged 
that in order to increase the turn over and increase the economy to 5 trillion US dollar, 
there is a need to resort to diversifications.   In this regard steps have been taken for 
Shifting from a coal-based initiatives to Railways and defence etc. The Ministry of 
Heavy Industries has developed a proven technology on coal gasification. Therefore, 

18 
 
the Committee wish to recommend the Ministry to take necessary steps for its wider 
operationalisation and commercialization.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Recognizing India’s global environmental commitments and Government’s shift 
of focus towards renewables, BHEL has envisioned to reduce dependence on coal-
based power plants. Efforts are underway to capitalize on the opportunities arising out 
of the need for greener utilization of coal through coal gasification besides diversifying 
into various sectors like Transportation, Defence and Aerospace, Nuclear power etc. 
Accordingly, R&D Projects are also being aligned with company’s diversification efforts 
and to address new opportunities emerging with technological advancements and 
market needs. Some of the R&D initiatives majorly include: 
 
1. Coal Gasification  
 Aiming commercialization of indigenously developed Pressurized Fluidized Bed 
Gasification (PFBG) technology and to harness opportunities emerging out of 
the National Coal Gasification Mission, BHEL entered into JV agreement with 
CIL i.e. Bharat Coal Gasification and Chemicals Limited (BCGCL) to develop 
a Coal-to-Ammonium Nitrate Plant. As per the JV Agreement, the Coal-to-
Syngas Island will be executed by BHEL using its in-house developed PFBG 
technology for coal gasification 
 
2. Transportation  
 Development of high-efficiency traction motors and control software for railway 
applications. 
 Electromagnetic design validation, Reliability Availability and Maintainability 
(RAM), Flow, Thermal, Shock and Modal Analysis of 230kW Traction Motor, is 
supporting to execute Indian Railways order for supply of 80 Vande Bharat 
train sets. 
 Development and commercialization of ceramic pouring tubes for railway 
applications 
 
3. Defence and Aerospace Innovations 
 Design and development of liquid cooling units, winged reserve propulsion 
systems, HTSC motor and Axial flux PM motors. 
 Development of Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing (WAAM) for critical defence 
components. 
 
4. Transmission and Digital Substation Technologies 
 Implementation of indigenous digital substation automation systems. 
 High-voltage direct current (HVDC) solutions and Synchronous condenser for 
efficient power transmission. 
 Design, engineering and evaluation of 420kV gas insulated bus ducts has 
contributed in executing order for Srisailam left bank power station 
 
5. Solar 
 Commissioned the largest floating solar power plant of India with 100 MW 
capacity at NTPC Ramagundam in Telangana 

19 
 
 BHEL has entered into an MoU with M/s REC Power Development Corporation 
Limited (RECPDCL – a subsidiary of REC) for exploring development of 
primarily RE Projects along with other energy source projects 
 
6. RMDS (Remote Monitoring and Diagnostic System) 
 Remote Monitoring and Diagnostic System (RMDS) successfully executed in 
FY 24-25 at an industrial plant – BPCL Mumbai. 
 
Ministry of Heavy Industries extends all out support to BHEL in achieving its 
diversification efforts. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
9. The Committee note that BHEL has been able to maintain its market leadership 
in the conventional Thermal Power Equipment manufacturing business over the years. 
One of the reasons attributed for loss of orders in case of few gas desulfurizations 
(FGP) is on account of procurement restrictions in line with Government of India’s 
Guidelines and lack of level playing filled vis-à-vis private players. Analysing 
Companies performance in supplying spare parts turn over for last five years from the 
period 2018-2019 till the second quarter of 2022-2023, the Committee observe that 
the turnover value has been reduced.  The production of Boiler, Power Transformer 
and Traction Machines have been reduced.  The Committee are also informed that the 
overall shop production of major products viz. Boilers, Turbines and Generators was 
impacted during the Financial Year 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 due to supply chain 
disruptions.  Further the productions were affected by Covid-19 pandemic and low 
orders inflow for execution resulting from orders not fortifying in the market in general.  
The Committee further recommend that BHEL should continue expanding its presence 
on Government e-Marketplace (GeM) for long-term and bulk quantity supplies. BHEL 
should thoroughly analyze its bidding strategy to identify weaknesses and focus on 
developing a more competitive strategy that aligns with evolving market dynamics and 
client expectations. To overcome the inconsistency in orders, BHEL should consider 
diversifying its product portfolio. Exploring opportunities in emerging technologies like 
energy storage and electric mobility can be advantageous. BHEL should conduct an 
in-depth analysis to identify the root causes of the decline in contract success. 
Following the analysis, BHEL should revamp its bidding and proposal strategies, 
focusing on improving competitiveness and aligning more closely with market 
dynamics. Finally, BHEL should establish a system for continuous monitoring of 
contract success and revise strategies as needed to ensure improved contract 
acquisition rates. 
Reply of the Government 
BHEL is proactively transforming its bidding, product, and operational 
strategies to remain competitive in a rapidly evolving market dynamics and client 
expectations for improving contract acquisition rates. Leveraging its expertise in the 
conventional thermal power business, and positioning itself in line with the 
Government’s target of adding 80 GW thermal capacity by 2032, BHEL has secured 
thermal orders of 9.6 GW in FY24 and 14.6 GW in FY25.  With this, the company’s 
total order book at the end of FY 2024–25 stands at Rs.1,96,328 Crore with highest-
ever order inflows of Rs. 92,535 Crore in FY25, reflecting a significant boost in 

20 
 
business performance. Targeted efforts which have yielded these positive results, 
majorly include: 
A. Bidding and Proposal Strategy Refinement: 
i. Market Benchmarking: Conducting detailed pricing and technology 
benchmarking against market trends and recently ordered projects. 
ii. Cost Optimization: Implementing cost control measures (design optimization, 
reducing CIF import content) to ensure more competitive pricing. 
iii. Lost Order Analysis: Conducting comprehensive evaluations of unsuccessful 
bids to identify root causes and refine future strategies. 
B. In-depth Contract Acquisition Analysis: 
  BHEL regularly carries out analysis of failure in securing contracts. In order to 
improve competitiveness and to improve contract acquisition rates, BHEL has taken 
the following corrective steps: 
 Cost Optimization through Project/tender specific layout optimization, Site 
visits before bid submission. 
 Actively pursuing pre-bid tie-ups to offer more competitive bids 
 Thrust on vendor development and relationship management for 
competitive offers.  
 Standardization in offerings and strategic partnerships with customers for 
reducing delivery cycles and optimizing material costs, resulting in repeat 
orders for projects with identical configurations 
C. Diversification of Product Portfolio: Apart from the focus on existing range of 
products and systems, BHEL is expanding its business in new and emerging areas 
and is expanding its offerings besides forming strategic alliances to maintain 
market leadership and explore new business areas: 
(i) Defence & Aerospace Business 
 Upgraded SRGM: BHEL signed amendment to License Agreement with M/s 
Leonardo Italy to manufacture Upgraded SRGM. Further, BHEL is 
undertaking augmentation of gun manufacturing facility. BHEL has also 
developed expertise to provide indigenous support to Indian Navy for 
Repair, Maintenance and Overhaul of SRGMs. 
 Compact Heat Exchangers for Fighter Aircraft: BHEL with consultancy from 
Aeronautical Development Agency has indigenously developed 07 types of 
Compact Heat Exchangers for fighter aircraft TEJAS. 
 Lithium Ion Cell: BHEL has established Li Ion Cell manufacturing facility with 
Transfer of Technology from ISRO. Nickel Cobalt Aluminium chemistry Li 
Ion Cells of rating 5Ah, 50Ah and 100Ah can be manufactured in this facility. 
These cells are used by ISRO on Launch vehicles and satellites. 
 Air Defence Guns - BHEL has participated in the RFQ for Air Defence Guns 
for the Indian Army for which prototype development is underway for 
participation in NC-NC trials. 
(ii) Transportation 
 BHEL is developing indigenous advance signalling system (KAVACH- Train 
Collision Avoidance System) in collaboration with M/s HIMA, Middle East 
FZE for which order in-flow is expected soon after establishment of 
prototype.  
(iii)  Transmission 
 HVDC Converter Stations: BHEL is addressing the HVDC business 
opportunities through Strategic Business tie-up with technology 

21 
 
partner/OEM on scope sharing basis. Recently, BHEL has secured two 
major orders for + 800kV 6000MW LCC (Line Commutated Converter) 
HVDC projects (consortium partner M/s Hitachi Energy) 
a. Khavda KPS2 Nagpur HVDC Project 
b. Bhadla-Fatehpur HVDC Project 
 
 EHV GIS (up to 400 kV): In order to be self-dependent for GIS based sub-
stations, BHEL has undertaken development of 400kV GIS (63kA Fault 
level) equipment.  
 Synchronous Condenser: BHEL has geared up to offer Synchronous 
Condenser as a fruitful grid solution under Make in India initiative, which can 
help mitigate Grid stability issues due to Renewable energy addition. BHEL 
is in active discussion with CEA, CTU, PGCIL, NRPC for preparation of DPR 
and has also submitted concept note to CEA for further analysis and 
demonstration of the technology through a pilot project. 
(iv)  Flexible Power Plant Operations:  
 BHEL has established its presence in Flexiblization domain and is currently 
executing multiple orders from Central and State Utilities as well as Private 
Power Producers, having proven its capabilities for both BHEL and non-
BHEL sets following the successful execution of the maiden flexiblization 
project at REGL Adani TPP. 
(v) Methanol-fired Gas Turbines:  
 A breakthrough order was received for demonstrating methanol firing in Gas 
Turbine at NTPC Kayamkulam Combined Cycle Power Plant (350 MW), 
which is the first project of its kind in India. This initiative aims to revive the 
idle gas turbines that are currently inoperative due to fuel constraints and 
marks BHEL’s entry into an emerging business area. 
D. Exploring Emerging Technologies: BHEL is actively exploring beyond conventional 
business area (i.e., thermal power) and investing in next-generation technologies: 
 Advanced Ultra-Supercritical (AUSC): Plans to install a technology 
demonstration plant based on AUSC technology which offers enhanced 
efficiency and reduced CO2 emissions w.r.t. sub-critical and supercritical 
coal-based power plants.   
 Long-term technology transfer agreements with SHI-FW for Circulating 
Fluidized Bed Combustion (CFBC) Boilers. 
 Collaboration with General Electric Technology GmbH, Switzerland, for Gas 
Turbines. 
 
  As regards GeM portal, BHEL has significantly expanded its presence as a key 
seller on the Government e-Marketplace (GeM), aligning with the Committee's 
recommendation to leverage this platform for long-term and bulk quantity supplies. 
Compared to FY 2023-24, where it secured Rs. 1220 Cr. worth of orders, BHEL has 
secured orders amounting to Rs. 3098 Cr during FY 2024-25.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
  

22 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
10. The Committee acknowledge the pivotal role played by BHEL in rail 
transportation sector for the past six decades consistently in fulfilling Indian Railways' 
rolling stock requirements by delivering 'Made in India' systems.  A substantial number 
of locomotives and EMUs within the Indian Railways fleet feature traction equipment 
manufactured by BHEL. It is estimated that an expenditure of around Rs. 2.8 Lakh 
crore will be incurred over the next ten years in meeting the evolving needs of Indian 
Railways, including approximately 62,000 coaches of various types (such as MEMU, 
EMU, and Trainsets), 11,000 locomotives, and signalling for roughly 17,000 km of 
track. Notably, there has been a positive trend in the five-year average order booking 
for Traction and Signalling Group (TBSG), increasing from Rs. 932 crore during the 
financial years 2012-17 to Rs. 2,003 crore during the financial years 2017-22. 
Furthermore, in the semi-high-speed rail segment, BHEL secured its first order for 
propulsion electrics for the 'Vande Bharat Express' last year, and it has received a 
Letter of Acceptance (LOA) for the supply and maintenance of 80 units of 'Vande 
Bharat Express' in March 2023. The Committee appreciate these developments on 
the part of BHEL and recommends that BHEL should make efforts for having maximum 
number of orders from Railways and others. Considering their expertise and 
contributions to the rail transportation sector, BHEL should also make effort for 
enhancing their collaboration with Railways and others. Collaborative efforts can lead 
to the development of cutting-edge solutions and equipment aligning the evolving 
needs of the sector. This will further boost the domestic manufacturing sector and 
reduce dependence on imports. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  BHEL has maintained its order book position in conventional railway products 
through strategic pricing despite increased competition. Company’s industrial segment 
comprising of market-focused groups, offers comprehensive and customised solutions 
for Rail Transportation, Defence & Aerospace, Transmission, Oil & Gas, Captive 
Power Plant, Industrial Products, and Renewables business. During, last 2 years 
(FY24 and FY25) Industry segment secured orders approx. Rs 33000 Crs (excluding 
taxes), including the largest ever orders in transportation and power transmission 
businesses. In addition to this, significant efforts have been put in to enhance product 
portfolio and develop solutions for advancement of Indian Railways. The Vande Bharat 
trains order is a testament to such efforts. 
Following actions initiated to enhance product portfolio and develop solutions for 
advancement of Indian Railways: 
 
 BHEL is developing Kavach - Train Collision Avoidance System for which we 
expect order in-flows soon after establishment of prototype. 
 BHEL is exploring partnerships to develop solutions for new age rolling stock 
like Hydrogen powered trains/locomotives, Battery operated trains, IoT 
solutions for remote monitoring and maintenance and track machines. 
 Augmenting engineering teams to catalyse new product development and take 
advantage of record capacity expansion planned by Indian Railways. 
 Pursuing railways for orders of WAG-9 electric locomotives for our dedicated 
loco facility created at Jhansi unit. 
 Discussions are ongoing with Railways for complete O&M of railway sheds for 
EMU/MEMU and locomotives to capitalise on BHEL’s experience.  

23 
 
 Focussing on successful execution of supply of 80 Nos Vande Bharat trainsets. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
11. The Committee acknowledge BHEL's extensive global footprint, with a 
presence in 89 countries worldwide, including countries like Afghanistan, Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, Nepal, as well as others such as Belarus, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iraq, Libya, 
Nigeria, Oman, Rwanda, Senegal, Sudan, and Spain. BHEL has been consistently 
providing post-sales support to its international clientele through the provision of spare 
parts and services. Notably, BHEL secured 70 contracts in 2017-18, encompassing 
various aspects, including spares and services. However, there has been a decrease 
in contract acquisition, with 37 contracts in 2020-21, and a recent uptick to 62 contracts 
in 2022-23. The Committee are happy to note that recognizing its core strength as a 
manufacturing company, BHEL has taken out efforts to focus on products as the core 
of its international business.  Further BHEL has strategies a multi pronged approach 
focus towards expanding its business in International Market through creation of 
Product Desk to increase its outreach in the target markets in a focused manner to 
stripe for quantum jump in product exports. The Committee hope and trust that these 
steps will yield desires in the coming years.  The Committee may be apprised about 
the achievement made in this regard in the action taken replies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  BHEL continues with its focus on product sales and after sales support to 
expand its global footprints.  
  It is worthwhile to mention that large orders in the export market are sporadic 
in nature, for e.g. Maitree project in Bangladesh in the year 2017 and Arun-3 hydro 
project in Nepal in the year 2018. As regards overcoming challenges, concerted efforts 
are being made by BHEL to enhance exports order-book, some of which are: 
 Adopting a two-pronged approach of: (i) increasing Product-Sales (ii) 
attempting large orders. 
 Focus on Product-Sales segment has started to contribute as BHEL recently 
secured orders for stand-alone generators for Botswana and Russia.  
 BHEL is also targeting large size hydro projects in Nepal and Bhutan. 
Orders have been recently secured for products such as Generators, Gas Turbine 
components, Transformers, Motors, Valves and several spares and services. With 
these orders, BHEL has also enhanced its footprints in three new countries i.e. 
Botswana (Generators), Costa Rica (Valves) and Gautemala (Spares) with our global 
footprints in 92 countries (other than India) as on date. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Financial Performance 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
12. The Committee observe a fluctuating financial performance for BHEL over the 
last few years. There was a negative trend with losses of Rs. 1,473 crore in 2019-20 
and Rs. 2,717 crore in 2020-21. However, there has been a positive turnaround in the 
last two years, with a profit after tax of Rs. 448 crore in the recent fiscal year (2022-
23). BHEL's financial position in 2022-23 is characterized by total assets of Rs. 59,804 
crore and total liabilities of Rs. 32,542 crore, with revenue from operations reaching 

24 
 
Rs. 23,365 crore. The Committee further note that BHEL's total assets have shown a 
declining trend over the years, decreasing from Rs. 63,764 crore in 2017-18 to Rs. 
56,708 crore in 2021-22. The Committee are happy to note that BHEL has made a 
remarkable turnaround from losses in 2019-20 and 2020-21 to a profit after tax of Rs. 
448 crore in 2022-23. This recovery is commendable, but Committee are still wary of 
the fact that profit margin remains relatively modest when compared to total revenue.  
The Committee, therefore, suggest that BHEL should  prioritize strategic sourcing, 
establish vendor partnerships, explore cost-effective alternatives, collaborate with 
local suppliers, negotiate bulk discounts,  assess its pricing strategy, explore options 
to improve profit margins, enhance operational efficiency, control overhead costs,  
adopt lean practices, diversify into higher-margin products/services, explore 
international markets etc. to mitigate the impact of rising material costs and increasing 
profit. To improve its financial stability, BHEL should also actively engage with 
customers to negotiate more balanced payment terms for ensuring a consistent cash 
flow. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BHEL acknowledges the committee’s feedback on its financial performance 
and agrees that there were concerns during the difficult years of FY 2019-20 and 2020-
21, mainly due to market challenges and project delays. However, BHEL has followed 
the growth trajectory and registered strong growth in its physical and financial 
performance. Company’s Profit After Tax (PAT) ascended to Rs. 513 Cr. for FY-25 from 
Rs. 260 Cr. in FY-24 while Revenue from Operations (RFO) soared by 19% to Rs. 
28339 Crores in FY-25 vis-à-vis Rs. 23893 Crores in FY-24.  
 
Company has adopted various structural reforms and initiatives for enhancing 
profitability and financial strength which have started yielding positive results. 
Company’s cash collection in FY-25 stood at Rs. 37,881 crores which is ~37 % 
increase from FY-24. Material cost has also started to reduce in recent past thereby 
supporting bottom-line of the company. It is worth mentioning that Material Cost (as % 
of Gross Turn Over) has witnessed a reduction of 3% from 72% in FY-24 to 69% in 
FY-25. However, consistent efforts are underway for enhancing cash collection and 
further reduction in material costs. Some of the prominent strategic initiatives taken by 
the company aiming at reducing material costs and enhancing profit margins are as 
below: 
1. Efficient sourcing and vendor management: 
 Uniformity and standardization in tendering process 
 Focus on vendor enhancement for increasing competitiveness 
 Leveraging benefits of bulk purchasing (bulk discounts), streamlined 
decision-making, and enhanced efficiency.  
 Focused on rationalizing material specifications and negotiating 
improved terms and conditions with suppliers.  
2. Unified Supplier Development Cell (USDC) - Better Vendor Management: 
 Strengthening long-term vendor ties  
 Expanding vendor base including MSMEs to improve delivery times and 
reduce costs. 
 Tracking the development of new suppliers, particularly for items with 
limited sources or previously imported, where indigenous development 
is required. 
3. Suvidha Portal – Supplier Dashboard: 

25 
 
 User-friendly, single-point dashboard made available by BHEL for 
suppliers to seamlessly track the status of their invoices from submission 
to payment, with detailed visibility into deductions.  
 Provides a grievance lodging mechanism, enabling suppliers to address 
issues promptly.  
4. BHEL SAMVAAD: 
 BHEL’s flagship initiative for engaging with domestic industry, BHEL 
SAMVAAD, serves as an interactive platform to drive the indigenization 
of imported items.  
 During these forums, BHEL’s engineering experts share detailed 
specifications and requirements for such items, enabling potential 
suppliers to align their development efforts with BHEL’s needs.  
 This initiative has been instrumental in expediting the development 
process and reducing import dependencies. Latest BHEL SAMVAAD 4.0 
was held at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi on 25-11-2024. 
5. Improved Pricing and Margins: 
 Reviewing pricing strategies for better risk management. 
 Ensuring timely claims and better payments terms in upcoming project. 
6. Policy Reforms for Enhanced Competition: 
To remain at the forefront of industry standards, BHEL constantly updates 
its procurement policies in line with the latest Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) manuals and globally recognized best practices. BHEL has 
undertaken a comprehensive overhaul of its policies which includes 
introduction of a Development Policy with several supplier-friendly 
provisions, like: 
 Prioritization of indigenous development. 
 Relaxations in tenders for new suppliers. 
 Sufficient order quantities for development efforts. 
 Exemption from penalties during the development phase. 
 Milestone-based payment terms to encourage participation. 
7. Stronger Cash Flow and Client Coordination 
 Renegotiating payment terms to get funds earlier in the project cycle. 
 Improving billing and follow-up to ensure timely payments. 
 Updating the credit and risk framework to handle delays and strengthen 
contracts. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 18 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
13. The Committee note a decrease in total liabilities from Rs. 31,124 crore in 2017-
18 to Rs. 29,737 crore in 2021-22, and thereafter, an increase in total liabilities to Rs. 
32,542 crore in 2022-23. Further, financial performance from 2017-18 to 2022-23 
shows a fluctuating trend in profit. In 2017-18, BHEL reported a profit of Rs. 807 crore 
which increased to Rs. 1,209 crore in 2018-19 and thereafter, there was significant 
losses in 2019-20 and 2020-21, amounting to Rs. 1,473 crore and Rs. 2,717 crore, 
respectively. However, there is an improvement in reducing the number of days in 

26 
 
liquidating trade receivables, from 192 days in 2019-20 to 102 days in 2022-23. The 
percentage of trade receivables liquidated out of net billing has also improved from 
73% to 86% during the same period which demonstrates better collection efficiency. 
From the information furnished to the Committee, the decline in profitability has been 
attributed to several factors, including lower order inflow due to a shift towards 
renewable energy sources, unexecutable orders, disruptions caused by the COVID-
19 pandemic, and rising input/material costs. To recover profitability, BHEL has 
undertaken various initiatives such as cost reduction, lower operational expenses and 
improved customer satisfaction following which the Company achieved 23% increase 
in revenue in 2021-22. The Committee feel that Company can further improve its 
profitability through automation, stricter credit policies, and proactive follow-up on 
overdue payments, enhancing cash flow and reducing financial stress besides 
concentrating on new areas such as  coal gasification, rail transportation, and defence 
etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to their existing expertise, 
BHEL should implement robust financial management practices and explore new 
areas to reduce its liabilities and increase profitability for overall financial stability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The company acknowledges committee's observations on the trends in 
liabilities and profitability, including the losses during FY 2019-20 and 2020-21, period 
affected by disruptions caused by Covid-19 aftermath. However, with adoption of 
strategic initiatives focussing on enhancing operational efficiency, resource 
optimisation, cost reduction and faster cash collection, the company’s business 
performance is witnessing significant improvement in terms of revenue and 
profitability. Noteworthy highlights are as below: 
 Revenue from Operations: Soared by 19% to Rs. 28339 Crores in FY-25 vis-à-
vis Rs. 23893 Crores in FY-24 
 Profit After Tax: Profit ascended to Rs. 513 Cr. for FY-25 from Rs. 260 Cr. in FY-
24 
 Material Cost (as % of Gross Turn Over) : Witnessed a reduction of 3% from 
72% in FY-24 to 69% in FY-25 
 Trade Receivables as No of Days of Revenue from Operations has decreased 
from 198 days in FY 2019-20 to 115 Days in FY 24-25. 
Thus, BHEL has been able to register strong growth in its physical and financial 
performance. This improvement in company’s growth trajectory is attributable to 
adoption of robust financial management practices mentioned below: 
 Comprehensive budgeting and variance analysis 
 Price forecasting tool being actively utilized to forecast material prices for the 
upcoming quarter, aiding in price discovery during quarterly tenders 
 Efficient treasury operations for liquidity and investment optimization 
 Active risk management frameworks 
 Regular internal audits to ensure compliance and financial integrity 
These measures support our goal of reducing liabilities and ensuring long-term 
financial stability. Further, BHEL re-affirms the committee for maximizing its efforts for 
adopting innovative approaches and sustaining profitability. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
 

27 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
14. The Committee are happy to note that BHEL established a Cost Optimization 
Cell for the purpose of reducing costs through initiatives like design optimization and 
design-to-cost. With a view to improve profitability of the Company, the Committee 
strongly believe that BHEL should maintain a strong focus on cost control and 
optimization to  improve profit margins by meticulously following effective cost control, 
diversification in sectors beyond thermal power, efficiency improvement by measures 
that could help in reducing trade receivables besides closely monitoring of market 
dynamics and plan its business strategy accordingly to meet the requirement of 
changing industry trends and customer demands.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Company and progress made in implementing these 
suggestions. The Committee also like to be apprised of the achievements made by 
the Cost Optimization Cell so far.  
 
Reply of the Government 
BHEL concurs with the Committee’s recommendation to maintain a strong 
focus on cost control, diversification beyond thermal power, and operational efficiency 
to enhance profit margins. In alignment with this, the Company has undertaken several 
measures: 
 Strict budgetary control and continuous variance analysis are being rigorously 
implemented across all functions to identify and eliminate inefficiencies. 
 Reduction in trade receivables remains a high priority. Efforts are ongoing to 
shorten the collection cycle through systematic follow-up, improved billing 
practices, and enhanced coordination with customers, thereby strengthening 
liquidity. 
Attributing to the above efforts, Material Cost (as % of Gross Turn Over) has 
witnessed a reduction of 3% from 72% in FY-24 to 69% in FY-25. Further, consistent 
efforts are underway for enhancing cash collection and further reduction in material 
costs.  
Furthermore, Cost Optimization Cell (COC) is actively engaged in streamlining 
material and production costs. Since formation, COC is closely working with Units and 
Engineering centres for Design Optimization of Products and Systems within the 
periphery of contractual requirements. Various Cost Optimization initiatives viz. review 
of Bill of Quantities (BoQ), Layout optimization, enhancing vendor base by taking 
approvals from customer, Indigenization of items, Utilization of surplus materials etc. 
have been undertaken which have resulted in cost reduction for components like Boiler 
Structures, ESP structures, FGD Ducts, Coal Handling Plant and Building Structures, 
Coal Shed, Boiler Tubes, Compressed Air system etc. Further, the reduced structural 
quantity has positive impact in terms of BoQ reduction of Civil items like RCC, TMT 
bar, Structural Steel etc. 
The process of identification and implementation of such Cost Optimization 
initiatives are being carried out in the recently awarded projects also. 
As regards diversification initiatives, the same have been mentioned in reply 
towards point / question no - 11. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
  

28 
 
Receivables and Payables 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18 to 21) 
15. The Committee note that the trade receivables of BHEL have exhibited a 
fluctuating pattern over the years. In FY 2018-19, the trade receivables amounted to 
Rs. 15,796 crore, which decreased to Rs. 11,641 crore in FY 2019-20. However, they 
saw a significant drop in FY 2020-21, with trade receivables amounting to only Rs. 
7,213 crore, followed by a slight increase to Rs. 6,229 crore in FY 2021-22 and Rs. 
6,544 crore in FY 2022-23. The Committee have been informed that trade receivables 
in terms of the number of days of revenue from operations reduced from a level of 192 
days in 2017-18 to 107 days in 2021-22 and the number of days was further reduced 
to 102 days in 2022-23. As regards contract assets, the Committee note that contract 
assets were on an increasing trend over the years i.e. in FY 2018-19, they were at Rs. 
22,819 crore, which further increased to Rs. 23,794 crore in FY 2019-20 and continued 
to rise to Rs. 26,940 crore in FY 2021-22 and then, as of March 2023, contract assets 
were reached Rs. 29,740 crore. Similarly, the total debtors (net of provision) also 
showed fluctuations as in FY 2018-19, the total debtors were Rs. 38,615 crore, which 
decreased to Rs. 35,435 crore in FY 2019-20, and then further dropped to Rs. 31,292 
crore in FY 2020-21. In FY 2021-22, they increased to Rs. 33,168 crore, and as of 
March 2023, they stand at Rs. 36,284 crore.   As far as payables of BHEL, it shows a 
relatively stable trend such as in FY 2018-19, trade payables were Rs. 12,078 crore, 
which decreased to Rs. 9,900 crore in FY 2019-20, they increased slightly from Rs. 
8,559 crore in FY 2020-21, Rs. 9,882 crore in FY 2021-22, and further increased to 
Rs. 10,404 crore as of December 2022.  
and 
16. When analyzed the customer-wise receivable figures, the Committee find that 
BHEL's top 10 customers account for a significant portion of its receivables, with these 
customers representing 70% of the total debtors as of September 2022. NTPC is the 
largest debtor, accounting for 26% of the total, followed by TANGEDCO at 16%. The 
Committee also found that the majority of BHEL's receivables were historically from 
State Electricity Boards (SEBs), which accounted for 45% of total receivables in FY 
2018-19, 47% in FY 2019-20, 43% in FY 2020-21, 42% in FY 2021-22, and 41% in FY 
2022-23. Central PSUs, including Railways and Government departments, also 
constitute a significant portion of the receivables. 
and 
17. With a view to minimize the risk of bad debts and overdue receivables, the 
Committee recommend BHEL to enforce stringent credit policies to assess the credit 
worthiness of its customers before entering into contracts and develop a robust system 
for monitoring of the recoverability of outstanding receivables with regular follow-ups, 
periodic reconciliations, and identifying accounts that are at risk of becoming overdue 
besides monitoring payment history and patterns of its customers regularly. Wherever 
realization is not probable in the near future, appropriate provisions should be made 
in accordance with accounting standards.  
and 
18. The Committee also recommend that in cases where payments are pending 
from Government entities including State Electricity Boards, BHEL should escalate its 
efforts to seek intervention and support from relevant Ministries/Departments/State 
Governments to expedite outstanding payments, as demonstrated in the case of 
TANGEDCO which certainly can be effective and, in the cases of chronic non-payment 
from private sector clients, BHEL should consider taking timely legal actions, such as 

29 
 
arbitration proceedings, to recover dues. The Committee also feel that over reliance 
on a few major customers can pose significant risks to the Company and, therefore, 
BHEL should explore opportunities to diversify its customer base and reduce 
dependence on a small number of clients.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The company is persistently focusing towards optimizing and overall reduction 
of Trade Receivables for which various protectionist measures are being taken for risk 
mitigation and avoiding long litigation time for recovering dues. These measures have 
shown encouraging results in the form of ~37 % increase in cash collection which 
stood at Rs. 37,881 crores in FY-25 vis-a-vis Rs. 27,621 crores FY-24. Also Trade 
Receivables as Number of Days of Revenue from Operations has decreased from 192 
days in FY 2017-18 to 115 Days in FY 24-25. Some of the prominent steps responsible 
for striking improvement, majorly include: 
 Company has an approved Trade Receivables Policy and all receivables are 
reviewed in line with this Policy 
 Periodical review and monitoring of Gross Debtors are being ensured to have 
better control on overall receivables. 
 Wherever the recoverability is doubtful suitable provisions are being made in 
compliance with applicable accounting standard. 
 Timely legal recourse against the non-paying customers (including central and 
state utilities) to recover outstanding dues as per the Trade Receivable Policy 
are being initiated to protect company interest.  
 Balanced order book mix with enhanced customer base. In thermal sector, 
company has balanced its order book mix by actively engaging with 
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) and private utilities to expand its 
customer base, thus reducing over dependence on central and state utilities. 
 Entry into Non-Conventional Power Solutions:  
o In Thermal sector: Approached customers for installing CFBC based power 
plants where the coal quality is inferior.  
o In hydro sector: Approaching new developers for Pumped Storage Projects. 
o Further, BHEL has forayed into coal gasification and methanol fired gas 
turbines businesses recently.  All these efforts are likely to pave the way to 
gain new customers and new businesses. 
Diversification initiatives taken by the company have also been mentioned in 
reply towards point / question no - 11. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Cost Cutting 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
19. The Committee observe an upward trend in the material costs of various 
commodities, notably Steel, Copper, Aluminium, Nickel, and others over the past few 
years. This rise in material costs has occurred simultaneously with a decline in the 
market, exerting additional pressure on profit margins. Recent global disruptions have 
further exacerbated the pricing challenges of these commodities. The costs associated 
with civil construction, structural fabrication, and erection activities have also 
experienced an increase. The Committee find that BHEL is actively implementing a 
range of measures aimed at optimizing costs and reducing expenses. These 

30 
 
measures include Design Optimization, Design to Cost, 3D Structural analysis to 
provide optimal designs to our valued customers, the utilization of surplus materials, 
the digitization of various processes, real-time project monitoring through IPMS, and 
a Project-Centric approach, among others. In the light of the rising material costs and 
market challenges, the Committee advise BHEL to focus on developing a robust 
system for forecasting cost fluctuations in key commodities, especially Steel, Copper, 
Aluminum, and Nickel through the price discovery mechanism of Commodity 
exchanges and others. By analyzing various scenarios and their potential impact on 
costs of materials, BHEL can proactively adjust its strategies ensuring greater 
resilience to market fluctuations and enhancing its competitive edge. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  For adjusting towards market fluctuations with regard to prices of raw material 
and key commodities, BHEL has taken concerted steps so as to position itself for 
having a better competitive edge. Some of such steps majorly include: 
 Price forecasting tool which is actively being utilized to forecast steel prices for 
the upcoming quarter, is aiding in price discovery during quarterly tenders. 
Adoption of this tool has started yielding benefits thereby contributing to 
estimated savings of ~Rs. 140 Crores during FY 2024-25 compared to item 
estimates. Encouraged with outcomes, company is expanding implementation 
of this application to forecast prices for other critical commodities like 
aluminium, copper, etc., for further strengthening its cost management and 
driving procurement efficiency. 
 Focus on material code rationalisation, enhanced vendor engagement, 
developing local suppliers, negotiating improved terms and conditions with 
suppliers, etc. This approach fosters a win-win relationship, strengthening 
supplier partnerships while achieving significant cost reductions.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Export 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25 to 26) 
20. BHEL has set export performance targets as a percentage of Revenue from 
Operations (Net) in its Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries for the financial years 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21, and 2021-22. The 
Company has consistently achieved these targets as in FY 2018-19, the target was 
6%, and BHEL achieved 10.4%, in FY 2019-20, the target was 10%, and BHEL 
achieved 17.8%, in FY 2020-21, the target was 10%, and BHEL achieved 10.72%, in 
FY 2021-22, the target was 8%, and BHEL achieved 7.16%. BHEL's physical exports 
over the last six years have shown variations as in FY 2017-18, BHEL recorded 
exports worth Rs. 687 crore to countries such as Bangladesh, Brunei, Bhutan, 
Comoros, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Senegal, and Syria, exports increased significantly 
in FY 2018-19 to Rs. 3,282 crore, FY 2019-20 saw further growth, with exports 
reaching Rs.3,821 crore. However, in FY 2020-21, exports decreased to Rs.1,855 
crore and this declining trend continued in FY 2021-22, with exports at Rs.1,518 crore 
and as of FY 2022-23, exports stood at Rs. 1,075 crore.  BHEL attributes the declining 
trend in export turnover and profitability in overseas projects to several factors such 
as a significant impact of COVID-19 pandemic on BHEL's operations, both in terms of 

31 
 
supply chain disruptions and manpower shortages, and slowdown in BHEL production 
mainly due to low orders inflow for execution.  
and 
21. Given the sporadic nature of export orders and the impact of external factors 
like the COVID-19 pandemic, the Committee recommend that BHEL should explore 
diversification of export markets to reduce dependence on specific regions or countries 
with a view to mitigate risks associated with market fluctuations. BHEL should further 
enhance the resilience of its supply chain to cope with disruptions like pandemics or 
geopolitical challenges by developing alternate sourcing strategies, strategic 
stockpiling, or contingency plans. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  To cope with disruptions like pandemics or geopolitical challenges and enhance 
supply chain resilience, concerted steps are being taken by the company. Some of the 
major initiatives include: 
 
 For development of local suppliers, BHEL has intensified the efforts of vendor 
development by creating USDC (Unified Supplier Development Cell) for 
proactively scouting industry for capable sources and examining imports for 
indigenization using provisions of PPP-MII, DoE guidelines, etc.  
 
 Under SAMVAAD, BHEL’ flagship event, BHEL consistently interacts with all 
stakeholders in India be it the domestic industry, Academic/ Research Institutes, 
Customers etc. by fostering collaboration with them, and thereby expediting the 
development of imported items.  
 
 BHEL has indigenized over 60 items having procurement value of Rs. 500 Cr. per 
Annum in the last three years. 
 
 BHEL has updated its Development Order procedures which includes supplier-
friendly provisions such as prioritization of indigenous development, tender 
relaxations for new suppliers, sufficient order quantities for development, 
exemption from penalties during the development phase, and milestone-based 
payment terms to encourage participation. 
 
 BHEL also continuously updates its procurement policies in line with the latest 
Department of Expenditure (DoE) manuals and industry best practices, ensuring 
transparency, efficiency, and competitive engagement. 
 
  As regards, diversification of export markets, it has been a key element of 
BHEL’s exports strategy both in terms of geographical regions and product segments. 
Recently BHEL has achieved success by entering into new countries i.e. Botswana 
(Generators), Costa Rica (Valves) and Guatemala (Spares) enhancing its diversified 
geographical footprints. Expanding the scope of BHEL’s global offerings, BHEL has 
recently secured export orders from the railway segment in Sri Lanka and Technical 
services from Nigeria.  
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 

32 
 
Order Book of the Company 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27 to 28) 
22. BHEL provided data on orders booked in the Power Sector, Industry Sector, 
and by its International Operations Division for the period between 2015-16 and 2021-
22. The data shows a varying trend in the number of orders booked and completed. 
The Committee note that BHEL's order book for the financial year 2021-22 stood at 
4,700 MW, amounting to Rs.17,931 crore which the Company achieved in a 
competitive environment with a limited pipeline of orders. To enumerate, in the Power 
Sector, the number of orders booked and completed has fluctuated over the years, 
with a decline in the number of orders in recent years. Industry Sector has also 
experienced fluctuations in the number of orders, with a dip during the financial year 
2019-20 to 2020-21 attributed to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
Committee observe the reasons for the decline in the order book is primarily attributed 
to the sharp reduction in orders in the utility power segment, which constitutes a 
significant portion of BHEL's business. This reduction is notable as (i) orders reduced 
from over 25 GW per year during 2007-11 to an average of around 5 GW from 2016-
17 to 2021-22; (ii) thermal power ordering remained low, around 1.2 GW during the 
period 2016-2022; and (iii) no major thermal utility power project orders were finalized 
during 2020-21 and 2021-22.  The Committee also observed that the decline is also 
linked to a global shift towards cleaner and greener energy sources, driven by 
concerns about climate change and this has led to a decrease in orders for 
conventional coal-based thermal power plants. Besides, impact of COVID-19 
pandemic on the Industry Sector's order book due to disruptions in the economy, the 
Committee are of the views that delays in project ordering are also a major contributing 
factor as in the case of ordering for the 2x660 MW Talcher thermal power plant project. 
 
and 
23. The Committee have taken note of the various steps taken by BHEL to enhance 
order book such as (i) focusing on improving cost competitiveness through design 
optimization, reducing import content, and strategic collaborations with technology 
partners; (ii) participating in stand-alone Balance of Plant (BOP) packages, forming 
strategic tie-ups with technology collaborators, and exploring new product areas such 
as marine gas turbines and heat exchangers; (iii) BHEL is approaching project 
developers for equity participation to leverage equipment sales; (iv) engagement with 
the Government and policymakers to advocate for policy amendments that level the 
playing field with other industry players; (v) long-term spares supply agreements and 
service agreements with major customers are being pursued by BHEL to ensure a 
stable source of revenue; (vi) implementing advanced manufacturing actions and 
stocking spares to ensure quick turnaround of spare orders; (vii) diversifying into other 
business areas, such as the defense and aerospace sector, transportation, and 
downstream oil and gas segments aiming at expanding its order book beyond 
traditional sectors; and (viii) enhancing its vendor base and entering into rate contracts 
with vendors to become more competitive in the market. The Committee are of the 
view that BHEL can work towards stabilizing and expanding its order book, ensuring 
sustainable growth in a rapidly evolving energy sector, only with continuation of its 
efforts and proactively adjust business strategies accordingly. 
 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
Taking note of committee’s recommendations, BHEL has taken strategic 
initiatives for not only revival of company’s orderbook but also for long term 
sustainability of orders by expanding its reach in diversified business areas. As a 
result, BHEL secured its highest-ever order inflows during the year, amounting to Rs. 
92,535 Crore. With this, company’s total order book at the end of FY 2024–25 stands 
at Rs.1,96,328 Crore. Out of FY 2024–25 order inflow of Rs. 92,535 Crore, BHEL has 
booked orders of Rs. 81,349 Cr. in power sector due to renewed focus of Govt. of India 
on adding thermal power capacity in installed energy mix.  
In recently issued National Electricity plan of Generation and Transmission, 
Renewable energy installation is projected to see an upward trend and thermal 
ordering is likely to see a downward trend from FY26-27 onwards. The company takes 
note of the future scenario and market dynamics and is taking concerted steps for 
maintaining the growth momentum. Envisaging the future markets, BHEL is 
persistently focussing on the industrial segment. As result, company’s industrial 
segment secured orders approx. Rs 33,000 Cr. (excluding taxes) in last 2 years (FY24 
and FY25), including the largest ever orders in transportation and power transmission 
businesses. This reflects the company’s diversified presence across sectors such as 
transportation, defence, process industries, and industrial equipment. 
Diversification initiatives of the company have also been mentioned in reply 
towards point / question no - 11. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29 to 30) 
24. The Committee observe that as of December 1, 2022, a total of 13,771 MW of 
Power Sector projects, Rs. 292 crore worth of Industry Sector projects, and 3 
International projects have been categorized as 'On-Hold.' These projects are 
currently in a state of suspension due to various reasons, including challenges related 
to environmental clearance, fuel availability, coal linkages, financial constraints faced 
by customers, alterations in customer requirements, and ongoing arbitration or legal 
proceedings. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries should take a proactive role in resolving the above challenges obstructing 
the progress of these projects. Their pivotal role will reinvigorate these 'On-Hold' 
projects, which, in turn, can contribute to the revitalization of the power and industrial 
sectors. On the aspect of International Projects on hold, the Committee would 
recommend BHEL to stay informed about the evolving situations in international 
projects and work closely with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to assess the 
feasibility of revival in unstable regions. 
and 
25. The Committee acknowledge that the timely completion of projects is vital for 
the industry's growth. Project delays have been primarily attributed to various factors, 
including delays in the provision of necessary inputs, the impact of events such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic and changing geopolitical situations (e.g., the Russia-Ukraine 
conflict), unprecedented increases in steel and commodity prices, procurement 
restrictions from neighboring countries, and limitations associated with Global Tender 
Enquiries (GTE) for procurement. In response to these challenges, BHEL has initiated 
several measures to ensure that projects are completed as per schedule. These 
measures include shifting from a revenue-centric approach to a project-centric one, 

34 
 
revising work and purchase policies, implementing real-time project monitoring 
through the Integrated Project Management System (IPMS), and introducing bonus 
clauses for subcontractors to incentivize early completion. The Committee note that 
BHEL successfully closed 19 projects in the fiscal year 2021-22, indicating an 
improvement in its project execution tonnage, which increased from 4,07,323 MT in 
2017-18 to 4,58,263 MT in 2021-22. In light of these facts and figures, the Committee 
strongly recommend to evolve a system for addressing the obstacles hindering the 
project completion. A system that rewards companies for completing projects on time 
while imposing penalties for delays may be implemented. This approach will serve to 
foster a culture of timely project delivery and enhance the efficiency and 
competitiveness of the industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
For ensuring effective project execution, BHEL is taking concerted steps for 
persistent improvement through online systems for monitoring of projects besides 
adoption of best industry practices for timely project delivery. Some of these practices 
are as mentioned below: 
i. Dedicated project specific Project Management Teams identified to monitor 
execution of projects.  
ii. Deployment of reputed PMC (Project Management consultant) in EPC Projects 
iii. Policy amendments to enable vendors for faster site execution. 
iv. Penalty in vendor contracts- this acts as a safeguard mechanism against delay 
in supplies from vendors. 
v. Timely Payment and quick time bound resolution of vendor issues 
vi. Timely availability of fronts at sites – most thermal orders being brownfield 
 
With regard to projects “On Hold”, these are majorly on account of reasons like 
fund constraints with customer, delay in Govt. clearances etc. Whenever a project 
goes under hold, all efforts for its revival are made like pursuing with customer’s higher 
management, offering re-negotiation of terms/prices etc. (while safeguarding BHEL 
interest). Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) periodically reviews the progress of the 
projects and the performance of all CPSEs under its administrative control including 
BHEL. MHI brings any challenges faced by BHEL to the attention of the competent 
authority in the Government for appropriate intervention. 
 
In certain cases, the efforts do not materialize due to issues beyond control of 
BHEL or customer (grave fund constraints of customer company leading to 
Insolvency/liquidation, Non-receipt of Govt. Clearances etc.). In such cases, either the 
projects are cancelled and the cancellation charges are settled with customer, or Legal 
route is pursued for dispute resolution. However, best efforts are made to ensure that 
BHEL’s interests are safeguarded. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Research and Development 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31 to 33) 
26. The Committee observe that the value of imports consumed by BHEL varied 
over the last five years, with the highest being in 2018-19 at Rs.4603.07 crore and the 
lowest in 2021-22 at Rs.2016.33 crore. To address this issue, the Committee note that 

35 
 
BHEL has consistently invested in research and development (R&D), with R&D 
expenditure as a percentage of total turnover varying between 2.5% to 4.5% over the 
last five years. As of September 30, 2022, BHEL has registered 5163 Intellectual 
Property Rights (IPRs) or patents. This signifies that the Company has a strong 
commitment to innovation and technological advancement. The Committee also note 
that BHEL's R&D efforts are extensive and encompass various domains, including: 
 Coal gasification technology for coal-to-chemicals production. 
 Advanced Ultra Supercritical (AUSC) technology for coal-based power 
generation with reduced CO2 emissions. 
 Development of gas-insulated switchgear (GIS) and alternative environmentally 
friendly gas compositions. 
 Research in the hydrogen value chain and fuel cell applications. 
 Remote monitoring, diagnostics services, and reliability-centric maintenance. 
 Development of a Smart Project Management System (SPMS) for project 
execution efficiency. 
 Hardware In Loop and Software In Loop Test facility. 
 Solutions for the e-mobility ecosystem. 
 Indigenization of industrial products and components. 
 Research in flue gas desulfurization, marine gas turbines, and nuclear power 
segments. 
and 
27. The Committee further note that BHEL has been taking initiatives to reduce 
dependency on imports by indigenizing critical components and materials, and the 
Company has completed several major indigenization activities through R&D, 
contributing to import substitution. Besides supporting domestic manufacturing and 
reduce dependency on imports, including Make-in-India, Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India) Orders, Production Linked Incentives (PLI) schemes, 
and the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) 
Scheme, the Ministry of Heavy Industries are also supporting BHEL and also facilitate 
to get foreign players registered to participate in domestic tenders, ensuring better 
monitoring and regulation.  
and 
28. The Committee, having been satisfied with the combined endeavour of the 
Company and the Ministry of Heavy Industries in R&D, expect that BHEL would 
continue to allocate a significant portion of the budget for R&D to drive innovation, 
technology development, and product improvement with maintaining an R&D 
expenditure of around 2.5% to 4.5% of total turnover is commendable and should be 
sustained. While stressing upon focusing on areas such as coal gasification and power 
generation, the Committee urge BHEL to consider diversifying R&D efforts into 
emerging technologies like hydrogen-based energy systems, advanced materials, and 
renewable energy solutions to align with changing market trends; to collaborate with 
leading research institutions, universities, and other industry players to enhance R&D 
capabilities and leverage external expertise; to focus on commercializing successful 
R&D projects and technologies, especially those with the potential for significant 
market impact, such as coal gasification and AUSC technology; to reduce import 
dependency by indigenizing critical components and materials by identifying key 
components that can be indigenized and develop strategies for their local production; 
and on the same time to explore opportunities to export indigenously developed 
products and technologies to international markets, as the Committee opine, 

36 
 
diversifying the customer base can reduce dependence on the domestic market. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest for a regular performance assessment on the impact 
and effectiveness of R&D investments, ensuring that they align with the Company's 
long-term goals and objectives and to see whether the R&D efforts being taken by the 
Company are also aligned with environmental sustainability goals, especially in 
renewable energy and clean technologies, to stay competitive in a rapidly evolving 
market. 
 
Reply of the Government 
R&D initiatives in BHEL are aligned with company’s business requirements, 
addressing new opportunities, emerging technological advancements and long-term 
sustainability goals while remaining competitive in the market. Some of the R&D 
Projects contributing in commercialization/ tap emerging business opportunities 
majorly include: 
 
 Coal Gasification Technology: The development of Pressurised Bed 
Gasification (PFBG) and Syngas Cleanup System (Coal to Methanol 
Technology) is enabling business for a 2000 TPD Coal to Ammonium Nitrate 
plant with M/s Bharat Coal Gasification & Chemicals Ltd (BCGCL) – A JV 
between CIL and BHEL. 
 Power Transmission: Design, engineering and evaluation of 420kV gas 
insulated bus ducts has contributed in executing a commercial order of 420kV 
gas insulated bus ducts for Srisailam Left bank power station  
 Railway Infrastructure: Development and commercialization of Ceramic pouring 
tubes for Indian Railways application. 
 Development of IGBT-based 3-Phase Traction Drive Control Software (Kolkata 
Metro) is facilitating the execution of commercial order from Indian Railways for 
four metro rakes. 
 Electromagnetic design validation, Reliability Availability and Maintainability 
(RAM), Flow, Thermal, Shock and Modal Analysis of 230kW Traction Motor, is 
supporting to execute commercial order from Indian Railways for supply of 80 
Vande Bharat sleeper train sets  
 Avenues are being explored for commercialization of Top Pressure Recovery 
Turbine (TRT)  
 Digital Substation Automation System is progressing towards commercial 
adoption. 
 Remote Monitoring and Diagnostic System (RMDS) is successfully executed in 
FY 24-25 at an industrial plant – BPCL Mumbai. 
 Avenues are being explored for the commercialization of the 200 kW HTSC 
Motor 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Joint Ventures 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
29. The Committee note that BHEL has four Joint Venture Companies (JVCs), 
namely BHEL-GE Gas Turbine Services Private Ltd. (BGGTS), Raichur Power 
Corporation Ltd. (RPCL), NTPC-BHEL Power Projects Private Ltd. (NBPPL), and 

37 
 
Powerplant Performance Improvement Pvt. Ltd. (PPIL). Among these, BGGTS is the 
sole profitable venture, reporting a profit of Rs. 100.84 crore in the fiscal year 2021-
22, while both RPCL and NBPPL have incurred significant losses of Rs. 565.00 crore 
and Rs. 40.52 crore in the same period respectively. The Committee also note that 
PPIL is already under liquidation and the Board in its meeting held on 8 February, 2018 
had accorded in principle approval for pursuing winding up of NBPPL also. Notably, 
the Government's increasing emphasis on renewable energy sources has led to a 
challenging environment for the thermal power sector, resulting in adverse effects on 
these JVCs due to escalating expenses and fixed costs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that unprofitable joint ventures should either be wound up expeditiously 
or adapt their business models to align with the current market dynamics. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  BHEL notes recommendations of the committee and is poised to take strategic 
measures for its JVs accordingly. Considerable steps have been taken by BHEL with 
regard to unprofitable joint ventures. The status is as mentioned below:  
 
PPIL: Powerplant Performance Improvement Private Ltd. (PPIL) is already under 
liquidation and the Liquidator has submitted final report for dissolution of PPIL to 
Hon’ble NCLT in January 2025. 
 
NBPPL: Due to consistent losses and bleak future outlook, BHEL Board of Directors 
in Feb 2018 had approved winding up of NBPPL. However, in view of announcement 
in Union Budget for FY 2024-25, BHEL Board of Directors in January 2025 accorded 
in-principle approval for taking up the implementation of 1x800 MW AUSC (Advanced 
Ultra Super Critical) Technology Demonstration Plant (TDP) by NBPPL. As a result, 
the business model of NBPPL will shift from EPC and manufacturing of power plant 
equipment to setting up and operating AUSC technology based TDP .  
 
RPCL:   BHEL’s equity investment in RPCL has been evaluated by a Financial 
Institution in 2024. As per the analysis, RPCL is expected to generate profits in future. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Environmental Matters 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
30. The Committee note that BHEL is inherently a low carbon-emitting Company, 
with its carbon emission intensity reducing from 19.9 metric tonnes in 2020-21 to 16.1 
metric tonnes in 2021-22. The Committee observe that BHEL is diligently monitoring 
its Scope-1 and Scope-2 emissions and maintaining a comprehensive record of its 
carbon footprint. The Company is unwavering in its commitment to decarbonization, 
demonstrated through a new initiative called "Harit BHEL," aimed at transitioning into 
an environmentally responsible corporation. The Committee further note that BHEL's 
commitment to achieving net-zero carbon emissions aligns with the Government's 
environmental objectives. The Committee are of the opinion that BHEL should 
prioritize the development and deployment of AUSC technology and low-rating 
supercritical sets, making them accessible for new coal-based power plants. BHEL 
should also explore opportunities in the coal-to-chemicals sector and bolster its 
presence in the nuclear power field. With the target of becoming a Net Zero Company 

38 
 
by 2047, the Committee anticipate that BHEL will continue its resolute efforts in the 
pursuit of Net Zero decarbonization.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In the backdrop of India’s commitments in COP26 for attaining Net Zero by 
2070, BHEL has initiated the हǐरत बीएचईएल (HARIT BHEL) initiative for making BHEL 
a “Green Company” and a model “Green PSU” with a target to become Net Zero with 
respect to Scope-1 and Scope-2 Emissions by 2047. This initiative broadly 
encompasses three pivotal components, which are: 
 
a) Targeting Net Zero Emissions by 2047: BHEL has pledged to attain Net Zero status 
for Scope-1 and Scope-2 emissions by 2047. 
 
b) Green Company Rating for Manufacturing Units: Seeking GreenCo ratings by CII-
Sohrabji Godrej Green Business Centre for the BHEL Manufacturing Units. 
 
c) Focused Sustainability Initiatives: Nine focused sustainability initiatives were 
identified for implementation across BHEL viz. Plantation, Increasing Rainwater 
Harvesting systems, Creating Water Bodies, Water Audit, Zero Liquid Discharge 
(ZLD) status for Units, Solid Waste Management, Energy Audit, Augmenting Solar 
PV capacity in units, Increased Use of Daylight. 
 
Besides above, company is taking concerted steps towards supporting the nation for 
achieving sustainable development with the adoption of clean coal technologies, 
nuclear power etc. 
 
i. Advanced Ultra Supercritical (AUSC) technology: Cabinet Committee 
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the R&D Project for development of 
Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal power plants 
on a mission mode. The project was envisaged to be executed in two 
phases, with Phase-I focusing on technology development while Phase-II 
targets for setting up the Technology Demonstration Plant (TDP) leading to 
the establishment of this technology. 
In Phase-I, the indigenous development of AUSC technology was jointly 
undertaken by BHEL, NTPC and IGCAR as a part of the 9th National 
Mission on Clean Coal Technologies, under the aegis of National Action 
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), with a project funding of Rs. 905 Crores.  
 
Phase-II: In Union Budget 2024-25, Hon’ble Finance Minister announced 
that a joint venture between NTPC and BHEL will set up a full scale 800 MW 
commercial plant using AUSC technology. The government will provide the 
required fiscal support. 
 
ii. Coal Gasification Technology: BHEL has indigenously developed the 
Pressurized Fluidized Bed Gasification (PFBG) technology, which is the 
best-suited technology for gasification of high-ash Indian coal and lignite.  
 
Aiming commercialization of this technology and to harness opportunities 
emerging out of the National Coal Gasification Mission, BHEL entered into 
JV agreement with CIL i.e. Bharat Coal Gasification and Chemicals Limited 

39 
 
(BCGCL) to develop a Coal-to-Ammonium Nitrate Plant. As per the JV 
Agreement, the Coal-to-Syngas island will be executed by BHEL using its 
in-house developed PFBG technology for coal gasification 
 
iii. Flexible Operation: With the large-scale influx of RES (Renewable Energy 
Sources) based power systems, low load flexibilization and two-shift 
operation solutions for thermal power plants will be needed which may have 
to work in consonance with the gas and hydro based projects. 
 
iv. Low Rating Supercritical technology: BHEL has a design variant ready 
for the lower rating supercritical sets and would be offered to customers for 
installation on need basis. The requirement for these lower rating 
supercritical sets may also arise in future, given the land constraints in 
upcoming expansion projects. 
 
v. Nuclear Sector:  
 Currently assisting CEA, DAE and Niti Aayog in deliberations for future plans 
regarding Nuclear Segment in India.  
 BHEL has entered into a Memorandum of Cooperation with EDF for the 
Jaitapur Nuclear Power Plant, European Pressurized Reactors (EPRs) and 
the Nuward SMR.  
 BHEL has long standing Association with Arabelle Solutions, an EDF group 
Company (Erstwhile GE, Alstom) for 700 MWe NPPs being set up in India 
and is continuously upgrading its technology base. 
 
vi. BHEL has installed several Solar power plants at its manufacturing units, 
spread across the country, totalling to around 41+ MW. 
 
vii. Usage of LED lighting in place of conventional lighting systems   
 
viii. Switching to greener fuel such as LPG/PNG/RLNG in place of LDO/HSD/FO 
for operational use 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Waste Management 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38 to 39) 
31. The Committee note that BHEL has implemented a Waste Management 
System founded on the "3R" approach, emphasizingon the reduction, reuse, and 
recycling of resources. The Company's commitment to minimizing raw material 
consumption aligns with its core objectives, with impressive results in waste 
management. In the case of non-hazardous waste, BHEL generated 52,696 metric 
tonnes, recycling or reusing the same amount. For hazardous waste, the Company 
generated 1,528 metric tonnes and successfully recycled or reused 1,225 metric 
tonnes in 2020-21. The Committee appreciate the efforts and desire the Company to 
continue its current waste management approach while also enhancing efforts to 
reuse and reduce its hazardous waste. 
and 

40 
 
32. Furthermore, the Committee recognize that BHEL effectively sold scrap 
materials amounting to Rs. 274 crore in the fiscal year 2021-22. The proactive 
utilization of surplus and unused materials on-site is a commendable practice. This 
endeavour has notably contributed to the Company's operational income, which 
reached a peak of Rs. 1,058 crore in the same financial year, thereby directly 
benefiting the Company's overall financial performance. The Committee appreciate 
the efforts and encourages the Company to persist in its efforts to make effective and 
gainful use of surplus materials. 
 
Reply of the Government 
BHEL thanks committee for appreciating company’s waste management 
approach and reaffirm that continued efforts will be made for Resource conservation 
and waste reduction in all its activities / processes of designing, planning, production, 
and operations for optimizing raw material consumption. Aiming to contribute to 
Company's operational income significantly, efforts are underway for proactive 
utilization of surplus and unused materials. In this direction, a Policy for Disposal of 
Scrap/Unusable Surplus (PDSS) was issued to further streamline and institutionalize 
the process. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 40) 
33. The Committee note that BHEL has consistently allocated a portion of its annual 
profit for CSR activities, complying with the requirements under the Companies Act, 
2013. While the allocated funds have been substantial, there have been variations in 
utilisation. In 2021-22, BHEL allocated a CSR budget of Rs. 22.16 crore. The 
Company demonstrated its commitment to various CSR activities in sectors like Clean 
India, Educated India, Green India, Healthy India, Inclusive India, Responsible India, 
and more. BHEL has taken an all-encompassing approach in line with the Companies 
Act, 2013, and the Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014. Notably, the CSR fund in 
BHEL is non-lapsable, and any unspent or unallocated amounts are carried forward to 
subsequent years, allowing for flexibility in project execution, especially for long-term 
projects with multiple stakeholders. The Committee recommend that BHEL should 
continue its commitment to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities, ensuring 
effective and timely utilization of allocated funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In its endeavour as a responsible corporate citizen, BHEL has always aimed its 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) related activities towards working for the 
welfare of the society in identified focus areas like infrastructure development, 
programs on health care / sanitation / hygiene, environment & sustainability, 
empowerment of communities, environment protection, development of backward 
regions, women empowerment, upliftment of the under-privileged sections of the 
society etc.  
BHEL has consistently allocated a portion of its annual profit for CSR activities, 
complying with the requirements under the Companies Act, 2013. We affirm that BHEL 

41 
 
has continued its commitment to CSR and will continue to do so, for ensuring effective 
timely utilization of allocated funds. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Cases in ARBITRATION, AMRCD and CVC 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
34. The Committee note from the information provided by BHEL, indicating that as 
of December 31, 2022, there were approximately 118 cases stemming from 
commercial contracts with financial implications exceeding Rs. 10 crore that remained 
unresolved in arbitration. Besides, there were five cases pending in the AMRCD. As 
of March 31, 2023, claims against BHEL was amounted to Rs. 3,843.89 crore, with 
counterclaims by BHEL totaling Rs. 2,622 crore within arbitration proceedings. On the 
same date, BHEL asserted claims amounting to Rs. 12,944.29 crore, while 
counterclaims against BHEL reached Rs. 24,721.18 crore in arbitration cases. The 
Committee recommend that the Company should expeditiously resolve these cases, 
collaborating with the administrative Ministry wherever necessary, and explore 
alternative dispute resolution methods, too. The cases under AMRCD may be resolved 
with priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As on March 31, 2025, in on-going arbitration matters, claims and 
counterclaims against BHEL stood at Rs. 3,557 crore and Rs. 21,210 crore 
respectively showing a noticeable reduction in the amounts involved in arbitration 
cases. This reduction has been achieved through efforts made towards ensuring early 
and timely disposal of disputes, settlement of disputes at the initial stages of 
proceedings, etc.  
 
Company has ‘BHEL Arbitration Guidelines, 2018’ in place which provides that 
it is open to parties to explore possibilities for amicable settlement of the disputes even 
during pendency of arbitral proceedings. As per BHEL Arbitration Guidelines, 
proposals for assignment of disputes and appointment of arbitrator(s) and/ or 
reference of dispute to AMRCD are examined by Corporate Law and approval of top 
management is obtained. Thereby such proposals are scrutinized at highest level.   
Also, with a view to ensure that disputes are not routinely referred for arbitration 
or award challenged mechanically, a high-level standing committee named as “Dispute 
and Arbitration Award Evaluation Committee” (DAAEC) have been constituted in all 
the Units/Divisions/ Regions/ Business Groups across BHEL. Legal/ Arbitration 
proceedings before initiation are examined by DAAEC consisting of Heads of 
Engineering/ MM/ Contracts, Finance, Law and the concerned department to which 
the dispute belongs. The recommendation of DAAEC is acted upon after approval of 
concerned Unit Head.  
It may be highlighted that in the event an amicable settlement cannot be 
reached on the dispute, then only action can be initiated under BHEL Arbitration 
Guidelines for assigning dispute for arbitration and appointment of arbitrator. In all the 
proposals for referring the dispute to arbitration and/or appointment of arbitrator(s), the 
efforts made to settle the dispute amicably are to be mentioned. Communications has 
been issued by the Higher Management directing that before the proposal for referring 
the dispute to arbitration is initiated, efforts at amicable resolution, if any, including 

42 
 
referring dispute to conciliation under BHEL’s Conciliation Scheme be made and only 
after exhaustion of all possible avenues such proposal are to be initiated.  
BHEL also has BHEL Conciliation Scheme in place which enables settlement 
of dispute through conciliation (alternative dispute resolution method). Once Mediation 
Act comes into effect, the same will also be resorted to. 
With regard to on-going disputes under AMRCD all out efforts are being made 
to get the disputes resolved expeditiously and all the directions of the Committee of 
Secretaries are complied. In 2023 and 2024 two disputes with NIACL and NTPC have 
been settled after referring to AMRCD. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
35. The Committee take note of two pending cases with the Central Vigilance 
Commission. In one instance, involving Shri R. Anbarasu, GM (Retd.), BHEL, PS-SR, 
Uppur Site, an inquiry was completed on October 22, 2022, and vigilance comments 
were submitted to the Disciplinary Authority on November 22, 2022, with further action 
currently underway. In the second case, CVC conducted an Intensive Examination of 
BHEL Tower, Sector-16A, NOIDA, which resulted in the resolution of 14 out of 19 
raised issues, based on BHEL's inputs. The CVC has also advised on system 
improvements and investigations for the remaining five issues, which are presently in 
progress. The Committee urge the Company to take appropriate actions in these 
cases in a time bound manner so as to prevent similar occurrences in the future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Case-1: With reference to above, it is mentioned that vide penalty order dated 
03.03.2023 Disciplinary Authority imposed penalty on Shri R Anbarasu.  After 
imposition of penalty on Shri R Anbarasu the case stands closed. 
 
Case-2: Post resolution of 14 out of 19 paras CVC vide OM reference no. 
022/HVI/004/531430 dated 25.11.2022 advised BHEL as mentioned below against 
balance paras: 
1. To fix responsibility and seek first stage advice on the points as described in the 
letter. 
2. Issuance of suitable advisory regarding more precautions and detailing during 
preparation of estimate. 
Regarding S. No.1, report was submitted to CVC on 22.02.2023. CVC vide OM 
reference no. 022/HVI/004/543610 dated 31.03.2023 advised initiation of minor 
penalty against the following 02 employees which was intimated to Director (Power 
and HR -additional charge) for further necessary action (copy enclosed Annexure - 
B): 
a) Shri Rajan Yadav, the then DGM (Adm.) now SDGM (Adm. -NBP), Noida 
b) Shri B. K. Singh, the then AGM (Adm.), Corp. Office (retd.) 
 
The minor penalty was initiated against the two of the employees.  
 
Regarding Sl. no. 2, note reference no. AA: VIG:3080 dated 23 December 2022 
(attached as Annexure B-1) was sent to Director (Power and HR -additional charge) 
by CVO for issuance of suitable advisory. In compliance of it, a circular was issued by 
ED (HR), Corporate Office reference no. AA/HR/IR/481 dated 16 January 2023 for 

43 
 
compliance with regard to provisions of Purchase/Works Policy (attached as 
Annexure B-2). 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
C&AG Audit Paragraphs 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
36. BHEL apprised the Committee about the eight pending Audit Paras from the 
C&AG, each highlighting specific issues. The Committee observe for each Audit Para, 
as under: 
(i)  Audit Para 5.1 (Year: 2020-21) - Avoidable Loss: BHEL suffered a loss of 
Rs. 13.69 crore due to laxity in supplying complete sets of Alternate Current 
Electrical Multiple Units. The matter was sub-judice before the Hon’ble High 
Court of Kolkata. The issue was under consideration with MAB-Delhi. 
(ii)  Audit Para 5.2 (Year: 2020-21) - Non-safeguarding of Financial Interest: 
Electronics Division, Bengaluru unit of BHEL incurred an additional liability 
of Rs. 11.58 crore towards payment of Safeguard Duty for clearing imports 
due to not taking cognizance of proposed changes in tax structure and 
delivery schedules. The issue was reported to be under consideration with 
MAB-Hyderabad. 
(iii)   Audit Para 6.1 (Year: 2019-20) - Loss Due to Non-Performance: BHEL 
suffered a loss of Euro 3.83 million (Rs. 28.35 crore) due to failure to deliver 
performance as per the contractual provisions, resulting in the invocation 
of Bank Guarantee by the client (Keban). The issue was reported to be 
under consideration with MAB-Delhi. 
(iv)   Audit Para 4.1 (Year: 2018-19) - Undue Benefit to Employees: BHEL 
extended undue benefits to its employees towards Late Night Snacks 
Allowance, amounting to Rs. 16.69 crore, in violation of guidelines. The 
issue was reported to be under consideration with MAB-Hyderabad. 
(v)  Audit Para 6.1 (Year: 2017-18) - Avoidable Payment of Customs Duty and 
Safeguard Duty: BHEL, Trichy unit, made avoidable payments of customs 
duty (including safeguard duty) amounting to Rs. 5.71 crore due to not 
obtaining amendments to advance authorization for import of seamless 
carbon steel tubes in time. Final ATNs were submitted to MHI on 
14.07.2022. 
(vi)  Audit Para 13.1 (Year: 2014-15) - Irregular Payment Towards Leave 
Encashment: BHEL deviated from DPE guidelines and made irregular 
payments of Rs. 36.86 crore towards HPL/SL/EL encashment on 
superannuation over and above the ceiling of 300 days. Final ATNs were 
submitted to MHI on 01.09.2021. 
(vii)  Audit Para 13.2 (Year: 2014-15) - Irregular Payment Towards Performance 
Related Pay (PRP): BHEL made a payment of Rs. 15 crore due to non-
adherence to DPE guidelines on PRP. The issue was reported to be under 
consideration with MAB-Delhi. 
(viii)  Audit Para 14.3 (Year: 2010-11) - Compliance of DPE Guidelines on 
Perquisites and Allowances: BHEL incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 
359.55 crore due to non-compliance with DPE guidelines on perquisites 
and allowances. Last replies were submitted to MHI on 21.12.2020. 
 

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
Updated Status of BHEL Printed paras are enclosed at Annexure ‘C’. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
37. In connection with resolution of pending audit matters, the Committee are of the 
view that BHEL should actively engage with the concerned i.e. Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, C&AG, MAB-Delhi & Hyderabad, for speeding resolution of pending Audit 
Paragraphs. Regarding this, the Committee suggest for strengthening BHEL's internal 
controls and processes to prevent avoidable losses and irregular payments in the 
future. The Committee also desire that a robust online monitoring mechanism should 
be established to track and report compliance with guidelines on each Audit Para, 
reducing the likelihood of similar issues arising in the future. The suggested 
mechanism, if established, would facilitate a real time regular updates to the 
authorities concerned on the progress and timely resolution of pending Audit Paras 
with transparency and accountability. 
  
Reply of the Government 
In view of the Committee’s valuable observations and recommendations on the 
resolution of pending audit matters, BHEL continues to make dedicated efforts to 
actively engage with the concerned authorities, including the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries, the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG), and the MAB offices at Delhi 
and Hyderabad, to expedite the closure of outstanding Audit Paragraphs. Notably, the 
printed para titled “Non-safeguarding of financial interest resulting in additional burden 
towards payment of Safeguard Duty” has been resolved during the current period. 
 
In line with the C&AG observations and the Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
submitted, BHEL is proactively strengthening its internal controls and processes to 
prevent avoidable financial losses and irregular payments. Additionally, 
advisories/guidelines are issued as and when required, and uploaded in the intranet 
system to ensure compliance and effective control across the organization, thereby 
significantly reducing the likelihood of recurrence of similar issues. 
 
Recognising the importance of transparency and accountability, BHEL has 
developed an Online Para System for real-time monitoring of Government audit 
observations across the organisation. This digital platform serves as a centralised 
repository for all CAG Paras and observations, enabling the tracking of action taken, 
and ensuring timely compliance and reporting. The system will also facilitate a 
transparent and accountable resolution process for pending Audit Paras. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
 
 
 

45 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Diversification in Manufacturing Segment 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34 to 35) 
 The Committee observe that Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) is 
undergoing a transformation from being primarily focused on thermal power equipment 
and engineering services to becoming a versatile "Engineering Company" that offers 
a broad range of products and services across various sectors of the economy. In 
pursuit of this transformation, BHEL has taken diversification initiatives in several key 
areas. These are: - 
Solar Energy: BHEL is actively involved in solar energy by manufacturing 
essential equipment like solar PV cells, modules, power conditioning units, 
transformers, and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems. 
While some items are imported, BHEL is one of the few domestic manufacturers 
with production capabilities for solar PV cells and modules and is exploring 
collaborations with other public sector units and industry partners to expand 
manufacturing. 
Defence & Aerospace: BHEL has a strong presence in the defence sector, with 
a focus on innovation and technology. It is working on projects such as Super 
Rapid Gun Mount (SRGM), Integrated Platform Management System (IPMS), 
Compact Heat Exchangers, strategic equipment for the Indian Navy, space-
grade solar panels, and lithium-ion batteries. BHEL's enhanced offerings, 
certifications, and extensive research and development efforts enable it to 
compete with existing players in the defence industry. 
E-Mobility and Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS): BHEL is actively 
involved in the supply of electric vehicle (EV) chargers and associated electrical 
systems. The Company offers engineering, procurement, and construction 
(EPC) solutions for EV charging stations. BHEL has set up a dedicated group 
for Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) and has secured orders for the 
installation of BESS units. 
Captive Power & Process Plant (CPPP) and Industrial Products for Oil & Gas 
Sector: BHEL's successful execution of projects like the IOCL Paradip Sulphur 
Recovery Unit (SRU) positions it to address various other downstream oil and 
gas engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) packages. The 
Company is also working on the indigenization of items required for centrifugal 
compressor packages. 
Hydrogen Mission: BHEL is actively participating in India's National Green 
Hydrogen Mission, with a focus on electrolyzer and type-IV cylinders. The 
Company has initiated partnerships with research organizations and is working 
on developing technology for hydrogen generation, storage, and transportation. 
Coal Gasification and Chemical: BHEL has developed Pressurized Fluidized 
Bed Gasification (PFBG) technology, which is unique for gasifying high ash 
Indian coal. This technology has significant potential in the National Coal 
Gasification Mission of India, which aims to gasify 100 million metric tons of 
coal by 2030.  

46 
 
and  
2. The Committee recognize that BHEL is actively engaged in various critical 
sectors such as Hydro Power, Nuclear Power, Defence, Space, Renewable Energy, 
and International Operations. BHEL plays a significant role in supporting the value 
chain of these vital sectors within the country.  The Committee feel that as India 
steadily asserts its position as a global leader, towards which safeguarding its strategic 
interests becomes imperative and BHEL has the potential to make substantial 
contributions under these circumstances. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Government should consider bestowing upon BHEL the status of 
a ‘Strategic’ Public Sector Undertaking (PSU). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BHEL has become one of the key pillars for nation making and thus proves its 
worth for status of a ‘Strategic’ Public Sector Undertaking (PSU).  
 
As one of the leading contributors towards building of AatmaNirbhar Bharat, 
company provides a comprehensive portfolio of products, systems and services in 
the areas of Power (thermal, hydro, gas, nuclear and solar photo-voltaic), Power 
Transmission, Transportation, Defence & Aerospace, Oil & Gas and other core 
sectors of the country, and also abroad. BHEL commands 53% share in India's total 
installed capacity of utility power segment (excluding renewables) besides its crucial 
contributions in other strategic sectors including defence, transportation, nuclear etc. 
This stands as testimony to its valuable contribution towards nation building. BHEL 
has also established references in 92 countries in all the 6 inhabited continents, with 
equipment supplied for about 13,000 MW of power generating capacity in overseas 
markets. 
In Nuclear power segment, BHEL is the only company to be part of all the 3 
stages of India’s nuclear program and is the sole indigenous supplier of Nuclear 
Turbines and Generators. Approx. 60% of the India’s installed nuclear power capacity 
consists of BHEL supplied equipment. 
Defence is another strategic area, where BHEL has made its presence felt over 
the past five decades. By being the exclusive trusted supplier of frontline weapon 
system for naval warships of the Indian Navy, BHEL has a proven long track-record of 
supporting the Defence Forces. Through design and development of some of the most 
complex equipment and weapon systems, including critical strategic equipment, BHEL 
has been in the forefront for achievement of indigenous capability to achieve self-
sufficiency in the field of Defence. 
For Indian Air force, BHEL has indigenously designed, developed and 
manufactured Compact Heat Exchangers for Light Combat Aircraft – Tejas LCA and 
Su-30MkI aircraft, Advanced Light Helicopters and Advanced Medium Combat Aircraft. 
Also, BHEL is developing Li-ion battery system for next generation aircraft (i.e. AMCA) 
for the first time in the country, a testimony to BHEL’s capability to serve the defence 
sector. BHEL has also developed Liquid Cooling System for Light Combat Aircraft 
(LCA) Tejas. Further, BHEL is also developing pump module for Su-30Mki Aircraft and 
Liquid Cooling System for Jaguar Aircraft. 

47 
 
Majority of ISRO satellites including Chandrayaan and Mangalyaan are 
equipped with BHEL supplied space-grade solar panels and Li-ion batteries, which re-
affirms BHEL’s contribution in Space sector. 
In the Rail transportation segment, significant share of Indian Railways rolling 
stock is equipped with BHEL’s propulsion equipment. BHEL led consortium is (only 
fully Indian consortium) executing order for supply and maintenance of 80 nos. sleeper 
version of “Vande Bharat” Trainsets in Manufacturing-cum-Maintenance Agreement 
(MCMA) model for 35 years. 
In the Transmission segment, BHEL has executed 6 out of 9 nos. LCC HVDC 
projects in India. BHEL had partnership with Global OEMs in HVDC and has 
established manufacturing facilities for HVDC products up to 800 kV, including HVDC 
converter transformers and thyristor valves 
In Solar segment, BHEL provides complete EPC solutions of Solar Photo 
Voltaic (SPV) Power Plants including Grid Interactive systems with and without BESS 
(Battery Energy Storage System), Floating Solar Power Plants, Standalone Systems, 
Erection, commissioning, O&M and consultancy services. 
In view of the above facts and with BHEL being an integral part of the value 
chain of these strategic sectors, BHEL should be considered as ‘strategic’ public sector 
undertaking. 
MHI vide its OM dated 15.05.2023 has informed DIPAM that BHEL is an integral 
part of the value chain of the strategic sectors and therefore it should be considered 
as strategic PSE and needs to continue as a Public Sector company. 
 
Note: Major contributions of BHEL which proves it’s worth for consideration as 
Strategic PSU is placed at Annexure - A 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAD NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
Human Resources 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 The Committee note that the strength of female employees of BHEL has 
declined from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1746 in the year 2023. The Committee note 
that to enhance the representation of women in the Company us a continuous focus 
area for which various steps/ initiatives are being taken. The Committee hope that 
these steps will yield desired results in the coming years and BHEL should will be able 
to achieve a certain percentage increase in the number of female employees each 
year and increase the percentage of women in leadership roles, too. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that BHEL should set goals, aiming to increase the 
representation of women within the workforce. This will not only align with global best 
practices but also enhances creativity and innovation within the organization, 
contributing the long-term success of Company. 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that, BHEL experienced a decline in total manpower strength 
from 35,471 in 2019 to 27,800 in 2025 and thus a proportionate decline was observed 
in women employees also i.e. from 2053 in the year 2019 to 1617 in the year 2025. 
As an engineering and manufacturing organization, BHEL receives a significantly 
lower number of applications from female candidates for its regular positions, which 
are primarily in Mechanical, Electrical and Civil Engineering. However, enhancing the 
representation of women in the Company remains a continuous focus area, and 
various steps and initiatives are being undertaken to address this, such as reaching 
out to candidates on Social Media platforms like LinkedIn, Twitter etc. and online 
portals like Company’s own website, National career Service Portal etc. 
 
BHEL’s recruitment at key induction levels—such as Engineer Trainees and 
Supervisor Trainees—is conducted through a highly competitive process with 
selection based strictly on comparative merit. BHEL’s Recruitment Policy is fully 
aligned with the government’s directives on non-discriminatory recruitment practices, 
ensuring fairness and equal opportunity irrespective of gender, caste, disability, or 
religion. 
 
BHEL fosters a diverse and inclusive work environment and is an equal 
opportunity employer. L&D at BHEL holds special focus programs for women to 
develop their leadership and mentor them to excel in their careers. It is worth 
mentioning that BHEL is currently having a women functional director in the board of 
the company. Also, many key portfolios including responsibility of Chief Risk Officer 
(CRO) and Chief Investment Relations Officer (CIRO) are being held by women 
executives.  
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 

49 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH THE GOVERNMENT HAS FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
AND FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL AWAITED 
Board of Directors of BHEL 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6 to 7) 
 The Committee note that the vacancies in various posts in the Board of 
Directors (BoD) of BHEL is a matter of concern. As of July 6, 2023, the actual strength 
of the BoD stands at 10 out of a sanctioned strength of 16. Notably, there are 
significant gaps in the representation of Part-time Non-official (Independent) Directors, 
which is critical for ensuring corporate governance and independent decision-making. 
The Committee note that the post of Director `Human Resources’ was laying vacant 
since 1.2.2022.  For this post the interview was held on 10.11.2022. The Director joined 
the Board of Directors on July 2023.  During the vacant period for this post the Director 
was holding additional charge of the post of Director Human Resources. The 
inordinate delay in filling of the vacancies is a matter of concern. This under-
representation of independent directors is a regulatory compliance of SEBI, BSE and 
NSC. Non-compliance of such regulatories leads to imposition of substantial fines by 
stock exchanges (BSE and NSE) and SEBI from September 2018 to March 2023. 
Although the fines have been partially waived by the stock exchanges, they raise 
questions about adherence to regulatory norms and governance practices. BHEL 
faced financial penalties amounting to Rs. 17,003,800 over this period due to these 
violations. The Committee observe that the Company has taken steps to address this 
issue by inducting independent directors, however, the Committee wish to recommend 
that BHEL should ensure timely action for the compliances and should give top priority 
for maintaining governance standards.  
and 
2. The Committee are well aware of the fact that vacant positions in the Board can 
adversely impact the effective functioning of any Company. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the administrative Ministry should take up the matter with 
DPE for seriously looking into the issue of abnormal delay in appointment of Directors 
on the Board. The Committee further recommend that the controlling Ministry and DPE 
should anticipate the future vacancies for various posts in the Board of Directors and 
initiate the required actions and complete the process of the filling up the vacancies 
well before the end of the term of the outgoing Directors.  
Reply of the Government 
BHEL had received notices along with fine from Stock Exchanges due to non-
compliance with provision of Regulation 17 (1) of the SEBI (LODR) Regulations i.e. 
Composition of Board due to non-appointment of requisite number of Independent 
Directors.  In this regard, it has been submitted to the Stock Exchanges (SEs) that the 
Company should not be held liable to pay the fine as the non-compliance with regard 
to composition of the Board is not due to any negligence / default by the Company as 
the same is not under the control of the Company. Accordingly, BHEL requested SEs 
to waive off the fine imposed w.e.f. quarter ending September-2022. It may be 
appreciated that in earlier instances of non-compliance of similar nature, SEs had 

50 
 
already waived fine imposed earlier on BHEL on the similar ground.  It is pertinent to 
mention here that BHEL being a Govt. Company, the power to appoint Directors 
including Independent Directors, lies with the Govt. of India/Administrative Ministry 
(Ministry of Heavy Industries) by following the laid down guidelines of the Govt. of India 
and after obtaining approval of the Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC). 
As on 01.05.2025, there are 5 vacancies of Independent Directors. As such, 
BHEL is regularly taking up with the Administrative Ministry requesting for appointment 
of requisite number of Independent Directors so as to ensure compliance with 
Corporate Governance norms enunciated under SEBI Listing Regulations as well as 
the Companies Act. The matter of filling up of these vacancies is under process at the 
end of Ministry of Heavy Industries, Government of India. 
Ministry of Heavy Industries is regularly pursuing the matter of filling the vacant 
posts of both Functional and Independent Directors. Presently, all the posts of 
Functional Director on the Board of BHEL have been filled. In March, 2025, based on 
the recommendation of the DPE Search Committee and approval by the Appointments 
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC), two (02) nos. Independent Directors have been 
appointed on the Board of BHEL. Further, MHI is regularly pursuing the matter of filling 
up of vacant posts of Independent Directors with DPE. 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated19th June 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 9 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology 
Recommendation (SI. No. 12) 
3. The Committee have been apprised that the Power Sectors Current Thermal 
Fleet has a significant proportion of older plants. with ~13% of coal-based plants (~28 
GW) aged more than 30 years, out of which ~5 GW of plants are aged more than 40 
years. Further, ~18 GW plants are expected to cross 30 years of age in the next 
decade and >130 GW of plants will cross this age by 2047. Notably, most of these 
plants are subcritical in nature, which have lesser efficiencies (~10% lower) and higher 
carbon emitter (10-20% higher) than the newer supercritical power plants.  The 
representative of BHEL have acknowledged that it is imperative to have a Policy 
Driven Mechanism for retirement of these older plants. The Committee applaud the 
fact that to address the issue of aging power plants, BHEL has initiated the 
development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) technology, aiming to enhance 
efficiency and reduce emissions. The Ministry of Heavy Industries, along with other 
stakeholders, such as BHEL, IGCAR has provided funding and technical support for 
this project. A Technology Demonstration Plant (TDP) of 1X800 MW capacity based 
on AUSC technology is planned under the Ministry of Power.  A budgetary provision of 
Rs. 900 crore has been envisioned.  A MoU was signed 3 years back but till date the 
approval is pending. The Committee recommend that BHEL should collaborate with 
the Government to expedite approvals and render adequate financial support for the 
development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology which will improve 
the efficiency and environmental performance of India's thermal power plants. This will 

51 
 
boost the orders of BHEL for replacing older thermal power plants with AUSC 
technology.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this direction.”  
Reply of the Government 
“With guidance and support from MHI and NITI Aayog, BHEL is making concerted 
efforts and move ahead in establishment of technology demonstration plant for 
Advanced Ultra-Super Critical (AUSC) technology. Progress made so far is as below: 
 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs had earlier approved R&D Project for 
development of Advanced Ultra Super Critical (AUSC) Technology for Thermal 
power plants on a mission mode.  
 The project was envisaged to be executed in two phases, with Phase-I focusing 
on technology development while Phase-II targets for setting up the Technology 
Demonstration Plant (TDP) leading to the establishment of this technology. 
 BHEL has successfully completed the R&D phase (i.e. Phase-I) of development 
of this technology in Dec’20, jointly with NTPC Ltd. and Indira Gandhi Centre 
for Atomic Research (IGCAR). 
 Phase-II: In Union Budget for FY 2024-25, Hon’ble Finance Minister announced 
that a joint venture between NTPC and BHEL will set up a full scale 800 MW 
commercial plant using AUSC technology. The government will provide the 
required fiscal support. Subsequent, to the budget announcement, follow-up 
meetings were held at NITI Aayog in August’ 24 and December’ 24. The major 
actions taken are: 
 Project site has been identified as NTPC Korba, Chhattisgarh for setting up 
1x800MW AUSC TDP (Technology Demonstration Plant). 
 The project will be implemented by an existing joint venture company of 
NTPC and BHEL called NTPC BHEL Power Projects Private Limited 
(NBPPL). 
 A committee was constituted by NITI Aayog to oversee finalization of total 
cost estimates of the proposed 800 MW AUSC TDP under the chairmanship 
of Dr. V.K. Saraswat (Member, NITI Aayog). Meetings of the cost committee 
held in Feb’25 and March’25 
 Based on the decisions of the Cost Committee meeting held in March’25, 
draft Public Investment Board (PIB) note for approval of GOI is submitted to 
MoP by NTPC with project details. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 15 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
Challenges Due to Procurement Restrictions 
Recommendation (SI. No. 23 and 24) 
4. The Committee find that BHEL is grappling with challenges related to Land 
Border Sharing and Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) restrictions. These challenges have 
had a cascading effect on project timelines, causing delays of 5-6 months and, in 
certain instances, up to 9 months. These delays result in adverse consequences for 
the Company, including missed business opportunities, postponed deliveries, project 

52 
 
setbacks, and the imposition of liquidated damages (LDs) for tardiness. Moreover, due 
to the constraints on procuring from nations sharing land borders with India, BHEL has 
incurred significant additional costs for the acquisition of crucial components. BHEL 
has made multiple appeals to the administrative ministry regarding these concerns 
who have taken the matter with M/o Finance to have a level playing field for BHEL. 
However, the Ministry has done nothing substantial yet. Besides, BHEL has organized 
a series of workshops called BHEL SAMVAAD since December 2020, engaging with 
the domestic industry to cultivate to mitigate the challenges posed by Land Border 
Sharing and Global Tender Enquiry (GTE) restrictions. The Committee, therefore 
desire that MHI should vigorously take up the matter with M/o Finance for removal of 
restrictions and providing level playing field to BHEL.  Further, BHEL should also 
develop a network of local suppliers which will reduce delays, minimize additional 
procurement costs, and enhance supply chain resilience.” 
and 
5. The Committee are surprised to know that these restrictions are applicable only 
to public sector entities, not the private sector, however, nothing else has been divulge 
in support of this condition except national security.  Therefore, the Committee urge 
that both the Ministry of Heavy Industries and BHEL should continue with their efforts 
to advocate for removal or modification of GTE and land border sharing restrictions 
that adversely affect its operations.  The Committee expect that the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries would take up vigorously the issue with the concerned Government 
authorities and Ministries which is crucial to address these challenges effectively for 
providing a level playing field to CPSUs particularly BHEL.  Simultaneously, BHEL 
should keep maintaining open lines of communication and collaboration with the 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and other relevant Government bodies for the sake of 
facilitating a better understanding of BHEL’s needs and concerns.”  
Reply of the Government 
Based on the request of BHEL, MHI has communicated to DoE, Ministry of Finance 
on 28-08-2024 to provide GTE exemption for BHEL for 95 identified items in the 
various categories like castings and forgings, Special Steel - Tubes and Pipes, Sheets/ 
Plates, electrical steel, Electric Insulating Materials, Electronic Components, Current 
insulated, Hybrid, Rivetless and Anti Friction Bearings, etc. While there has been no 
response from DoE, BHEL is following up with all concerned stakeholders in GoI 
through MHI viz. MoP, MoS, DPIIT, Cab Sec, etc. for providing relief to BHEL so that 
deliverables in projects of National importance are not affected. 
 
BHEL has been constantly following up with DPIIT as well as Ministry of Power and 
Ministry of Steel, through MHI since Sep’ 2022, that there are certain items like alloy 
steel seamless pipes and tubes (required for Boilers), IP outer casings (required for 
turbines), Gypsum De-watering System, etc. where the sources are predominantly 
from countries sharing Land Borders with India and it is in interest of the country to 
bring down the cost to nation. We request suitable directions to DPIIT, Ministry of 
Power and Ministry of Steel to permit registration of bidders representing countries 
sharing Land Borders with India especially in materials where no electronic controls 
are involved.  
 
As regards development of local suppliers, BHEL has intensified the efforts of vendor 
development by creating USDC (Unified Supplier Development Cell) for proactively 

53 
 
scouting industry for capable sources and examining imports for indigenization using 
provisions of PPP-MII, DoE guidelines, etc.  
 
Furthermore, BHEL organizes its flagship event BHEL SAMVAAD every year wherein 
suppliers across India are invited to discuss potential business opportunities in the 
coming years. The details of this initiative have already been mentioned at reply no. 
15.   
Ministry of Heavy Industries has brought to the notice of the Appropriate Authority in 
the Government the constraints faced by BHEL. Various initiatives taken by the 
Government has increased the domestic availability of several goods which were 
previously imported by BHEL. MHI also facilitates all CPSEs under its administrative 
control including BHEL, for timely procurement of items that are not domestically 
available ensuring that they do not lose their competitive edge over its competitors. 
 
[Ministry of Heavy Industries, OM No. 16(3)/2025-PE-XI/CPSE.1 Dated 19th June 2025] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter 1 of the Report) 
 
 
New Delhi:  
08 August, 2025  
17 Sravana, 1947(S)                                                                  
BAIJAYANT PANDA 
Chairperson, 
CommiƩee on Public Undertakings 
 
 
  

54 
 
ANNEXURE-A 
Major Contributions of BHEL in Strategic Sectors are as below:  
A. Power Sector: 
 One of the few EPC players left in country for handling the upcoming orders 
for thermal power plants and ensuring the energy security for the nation. 
Presently executing around 90% of the main thermal plant orders which are 
under construction and are likely to contribute to electricity needs by 2030-
32.  
 Hydro power - BHEL would play a significant role in supporting the value 
chain of Pumped Storage Projects (PSP) within the country, which offers 
benefits of grid stability and energy transition strategies. However, BHEL is 
actively pursuing to gain support from policymaking bodies like CEA to 
qualify BHEL for enabling participation in Electro-Mechanical works of 
Pumped Storage Projects. 
B. Non-conventional areas of power sector: 
 Coal Gasification: BHEL’s indigenous pressurized fluidized bed Coal 
Gasification allows the conversion of India's abundant high ash coal 
reserves into syngas (a mixture of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and 
methane), which can be used to produce electricity, chemicals, hydrogen 
and other synthetic fuels. The production of chemicals from syngas can 
reduce the net imports of the nation.  
 BHEL entered into JV agreement with Coal India Limited (CIL) and formed 
Bharat Coal Gasification and Chemicals Limited (BCGCL) to develop a 
Coal-to-Ammonium Nitrate Plant. 
 Methanol fired gas turbine segment:  BHEL has established a new business 
segment - methanol fired gas turbine segment, which would pave the way 
for reviving unutilized gas turbine sets in the country that are inoperative 
due to unavailability of natural gas and naphtha. 
C. Nuclear Power: 
 BHEL has been associated with India’s nuclear power programme since 5 
decades.  
 BHEL is the only Indian company associated with all the three stages of the 
Indian Nuclear Power Programme – 
1st Stage (Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWR):  
 Supply of Primary Side Equipment such as Steam Generators (45 
nos.), Reactor Headers (96 nos.), End Shields (4 nos.), Other Heat 
Exchangers on Primary/ Reactor Side. 
 Supply of 15 nos. Turbine Generator Sets of rating 220 MWe, 540 
MWe and 700 MWe. 
2nd Stage (Fast Breeder Reactors): 
 Supply and E&C of Entire TG Island for 500 MWe along with supply 
of secondary side equipment such as Thermal Baffle and Inner 
Vessel. 
3rd Stage (Advance Heavy Water Reactor): 
 Development of design of Secondary Side Power Cycle for 300 MWe 
AHWRs 

55 
 
 15 out of 21 PHWRs operating in India are equipped with BHEL supplied 
Turbine Generator sets. 
 Foreign Cooperation Projects (Kudankulam NPP) 
 Erection of TG island for Unit 1&2. Units 3&4 (Under implementation)  
 Erection of Reactor side equipment for 2x1000 MWe Unit 3&4 (Under 
implementation). 
 BHEL and EDF have also signed a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) in 
Nov’23 to explore larger collaboration for the European Pressurized 
Reactors (EPRs) and for the NUWARD SMR (Small Modular Reactor). 
 The development of SMR technology is in a nascent stage and leading 
OEMs in the SMR field like Rosatom, Electricité de France S.A., France 
(EDF) and Hyundai Engineering & construction (HEC) have approached 
BHEL for potential collaboration in the field of SMRs. 
 BHEL’s design and manufacturing capabilities can be leveraged as 
indigenous designer of SMR for this envisaged energy transition. BHEL, 
with its existing facilities, is capable to support the indigenous design and 
development of SMRs and manufacture all mechanical components of SMR 
along with complete Turbine Island. 
D. Defence and Aerospace: 
D.1) Indian Navy: 
 48 Naval Guns – SRGM supplied to Indian Navy. (Frontline weapon on 
board Indian Naval Warships) 
 Providing product life cycle support for SRGM 
 Integrated Platform Management System - INS Vikrant  
 Design, Development, Manufacturing and Supply of Strategic Equipment 
and Systems for naval applications   
D.2) Indian Army: 
 Turret Castings for T72 Tanks 
 Thermo-pressed components for T-72 and T-90 tanks 
D.3) Aerospace: 
 Compact Heat Exchanger for Light Combat Aircrafts (LCA) – Tejas and Su-
30MKi aircraft. 
 Liquid Cooling system and Pump Module for LCA Tejas 
 Li-ion Batteries for Fighter Aircraft (AMCA) 
 Space Grade Solar Panels for Satellites 
 Li-ion Batteries and cells for Space applications. 
 BHEL manufactured batteries for lander and propulsion module, Titanium 
propellant tank and friction welded bimetallic adaptors were part of the 
Chandrayaan-3 launched in July 2023 
E. Transportation: 
 In the Rail transportation segment, significant share of Indian Railway’s 
rolling stock is equipped with BHEL’s propulsion equipment.  
 BHEL led consortium (only fully Indian consortium) executing order for 
supply and maintenance of 80 nos. sleeper version of “Vande Bharat” 
Trainsets in Manufacturing-cum-Maintenance Agreement (MCMA) model 
for 35 years. 
 

56 
 
F. Transmission 
 BHEL undertakes turnkey projects from concept to commissioning for EHV 
(Extra High Voltage) Substations, HVDC Converter Stations and is one of 
the largest manufacturers of HV transformers in the country 
 In the Transmission segment, BHEL has executed 6 out of 9 nos. LCC 
HVDC projects in India. BHEL had partnership with Global OEMs in HVDC 
and has established manufacturing facilities for HVDC products up to 800 
kV, including HVDC converter transformers and thyristor valves. 
 Above capability and competency is essential to achieve the national 
mission to meet the targeted RE (Renewable Energy) capacity of 500GW 
by 2030 
 
 

57 
 
ANNEXURE-B 
 
 
 
  


58 
 
ANNEXURE-B 
 
  


59 
 
ANNEXURE-B-1 
  


60 
 
ANNEXURE-B-2 
  


61 
 
ANNEXURE-C 
PENDING CAG AUDIT PARA  
S. 
No. 
Gist of the Audit Para pending 
1 
  
Loss of revenue to the tune of 6.36 crore due to delay in execution of an order for supply of transformers 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) supplied the transformers ordered by UP 
Power Transmission Corporation Limited, Lucknow with delays ranging between six and 
26 weeks resulting in invocation of price reduction clause, thereby, impacting the revenue 
of BHEL. 
2 Avoidable loss due to laxities in supply of Alternate Current Electrical Multiple Units. 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited suffered a loss of Rs. 13.69 Crore due to laxity in supply of complete 
sets of Alternate Current Electrical Multiple Unit. 
3 Non- safeguarding of financial interest resulted in additional burden towards payment of Safeguard Duty. 
 
Electronics Division, Bengaluru unit of Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited did not take cognisance of the 
proposed changes in tax structure and the delivery schedules, resulting in additional liability of Rs. 11.58 
Crore towards payment of Safeguard Duty for clearing of imports. 
4 Loss due to non-performance under a contract (Keban-BG encashment Rs. 28.35 Crore) 
 
BHEL suffered a loss of Euro 3.83 million (Rs. 28.35 crore) due to failure to deliver performance as per 
the contractual provisions and resultant invocation of Bank Guarantee by the client (Keban). 
5 Undue benefit to employees towards Late Night Snacks Allowance. 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Hyderabad extended undue benefit to its employees towards payment 
of Late Night Snacks Allowance to the tune of Rs. 16.69 Crore, in violation of the guidelines of DPE as 
well as its own Personnel Policy.  
6 Avoidable payment of customs duty and safeguard duty. 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Trichy unit did not obtain the amendments to the advance authorization 
for import of seamless carbon steel tubes in time and consequently made avoidable payment of customs 
duty (including safeguard duty) amounting to Rs. 5.71 Crore. 
7 Irregular payment towards encashment of Half Pay Leave (HPL)/ Sick Leave (SL)/ Earned Leave (EL) as 
well as employer's share of EPF (Employees’ Provident Fund) contribution on leave encashment. 
 
Audit observed that BHEL deviated from the DPE (Department of Public Enterprises) guidelines and made 
irregular payment of Rs. 36.86 Crore to their employees towards HPL/ SL/ EL encashment on 
superannuation over and above the ceiling of 300 days.  
8 Irregular payment towards Performance Related Pay (PRP). 
 
Due to non-adherence to the DPE guidelines with respect to payment of performance related pay, the 
BHEL has made payment of Rs. 15 Crore. 
9 Compliance of DPE Guidelines on Perquisites and allowances. 
 
DPE while issuing guidelines of pay revision stipulated therein a ceiling of 50% of basic pay on payments 
made to employee towards perquisites and allowances. Audit observed that BHEL incurred an excess 
expenditure of Rs. 359.55 Crore. 
 
 
 

62 
 
C&AG AUDIT PARAS ON MATTERS RELATING TO BHEL 
Sr. No. Gist of the Audit Para 
pending 
Date of 
Receiving  
Action Taken by the 
Company to 
expedite the para 
Present Status 
CAG commercial Report of 2023 
1 Loss of revenue to the 
tune of 6.36 crore due 
to delay in execution of 
an order for supply of 
transformers 
01.01.2024 Reply to the C&AG 
para submitted on 
23.01.2024. 
Under consideration 
with CAG office, New 
Delhi. 
 
 
Chapter V of Report No. 14 of 2021 
Para No. 5.1 (Year: 2020-21)  
2 Avoidable loss due to 
laxities in supply of 
Alternate Current 
Electrical Multiple Units. 
 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited 
suffered a loss of Rs. 
13.69 Crore due to 
laxity in supply of 
complete sets of 
Alternate Current 
Electrical Multiple Unit. 
 
Received on 
01.10.2021 
Replies/ATNs to the 
printed Para and 
vetting Remarks have 
been submitted to 
CAG. The latest replies 
to the vetting remarks 
were submitted on 
19.10.2023. 
 
MHI vide letter dated 
28.02.2024, has 
intimated that The 
matter has been 
referred to COPU by 
C&AG. 
Chapter V of Report No. 14 of 2021 
Para No. 5.2 (Year: 2020-21)  
3 Non- safeguarding of 
financial interest 
resulted in additional 
burden towards 
payment of Safeguard 
Duty. 
 
Electronics Division, 
Bengaluru unit of 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited did 
not take cognisance of 
the proposed changes 
in tax structure and the 
delivery schedules, 
resulting in additional 
liability of  Rs. 11.58 
Crore towards payment 
of Safeguard Duty for 
clearing of imports. 
 
Received on 
10.06.2021 
As per MHI letter 
dated 17.10.2024 
para is settled and not 
to be perused further.  
Para Settled  
Chapter VI of Report No. 18 of 2020 
Para No. 6.1 (Year: 2019-20) 
4 Loss due to non-
performance under a 
contract (Keban-BG 
encashment Rs. 28.35 
Crore) 
 
BHEL suffered a loss of 
Euro 3.83 million (Rs. 
 
Received on 
21.05.2021 
 
Replies/ATNs to the 
printed Para and 
vetting remarks have 
been submitted to 
CAG. The latest 
replies to the vetting 
remarks were 
submitted on 
19.10.2023. 
MHI, vide letter dated 
28.02.2024, has 
intimated that the 
matter has been 
referred to COPU by 
C&AG. 

63 
 
Sr. No. Gist of the Audit Para 
pending 
Date of 
Receiving  
Action Taken by the 
Company to 
expedite the para 
Present Status 
28.35 crore) due to 
failure to deliver 
performance as per the 
contractual provisions 
and resultant invocation 
of Bank 
Guarantee by the client 
(Keban). 
MHI, vide letter dated 
28.02.2024, has 
intimated that the 
matter has been 
referred to COPU by 
C&AG. 
Chapter IV of Report No. 13 of 2019 
Para 4.1 (Year: 2018-19) 
5 Undue benefit to 
employees towards 
Late Night Snacks 
Allowance. 
 
 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited, 
Hyderabad extended 
undue benefit to its 
employees towards 
payment of Late Night 
Snacks Allowance to 
the tune of Rs. 16.69 
Crore, in violation of the 
guidelines of DPE as 
well as its own 
Personnel Policy. 
 
 
Received on 
10.10.2018 
 
ATN was sent to 
C&AG on 11.08.2021 
by the Ministry of 
Heavy Industries 
(MHI). 
 
Also, the concern 
raised in the Audit 
observation has been 
suitably addressed by 
BHEL, and its Action 
Taken Note (ATN) 
submitted to the MHI 
on 24.11.2021. In 
response to MHI 
communication, reply/ 
ATN has been 
submitted on 
22.04.2022. Vide letter 
dated 10.06.2022, 
CAG requested MHI to 
forward the matter to 
COPU. Comments of 
BHEL submitted to 
MHI on 06.07.2022. 
Further, reply has been 
submitted on 
31.08.2022 with 
respect to MHI letter 
dated 26.07.2022. 
Matter referred to 
COPU by MHI vide 
letter dated 
07.09.2022. 
Chapter VI of Report No. 11 of 2018 
Para 6.1 (Year: 2017-18) 
6 Avoidable payment of 
customs duty and 
safeguard duty. 
 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited, 
Trichy unit did not 
obtain the amendments 
to the advance 
authorization for import 
of seamless carbon 
steel tubes in time and 
consequently made 
avoidable payment of 
customs duty (including 
 
Received on 
12.01.2018 
 
Reply/ATN submitted 
on 27.04.2018 and 
04.06.2020 to the 
Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI). 
 
Fresh ATNs 
submitted on 
14.07.2022 and 
09.08.2022 with 
respect to MHI letters 
dated 17.06.2022 and 
18.07.2022 
respectively. 
 
DGFT, Chennai vide 
letter dated 
30.07.2024, has 
intimated that a refund 
claim amounting to Rs 
1.35 crore has been 
admitted. The 
remaining portion of 
the claim is currently 
under process. 

64 
 
Sr. No. Gist of the Audit Para 
pending 
Date of 
Receiving  
Action Taken by the 
Company to 
expedite the para 
Present Status 
safeguard duty) 
amounting to Rs. 5.71 
Crore. 
 
Chapter XIII of Report No. 13 of 2014 
Para 13.1 (Year: 2014-15) 
7 Irregular payment 
towards encashment of 
Half Pay Leave (HPL)/ 
Sick Leave (SL)/ 
Earned Leave (EL) as 
well as employer's 
share of EPF 
(Employees’ Provident 
Fund) contribution on 
leave encashment. 
 
Audit observed that 
BHEL deviated from the 
DPE (Department of 
Public Enterprises) 
guidelines and made 
irregular payment of Rs. 
36.86 Crore to their 
employees towards 
HPL/ SL/ EL 
encashment on 
superannuation over 
and above the ceiling of 
300 days. 
 
Received on 
03.09.2014 
Replies/ATNs to the 
para and subsequent 
rejoinders submitted 
from time to time. Last 
reply/ATN submitted to 
the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI) on 
01.09.2021, with 
respect to MHI letter 
dated 25.08.2021. 
 
 
 
Matter referred to 
COPU by MHI vide 
letter dated 
15.11.2021. 
 
 
Chapter XIII of Report No. 13 of 2014 
Para 13.2 (Year: 2014-15) 
8 Irregular payment 
towards Performance 
Related Pay (PRP). 
 
Due to non-adherence 
to the DPE guidelines 
with respect to payment 
of performance related 
pay, the BHEL has 
made payment of Rs. 
15 Crore. 
 
Received on  
03.09.2014 
Replies/ATNs to the 
para and subsequent 
rejoinders submitted 
from time to time. Last 
reply/ATN submitted to 
the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI) on 
24.12.2021. 
 
 
Under consideration 
with MAB-Delhi. 
 
[MAB: Member Audit 
Board] 
 
Reply to COPU query 
also submitted in Feb. 
2023. 
Chapter XIV of Report No. 3 of 2011 
Para 14.3 (Year: 2010-11) 
9 Compliance of DPE 
Guidelines on 
Perquisites and 
allowances. 
 
DPE while issuing 
guidelines of pay 
revision stipulated 
therein a ceiling of 50% 
of basic pay on 
payments made to 
employee towards 
 
Received on 
28.03.2011 
 
ATNs clarifying 
correctness of 
payment and 
Conformance to the 
DPE Guidelines 
submitted from time to 
time. Last reply 
submitted to the 
Ministry of Heavy 
Industries (MHI) on 
21.12.2020. 
 
Matter referred to 
COPU by MHI vide 
letter dated 
31.08.2021. 
 
Reply to COPU query 
also submitted in Nov. 
2022 and Feb. 2023. 
 

65 
 
Sr. No. Gist of the Audit Para 
pending 
Date of 
Receiving  
Action Taken by the 
Company to 
expedite the para 
Present Status 
perquisites and 
allowances. Audit 
observed that BHEL 
incurred an excess 
expenditure of Rs. 
359.55 Crore. 
  

66 
 
APPENDIX I 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 1st August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. ‘1’, Ground Floor, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
             Shri Baijayant Panda         -          Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri Tariq Anwar 
3. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
4. Shri Mukesh Rajput 
5. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
6. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
7. Shri Lalji Verma 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
9. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
10. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
11. Shri Arun Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Anjani Kumar - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mriganka Achal - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen - Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY (DAE)  
 
1. Dr. Ajit Kumar Mohanty - CMD  
2. Shri Karthigeyan P. Subramanyam - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anjali Sinha - Joint Secretary 
 

67 
 
PART-A 
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairperson briefly apprised the Members about the draft Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings (18th Lok 
Sabha) on Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL). The Committee then considered 
and adopted the report, without any changes/modifications. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report on the 
basis of factual verification as suggested by the concerned CPSU and 
Ministry/Department and present the Report during the ongoing session of Parliament.  
 
4. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX    XXXX  
Then, the Committee took up the next agenda of the sitting 
  

68 
 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE REPORT OF 
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS ON BHARAT HEAY ELECTRICALS 
LIMITED (BHEL) 
 
I. Total number of recommendations  44 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
SI. Nos 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18-21, 22, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31-33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 
44. 
Percentage of total: 
 36 
 
 
 
 
81.82% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
Sl. Nos. 34 and 35. 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
04.55% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government had not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
Sl. No. 9. 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
02.27% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Government has furnished interim replies and final replies are 
still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 12, 23 and 24. 
Percentage of total: 
  
 
 
 
11.36% 
 