 
 
 
                                         
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
THE WETLANDS (CONSERVATION AND 
MANAGEMENT) RULES, 2017 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th December, 2023) 
 
 
(Presented on  12th  February, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
  REPORT NO. 
252 

 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
                                      PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
                      (i) 
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
                 (ii) 
 
 
3. ABBREVIATIONS 
 
                (iii) 
 
 
4. REPORT               1-13 
 
                                                                                                                                                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
 
             14-19 
 
 
6. MINUTES                                                                                                    
                                                                 
            20-25 
   
7. ANNEXURE                                                                                                         26- 47 

 
 
 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
(RECONSTITUTED ON THE 2nd November, 2022) 
 
1. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee                               -          Chairman 
2. Shri Raghav Chadha * 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
5.  ( vacant  ) ** 
6. Shri R. Dharmar 
7. Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
9. Dr. Amar Patnaik  
10. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
11. Shri S Niranjan Reddy 
12. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
13. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
14. Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
15. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
______________________________________________________ 
* Shri Raghav Chadha suspended from the service of the House w.e.f. 11 th August, 2023. 
** Vacancy caused due to retirement of Ms. Sushmita Dev  w.e.f  18 th August, 2023.  
________________________________________________________ 
SECRETARIAT 
1.        Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajendra Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms. Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri P.P. Raumon, Under Secretary 
7. Shri Naresh Kumar, Committee Officer 
 (i) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.  I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having 
been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf this Two 
Hundred and Fifty Second Report of the Committee. 
2. The Committee examined the matters that came up while scruti nizing the 
Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 and issue relating to 
them along with the comments received from the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change. The Ministry has notified Wetlands (Conservation 
and Management Rules, 20 17 under the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 as regulatory framework for conservation and 
management of wetlands in India.  
3. The above Rules were framed under Sub -section (1) and clause (v) of 
Sub-section (2) and Sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Environment Protection 
Act, 1986. The Wetlands Conservation and Management is an important and 
crucial area. These rules fortify the legal framework for environmental concerns 
and strengthen the institutional framework through State/UT Wetland 
Authorities and the National Wetland Committee.  
4. The Committee’s observations/recomm endations are contained in the 
Report.  
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting 
held on 5th October, 2023. 
 
DR. LAXMIKANT BAJPAYEE,  
Chairman 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
NEW  DELHI 
5th October, 2023 
(ii) 
  

 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
CRWA   Central Wetlands Regulatory Authority 
CRZ    Coastal Regulation Zone 
NGT    National Green Tribunal 
NLCP    National Lake Conservation Plan 
NPCA   National Parks Conservation Association 
NWC    National Wetlands Committee 
NWCP   National Wetlands Conservation Program 
UNESCO   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UT    Union Territory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
1. 
Report 
on 
The Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 
I. Background and Introduction 
Wetlands are vital parts of the hydrological cycle and are highly 
productive ecosystems which support rich biodiversity and provide a wide range 
of ecosystem services. Environmentalists, biologists and others concerned about 
the health of the planet and its inhabitants recognize the key role wetlands play 
in life on Earth.   Wetlands are also key drivers of local economies, given their 
importance to agriculture, recreation and fishing.  However, they are under 
tremendous stress due to rapid urbanization, in dustrialization and agricultural 
intensification, manifested by the shrinkage in their area extent, and decline in 
the hydrological, economic and ecological functions they perform. The pressure 
on wetlands is likely to intensify in the coming decades due t o increased global 
demand for land and water, as well as climate change.  
2. India is one of the 170 Contracting Parties to the Ramsar Convention on 
Wetlands (signed in Ramsar, Iran, in 1971 and entered into force in 1975), an 
intergovernmental treaty that  provides the framework for n ational action and 
international cooperation for th e conservation and wise use of w etlands and 
their resources. There are 2,477  Ramsar sites across the world. M inistry of 
Environment Forests and Climate Change has so far identified 115 wetlands and 
63 Lakes in 24 States and 2 Union Territories for conservation and management 
under National Wetlands Conservation Program  (NWCP)/National Lake 
Conservation Plan  (NLCP)/National Parks Conservation Association( NPCA). 
The National Envir onment Policy, 2006 recognised the ecosystem services 
provided by wetlands and emphasized on the need to set up a regulatory 
mechanism for all wetlands so as to maintain their ecological character and 
ultimately support their integrated management. (Ref: Preamble to the Wetlands 
Rules, 2017). Thereafter, the Central Government had published the Wetlands 
(Conservation and Management) Rules, 2010, dated the 4th December, 2010. 
However, with the passage of time and experience gained, the Central 
Government considered it necessary to supersede the Wetlands (Conservation 
and Management) Rules, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as 2010 Rules) for 
effective conservation and management of wetlands in the country. Thus in 
exercise of the powers conferred by secti on 25, read with sub -section (1) and 

 
 
2. 
clause (v) of sub -section (2) and sub -section (3) of section 3 and section 23 of 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (Annexure I) and in supersession of 
the Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2010  (Annexure II), the 
Central Government notified the Wetlands (Conservation and Management) 
Rules, 2017 (Annexure III) (hereinafter referred to as 2017 Rules), notified on 
September 26, 2017 for effective conservation and management of wetlands. 
3. The salient features of the Rules are as follows:  
(i) These Rules shall apply to the following wetlands or wetlands complexes, 
namely: (a) wetlands categorised as 'wetlands of international importance' under 
the Ramsar Convention; (b) wetlands as notified by the Central G overnment, 
State Government and Union Territory Administration.  
(ii) The wetlands shall be conserved and managed in accordance with the 
principle of 'wise use' as determined by the Wetlands Authority. 
(iii)The Central Government shall  also constitute the State Wetlands Authority 
in each State. The Central Government shall also constitute the National 
Wetlands Committee which will monitor the implementation of the Rules. The 
authorities, both at the Centre and State level, will have officials from the 
Ministries/Departments  of Environment, Tourism, Water Resources and Rural 
and Urban D evelopment, Fisheries, Revenue , Flood Control   as well as 
members of the Pollution Control Boards among others. 
(iv) The authorities at the State or Union T erritory level have been tasked with 
listing all wetlands in their territories within three months and prepare a list of 
wetlands to be notified, within six months, among other functions, including 
developing a comprehensive list of activities to be regulated and permitted 
within the notified wetlands and their zone of influence. 
II. Examination of Rules, Observations and Recommendations  
 
4. Keeping in view the significance of these Rules in conservation and 
management of wetlands in the country, these  were taken up for detailed 
examination by the Committee.  A detailed questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for their 
comments/clarifications on 27 th June, 2018. The Ministry furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the 29th June, 2018 (Annexure IV). The Committee 
considered the matter at its meeting held on the 3 rd July, 2018 with the 
Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change along with 

 
 
3. 
other senior Officials from the Mini stry.  A brief summary of the points raised 
by the Committee and the comments of the Ministry are elaborated in the 
succeeding paragraphs along with the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee.  
5. The Committee enquired about the reasons that led th e Central 
Government to frame the, 2017 Rules and supersede the  2010 Rules. The 
Ministry informed that the Rules have been formulated after taking into 
consideration the problems faced during implementation of the 2010 Rules and 
for a better identification, management and preservation of wetlands with the 
help of State administration. Based on the experience gained from the 
implementation of the 2010 Rules and consultation meetings with States etc., it 
was noticed that the 2010 Rules w ere highly centralized and the States and UTs 
could not assume and discharge their requisite responsibilities effectively for 
conservation and management of wetlands under their jurisdiction and control, 
without which it was not possible to implement the 2 010 Rules. Further, the 
Ministry stated that the 2010 Rules were uniform in nature without reference to 
site characteristics and diversities.  Therefore, for a more effective conservation 
and management of wetlands in the Country , the 2017 Rules were notif ied and 
the 2010 Rules were superseded.  
 In the 2010 R ules, the following provisions were specifically mentioned 
where as the 2017 Rules have totally removed such provisions. 
(i) List of activities that can be undertaken with the permission of state 
monitoring committee. 
(ii) Process of identification of wetland. 
(iii) Provision for appeal by the general public against the decision on 
Authority. 
6. The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and 
observes that the Ministry’s objective of better identificatio n, management 
and preservation of wetlands is laudable. After a detailed scrutiny of the 
Rules, the Committee, though in broad agreement with the objectives of the 
Rules, considered that these Rules are not as comprehensive as they ought 
to be, given the f act that they superseded the 2010 Rules with the objective 
of improving thereon. On a comparison of the 2017 Rules vis-à-vis the 2010 
Rules, the Committee notes that  Rules of 2010 had some  provisions which 
have been done away with in the 2017 Rules. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should try to revisit the 2017 Rules and try to 

 
 
4. 
accommodate/incorporate some provisions of 2010 Rules in the 2017 Rules  
to bring clarity.  
7.  Rule 9 o f the 2010 Rules stated that “any person aggrieved by the 
decision of the Authority may prefer an appeal to the National Green Tribunal 
constituted under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 within a period of 
sixty days from the date of such decision.” This provision does not exist in the 
2017 Rules. The Committee enquired about the reasons for doing away with 
this provision. The Secretary stated that since Rules are framed under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the provision of Appeal to the judic ial 
bodies for any act is implicit under the Rules. Further, the provision of Appeal 
to the NGT is a part of NGT Act and applies to any Rules framed under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, it was opined that the same need not be 
mentioned again in these rules.  
8. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that, even if the provision of Appeal to the judicial bodies for any act is 
implicit under the Rules as stated by the Secretary in his reply, the 
Ministry can explicitly provi de for provisions relating to appeal, more so, 
because there was already a similar provision, explicitly stated in the 2010 
Rules. There is no plausible reason for not menti oning this provision in the 
2017 Rules. 
9. Rule 2(g)  of the (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 defines 
‘Wetlands’ as: “An area of marsh, fen, peatland or water; whether natural or 
artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, 
brackish or salt, including areas of mar ine water the depth of which at low tide 
does not exceed six meters, but does not include river channels, paddy fields, 
human-made water bodies/tanks specifically constructed for drinking water 
purposes and structures specifically constructed for aquacultu re, salt 
production, recreation and irrigation purposes.”  The 2010 Rules included in 
the definition of wetlands all inland waters such as lakes, reservoir, tanks, 
backwaters, lagoon, creeks, estuaries, etc. However, from the above definition   
it is observed that 2017 Rules are not as comprehensive as the old ones. They do 
not include river channels, paddy fields, human -made water bodies/tanks 
specifically for drinking water purposes, aquaculture, salt production, and 
recreation and irrigation purposes. It also does not include wetlands under forest 
and coastal regulation zones. In view thereof t he Committee enquired from the 
Ministry about the justification for adopting this narrow and limited definition 

 
 
5. 
of wetlands in the 2017 Rules. The Ministry informed t hat in the 2017 Rules, 
human-made water bodies/tanks specifically constructed for drinking water 
purposes and structures specifically constructed for aquaculture, salt production, 
recreation & irrigation purposes have been excluded from the definition of 
wetland. It further stated that these Rules shall also not apply to the wetlands 
falling in areas covered under the Indian Forest Act, 1927, the Wild Life 
(Protection) Act, 1972, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the State Forest 
Acts, and the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 2011 as amended from time 
to time. The Ministry informed that the justification for the same is that they are 
already protected under other regulations an d this would enable the States and  
UTs to focus on the wetlands having no protection/regulation.  The Secretary 
further stated that human made water bodies are created for the specific 
purposes and if these are regulated under the 2017 Rules , these may not serve 
the purpose they are meant for due to regulation or prohibition of activities 
under the 2017 rules.  
10. The Committee also noted that Salt pans as ‘wetlands’ have been omitted 
from the new Rules. While these were identified as wetlands in the 2010 Rules, 
as they are often important sites for migratory birds and other for ms of wildlife. 
Thus the Ministry was specifically asked about the justification for omission of 
salt pans from the definition of wetlands.  The Secretary stated that salt pans 
were deliberately omitted because these are human made pans and not original 
wetlands.  Upon an enquiry from the Chairman about the reasons for omitting 
lakes, lagoons, creeks, the Secretary stated that backwaters, lagoons, etc., are 
already under the CRZ Rules and that the Ministry is managing them through 
those Rules and that’s why they have not been included.   
11. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that by undoing the protection for India’s already threatened wetlands by 
playing with definitions, the Ministry seems to have increased the 
vulnerability of these hydrologically sensitive area s. The widespread 
expansion of development  in the country in recent decades has only 
contributed towards making these sensitive areas even more vulnerable.  
The Committee feels that if left unchanged, the new Rules might facilitate 
the legal exploitation and development of wetlands as real estate, industrial 
sites and garbage dumps. For a country battling droughts , large scale 
pollution and floods caused by destructive land -use change and climate 
change, the new wetland rules can have disastrous consequences. Under the 
2010 Rules, in addition to Ramsar and government -notified wetlands, any 

 
 
6. 
high-altitude wetland larger than 5 hectares, or those at elevations less than 
2,500 metres and spread over 500 hectares automatically qualified for 
protection. So did wetl ands located in ecologically sensitive areas or areas 
recognised as or lying within UNESCO World Heritage Sites. This 
provision should be reinstated in the 2017 Rules. The Committee is also not 
convinced with the reasons for the omission of salt pans from the definition 
of ‘wetlands’ in the new Rules. Further, since salt pans have been removed, 
even the natural salt pans would fall outside the scope of the new Rules and 
hence are vulnerable to their commercial exploitation. These were 
identified as wetlands in the 2010 Rules, as they are often important sites of 
migratory birds and other forms of biodiversity. Hence, the omission in the 
2017 Rules implies that while salt  pans do exist as wetlands, they do not 
require any conservation or ecological balance.  
12. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the natural salt pans 
should be given protection under the Rules , given their significance as 
important sites for migratory birds and other forms of biodiversity. The 
Committee further notes that in the 2010 Ru les, some related criteria for 
identification of wetlands , which require protection  were made explicit, 
such as natural beauty, ecological sensitivity, genetic diversity, historical 
value, etc. However, these have been omitted in the 2017 Rules. This seems  
to be a retrograde step. The Committee notes with concern the definition of 
wetlands in 2017 Rules and recommends that the Ministry should revisit 
the narrow definition of wetlands in 2017 Rules and should include natural 
salt pans in the definition and emphasis should be given on protection of 
wetlands that protect wildlife and biodiversity.  The Committee further 
recommends that the criteria for identification of wetlands requiring 
protection which were explicitly mentioned in the 2010 Rules may be r e-
introduced in the present Ru les so that a clear cut  basis for selecting salt 
pan from the point of view of wildlife and biodiversity could be made out 
from the legislation itself rather than completely removing the  same from 
Rules.  Further, given the immen se significance of wetlands in 
environmental conservation, an action taken Note may be  expeditiously 
provided to the Committee.  The Committee also observed that in many 
places paddy fields are lying idle for many years due to various reasons and 
they are s erving the purpose of water storage, floo d mitigation, acquifer 
recharge etc. so such idle paddy fields etc for  a longer period of 10 years or 
more may be brought under these rules. The classification of such paddy 

 
 
7. 
fields may be done and records  be updated as the cases may be.  Similarly 
the Silica mining/granite mining sites and quarie s have good water holding 
capacity which is also to be included  in the wetland category and required  
to be conserved.  
13. Rule 7 provides for  “Delegation of powers and functions to the State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations.”  This Rule, which is newly 
introduced, puts the onus on the S tate governments to prepare brie f documents 
on each wetland identified for notification containing demarcation of the 
boundary, list out activities that would be permitted or regulated within the 
wetland or its zone of influence and also to work out modalities for enforcement 
of the Regulation. The State or Union Territory wetland authorities would make 
recommendations based on this document for notifying the wetlands. And in 
case of trans -boundary wetlands, the central Government will co -ordinate with 
concerned States/UTs for the above activity. The Ministry was asked to respond 
to the criticism that the 2017 Rules source out  wetland management to States 
and Union Territories despite there being lethargic responses from States and 
Union Territories in the past on wetland protection. The Committee feels that 
devolving management to States and Union Territories in their totality  could 
make wetland conservation ineffective. The Ministry stated in a written reply to 
the Committee that Central Government is conscious  of its obligations to 
protect environment, however, the subjects of Water and Land fall within the 
State List under E ntry 18 of list 2 of schedule 7 of the Constitution of India. 
Therefore, constitutionally, it is the State Governments which have to execute 
the same. The Ministry further stated that the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986, as well as Article 253 read with  Entry 13 and 14 of Seventh Schedule is 
in terms of the law making power of the Parliament. Hence, law is made by the 
Parliament and Rules are made by the Central Government but actual 
implementation has to be done by State Governments. The Ministry furthe r 
stated that the power to implement and execute particular provision has always 
been delegated to the State Government, under the Constitution itself with 
federal structure and states as federating units. The Ministry also informed that 
State Governments have adequate machinery and departments to deal with the 
information pertaining to land and water bodies. Therefore, the State 
Governments are in a better posit ion to identify and notify the w etlands. The 
Ministry informed the Committee that an empowered authority consisting of the 
officers of the State Government has been created to facilitate time bound 
identification of wetlands which is otherwise also a State subject. The creation 

 
 
8. 
of State and UT Wetlands Authorities is intended to facilitate the time bound 
identification of wetlands and it does not detract from the powers vested with 
the Central Government to issue appropriate orders and directions for fulfilment 
of the objective of the 2017 Rules.  
14. The Secretary further informed the Committee that the 2010 Rules 
needed certain amendments which were based on the knowledge that was 
gained while implementation of 2010 Rules. The  Secretary stated that the 2010 
Rules had become completely c entred and concentrated in the Union 
Government and the States had very little role.  As a result, when things were 
decided at Central level, the implementation was very difficult at the field level.  
So, it was decided that it is better that the Ministry focuses on implementation.  
To improve implementation, 2017 Rules were introduced, wherein the biggest 
attempt that was made was at decentralising powers to the State Gover nments 
and the Wetland Authorities there, so that they can take care of what they wa nt 
to do.  The Secretary further observed that when there is a much centralised 
system, it is a common prescription for all wetlands across the country, and 
wetlands differ both in size and site  and they need separate treatments.  That 
was another reason why this decentralisation was done by the Ministry.   
15.  The Committee is not convinced with the clarification of the Ministry that 
land and water fall in the State List and hence the wetlands management should 
also fall within the purview of the State/UT  Governments. The committee feels 
that Forest and Protection of Wild Animals and Birds, which comes at entry 
17A and 17B of the Concurrent List is the relevant provision for the present 
case. Further, the Committee  appreciates the efforts of the  Ministry t o 
decentralise the implementation of these Regulations, However, it cannot 
simply wash it hands off from the huge responsibility on it to protect, conserve 
and improve the quality of wildlife and forest gifted by mother earth to us, 
which is deteriorating every day. 
16. The Committee observes that new rules have done away with the 
National Wetlands Authority created under the 2010 R ules and conferred 
all regulatory powers on the State governments. The Centre’s act of 
abdicating its responsibilities is claim ed to be a virtuous move to 
decentralise in the spirit of federalism.  However, environmentalists say 
this is odd, as States and UTs have never acted on wetlands protection and 
notification in spite of the pressure exerted by the Central government — 
using the Central Wetlands Regulatory Authority (CWRA) — under the 

 
 
9. 
2010 Rules. The Committee expects the Ministry to play a pro-active role in 
the implementation of the Rules and recommends that the implementation 
of the Rules must be a joint responsibility of the Centre and the States. The 
Centre should not abdicate its constitutional responsibility and obligation 
to protect the wetlands and the environment. The Committee also 
recommends that the Central Government should extend any kind of 
feasible help, be it  in terms of manpower, infrastructure or financial aid, 
which may be needed by the States to preserve and protect the wetlands 
within their territory. 
17. Under the Rule 5(4)(n), the State wetland authorities can issue necessary 
directions for conservation  and sustainable management of wetlands to the 
respective implementing agencies. However, the directions are not binding in 
nature to desist from any activity detrimental to wetland conservation. The 
Ministry was asked to explain the reasons for the directions not being backed by 
a penal sanction.  The Ministry in a written reply to the Committee stated that 
penal provision can be made only in an Act of Parliament and not in the 
subordinate legislation. The Ministry further informed that it is in the process of 
amending the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 w.r.t civil penalties. 
However, the Secretary informed the Committee that there is a lack of enough 
awareness in this country on conservation and preservation of these wetlands.  
He stated that any amount  of legal framework that is created will not succeed 
unless that kind of awareness is generated at local level because wetlands are 
used by people every day.   
18. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that since penal provision  can be made only in an Act of Parliament and 
not in the subordinate legislation, therefore, the Ministry should expedite 
the process of amending the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to provide 
for civil penalties, if the directions issued by the State w etland authorities 
to the respective implementing agencies for conservation and sustainable 
management of wetlands are not adhered to. The amendment should 
clearly provide for the institutional mechanism to pursue cases of non 
compliance with the direction s issued by the State wetland authorities and 
the penalty should be sufficient enough to act as a deterrent. 
19. Rule 6 provides for constitution of National Wetlands Committee. The 
Committee noted that the 2017 Rules have done away with the Central 
Wetlands Regulatory Authority (CWRA) that was provided under the 2010 

 
 
10. 
Rules. CWRA’s place has been taken by the National Wetlands Committee, 
which has a merely advisory role. The Committee enquired about the reasons 
and necessity for such a step.  The Ministry st ated that it was envisaged that 
decentralization of functions and responsibilities can yield better results in the 
matter of preservation of land or water bodies. It informed the Committee that 
the National Wetlands Committee (NWC)  is constituted under the  2017 Rules 
and is categorically entrusted with the job to monitor implementation of the 
rules by the State and Union Territory (UT) Wetlands Authorities in addition to 
its advisory role. The Ministry further informed that NWC shall advise Central 
Government on appropriate policies and action programmes for conservation 
and wise use of wetlands, monitor implementation of the Wetlands Rules by 
concerned Wetlands Authorities, recommend new Ramsar Sites, recommend 
trans-boundary wetlands for notification under  these rules, review progress of 
integrated management of Ramsar sites and transboundary wetlands etc.  
20. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that the Ministry has not offered sufficient justification or rationale for 
doing away with the Central Wetlands Regulatory Authority (CWRA) that 
was provided under the 2010 Rules and replacing it with the National 
Wetlands Committee, which has a merely advisory role.  However, if the 
Ministry still feels compelled to continue with the National Wetlands 
Committee, then it should be given enough ‘teeth’ to enforce its directions 
and pursue its recommendations. It should not be a ‘toothless’ body and 
should be sufficiently empowered to enforce its mandate.  
21. Rule 4 (Restrictions of activities in wetlands), says that conservation and 
management of wetlands would be “in accordance with the principle of „wise 
use‟ as determined by the Wetlands Authority”.  The Committee noted that 
environmentalists have criticized this principle. Their conce rn is that how does 
one define ‘wise use’? It’s a very subjective term. The Ministry was asked about 
its views on this issue?  The Ministry stated that ‘Wise use’ has been defined as 
maintenance of their ecological character, achieved through implementation  of 
ecosystem approach within the context of sustainable development in the rules 
and is an accepted principle globally including the ‘Ramsar Convention’ on 
wetlands, an intergovernmental treaty which provides framework for national 
action for conservation  of wetlands. The Secretary further stated that the 
Ministry has initiated the process for formulation of Guidelines for 2017 Rules 
which shall inter-alia, guide on the technical terms such as ecological character, 

 
 
11. 
integrated management plan, wetlands complexes, wise use of wetlands, zone of 
influence used in the Rules.  
22. The Committee notes with concern that restriction of activities on 
wetlands will be done as per the principle of ‘wise use’, determined by the 
State Wetlands Authority. The Committee recommends that the term ‘wise 
use’ must be defined or clear parameters must be laid down to identify 
‘wise use’ so that there is no space for ambiguity or multiple 
interpretations of this term. The Committee also directs that the process 
for formulation of Guidelines for 2017 Rules which shall inter -alia, guide 
on the technical terms shall be completed as soon as possible and those 
guidelines should also be furnished to the Committee for its perusal. 
23. Rule 5(6) makes provisions for a Grievance Committee t o be constituted 
by the State Wetlands Authority, to provide a mechanism for hearing and 
forwarding the grievances raised by public to the Authority. However, the Rules 
do not provide for an appeal there from.  The Ministry was asked about the 
reasons for not providing a forum to make appeals against the decision of the 
Authority. The Ministry stated that since the provision of Appeal to the Hon’ble 
NGT is a part of NGT Act and applies to any Rules framed under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, it was  opined that the same need not be 
mentioned again in 2017 rules.  
24. The Committee observes from the replies fu rnished by the Ministry 
that  since the provision of Appeal to the Hon’ble NGT is applicable to the 
present Rules, therefore it would bring only  more transparency if it is 
made explicit in the Rules that appeal to NGT can be made against a 
decision of State Wetlands Authority.  
25. Under Rule 6(xviii),  one expert each in the fields of wetland ecology, 
hydrology, fisheries, landscape planning and socio -economic planning is to be 
appointed as a member of the National Wetlands Committee. The Committee 
enquired about the criterion for appointing such members and whether there any 
minimum eligibility qualifications prescribed for being appointed as a member 
of the Committee. The Ministry replied that no minimum eligibility 
qualifications have been prescribed. However, experts are always appointed 
based on their qualifications and work experience. 
26. The Committee strongly feels  that certain minimum 
eligibility/qualifications shall be prescribed for being appointed as a 

 
 
12. 
member of the National Wetlands Committee so that no arbitrary 
appointments are made to the  Committee and members are appointed on 
merit and not on any extraneous considerations or political affiliations. 
27. Further the Committee believes that Gram Panchayats are the bodies 
controlling land use in a  particular area, in each State . So the 
representation of the Panchayat authorities also need to be ensured in the 
Committee 
28. Rule 4 lists a range of prohibited activities within notified wetlands. But 
a proviso to it allows the Centre to omit any activities from this list if the State 
Wetlands Aut hority recommends it. A common criticism of t he Rules is that 
whatever minute  protection is offered is also discretionary. The Committee 
enquired the views of the Ministry on the need and justification for this proviso.   
The Ministry stated that the decision making power for any deviations from the 
prohibited activities within the wetland is vested with the Central Government 
in both the 2010 and 2017 Rules. In fact, such proposals recommended by t he 
State and UT Wetlands Authorities shall in turn be placed before the National 
Wetlands Committee for its recommendation as per Rule 6(3)(d) of the 2017 
Rules. The Ministry informed the Committee that the need for this proviso is 
upon consideration of the diversity in issues across the vast country. 
29. The Committee notes with concern that this proviso to omit activities 
from the list of prohibited activities in the state committee recommendation          
gives ample space to the Authorities to permit activities which ought to be 
prohibited. The proviso als o lends credence to the criticism of the Rules 
that whatever little protection is offered is also discretionary. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that this proviso should ideally not be 
there in Rules but if the Ministry still believes that its essenti al, then a 
check and balance may be added to ensure that the proviso is not misused 
to diminish the protection given to wetlands under the Rules.  For instance, 
a requirement may be added that if the Centre omits any activities from 
the list of notified we tlands then that omission should be approved by the 
NGT or some independent committee set up for the purpose, in a time 
bound manner. 
30. The Committee enquired that whether the R ules are enough to take care 
of all the illegal activities in wetlands and coastal areas and if they are 
sufficient, then why do these illegal activities still happen. The Secretary stated 
that they are absolutely sufficient and added that in fact, the Min istry is accused 

 
 
13. 
of having one of the toughest coastal zone regulations in the world. However, 
he admitted that the provisions are not effectively implemented and the Ministry 
is working on how to make the implementation of Rules more effective.  
31. The C ommittee notes with concern the tardy implementation of 
Rules and  observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry that steps 
should be taken to make the implementation of Rules more effective. The 
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that proper monitoring 
and inspection are essential for the proper and effective implementation of 
Rules and Regulations, and stresses upon the Ministry to strengthen its 
enforcement mechanism to ensure that the objectives of the Rules are 
achieved. If required , the Ministry should come out with necessary 
amendments in the Rules or the Environment Protection Act, 1986 to 
secure effective compliance with the provisions of these Rules. A 
Committee may also be constituted within the Ministry, headed by a senior 
bureaucrat or a noted environmentalist/renowned academician to monitor 
the implementation of these Rules and report or make recommendations 
about problems faced in implementation, if any. The Ministry can also 
provide for a informants reward  scheme for concer ned and proactive  
citizens to report illegal activities such as filling, clearing, or dumping in 
wetlands to government authorities. 
32. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would carry out the 
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously under intimation to it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
14. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT 
A GLANCE 
1. The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and 
observes that the Ministry’s objective of better identification, management 
and preservation of wetlands is laudable. After a detailed scrutiny of the 
Rules, the Committee, though in broad agreement with the objectives of the 
Rules, considered that these Rules are not as comprehensive as they ought 
to be, given the fact that they superseded the 2010 Rules with the objective 
of improving thereon. On a comparison of the 2017 Rules vis-à-vis the 2010 
Rules, the Committee notes that Rules of 2010 had some provisions which 
have been done away with in the 2017 Rules. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should try to revisit the 2017 Rules and try to 
accommodate/incorporate some provisions of 2010 Ru les in the 2017 Rules 
to bring clarity.  
(Para 6) 
 
2. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that, even if the provision of Appeal to the judicial bodies for any act is 
implicit under the Rules as stated by the Secretary in his r eply, the 
Ministry can explicitly provide for provisions relating to appeal, more so, 
because there was already a similar provision, explicitly stated in the 2010 
Rules. There is no plausible reason for not mentioning this provision in the 
2017 Rules. 
(Para 8) 
 
3. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that by undoing the protection for India’s already threatened wetlands by 
playing with definitions, the Ministry seems to have increased the 
vulnerability of these hydrologically se nsitive areas. The widespread 
expansion of development  in the country in recent decades has only 
contributed towards making these sensitive areas even more vulnerable.  
The Committee feels that if left unchanged, the new Rules might facilitate 
the legal exploitation and development of wetlands as real estate, industrial 
sites and garbage dumps. For a country battling droughts, large scale 
pollution and floods caused by destructive land -use change and climate 
change, the new wetland rules can have disastrous consequences. Under the 
2010 Rules, in addition to Ramsar and government -notified wetlands, any 

 
 
15. 
high-altitude wetland larger than 5 hectares, or those at elevations less than 
2,500 metres and spread over 500 hectares automatically qualified for 
protection. So did wetlands located in ecologically sensitive areas or areas 
recognised as or lying within UNESCO World Heritage Sites. This 
provision should be reinstated in the 2017 Rules. The Committee is also not 
convinced with the reasons for the omission of sal t pans from the definition 
of ‘wetlands’ in the new Rules. Further, since salt pans have been removed, 
even the natural salt pans would fall outside the scope of the new Rules and 
hence are vulnerable to their commercial exploitation. These were 
identified as wetlands in the 2010 Rules, as they are often important sites of 
migratory birds and other forms of biodiversity. Hence, the omission in the 
2017 Rules implies that while salt pans do exist as wetlands, they do not 
require any conservation or ecological balance.  
(Para 11) 
 
4. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the natural salt pans should 
be given protection under the Rules, given their significance as important 
sites for migratory birds and other forms of biodiversity. The Committee 
further notes that in the 2010 Rules, some related criteria for identification 
of wetlands, which require protection were made explicit, such as natural 
beauty, ecological sensitivity, genetic diversity, historical value, etc. 
However, these have been omitted in the 2017 Rules. This seems to be a 
retrograde step. The Committee notes with concern the definition of 
wetlands in 2017 Rules and recommends that the Ministry should revisit 
the narrow definition of wetlands in 2017 Rules and should include natural 
salt pans i n the definition and emphasis should be given on protection of 
wetlands that protect wildlife and biodiversity. The Committee further 
recommends that the criteria for identification of wetlands requiring 
protection which were explicitly mentioned in the 20 10 Rules may be re -
introduced in the present Rules so that a clear cut  basis for selecting salt 
pan from the point of view of wildlife and biodiversity could be made out 
from the legislation itself rather than completely removing the same from 
Rules.  Fur ther, given the immense significance of wetlands in 
environmental conservation, an action taken Note may be expeditiously 
provided to the Committee. The Committee also observed that in many 
places paddy fields are lying idle for many years due to various reasons and 
they are serving the purpose of water storage, flood mitigation, acquifer 
recharge etc. so such idle paddy fields etc for a longer period of 10 years or 

 
 
16. 
more may be brought under these rules. The classification of such paddy 
fields may be done a nd records be updated as the cases may be.  Similarly 
the Silica mining/granite mining sites and quaries have good water holding 
capacity which is also to be included in the wetland category and required 
to be conserved.  
(Para 12) 
 
5. The Committee observ es that new rules have done away with the 
National Wetlands Authority created under the 2010 Rules and conferred 
all regulatory powers on the State governments. The Centre’s act of 
abdicating its responsibilities is claimed to be a virtuous move to 
decentralise in the spirit of federalism.  However, environmentalists say 
this is odd, as States and UTs have never acted on wetlands protection and 
notification in spite of the pressure exerted by the Central government — 
using the Central Wetlands Regulatory Au thority (CWRA) — under the 
2010 Rules. The Committee expects the Ministry to play a pro-active role in 
the implementation of the Rules and recommends that the implementation 
of the Rules must be a joint responsibility of the Centre and the States. The 
Centre should not abdicate its constitutional responsibility and obligation 
to protect the wetlands and the environment. The Committee also 
recommends that the Central Government should extend any kind of 
feasible help, be it in terms of manpower, infrastructu re or financial aid, 
which may be needed by the States to preserve and protect the wetlands 
within their territory. 
(Para 16) 
 
6. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that since penal provision can be made only in an Act of Parliament and 
not in the subordinate legislation, therefore, the Ministry should expedite 
the process of amending the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to provide 
for civil penalties, if the directions issued by the State wetland authorities 
to the respe ctive implementing agencies for conservation and sustainable 
management of wetlands are not adhered to. The amendment should 
clearly provide for the institutional mechanism to pursue cases of non 
compliance with the directions issued by the State wetland a uthorities and 
the penalty should be sufficient enough to act as a deterrent. 
(Para 18) 
 

 
 
17. 
7. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that the Ministry has not offered sufficient justification or rationale for 
doing away with the Central Wetlands Regulatory Authority (CWRA) that 
was provided under the 2010 Rules and replac ing it with the National 
Wetlands Committee, which has a merely advisory role.  However, if the 
Ministry still feels compelled to continue with the National Wetlands 
Committee, then it should be given enough ‘teeth’ to enforce its directions 
and pursue its  recommendations. It should not be a ‘toothless’ body and 
should be sufficiently empowered to enforce its mandate.  
(Para 20) 
 
8. The Committee notes with concern that restriction of activities on 
wetlands will be done as per the principle of ‘wise use’, d etermined by the 
State Wetlands Authority. The Committee recommends that the term ‘wise 
use’ must be defined or clear parameters must be laid down to identify 
‘wise use’ so that there is no space for ambiguity or multiple 
interpretations of this term. The Committee also directs that the process 
for formulation of Guidelines for 2017 Rules which shall inter -alia, guide 
on the technical terms shall be completed as soon as possible and those 
guidelines should also be furnished to the Committee for its perusal. 
(Para 22) 
 
9. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that  since the provision of Appeal to the Hon’ble NGT is applicable to the 
present Rules, therefore it would bring only more transparency if it is 
made explicit in the Rules that appeal to NGT can be made against a 
decision of State Wetlands Authority.  
(Para 24) 
 
10. The Committee strongly feels that certain minimum 
eligibility/qualifications shall be prescribed for being appointed as a 
member of the National Wetlands Committ ee so that no arbitrary 
appointments are made to the Committee and members are appointed on 
merit and not on any extraneous considerations or political affiliations. 
(Para 26) 
 
11. Further the Committee believes that Gram Panchayats are the bodies 
controlling land use in a particular area, in each State. So the 

 
 
18. 
representation of the Panchayat authorities also need to be ensured in the 
Committee 
(Para 27) 
 
12. The Committee notes with concern that this proviso to omit activities 
from the list of prohibited activities in the state committee recommendation 
gives ample space to the Authorities to permit activities which ought to be 
prohibited. The proviso also lends credence to the criticism of the Rules 
that whatever little protection is offered is also discret ionary. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that this proviso should ideally not be 
there in Rules but if the Ministry still believes that its essential, then a 
check and balance may be added to ensure that the proviso is not misused 
to diminish the protection given to wetlands under the Rules.  For instance, 
a requirement may be added that if the Centre omits any activities from 
the list of notified wetlands then that omission should be approved by the 
NGT or some independent committee set up for the purp ose, in a time 
bound manner. 
(Para 29) 
 
13. The Committee notes with concern the tardy implementation of 
Rules and  observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry that steps 
should be taken to make the implementation of Rules more effective. The 
Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that proper monitoring 
and inspection are essential for the proper and effective implementation of 
Rules and Regulations, and stresses upon the Ministry to strengthen its 
enforcement mechanism to ensure that the objectives of the Rules are 
achieved. If required, the Ministry should come out with necessary 
amendments in the Rules or the Environment Protection Act, 1986 to 
secure effective compliance with the provisions of these Rules. A 
Committee may also be constituted within the Ministry, headed by a senior 
bureaucrat or a noted environmentalist/renowned academician to monitor 
the implementation of these Rules and report or make recommendations 
about problems faced in implementation, if any. The Ministry can also 
provide for a informants reward scheme for concerned and proactive 
citizens to report illegal activities such as filling, clearing, or dumping in 
wetlands to government authorities. 
(Para 31) 

 
 
19. 
14. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would carry out t he 
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously under intimation to it.  
(Para 32) 
  

 
 
20. 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
I 
First Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 11 A.M. on the 3 rd July, 2018 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  The following Members of the Committee were 
present in the meeting:-.   
 
Present 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
 
Members 
2. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
3. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia 
5.  Dr. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
6.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Arun Sharma, Director 
2. Shri R.S. Rawat, Additional Director 
3. Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
4. Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Under Secretary  
5. Shri Thang Joyful Tonsing, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change: 
Shri C.K. Mishra, Secretary 

 
 
21. 
Shri Anil Kumar Jain, Additional Secretary 
Shrimati Manju Pandey, Joint Secretary 
Shri Nikunja K. Sundaray, Joint Secretary 
Ms. Rita Khanna, Scientist ‘F’ 
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the newly nominated and other Members of the 
Committee and the officials present. Explaining the mandate of the Committee, he stated that 
the main function of the Committee is to examine and report to the House whether the powers 
to make rules, regulations etc., given to the Government by the Constitution or by an Act of 
the Parliament, have been properly exercised, both in letter and spirit. He then stated that in 
order to discuss and scrutiniz e the subordinate legislation framed under various acts of 
Parliament, the Committee has decided to call Ministry of  Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Coal along with CMDs of 
various Public Sector Undertakings. 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
3 xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
4. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
5.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for discussion the Wetlands (Conservation and 
Management) Rules, 2017 with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change . 
The Committee enquired from the Secretary about the objectives sought to be achieved by 
framing the Rules and the salient features of the Rules.  The Secretary informed the 
Committee that the Rules of 2010 needed certain amendments which were based on the 
knowledge that was gained while implementing them.  He stated that the Rules of 2010 had 
become completely centred and concentrated in the Union Government and the States had 
very little role.  As a result, when things were decided at Union Ministry level, the 
implementation was very difficult at the field level.  So, the Ministry decided that it is better 
that it focuses on implementation and decentralise powers to the State Governments and the 
Wetland Authority there. On an enquiry about the justification for adopting a narrow and 
limited definition of Wetlands in the 2017 Rules compared to th e wider definition in 2010 
Rules, the Secretary informed the Committee that the 2017 Rules did not include things like 
river channels, paddy fields, water bodies, water  for drinking purposes, or salt production 
purposes as all these are human made systems and are not original wetland systems.  He 
further stated that whatever was covered by the Forests Act or CRZ Regulation was also not 
taken in the Wetland Rules of 2017.   The Committee enquired from the Ministry whether the 
rules are enough to take care of  all the illegal activities in wetlands and coastal areas. The 

 
 
22. 
Secretary stated that they are absolutely sufficient and added that in fact, the Ministry is 
accused of having one of the toughest coastal zonal regulations in the world. However , he 
admitted that the provisions are not effectively implemented and the Ministry is working on 
how to make the implementation of Rules more effective.   
 
MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
6. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINES 
 
7. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx.  
 
8. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
 
ARUN SHARMA 
DIRECTOR 
 
New Delhi 
03.07.2018 
 
 
 
 
xx xx xx: pertains to other matter. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
23. 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA  
 
VII 
Seventh Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 5
th
October, 2023 in 
Committee Room 3, A- Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, 
New Delhi. 
 
Present 
1. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee, Chairman 
Members 
2. Smt.Vandana Chavan 
3. Shri R. Dharmar 
4. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
5. Shri K.R.Suresh Reddy 
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
7. Shri K.T.S.Tulsi 
8. Shri Vivek K.Tankha 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajendra Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri Rajendra Prasad, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms Aditi Chaudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri P.P.Raumon,Under Secretary 
7. Shri Naresh Kumar,Committee Officer 
 
Witnesses 
(A)       Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
1. Shri Shyamal Misra, Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.C.Joshi, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.D.Meena, Director 
(B) (i) Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
1. Shri Anurag Jain, Secretary 

 
 
24. 
2. Shri Mahmood Ahmed, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Paresh Goel, Director 
 
  (ii)  NITI Aayog 
1. Shri KannanVenkatnarayan,OSD(Health) 
 
   (iii)  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 
1. Ms. Mandakini Balodhi, Director (Insurance-2) 
2. Dr. Basant Garg, Addl. CEO, NHA 
     
                            (iv)  General Insurance Company (GIC) 
                  1. Shri Inderjit Singh, Secretary General 
        (v)  National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
          1.      Shri Joydeep Shome, DDG and HOD 
           2.      Shri Gautam Ghosh, Principal Consultant, NIC 
      
2. At the outset,  Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee and briefed them 
about agenda items for the day.  Thereafter, the first agenda item, the draft 252 nd Report 
on the Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017 was taken for discussion 
and adoption. The Committee after some discussions, adopted the Report without any 
changes. Then, the draft 253 rd Report on Delay in Fr aming of Rules and Regulations  
under Various Acts by the Ministries/Departments was considered by the Committee. The 
Members expressed their displeasure over inordinate delay in framing of 
Rules/Regulations by the Ministries/Departments despite several assurances given by 
them during v arious meetings/personal hearings and suggested for making additions in 
the report by inserting the details of assurances given by the Ministries at the time of oral 
evidence. The Committee reiterated its recommendations contained in its 9 th and 10 th 
Reports wherein the Ministries were advised to complete the rule making process as soon 
as possible but in no case later than six months from the date on which the statute comes 
into force.  The Committee also recalled paras 57 & 58 of its 10 th Report wherein i t had 
approved a formula for laying of Statutory Rules before both the Houses of Parliament 
and had recommended that the formula should be incorporated not only in new legislation 
but also in the existing Acts as and when bills to amend them are  brought be fore 
Parliament.  On the similar lines, the Committee recommended that the Ministry of Law 
and Ju stice may be advised that in future , a time limit for framing the Rules and 
Regulations may be incorporated in the Act itself by the administrative Ministries in that 
particular Act.  The Committee then suggested to include a para to this effect in the 
Report and authorized its Chairman to incorporate the modifications in the Report and 
adopted the same with these modifications.  The Committee decided to present  both the 
Reports during forthcoming Winter Session of  Rajya Sabha.  
 

 
 
25. 
3. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
4.  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
5. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
   7.  The meeting then adjourned at 5.02 p.m. 
 
RAJENDRA TIWARI 
DIRECTOR 
 
 
05.10.2023 
 
x xx xx : pertains to other matter. 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5864 GI/2017 (1) 
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99  REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99  
 
vlk/kj.k  
EXTRAORDINARY  
Hkkx  II — [k.M 3—mi&[k.M  (i)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 
izkf/dkj ls izdkf'kr  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY  
la-  802] ubZ fnYyh] eaxyokj] flrEcj 26] 2017@vkf'ou 4] 1939   
No. 802] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2017/ASV INA 4, 1939 
/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 ,, ,,    /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928 /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928 /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928 /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928     /uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F /uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F /uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F /uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F     
अिधसूचना अिधसूचना अिधसूचना अिधसूचना    
/uni0928/uni0908/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/g7016/uni0932/uni0940 , 26 /uni093F/uni0938/uni0924/g7013/uni0020 /uni092C र, 2017 
सा सा सा सा. . ..का. का. का. का.िन िन िन िन. . ..    120 120 120 1203 3 33(अ) (अ) (अ) (अ). . ..— — —— /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020 /uni091C/uni094B/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni091A/g7059/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0905/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0939/g7289/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0909/g6994/uni0020 /uni091A/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0909/g7004/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/uni0926/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 
/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni093F/uni0932/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020 /uni0939/g7289/uni0020 /uni091C/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092E/uni0943/g7373/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0948/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0939/g7289/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0939/uni092E/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092E/uni0943/g7373/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E/uni0902/g7021/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0943ि तक  िवरा सत का भाग होने क े  कारण क ई 
/uni092E/uni0939/g7004/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0928/uni094B/uni0930/uni0902/uni091C/uni0915/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E/uni092E/uni093E/uni093F/uni091C/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E/uni0902/g7021/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni0925/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni0947/uni0020 /g7263/uni090F/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni0020 /uni092D/uni0902/uni0921/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni0020 /uni0936/uni0941/uni093F/g7373/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni092C/uni093E/uni095D/uni0020 
/uni0905/g7016/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0940/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni0941/uni0928/uni003A/uni092D/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/g7023/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0928/uni002C/uni0020/uni0926/uni0943/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni094C/g7008/uni0020 /uni0926/uni092F/g6981/uni0020/uni092C/uni094C/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni092C/uni095D/uni093E/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020 
/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni092A/uni0915/uni0020/uni0930/g7286/uni091C/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0964  
 और,     अिधकतर /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E , अपवहन और /uni092D/uni0930/uni0923/g7021/uni0925/uni093E/uni0928 , /g7079/uni0926/uni0942/uni0937/uni0923  (घर े लू और /uni0914/g7378/uni094B/uni093F/uni0917/uni0915  /uni092C/uni093F/uni0939/uni003A/g7090/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7021/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E रण, ठोस 
/uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/g7298  क ा िनपटान), जल /uni093F/uni0935/g6980/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0940  /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928  (जल अपनयन  और /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0935/uni093E/g6981/uni0939  तथा ब िहवाह /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928 ) क े  /uni092E/uni093E/g7007/uni092F/uni092E  से 
भूिम /uni0938/uni0941/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni0935/g7059/uni092E/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0917/uni0902/uni092D/uni0940/uni0930/uni0020/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni091F/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925  /uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924  /uni092E/g7286 /uni0939/g7289 और उनक े  /g7079/uni093E/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0915  /uni0938/uni0902/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F िधक दोहन  क े  
/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0923/uni093E/uni092E/g7021/uni0935/g7272/uni092A  जैव िविवधता /uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0939/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni0932/g7011/uni0020 /uni0927/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0918/uni091F/uni0928/uni0020/g7263/uni0906/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B  
और,     /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/g6994/uni0020 /uni091B/uni0947द 51क क े  खं /uni0921/uni0020/uni0028/uni091B/uni0029/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092F/uni0939/uni0020/uni092C/uni0924/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni0928/uni093E/uni0917/g7407/uni0930/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni0939/uni0020/uni0915/uni0924/g6981/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F  होगा  
/g7408/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0939/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni002C/uni0020 /uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0928/uni002C/uni0020 /uni091D/uni0940/uni0932/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0935/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/uni0020 /uni0939/g7289/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0930/g6979/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0909/uni0938/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0935/uni0927/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 
/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0923/uni092E/uni093E/g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0926/uni092F/uni093E/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/uni0930/uni0916/uni0947/uni003B  
/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0029/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0031/uni0039/uni0038/uni0036/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020 
/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni092A/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni0924/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0925 - /uni0938/uni093E/uni0925/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni091C/uni0941/uni095C/uni0947/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni092E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/g7013/uni092E/uni093F/uni0932/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni0964  
और,     /uni0930/uni093E/g7398/uni0940/uni092F  /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923  नीित, 2006 /uni092E/g7286 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E  /uni0909/uni092A/uni0932/g7011/uni0927  /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409  सेवा को /uni092E/uni093E/g7008/uni092F/uni0924/uni093E  दी गई है और सभी 
/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  क े  िलए  ए क िविनयामक /uni0924/uni0902/g7074/uni0020/g7021/uni0925/uni093E/uni093F/uni092A/uni0924  करने /uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0906/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F कत ा पर बल /g7408/uni0926/uni092F/uni093E  गया है, िजस /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni0940  /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409  
/uni093F/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni092C/uni0928/uni093E/uni090F/uni0020/uni0930/uni0916/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0924/uni094B/uni0917/g7004/uni0020 /uni0935/uni093E/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0939/uni093E/uni092F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni003B  
और,     भारत, /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  संबंधी रामसर अिभस मय का /uni0939/g7021/uni0924/uni093E/g6979/uni0930/uni0915/uni0924/uni093E/g6981 है, तथा /uni0905/uni092A/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020 
/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni0941/uni093F/g7373/uni092E/uni0924/uni093E/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0964/uni0020  
26

2       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0034/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0032/uni0030/uni0031/uni0030/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni002E/uni0938/uni093E/uni002E/uni0915/uni093E/uni002E/uni093F/uni0928/uni002E  /uni0039/uni0035/uni0031/uni0028/uni0905/uni0029/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0032/uni0030/uni0031/uni0030/uni002C/uni0020/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni093F/uni0936/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni090F/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B  
/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E  /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/g6981/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0935/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0930/uni0935/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni0020 
/uni0906/g7414/uni0925/uni0915/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni092D/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य सरकार िविभ /g7008/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni0906/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni0923/g6981/uni092F/uni0020/uni0932/uni0947/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 
/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020/g7088/uni0943/uni0902/uni0916/uni0932/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B  
और,     /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni092F  /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7286/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0907/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020 /g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0905/uni092A/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni093E/g7004/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/g7059/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7414/uni0925/uni0915/uni0020 
/uni0915/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0923/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0948/uni0935/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0940/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0942/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298  पर ि वचार करने और इस बात को  
/uni0938/uni0902/g6980/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni0932/uni0947/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0906/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0939/uni0948/uni0020 /g7408/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0926/uni094B/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0918/uni091F/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni002C/uni0020 
/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/uni0938/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0937/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B/uni0020  
/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0936/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020 
िनयम, 2010 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/g7059/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F क समझा है;  
और,     /uni0905/uni092C/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923  ( /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923 ) अिधिनय म, 1986 /uni0915/g7409  उपधारा (1) और उपधारा (2) क े  खंड (v)  
और धारा 3 /uni0915/g7409  उपधारा (3) क े  साथ /uni092A/g7407/uni0920/uni0924  धारा 25 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E  /g7079/uni0926/g7275  /uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298  का /g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917  करते /g7263/uni090F  /uni091C/uni0928/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni002E/uni0915/uni093E/uni002E/uni093F/uni0928/uni002E/uni0020/uni0033/uni0038/uni0035/uni0020/uni0028/uni0905/uni0029/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0033/uni0031/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni091A/g6981/uni002C/uni0020/uni0032/uni0030/uni0031/uni0036/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 
/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0032/uni0030/uni0031/uni0036/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni093F/uni0936/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0925/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092F/uni0939/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni0917/uni0908/uni0020/uni0925/uni0940  /g7408/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0909/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 
/uni092A/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/uni092A/g7074/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni093F/uni0936/uni0924/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020/uni091C/uni0928/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni0932/g7011/uni0020 /uni0927  करा दी  जा ती है , 
/uni0938/uni093E/uni0920/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni093E/uni093F/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092A/g7019/uni0020 /uni091A/uni093E/uni0924/uni094D/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni0917/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
/uni0914/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020 2016 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F  
/g6979/uni0947/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/g7298/uni002C/uni0020/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni093F/uni0935/uni0932/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni093E/uni091C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni091D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g6979/uni0947/uni092A/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/g7263/uni090F/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B/uni0020  
/uni0914/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0906/g6979/uni0947/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni091D/uni093E/uni0935/g7298/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni090A/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/uni093F/g7016/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni092E/g7286 /g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/g7263/uni090F/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020 
/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni093E/uni092E/uni0936/g6981/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/g7013/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/uni0020/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni092F/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
/uni0905/uni0924/uni003A/uni0020/uni0905/uni092C/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0029/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0031/uni0039/uni0038/uni0036/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0033/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A -धारा (1) और उप-धारा (2) 
क े  खंड (v) और उप-धारा (3 /uni0029/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0925/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0920/uni0924/uni0020/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 25 और धारा 23 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/g7004/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni0947/uni0020/g7263/uni090F/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 
/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020 2010 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni0924/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/g7059/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni0947/uni0020/g7263/uni090F/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/g7008/uni0020 /uni0939/g7286/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/g7059/uni092E/uni0923/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/uni0942/uni0935/g6981/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 
/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni094B/uni092A/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0925/uni093E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0924/uni0940/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A — 
 1. /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7385 /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7385 /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7385 /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7385     नाम नाम नाम नाम    और और और और    /g7079/uni093E/uni0930/uni0902/uni092D /g7079/uni093E/uni0930/uni0902/uni092D /g7079/uni093E/uni0930/uni0902/uni092D /g7079/uni093E/uni0930/uni0902/uni092D .. ..— — ——        
(1) इन /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298  का /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7385  नाम /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  ( /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923  और /g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927 ) िनय म, 2017 है। 
(2) ये /uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/uni092A/g7074  /uni092E/g7286 /g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928  /uni0915/g7409  तारीख को /g7079/uni0935/uni0943/g7275  /uni0939/g7298 गे। 
2. 2. 2. 2. /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni0937/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni0937/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni0937/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni0937/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902.. ..— — ——        
(1) इन /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298  /uni092E/g7286, जब तक /g7408/uni0915  /uni0938/uni0902/uni0926/uni092D/g6981 से /uni0905/g7008/uni092F/uni0925/uni093E  /uni0905/uni092A/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924  न हो,— 
(क) “अिधिनय म” से /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923  ( /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923 ) अिधिनय म, 1986 /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924  है; 
(ख) “ /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923 ” से /uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924  /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924  है; 
(ग)  ''सिमित'' से िनयम 6 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B   
/uni0028/uni0918/uni0029/uni0020/uni0027/uni0027/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020/uni0917/uni0941/uni0923/uni0027/uni0027/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0918/uni091F/uni0915/g7298/uni002C/uni0020/g7079/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni0932/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020 
/uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni091A/uni093F/g7074/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B/uni0020  
( ङ ) ‘’ /uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E ’’ /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0908/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni093E/uni0020/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0935/uni0947/uni091C/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924 उपयोग क े  िलए 
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0928/uni0940/uni093F/uni0924/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g6981/uni0935/uni093E/uni0907/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0935/uni0923/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0020/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni0932/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0909/g7374/uni0947/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F ; /uni0909/g7374/uni0947/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298  को 
/g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g6981/uni0935/uni093E/uni0907/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni002C/uni0020/uni0935/uni0947/uni0020/uni0918/uni091F/uni0915 , /uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni092D/g7008/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni0932/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0924/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni0947/uni0020/uni0939/g7289, 
/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915/uni0924/uni0947/uni0020/uni0939/g7289;  /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0935/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni0917/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni093E  
/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni092A/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0940/uni091F/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/g7013/uni092E/uni093F/uni0932/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B/uni0020  
(च) “राम सर अिभसमय” से 1971 /uni092E/g7286 ईरान क े  रामसर /uni092E/g7286 /uni0939/g7021/uni0924/uni093E/g6979/g7407/uni0930/uni0924  /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E  संबंधी अिभस मय /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924  है; 
/uni0028/uni091B/uni0029/uni0020 /uni0020/uni0027/uni0027/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0908/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/g6994/uni0020 /uni091B/uni0020/uni092A/uni0902/uni0915/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni0940/uni091F/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni003B/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/g7074/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E/uni092F/uni0940/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0905/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E यी, जल जो 
/uni0920/uni0939/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni092C/uni0939/uni0924/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni091C/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0916/uni093E/uni0930/uni0947/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni0935/uni0923/uni0940/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni0941/g7076/uni0940/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0917/uni0939/uni0930/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020/g6996/uni0020 /uni0935/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni091B/uni0939/uni0020 
/uni092E/uni0940/uni091F/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0928/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0902/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0928/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0917/g6981/uni002C/uni0020/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0916/uni0947/uni0924/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni0947/uni092F/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0925/g6981/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  /g7272/uni092A/uni0020 
/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0935/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7414/uni092E/uni0924/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni002F/uni091C/uni0932/uni093E/uni0936/uni092F , /uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /uni0938 यपालन , /uni0928/uni092E/uni0915/uni0020/uni0909/g7004/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7410/uni0938/uni091A/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020/g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  
/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7414/uni092E/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/g7013/uni092E/uni093F/uni0932/uni0924/uni0020/uni0928/uni0939/g7277/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B  
27

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 3 
/uni0028/uni091C/uni0029/uni0020/uni0020/uni0027/uni0027/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0930/uni0027/uni0027/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0926/uni094B/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0926/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni0940/uni092A/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0928/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 
/uni091C/uni0941/uni095C/uni0947/uni0020/uni0928/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni002F/uni0935/uni093E/uni093F/uni0939/uni0915/uni093E/uni090F/uni0902/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/g7013/uni092E/uni093F/uni0932/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915/uni0924/uni0940/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni003B/uni0020  
/uni0028/uni091D/uni0029/uni0020/uni0027/uni0027/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0027/uni0027/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0924/uni0924/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0926/uni092D/g6981/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0926/uni0943/uni093F/g7397/uni0915/uni094B/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924  
/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020/uni0917/uni0941/uni0923/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0930/uni0916 - /uni0930/uni0916/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g7079/uni0947/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B  
(ञ) /uni0027/uni0027/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020 /uni091C/uni094B/uni0928/uni0027/uni0027/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942 /uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0906/uni0935/uni093E/uni0939 - /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0939/uni0020 /uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020 /uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni093E/g7004/uni0020 /uni092E क  
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0922/uni093E/uni0902/uni091A/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0935/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915 /uni0942 /uni0932/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092A/uni095C ता है। 
 (2)  /uni0909/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0936/g7011/uni0020 /uni0926/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0926/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947, /uni091C/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0907/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /g7079/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0939/g7289/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0937/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0939/g7277/uni0020 /uni0939/uni0948, /g7412/uni0915/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 
/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0937/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948, /uni0935/uni0939/uni0940/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/g6981/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni0020/uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni0964  
/uni0033/uni002E/uni0020/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0928/uni093E/uni002E /uni0033/uni002E/uni0020/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0928/uni093E/uni002E /uni0033/uni002E/uni0020/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0928/uni093E/uni002E /uni0033/uni002E/uni0020/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0928/uni093E/uni002E —— —— /uni092F/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A -  
(क) रामसर अिभसमय क े  अधीन ‘ /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0930/uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni092E/uni0939/g7004/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E ’ /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0935/uni0917/g7278/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902;  
/uni0028/uni0916/uni0029/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0964  
 पर ं तु ये िनयम समय-समय पर यथा संशोिधत भारतीय वन अिधिन य म, 1927 /uni002C/uni0020 /uni0935/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/uni0020 /uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0029/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020 
1972 /uni002C/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0028/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0029/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020 1980 /uni002C/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0924/uni091F/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0928/uni0020/uni091C/uni094B/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0032/uni0030/uni0031/uni0031/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020 
/uni0906/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092A/uni095C/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0932/uni093E/uni0917/uni0942/uni0020/uni0928/uni0939/g7277/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni0964/uni0020/uni0020 
/uni0034/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni0034/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni0034/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni0034/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092C/g7304/uni0927/uni0928/uni002E /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092C/g7304/uni0927/uni0928/uni002E /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092C/g7304/uni0927/uni0928/uni002E /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092C/g7304/uni0927/uni0928/uni002E —— —— /uni0028/uni0031/uni0029/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 
/uni0905/uni0935/uni0927/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020 ‘ /uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924  उपयोग’ /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/g7373/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/uni0938/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni0917/uni093E/uni0964/uni0020  
(2)  /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni093F/uni0937/g7373/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni0917/uni093E , /uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A -   
(i)  /g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/g7021/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0924/g7059 मण सिहत  गैर- /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928 ;  
(ii)  /g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni0909/g7378/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E/uni093F/uni092A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7378/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0909/g7378/uni094B/uni0917/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093Eर  कर ना ; 
(iii)  /uni093F/uni0928/uni092E/uni093E/g6981/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7007/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0902/uni0938/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E , 2016 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092E/uni093E/g6981/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7007/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0902स /uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  
/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092E/uni093E/g6981/uni0923/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0939/uni0925/uni093E/uni0932/uni0928/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092D/uni0902/uni0921/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092A/uni091F/uni093E/uni0928 ; प /g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni091F/uni092E/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092E/uni093E/g6981/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni092D/uni0902/uni0921/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 
आयात िनयम, 1989 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni091F/uni092E/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0942/g7023/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/g7298/uni0020 /uni0906/uni0928/uni0941/uni0935/uni0902/uni093F/uni0936/uni0915/uni0020 /g7272/uni092A/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/g7414/uni092E/uni0924/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/g7298/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni093F/uni0936/uni0915/uni093E/g7312/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 
उपयोग, आयात, /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092D/uni0902/uni0921/uni093E/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0031/uni0039/uni0038/uni0039/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni091F/uni092E/uni092F  /uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/uni0028/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928 , हथालन  
और सीमापारीय  संचलन ) िनयम  2008 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915/uni091F/uni092E/uni092F/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0926/uni093E/uni0925/g6981; ई- /uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020 /uni0028/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0029/uni0020 
िनयम, 2016 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0917/g6981/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni093E/uni0020/uni0908 - /uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F ;  
(iv)  /uni0920/uni094B/uni0938/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  का  प ाटन; 
     /uni0909/g7378/uni094B/uni0917/g7298 , /uni0936/uni0939/uni0930/g7298 , /uni0915/g7021/uni0020 /uni092C/g7298 , /uni0917/uni093E/uni0902/uni0935/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0935/uni0020 /uni092C/uni093F/g7021/uni0924/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0905/uni0936/uni094B/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0905/uni092A/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092C/uni093F/uni0939/g7090/uni093E/uni0935/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0928/g7021/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E रण; 
(v)  /g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E/uni092F/uni0940/uni0020/g7079/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092E/uni093E/g6981/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0020/uni0928/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/uni0918/uni093E/uni091F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947, /uni092A/uni091A/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni092E/uni0940/uni091F/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0907/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni0930/uni0902/uni092D/uni0020 
/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni092A/uni091B/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni0926/uni0938/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g7300/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/g7079/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni095D/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0914/uni0938/uni0924/uni0928/uni0020/uni0909/g6994/uni0020 /uni091A/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0917/uni0923/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni0917/uni0940 ; और 
(vi)  अवैध िशकार।  
/uni092A/uni0930/uni0902/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0932/uni094B/uni092A/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F  सरकार  या संघ 
/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/g7079/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0935/g7298/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020/uni0020/uni0020/uni0020  
/uni0035/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002E /uni0035/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002E /uni0035/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002E /uni0035/uni002E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002E —— —— (1 /uni0029/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य  स रका र, /g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0020 /uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A - 
(i)  /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002F/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni0940/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0937/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0930/uni0939/uni0947/uni0020 
/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni0940/uni0020 - /uni0905/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979; 
(ii)  /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni0924/uni0941/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F  सिचव  – /uni0909/uni092A/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979;  
(iii)  /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(iv)  वन िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(v)  शहरी िवकास िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(vi)  /g7061/uni093E/uni092E/uni0940/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(vii)  जल संसाधन िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
28

4       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
(viii)  /uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(ix)  /g7410/uni0938/uni091A/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni095D/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(x)  /uni092A/uni092F/g6981/uni091F/uni0928/uni0020 िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xi)  /uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/g7021/uni0020 /uni0935  िवभाग का भार साध क सि चव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xii)  िनदे शक, /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni0926/uni0942/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0935/uni0947/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076  – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;   
(xiii)  /uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/uni0020/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0921/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xiv)  /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni092C/uni094B/uni0921/g6981/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xv)  /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F  सिचव, /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni0942/uni0937/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni0020/uni092C/uni094B/uni0921/g6981/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xvi)  /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 , /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0915/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xvii)  /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409 , /uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g6980/uni093E/uni0928 , /uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/g7409 , भू- /uni0926/uni0943/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F  योजना और सा मािजक- /uni0906/g7414/uni0925/uni0915/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947क का एक 
/uni093F/uni0935/uni0936/uni0947/uni0937/g6980/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0928/uni093E/uni092E/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F ; और  
(xviii)  /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002F/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924  सिचव / ि नदेशक - /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F  सिचव। 
(2)  /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928 िलिखत 
/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A -  
(i)  /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0915/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F  स िचव – /uni0905/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979;  
(ii)  /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 – /uni0909/uni092A/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni003B/uni0020  
(iii)  वन िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(iv)  शहरी िवकास िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(v)  /g7061/uni093E/uni092E/uni0940/uni0923/uni0020 िवकास िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;    
(vi) जल संसाधन िवभाग का भारसाधक सिचव - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(vii) /uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(viii) /g7410/uni0938/uni091A/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni095D/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(ix) /uni092A/uni092F/g6981/uni091F/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(x) /uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/g7021/uni0020 /uni0935  िवभाग का भार साध क सि चव - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xi) /uni093F/uni0928/uni0926/uni0947/uni0936/uni0915/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni0926/uni0942/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0935/uni0947/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076  - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xii) /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni0942/uni0937/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xiii) /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0935 - /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0935/uni0927/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni092C/uni094B/uni0921/g6981/uni0020 - पदेन  स /uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xiv) /uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0921/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;   
(xv) /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni0927/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g6990/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0915/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xvi) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932 - /uni093F/uni0935/g6980/uni093E/uni0928/uni002C/uni0020/uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/g7409/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942- /uni0926/uni0943/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F  योजना और सा मािजक- /uni0906/g7414/uni0925/uni0915/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915 - /uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0936/uni0947/uni0937/g6980/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0928/uni093E/uni092E/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni003B/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020  
(xvii) /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002F/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0925/uni093E/uni0932/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002F/uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924  सिचव /िनदेशक - /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F  सिचव। 
(3)  /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni002C/uni0020/uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298 , 
का सह- /uni091A/uni092F/uni0928/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0915 /g7286 /uni0917/uni0947/uni0964/uni0020  
(4) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0943 /g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/uni0932/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni093E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni0020/uni003A —  
(क) इ /uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni0020 
तैयार करना; 
(ख) /uni0907/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni091B/uni0939/uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0948/uni092F/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 
/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0941/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0924/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0927/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni0924/uni0948/uni092F/uni093E/uni0930/uni002F/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7378/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/g6980/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020 
/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0932/uni0947/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
29

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 5 
(ग) /uni0907/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0905/uni0927/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020 /uni0909/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0935/uni0947/uni095B/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g6980/uni093E/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0941ित 
करना;  
(घ) /uni0907/uni0928/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni090F/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E पक िडज़ीट ल  सूची 
/uni0924/uni0948/uni092F/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0909/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /g7079/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093F/uni0938/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0921/uni0947/uni0921/uni0940/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7407/uni091F/uni0921/uni0020 /uni092C/uni0947/uni092C/uni0020 /uni092A/uni094B/uni091F/g6981/uni0932/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0907/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 
/uni0905/uni092A/uni0932/uni094B/uni0921/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni0926/uni0938/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/g7378/uni0924/uni0928/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni090F/uni0917/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
( ङ ) /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni093F/uni092E/uni0924/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/g6980/uni093E/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni090F/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0935/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0943त सूची िव किसत करना;   
(च) /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni093F/uni0937/g7373/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092C/uni095D/uni094B/uni0924/uni0930/uni0940/uni002C/uni0020/uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0908/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B  
(छ) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0909/uni0928/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0928/uni0940/uni093F/uni0924/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0937/uni0924/uni0020 
/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020/uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/uni0020/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0028/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni092D/g7003/uni0020 /uni0921/uni093E रण,  भू-जल संभरण, बाढ़- /g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni0930/uni094B/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0938/uni0947/uni0029/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni092E/uni0942/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F  
/uni0028/uni092E/uni0928/uni094B/uni0930/uni0902/uni091C/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0902/g7021/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/uni0020/uni091C/uni0948/uni0938/uni0947/uni0029/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0935/uni0943/uni093F/g7373/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0924/uni0940/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni003B/uni0020/uni0924/uni094B/uni0020/uni0907/uni0928/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925 ित क 
/g7079/uni0923/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/g7373/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0925/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0924/uni0020/uni0935/uni0939/uni0928/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni093E/uni0935/uni0947/uni093F/uni0936/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni0948/uni0020 
(जैसे जीवन - /uni093F/uni0928/uni0935/uni093E/g6981/uni0939/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni092E/uni091B/uni0932/uni0940/uni0020/uni092A/uni0915/uni095C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/g7021/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni092A/uni0948/uni0926/uni093E/uni0935/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0029/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0935/uni0947/uni0915/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
(ज) /g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020 /g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020 /uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0941/uni0928/g7414/uni0935/uni0932/uni094B/uni0915/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0028/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य सरकार क े  
/uni0938/uni092E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935 यन से स ीमा- /uni092A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093F/uni0939/uni0924/uni0029/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0907/uni0928/uni0020 /uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/g7312/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni002C/uni0020 /uni091C/uni094B/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020 
/g7021/uni0020 /uni0935/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/uni0915 /uni0942 /uni0932/uni0020/uni0939/g7289/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/uni0930/g7013/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0915/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020/uni0930/uni0916/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/uni0925/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B  
(झ) /uni0909/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni092E/uni0932/g7298/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni0939/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0938/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0940/uni092E/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni091C/uni0940/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942-धारण 
/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0939/uni0948/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0909/g7008/uni0020 /uni0939/g7286/uni0020 /uni092C/uni095D/uni093E/uni0935/uni093E/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/g7007/uni0020/uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409/uni092F/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni0935/g7272/uni092A/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni092C/uni0928/uni093E/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0930/uni0916/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0924/uni0902/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
(ञ) /uni093F/uni0935/g7378/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni002F/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/g7059/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0938/uni093E/uni0925/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020 /uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935 यन क े  
/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0938/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0924/uni0902/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni092A/uni0939/uni091A/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020  
(ट) इन  /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0941/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni002C/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928  /uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /g7079/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0941/uni093F/uni0928/uni093F/g7391/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/g7373/g6981-वा /g7414/uni0937/uni0915/uni0020 
/uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0028/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0948 /uni0932/uni0947/g7008/uni0020 /uni0921/uni0930/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni091C/uni0942/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/uni0938/g7013/uni0020 /uni092C/uni0930/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0029/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0902/g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0910/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 
/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य  सरका र को सूचना देना;  
(ठ) /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni092D/g7008/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0917/uni0924/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F  सं /uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0938/g7373/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 
/uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/g7312/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935 यन करन ा;  
(ड) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0928/uni094B/uni0921/uni0932/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7272/uni092A/uni0020 
/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981 क रना;  
(ढ) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0924/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni0906/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F क िन देश जारी करना;  
(ण) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092E/uni0942/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0923/uni0927/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni093E/uni0928/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092E/uni0941/uni0926/uni093E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092C/uni0940/uni091A/uni0020 /uni091C/uni093E/uni0917/g7272/uni0915/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 
/uni0938/uni0902/uni0935/uni0927/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni093E/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E/uni003B/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020  
(त) /g7021/uni0020 /uni0935/g7079/uni0947/uni0930/uni0923/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F  मामले पर सलाह देना।  
(5) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni002C/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0928/uni094B/uni0921/uni0932/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 
/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni092D/uni0940/uni0020/uni0906/uni0935/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni0939/uni093E/uni092F/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni093E  /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni093E/uni0964/uni0020/uni0020  
(6) /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0907/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0928/g7011/uni0020 /uni092C/uni0947/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni003A/uni0020  
(क)  /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0935/uni0947/uni095B/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020 /uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/g7312/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0941/uni0928/g7414/uni0935/uni0932/uni094B/uni0915/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  
/g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni0924/uni0915/uni0928/uni0940/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0937/uni092F/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0932/uni093E/uni0939/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0924/uni0915/uni0928/uni0940/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni002C/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930  
 (ख)   /uni091C/uni0928/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0917/g7306/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0936/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/uni0924/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0941/uni0928/uni0935/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/g7008/uni0020 /uni0939/g7286/uni0020 /uni0905/g7061/uni0947/uni093F/uni0937/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni090F/uni0915/uni0020 
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0924/uni0902/g7074/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni0932/g7011/uni0020 /uni0927/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298  से िमलकर बनी ए क िशकायत सिमित का गठन  कर े गा ।  
(7) उप-िनय म (6 /uni0029/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni092F/uni093E/uni0902/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0943 /g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7020/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093E/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0924/uni092E/uni093E/uni0939/uni0940/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni0948/uni0920/uni0915/uni0020 
/uni0915/uni0930/g7286/uni0917/uni0940/uni0020/uni0964/uni0020  
(8) /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni0948/uni0920/uni0915/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964  
(9) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093E/uni092E/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0917/uni0948/uni0930 - /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni093E/uni0932/uni0020 
/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0924/uni092E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0917/uni093E/uni0964/uni0020  
 
30

6       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
6. 6. 6. 6.    /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940 /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940 /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940 /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni002E /uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni002E /uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni002E /uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni002E —— —— (1 /uni0029/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0917/uni0920/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni002C/uni0020/uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020 
/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0939/g7298/uni0917/uni0947/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni0020/uni003A —  
 (i) /uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – /uni0905/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni003B  
(ii) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0916  /uni0930/uni0939/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0936/uni0947/uni0937/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020  /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 
/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – /uni0909/uni092A/uni093E/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni003B/uni0020  
(iii) /uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0939/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0926/uni0947/uni0936/uni0915/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0935/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni091C/uni0940/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020 /uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – पदेन 
/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
 (iv) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0020 /uni0926/uni0947/uni0916/uni0020 /uni0930/uni0939/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0932/uni093E/uni0939/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/uni0915 /uni094D /uni0020  /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020 /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923/uni002C/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni091C/uni0932/uni0935/uni093E/uni092F/uni0941/uni0020 /uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020 
/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
 (v) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni092A/uni092F/g6981/uni091F/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(vi) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0938/uni093E/uni0927/uni0928/uni002C/uni0020/uni0928/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0917/uni0902/uni0917/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
 (vii) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni093F/uni0937/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0923/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni002C/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020– /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;   
 (viii) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni091A/uni0935/uni002C/uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni092E/uni093E/uni093F/uni091C/uni0915/uni0020/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni092F/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020/uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 – /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(ix) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924  सिचव, /uni0936/uni0939/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F , भारत सरका र - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(x) /uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020 /uni0924  सिचव, /g7061/uni093E/uni092E/uni0940/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0915/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F , भारत सरका र - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xi) /uni0905/g7007/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979, /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/g7079/uni0926/uni0942/uni0937/uni0923/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni0902/g7074/uni0923/uni0020/uni092C/uni094B/uni0921/g6981/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xii) िनदे शक, /uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0923/uni0020/uni0938/uni0935/g7287/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0935/uni0948/g6980/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0915/uni0020/uni090F/uni092B/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xiii) िनदे शक, /uni092D/uni093E/uni0930/uni0924/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0935/uni0928/g7021/uni0020 /uni092A/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0935/g7287/g6979/uni0923/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0935/uni0948/g6980/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0915/uni0020/uni090F/uni092B/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xiv) िनदे शक, /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/g7407/uni0930/g6979/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/g7079/uni092F/uni0941/uni093F/g7334/uni0020/uni0915 /g7286 /g7076 , /uni0905/uni0939/uni092E/uni0926/uni093E/uni092C/uni093E/uni0926/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0935/uni0948/g6980/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0915/uni0020/uni090F/uni092B/uni0020 - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xv) /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य जल आयोग - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ;  
(xvi) सलाहकार, नीित  आयोग - /uni092A/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F ; 
(xvii) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020 /g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni093F/uni0928/uni093F/uni0927 , /uni091A/g7059/uni093E/uni0928/uni0941/g7059/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930 , /g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0926/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni093E/uni0932/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 िलए ; 
(xviii) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915/g7409 , /uni091C/uni0932/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g6980/uni093E/uni0928 , /uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074 , भू- /uni0926/uni0943/g7019/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni092F/uni094B/uni091C/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni092E/uni093E/uni093F/uni091C/uni0915/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/g6981/uni0936/uni093E/g7021/uni0020 /g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/g7298/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020 
/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947क का ए क- /uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0936/uni0947/uni0937/g6980 ; और  
(xix) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni0926/uni0947/uni0936/uni0915/uni002F/uni0905/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni0926/uni0947/uni0936/uni0915/uni002F/uni0938/uni0902/uni092F/uni0941/g6989/uni0020/uni0924  िनदेशक, /uni092A/uni092F/uni093E/g6981/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 , वन और जलवायु 
/uni092A/g7407/uni0930/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni092E/uni0902/g7074/uni093E/uni0932/uni092F/uni0020 - /uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F  सिचव।  
 (2)  /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924 , /uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0947/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B , /uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298  को सहय ोिजत कर सक े गी।  
 (3) /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928/uni093F/uni0932/uni093F/uni0916/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0943 /g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/uni0932/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni002C/uni0020/uni0905/uni0925/uni093E/g6981/uni0924/uni094D/uni003A — 
(क) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0930/g6979/uni0923/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 /uni092C/uni0941/uni093F/g7373/uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092E/uni0941/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0928/uni0940/uni093F/uni0924/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g6981/uni0935/uni093E/uni0908/uni0020 /uni0938/g7013/uni0020 /uni092C/g7008/uni0020 /uni0927/uni0940  
/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g6981/g7059/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0937/uni092F/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni0932/uni093E/uni0939/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni093E ;  
(ख) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020 /g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 /uni092C/uni0941/uni093F/g7373/uni092E/g7004/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni092A/uni0942/uni0923/g6981/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0938/g7373/uni093E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0906/uni0927/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0924/uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0926/uni0902/uni0921/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 
/uni092E/uni093E/uni0917/g6981/uni0926/uni0936/g6981/uni0915/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/g7373/uni093E/uni0902/uni0924/uni0020/uni0924/uni0948/uni092F/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E ; 
(ग) /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0907/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935/uni092F/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni0917/uni0930/uni093E/uni0928/uni0940/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E ; 
(घ)  िनयम 4 क े  उप िनय म (2 /uni0029/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7079/uni093F/uni0924/uni0937/uni0947/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918  /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F  
/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni092A/uni0941/uni0928/uni0930/uni0940/uni093F/g6979/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E/uni0935/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य सरकार को सलाह देना;  
(ड.)  /uni0930/uni093E/uni092E/uni0938/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0938/uni092E/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni0905/uni0927/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0930/uni093E/g6981/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni092E/uni0939/g7004/uni0020 /uni0935/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni093F/uni0939/uni0924/uni0020 /g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020 /uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020 
करना; 
(च)  /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0940/uni092E/uni093E/uni092A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E ;  
(छ)  /uni0930/uni093E/uni092E/uni0938/uni0930/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925/uni0932/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0940/uni092E/uni093E/uni092A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/g7409/uni0915 /uni0943 /uni0924/uni0020/g7079/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/g7079/uni0917/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092A/uni0941/uni0928/g7414/uni0935/uni0932/uni094B/uni0915/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni093E ;  
(ज)  /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni092E/uni0941/g7374/g7298/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni0902/uni0924/uni0930/uni093E/g6981/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/g7008/uni0020/uni0935/uni092F/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni0927/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0932/uni093E/uni0939/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni093E ; और  
(झ)  /g7408/uni0915/uni0938/uni0940/uni0020/uni0905/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni092E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/g7021/uni0935/g7079/uni0947/uni0930/uni0923/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0932/uni093E/uni0939/uni0020/uni0926/uni0947/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni092F/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7416/uni0926/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F  करना । 
31

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 7 
(4) सिमित क े  गैर- /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0020/uni0938/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni092F/g7298  को का /uni092F/g6981/uni0915/uni093E/uni0932/uni0020/uni0924/uni0940/uni0928/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0928/uni0939/g7277/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B/uni0917/uni093E/uni0964/uni0020  
(5) /uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni091B/uni0939/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0938/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915/uni092E/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni092C/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni092C/uni0948/uni0920/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020  
7. /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F /uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g7300/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g7300/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g7300/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E /uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0936/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni092F/g7300/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E योजन योजन योजन योजन. . ..— — —— (1) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F  सरकार य ा सं घ 
/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/g7013/uni0020 /uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni092D/uni093E/uni0917/uni0020/uni0907/uni0928/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni0915/uni093E/uni0936/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0935/uni0937/g6981/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020 
/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0939/uni0947/uni0924/uni0941/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni092D/g6980/uni093E/uni0924/uni0020/g7079/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0947/uni0915/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0926/g7021/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E वेज तैयार कर े गा , /uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni093F/uni0928/g7013/uni0020 /uni0928 िलिखत का उपबंध होगा:—     
(क) /uni093F/uni0928/uni0926/g7287/uni0936/uni093E/uni0902/uni0915/g7298/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093F/uni0939/uni0924/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni0925/g6981/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0921/uni093F/uni091C/uni091F/uni0932/uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni093F/uni091A/g7074/g7298/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni092E/g7414/uni0925/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /uni091C/uni092E/uni0940/uni0928/uni0940/uni0020 /uni0938/g7004/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni092A/uni0928/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni092E/uni093E/g7008/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni093E/uni0020 
सीमांकन;  
(ख) /uni0907/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0940/uni092E/uni093E/uni0902/uni0915/uni0928/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0921/uni093F/uni091C/uni091F/uni0932/uni0020/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni093F/uni091A/g7074/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni093F/uni0924/uni0924/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0909/uni092A/uni092F/uni094B/uni0917/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g6994/uni0020 /uni091B/uni093E/g7408/uni0926/uni0924/uni0020/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074 ;  
(ग) /uni092A/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni093F/g7021/uni0925/uni093F/uni0924/uni0915 - /g7021/uni0020 /uni0935/g7272/uni092A/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0935/uni0930/uni0923 ;  
(घ) /uni092A/uni0942/uni0935/g6981/uni0924/uni003A/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/g7378/uni092E/uni093E/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0936/uni0947/uni0937/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0932/uni0947/uni0916/uni093E ;  
(ड.) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0924/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020/uni0907/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni0941/g6980/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925 ल- /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940 ;  
(च) /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0909/uni0938/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni0935/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni093F/uni092E/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0935/uni093E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020/g7021/uni0020 /uni0925 ल- /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0936/g7020/uni0020 /uni091F/uni0020/g7408/g7059/uni092F/uni093E/uni0915/uni0932/uni093E/uni092A/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940 ; और 
(छ) /uni093F/uni0935/uni093F/uni0928/uni092F/uni092E/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/g7079/uni0935/uni0924/g6981/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0930/uni0940/uni093F/uni0924 ; 
(2)   /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930 ण , /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E वेज क े  आधार प र, /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020/uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F  सरकार या सं घ 
/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni093E/uni0964  
(3) /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020 /uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0914/uni0930/uni0020 /g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0906/g6979/uni0947/uni092A/g7298 , /uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0908/uni0020 /uni0939/g7298 , पर 
/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092A/g7019/uni0020 /uni091A/uni093E/uni0924/uni094D/uni0020 /g7079/uni093E/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0930/uni0923/uni0020 /g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 /uni0917/uni092F/uni0940/uni0020 /uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0926/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0938/uni094C/uni0020 /uni091A/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0938/uni0020 /g7408/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0905/uni0928/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020 /uni0915/g7409/uni0020 
/uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/uni092A/g7074/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020  
(4) (क)  /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य सरकार  सीमा- /uni092A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020 /uni092E/uni093E/uni092E/uni0932/uni0947/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286, /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E वेज, /uni093F/uni091C/uni0938/uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni0909/uni092A -िनयम (1 /uni0029/uni0020 /uni092E/g7286/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0925/uni093E/uni0020 
/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0940/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0926/uni0940/uni0020/uni0917/uni0908/uni0020/uni0939/uni094B , /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020/uni0924/uni0948/uni092F/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020 /uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020 /g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni0938/uni093E/uni0925/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/g7008/uni0020 /uni0935 य 
कर े गी।  
(ख) /uni0938/uni0902/uni093F/g6979/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020 /uni0926/g7021/uni0020 /uni0924/uni093E वेज क े  आधार पर, /uni0930/uni093E/g7020/uni0020 /g7069/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020 /uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni0020 /uni0915/uni094B/uni0020 /uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020 /g7408/uni0915/uni092F/uni0947/uni0020 /uni091C/uni093E/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020 /uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020 
/uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940 य सरकार  को िसफा /g7407/uni0930/uni0936/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020  
(ग) /uni0915 /uni0947 /g7008/uni0020 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/g7373/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/g7079/uni092D/uni093E/uni093F/uni0935/uni0924/uni0020/g7018/uni0020 /uni092F/uni093F/g7334/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/g7079/uni093E/g7009/uni0020 /uni0924/uni0020/uni0906/g6979/uni0947/uni092A/g7298 , /uni092F/g7408/uni0926/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0908/uni0020/uni0939/g7298 , /uni092A/uni0930/uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni091A/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0928/uni0947/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092A/g7019/uni0020 /uni091A/uni093E त् 
/uni0938/uni093F/uni092E/uni093F/uni0924/uni0020/g7367/uni093E/uni0930/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0917/uni0908/uni0020/uni093F/uni0938/uni092B/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0936/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0924/uni093E/uni0930/uni0940/uni0916/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0926/uni094B/uni0020/uni0938/uni094C/uni0020/uni091A/uni093E/uni0932/uni0940/uni0938/uni0020/g7408/uni0926/uni0928/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0905/uni0928/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0905/uni0935/uni093F/uni0927/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni092D/uni0940/uni0924/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915/uni094B/uni0020 
/uni0930/uni093E/uni091C/uni092A/g7074/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0938/uni0942/uni093F/uni091A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020  
 (5) (क) /uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0938/uni0947/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni092C/uni0902/uni093F/uni0927/uni0924/uni0020/uni0938/uni0942/uni091A/uni0928/uni093E/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0932/uni090F/uni0020/uni090F/uni0915/uni0020/uni0938/uni092E/g7414/uni092A/uni0924/uni0020/uni0935/uni0947/uni092C/uni0020/uni092A/uni094B/uni091F/g6981/uni0932/uni0020/uni0915/uni093E/uni0020/uni0938/uni0943/uni091C/uni0928/uni0020/uni0915/uni0930/uni0947/uni0917/uni0940/uni0964/uni0020  
(ख) /uni0915 /g7286 /g7076/uni0940/uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni002C/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0020/uni0938/uni0930/uni0915/uni093E/uni0930/uni0020/uni0914/uni0930/uni0020/uni0938/uni0902/uni0918/uni0020/uni0930/uni093E/g6996/uni092F/uni0020/g6979/uni0947/g7074/uni0020/g7079/uni0936/uni093E/uni0938/uni0928/uni0020/uni0905/uni092A/uni0928/uni0940/uni0020/uni0905/uni093F/uni0927/uni0915/uni093E/g7407/uni0930/uni0924/uni093E/uni0020/uni092E/g7286/uni0020/uni0915/g7409/uni0020/uni0906/g7076/g6981/uni092D/uni0942/uni093F/uni092E/uni092F/g7298/uni0020/uni0915 /uni0947 /uni0020/uni093F/uni0935/uni0937/uni092F/uni0020 
/uni092E/g7286, सभी संबंिधत सूचना अपलोड कर े गी।  
[फा. सं. जे-22012/78/2003- /uni0938/uni0940/uni090F/uni0938/uni0028/uni0921/g7011/uni0020 /g7016/uni0020 /uni092F/uni0942/uni0029/uni0020/uni092A/uni093E/uni091F/g6981/uni002E 
V] 
डॉ. ए . दु र ै सामी, /uni0935/uni0948/g6980/uni093E/uni093F/uni0928/uni0915/uni0020 'जी'  
  
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE  
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 26th September, 2017 
G.S.R. 1203(E).— Whereas the wetlands, vital parts of the hydrologic al cycle, are highly productive 
ecosystems which support rich biodiversity and prov ide a wide range of ecosystem services such as wate r storage, water 
purification, flood mitigation, erosion control, aq uifer recharge, microclimate regulation, aesthetic enhancement of 
landscapes while simultaneously supporting many sig nificant recreational, social and cultural activiti es, being part of 
our rich cultural heritage; 
And whereas many wetlands are threatened by reclama tion and degradation through drainage and landfill,  
pollution (discharge of domestic and industrial eff luents, disposal of solid wastes), hydrological alt eration (water 
withdrawal and changes in inflow and outflow), over -exploitation of their natural resources resulting in loss of 
biodiversity and disruption in ecosystem services provided by wetlands;  
32

8       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
And whereas clause (g) of article 51A of the Consti tution stipulates that it shall be the duty of ever y citizen of 
India to protect and improve the natural environmen t including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and  to have 
compassion for living creatures;  
 And whereas the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  is a comprehensive legislation to provide protecti on and 
improvement of the environment, including inter-alia , wetlands, and for matters connected therewith;   
And whereas the National Environment Policy, 2006 r ecognises the ecosystem services provided by wetlan ds 
and emphasizes the need to set up a regulatory mech anism for all wetlands so as to maintain their ecol ogical character, 
and ultimately support their integrated management;  
And whereas India is a signatory to the Ramsar Conv ention on Wetlands and is committed to conservation  and 
wise use of all wetlands within its territory; 
And whereas the Central Government has published th e Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 
2010, vide number G.S.R. 951(E), dated the 4 
th December, 2010;  
And whereas conservation and wise use of wetlands c an provide substantial direct and indirect economic  
benefits to state and national economy, and thereby  the Central Government stands committed to mainstr eaming full 
range of wetland biodiversity and ecosystem services in development planning and decision making for various sectors;  
And whereas the State Governments and Union Territo ry Administrations need to take into account wetlan d 
ecosystem services and biodiversity values likewise  within their developmental programming and economi c well-being, 
also taking into cognizance that land and water, two major ecological constituents of wetland ecosystems, are enlisted as 
State subjects as per the Constitution;  
And whereas the Central Government considered it ne cessary to supersede the Wetlands (Conservation and  
Management) Rules, 2010 for effective conservation and management of wetlands in the country;  
And whereas the Central Government had, in exercise  of the powers conferred by section 25, read with s ub-
section (1) and clause (v) of sub-section (2) and s ub-section (3) of section 3 of the Environment (Pro tection) Act, 1986, 
published the draft Wetlands (Conservation and Mana gement) Rules, 2016, vide number G.S.R. 385 (E) dat ed 31 st  
March, 2016 for information of the public likely to  be affected thereby; and notice was given that the  said draft rules 
would be taken into consideration by the Central Go vernment after expiry of a period of sixty days fro m the date on 
which copies of the Gazette notification is made available to the public;  
And whereas the Central Government has received the  suggestions and objections from the State 
Governments, Union Territories and its organisation s, individuals and civil society organisations on t he draft Wetlands 
(Conservation and Management) Rules, 2016; 
And whereas the suggestions and objections received  in response to the above mentioned draft rules hav e been 
duly considered by the Central Government in consul tation with State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations. 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred  by section 25, read with sub-section (1) and claus e (v) of 
sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 3 an d section 23 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1 986 and in 
supersession of the Wetlands (Conservation and Mana gement) Rules, 2010, except as respects things done  or omitted to 
be done before such supersession, the Central Gover nment hereby makes the following rules for conserva tion and 
management of wetlands, namely:— 
1. Short title and commencement.— 
(1)  These rules may be called the Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules, 2017.  
(2) These shall come into force from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
2.  Definitions.— 
(1)  In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
(a)  "Act" means the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;  
(b)   "Authority" means the State Wetlands Authority or Union Territory Wetlands Authority, as the case may  
be; 
33

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 9 
(c)  "Committee" means the National Wetlands Committee r eferred to in rule 6; 
(d)  “ecological character” means the sum of ecosystem c omponents, processes and services that characterise  
the wetlands; 
(e)  “integrated management plan” means a document which  describes strategies and actions for achieving 
wise use of the wetland and the plan shall include objectives of site management; management actions 
required to achieve the objectives; factors that af fect, or may affect, the various site features; mon itoring 
requirements for detecting changes in ecological ch aracter and for measuring the effectiveness of 
management; and resources for management implementa tion; 
(f)  "Ramsar Convention" means the Convention on Wetland s signed at Ramsar, Iran in 1971; 
(g)   “wetland" means an area of marsh, fen, peatland or  water; whether natural or artificial, permanent or  
temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fr esh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine wa ter the 
depth of which at low tide does not exceed six mete rs, but does not include river channels, paddy fiel ds, 
human-made water bodies/tanks specifically construc ted for drinking water purposes and structures 
specifically constructed for aquaculture, salt production, recreation and irrigation purposes;  
(h)   “wetlands complexes" means two or more ecologicall y and hydrologically contiguous wetlands and may 
include their connecting channels/ducts; 
(i)  “wise use of wetlands” means maintenance of their e cological character, achieved through implementatio n 
of ecosystem approach within the context of sustainable development; 
(j)  “zone of influence” means that part of the catchmen t area of the wetland or wetland complex, 
developmental activities in which induce adverse changes in ecosystem structure, and ecosystem services. 
(2)  The words and expressions used in these rules and not defined, but defined in the Act, shall have  the 
meanings assigned to them in the Act.  
3.  Applicability of rules.—These rules shall apply to the following wetlands or wetlands complexes, namely: — 
(a)  wetlands categorised as 'wetlands of international importance' under the Ramsar Convention; 
(b)  wetlands as notified by the Central Government, State Government and Union Territory Administration: 
Provided that these rules shall not apply to the we tlands falling in areas covered under the Indian Fo rest 
Act, 1927, the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, th e Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the State Forest  Acts, and the 
Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 2011 as amended from time to time. 
4.  Restrictions of activities in wetlands.— (1) The wetlands shall be conserved and managed in accordance with the 
principle of 'wise use' as determined by the Wetlands Authority. 
 (2)     The following activities shall be prohibit ed within the wetlands, namely,- 
(i)  conversion for non-wetland uses including  encroachment of any kind; 
(ii)  setting up of any industry and expansion of existing industries; 
(iii)  manufacture or handling or storage or disposal of c onstruction and demolition waste covered under 
the Construction and Demolition Waste Management Ru les, 2016; hazardous substances covered 
under the Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazard ous Chemical Rules, 1989 or the Rules for 
Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of Haz ardous Micro-organisms Genetically engineered 
organisms or cells, 1989 or the Hazardous Wastes (M anagement, Handling and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2008; electronic waste covered under the E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016;  
(iv)  solid waste dumping;  
(v)  discharge of untreated wastes and effluents from in dustries, cities, towns, villages and other human 
settlements; 
(vi)  any construction of a permanent nature except for b oat jetties within fifty metres from the mean high 
flood level observed in the past ten years calculat ed from the date of commencement of these rules; 
and, 
(vii)  poaching.  
34

10       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
Provided that the Central Government may consider p roposals from the State Government or Union 
Territory Administration for omitting any of the activities on the recommendation of the Authority. 
5.  Wetlands Authorities.— (1) The Central Government hereby constitutes  the State Wetlands Authority in each 
State with the following members, namely:— 
(i)  Minister In-charge of the Department of Environment /Forests of the State Government or Minister In-
charge of the Department handling wetlands - Chairperson; 
(ii)  Chief Secretary of the State or Additional Chief Secretary equivalent - Vice Chairperson; 
(iii)  Secretary in-charge of  the Department of Environment - Member ex-officio ; 
(iv)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Forests - Member ex-officio ; 
(v)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Urban Development - Member ex-officio ; 
(vi)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Rural Deve lopment - Member ex-officio ; 
(vii)   Secretary in-charge of the Department of Water Resources - Member ex-officio ;  
(viii)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Fisheries - Member ex-officio ; 
(ix)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Irrigation and Flood Control - Member ex-officio ; 
(x)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Tourism - Member ex-officio ;  
(xi)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Revenue - Member ex-officio ; 
(xii)  Director, State Remote Sensing Centre - Member ex-officio ; 
(xiii)  Chief Wildlife Warden - Member ex-officio ; 
(xiv)  Member Secretary, State Biodiversity Board - Member ex-officio ; 
(xv)  Member Secretary, State Pollution Control Board - Member ex-officio ; 
(xvi)  Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests  of the Regional Office of Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change - Member ex-officio ; 
(xvii)  One expert each in the fields of wetland ecology, h ydrology, fisheries, landscape planning and socio-
economics to be nominated by the State Government; and 
(xviii)  Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director in th e Department of Environment/Forests or 
Department handling wetlands - Member Secretary.  
             (2)         The Central Government her eby constitutes the Union Territory Wetlands Author ity for each Union 
Territory with the following members, namely:— 
(i)  Administrator or Chief Secretary of the Union Territory - Chairperson; 
(ii)  Secretary in-charge of  the Department of Environment - Vice Chairperson; 
(iii)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Forests - Member ex-officio ; 
(iv)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Urban Development - Member ex-officio ; 
(v)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Rural Deve lopment - Member ex-officio ; 
(vi)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Water Resources - Member ex-officio ; 
(vii)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Fisheries - Member ex-officio ; 
(viii)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Irrigation and Flood Control - Member ex-officio ; 
(ix)  Secretary in-charge of the Department of Tourism - Member ex-officio ; 
(x)  Secretary in-charge of the Departments of Revenue - Member ex-officio ; 
(xi)  Director, Remote Sensing Centre - Member ex-officio;  
(xii)  Member Secretary, Union Territory Pollution Control Committee - Member ex-officio ; 
35

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 11  
(xiii)  Member Secretary, Biodiversity Board of the UT - Me mber ex-officio ; 
(xiv)  Chief Wildlife Warden - Member ex-officio ; 
(xv)  Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests  of the Regional Office of Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change- Member ex-officio ; 
(xvi)   One expert each in the fields of wetland ecology, hydrology, fisheries, landscape planning and socio-
economics to be nominated by the Union Territory Administration; and 
(xvii)  Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director in th e Department of Environment/Forests or 
Department handling wetlands - Member Secretary.  
(3)  The State Wetlands Authority or Union Territor y Wetlands Authority may co-opt other members, not 
exceeding three in number, if required. 
(4)  The State Wetlands Authority or Union Territory Wet lands Authority shall exercise the following 
powers and perform the following functions, namely:- 
(a)  prepare a list of  all wetlands of the State or Uni on Territory within three months from the date of 
publication of these rules; 
(b)  prepare a list of wetlands to be notified, within s ix months from the date of publication of these rul es; 
taking into cognizance any existing list of wetlands prepared/notified under other relevant State Acts; 
(c)  recommend identified wetlands, based on their Brief Documents, for regulation under these rules; 
(d)  prepare a comprehensive digital inventory of all we tlands within a period of one year from the date of  
publication of these rules and upload the same on a  dedicated web portal to be developed by the 
Central Government  for the said purpose; the inventory to be updated every ten years; 
(e)  develop a comprehensive list of activities to be re gulated and permitted within the notified wetlands 
and their  zone of influence; 
(f)  recommend additions, if any, to the list of prohibited activities for specific wetlands;  
(g)  define strategies for conservation and wise use of wetlands within their jurisdiction; wise use being a 
principle for managing these ecosystems which incor porates sustainable uses (such as capture 
fisheries at subsistence level or harvest of aquati c plants) as being compatible with conservation, if  
ecosystem functions (such as water storage, groundw ater recharge, flood buffering) and values (such 
as recreation and cultural) are maintained or enhanced;  
(h)  review integrated management plan for each of the n otified wetlands (including trans-boundary 
wetlands in coordination with Central Government), and within these plans consider continuation and 
support to traditional uses of wetlands which are harmonized with ecological character; 
(i)  in cases wherein lands within boundary of notified wetlands or wetlands complex have private 
tenancy rights, recommend mechanisms for maintenanc e of ecological character through promotional 
activities;  
(j)  identify mechanisms for convergence of implementati on of the management plan with the existing 
State/Union Territory level development plans and programmes;  
(k)  ensure enforcement of these rules and other relevan t Acts, rules and regulations and on half-yearly 
basis (June and December of each calendar year)  in form the concerned State Government or Union 
Territory Administration or Central Government on t he status of such notified wetlands through a 
reporting mechanism; 
(l)  coordinate implementation of integrated management plans based on wise use principle through 
various line departments and other concerned agencies; 
(m)  function as nodal authority for all wetland  specif ic authorities within the State or Union Territory 
Administration; 
(n)  issue necessary directions for conservation and sus tainable management of wetlands to the respective 
implementing agencies; 
36

12       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
(o)  undertake measures for enhancing awareness within s takeholders and local communities on values 
and functions of wetlands; and 
(p)  Advise on any other matter suo-motu, or as referred by the State Government/Union Terr itory 
Administration. 
(5)  The concerned Department of the State Government or  Union Territory shall provide all necessary 
support and act as nodal Department and Secretariat to the Authority. 
(6)  The Authority shall, within ninety days of  publication of these rules, shall constitute,— 
(a)  a technical committee to review brief document s, management plans and advise on any 
technical matter referred by the Wetland Authority; and  
(b)  a grievance committee consisting of four membe rs to provide a mechanism for hearing and 
forwarding the grievances raised by public to the Authority; 
(7)    The Committees referred to in sub-rule (6) s hall meet at least once in every   quarter to perfo rm their 
functions. 
(8)  The Authority shall meet at least thrice in a year. 
(9)  The term of non-official members of the Authority n ominated by State Government or Union 
Territory Administration, shall be for a period not exceeding three years. 
6.  Constitution of National Wetlands Committee.— (1) The Central Government, hereby constitutes the National 
Wetlands Committee with the following members, name ly:— 
(i)  Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India - Chairperson; 
(ii)  Special Secretary or Additional Secretary dealing w ith wetlands, Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India-Vice Chairperson; 
(iii)  Additional Director General, Wildlife, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Government of India - Member ex-officio ; 
(iv)  Adviser or Joint Secretary dealing with wetlands, M inistry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change - Member ex-officio ; 
(v)  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India- Member ex-officio ; 
(vi)  Joint Secretary , Ministry of Water Resources, Rive r Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, 
Government of India- Member ex-officio ; 
(vii)  Joint Secretary, Ministry of  Agriculture and Farme rs Welfare, Government of India- Member ex-
officio ; 
(viii)  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Emp owerment, Government of India- Member ex-
officio ; 
(ix)  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India- Member ex-officio ; 
(x)  Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India- Member ex-officio ; 
(xi)  The Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board - Member ex-officio ; 
(xii)  Director, Zoological Survey of India or Scientist F- Member ex-officio ; 
(xiii)  Director, Botanical Survey of India or Scientist F- Member ex-officio ; 
(xiv)  Director, Space Application Centre, Ahmedabad or Scientist F- Member ex-officio ; 
(xv)  Member, Central Water Commission - Member ex-officio ;  
(xvi)  Adviser, Niti Aayog - Member ex-officio ; 
(xvii)  Three representatives of State Government or Union Territory Administration on a rotational basis for 
a tenure of two years each; 
(xviii)  One expert each in the fields of wetland ecology, h ydrology, fisheries, landscape planning & socio-
economics; and 
 
37

¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i) º          Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 13  
(xix)  Director/Additional Director/Joint Director dealing  with wetlands, Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change - Member Secretary. 
(2)     The National Wetlands Committee may co-opt other members, not exceeding three in number, if 
required. 
(3)  The National Wetlands Committee shall perform the f ollowing functions, namely:- 
(a)  advise the Central Government on appropriate polici es and action programmes for conservation and 
wise use of wetlands; 
(b)  evolve norms and guidelines for integrated management of wetlands based on wise use principle; 
(c)  monitor implementation of these rules by the Authority; 
(d)  advise the Central Government on proposals received  from State Governments or Union Territory 
Administrations for omission of the prohibited activities as referred in sub-rule (2) of rule 4; 
(e)  recommend designation of wetlands of international importance under Ramsar Convention; 
(f)  recommend trans-boundary wetlands for notification; 
(g)  review progress of  integrated management of Ramsar sites and transboundary wetlands; 
(h)  advise on collaboration with international agencies on issues related to wetlands; and 
(i)  advise on any other matter suo-moto , or as referred by the Central Government. 
(4)  The tenure of non-official members of the Committee shall not exceed three years. 
(5)  The Committee shall meet at least once in every six months. 
7.  Delegation of powers and functions to the State Gov ernments and Union Territory Administrations .— 
(1) The concerned Department of the State Governmen t or Union Territory Administration shall, within a  period 
of one year from the date of publication of these rules, prepare a Brief Document for each of the wetl and identified 
for notification, providing:— 
(a)  demarcation of wetland boundary supported by accura te digital maps with coordinates and validated by 
ground truthing; 
(b)  demarcation of its zone of influence and land use and land cover thereof indicated in a digital map;  
(c)  ecological character description;  
(d)  account of pre-existing rights and privileges;  
(e)  list of site-specific activities to be permitted within the wetland and its zone of influence;  
(f)  list of site specific activities to be regulated within the wetland and its zone of influence; and 
(g)  modalities for enforcement of regulation; 
(2)  Based on the Brief Document, the Authority shall ma ke recommendations to the State Government or Union  
Territory Administration for notifying the wetlands.  
(3)  The State Government or Union Territory Administrat ion shall, after considering the objections, if any , from 
the concerned and affected persons, notify the wetl ands in the Official Gazette, within a period not e xceeding 
240 days from the date of recommendation by the Authority.  
(4)  (a) In case of trans-boundary wetlands, the Central  Government shall coordinate with concerned State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations to prepare the Brief Document containing information a s 
listed in sub-rule (1).  
(b) Based on the Brief Document, the National Wetla nds Committee shall make recommendations to the 
Central Government for notification of the wetland.  
(c) The Central Government shall, after considering  the objections, if any, from the concerned and aff ected 
persons, notify the wetlands in the Official Gazett e, within a period not exceeding 240 days from the date of 
recommendation by the Committee. 
38

14       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY               [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)] 
(5)  (a) The Central Government shall create a dedicated  web portal for information relating to wetlands.  
(b)  The Central Government, State Government and U nion Territory Administration shall upload all rele vant 
information and documents pertaining to wetlands in their jurisdiction. 
 
[F. No. J-22012/78/2003-CS (W) Pt. V] 
Dr. A. DURAISAMY, Scientist 'G' 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at  Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.  
ALOK 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
ALOK KUMAR 
Date: 2017.09.26 
22:25:31 +05'30'
39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47
*****