 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH 
The Consumer Protection (E 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
March , 2021/ Faghun, 1942 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY FIFTH  REPORT  
on  
The Consumer Protection (E -Commerce) 
Rules, 2020  
  
(Presented on    24 th  March, 2021 ) 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION  
 
Commerce) 
  REPORT NO.  
245  

C O N T E N T S 
             
Pages  
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      
  
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION                (ii) 
3. REPORT ON CONSUMER PROTECTION (E-COMMERCE) RULES , 2020 1-15 
I       BACKGROUND  
II      GENESIS OF CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS IN INDIA  
III VARIOUS THREATS TO CONSUMERS ON E-COMMERCE 
PLATFORM 
 
IV SALIENT FEATURES OF THE E-COMMERCE (CONSUMER 
PROTECTION) RULES, 2020 
 
V ORAL EVIDENCE TENDERED BY THE MINISTRY OF 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS) 
 
 
SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE  16-19 
5.  ANNEXURES: I & II 20-30 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019--2021) 
1. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa   Chairman 
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia 
3.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
4.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
5.  Dr.  Amar Patnaik 
6. Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7.  Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
8.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 
9. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
10. Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
11. Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar 
12. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
13. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
14. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
15.  Vacant ( due to demise of Shri Abhay Bharadwaj ) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
3. Shri Prem Singh, Additional Director  
4. Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Anju Bala Nayar, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Priyanshu Vaidya, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
  (i)  

INTRODUCTION  
  
 I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Leg islation, 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Fort y fifth Report of 
the Committee.  
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting 
held on March 23 rd  , 2021.  
 1.3 The matter arises out of the examination of th e Consumer 
Protection (e-Commerce) Rules, 2020 and related are as which was 
discussed by the Committee in consultation with the  Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Department of 
Consumer Affairs. The observations and recommendati ons, which in the 
opinion of the Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, 
are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
NEW DELHI;  
24 th   March, 2021  
  
Shri Partap Singh Bajwa  
Chairman,  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
Rajya Sabha  
  

REPORT  
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (E-COMMERCE) RULES, 2020  
  
I. BACKGROUND 
 
“A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependent on us. We are 
dependent on him. He is not an interruption in our work – he is the purpose of it. We are not 
doing him a favor by serving him. He is doing us a favor by giving us the opportunity to serve 
him.” 
–Mahatma Gandhi   
 The Information Technology revolution at the begin ning of the new century brought about a 
transformation in the way in which Commerce and Bus iness are conducted throughout the 
world. The new terminologies like ‘dot com’ and ‘e’-version companies over-shadowed the old 
brick-and-mortar business industries. Technology an d Business are becoming inextricably 
interwoven and this has fostered the growth of e-Co mmerce Industry. e-Commerce means 
application of electronics in Commerce. The influx of the Internet and World Wide Web has 
made it possible to communicate and transact over cyberspace and made the whole world into a 
'Global village'. This transformation has also brought a number of challenges like cyber crimes, 
quality issues, and payment related frauds and a pressing need for its regulation has emerged as 
a prime concern for the authorities. At the pace wi th which the e-Commerce industries are 
growing, regulation of this sector along with educa ting consumers about their rights has 
become vital for healthy growth of e Commerce industries. 
2. The emergence of global supply chains, rise in i nternational trade and the rapid development 
of e-Commerce have led to new delivery systems for goods and services and have provided 
new opportunities for consumers. The e-Commerce ind ustry has been the backbone in the fight 
against the Covid-19 pandemic in the Country and it  was because of this industry that the basic 
needs of the people could be met with. Consumers ac ross the world are waking up to the true 
potential of the e-Commerce Industry and accepting it whole-heartedly. On the other-hand, the 
development of e-Commerce has rendered the consumer  vulnerable to new forms of unfair 
trade and unethical business practices and also vio lation of personal data and information 
secrecy. Misleading advertisements, tele-marketing, multi-level marketing, direct selling and e-
tailing pose new challenges to consumer protection. For redressal of such issues, the Consumer 
Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, 2020 (Rules hereinaf ter) were notified by the Government of 
India on 23.07.2020. These Rules were framed under the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 and 
are intended to complement the said Act by regulati ng all e-Commerce activities and 
transactions. The Rules have sought to govern all s uch e-Commerce activities by laying down 
duties and liabilities to be adhered to by e-Commer ce entities, marketplace e-Commerce 
entities, sellers on marketplace, and inventory e-C ommerce entities. The Act defines ‘e-
Commerce’ under Section 2(16), as “ buying or selling of goods or services including di gital 
products over digital or electronic network” . The Rules are made applicable to (i) an e-
Commerce entity operating in India and also (ii) an  e-Commerce entity which ‘systematically 
offers’ goods and services to consumers in India. T he Rules are expected to deter the e-

Commerce companies from indulging in unfair trade practices while protecting the rights of the 
consumers at the same time. 
  
II. GENESIS OF CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS IN INDIA  
  3. The e-Commerce platform is operating all over the world; however, laws governing e-
Commerce are not globally uniform. With the ever ev olving nature of the Telecommunication 
and Trade & Commerce, the old set of rules and prac tices governing communication and 
trading is largely incompatible with the emerging s ystem of communication and trading 
practices in a borderless world created by the Inte rnet. Thus, in order to pave the way for the 
development of internationally uniform and compatib le e-Commerce rules and practices, the 
United Nations Commission on International Trade La w (UNCITRAL) established by the 
United Nations General Assembly in 1996 has adopted  the Model Law of Electronic 
Commerce in 1996. The UNCITRAL Model Law on e-Commerce was drafted in order to serve 
as a document that the various countries of the wor ld could use and evaluate and amend their 
own laws. On the basis of these Model Laws, India h as enacted the Information Technology 
(IT) Act 2000. In India various offences relating t o Internet are enumerated in the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 and the Information Technology  (Amendment) Act, 2008. The 
Information Technology Act, 2000 deals with contrac tual aspects of use of electronic records. 
Another Act viz. Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (COP RA), which is considered as the magna 
carta of consumer protection in India, was an Act o f the Parliament of India enacted in 1986 to 
protect the interests of consumers in India. It was  replaced by the Consumer Protection Act, 
2019, which provides for the establishment of consu mer councils and other authorities for the 
settlement of consumer's grievances and matters con nected therewith. Section 94 of the Act 
provides that, for the purposes of preventing unfai r trade practices in e-Commerce, and also to 
protect the interest and rights of consumers, the C entral Government may take such measures 
in the manner as may be prescribed. Section 101 emp owers the Central Government to make 
rules to prevent unfair trade practices in e-Commer ce. In the light of this background that the 
Consumer Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, 2020 has be en notified on 23 rd  July, 2020, in an 
attempt to create more uniformity and transparency for buyers. 
  
  
  

 III. VARIOUS THREATS TO CONSUMER ON E-COMMERCE PLATFORM  
  4.  Before the features of the Rules and its objec tives are discussed, it is important to 
understand the risks that e-Commerce Consumers are exposed to and the various types 
of threats they could encounter at each level of hi s/her online shopping process. The 
following table illustrate some of the most popular form of threats encountered by the e-
Consumers: - 
Sl.No.  Activities of e-
Consumer  
Common threat at each 
level of 
Consumer activity  
I. Information Sharing Unwanted Program- Adware, Spyware, 
Browser Parasites 
Cyberstalking. Risk to  
behavioural pattern 
data. 
II. Ordering of Product  
  
  
Risk of misuse of the  
behavioural pattern 
data, malicious recommender system 
algorithm. 
III. Payment Phishing, Pharming attacks, Salami attacks 
and Risk to transaction related data. 
IV. Delivery Breach of contract of sale e.g., Product 
Quality, delivery time etc. 
  
  
V. Support Processing of cancellation and refund 
request, Service related issues 
  
 Table: Showing various stages in e-Commerce purchas ing and threats associated at each 
stage . 
  
  

  IV. SALIENT  FEATURES OF THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (E-
COMMERCE) RULES, 2020  
 5.  The Consumer Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, 20 20 has been brought to regulate all 
goods and services bought and sold over digital or electronic network including digital 
products; all models of e-Commerce, including marke tplace and inventory models of e-
Commerce; all e-Commerce retail, including multi-ch annel single brand retailers and single 
brand retailers in single or multiple formats; and all forms of unfair trade practices across all 
models of e-Commerce. However, these rules do not a pply to any activity of a natural person 
carried out in a personal capacity not being part o f any professional or commercial activity 
undertaken on a regular or systematic basis. Furthe rmore, these rules also apply to an e-
Commerce entity, which is not established in India,  but systematically offers goods or services 
to consumers in India. 
  6.  The Rules specify the duties of e-Commerce en tities, liabilities of marketplace e-
Commerce entities, duties of sellers on marketplace  and duties and liabilities of inventory e-
Commerce entities. The Rules also clarify the disti nct scope of responsibilities between the 
marketplace platform and the sellers on the marketp laces. This clarity will help in effective 
enforcement of the provisions of the Rules and crea ting a congenial business atmosphere. In 
order to understand the mandate of the Rules, the s alient features of these rules given by the 
nodal ministry are as under : 
 (i) Appointment of nodal person:  Every e-Commerce entity is to appoint a nodal pers on of 
contact or an alternate senior designated functiona ry who is resident in India, to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder. 
(ii) Providing certain information:  
a. Every e-Commerce entity is to provide on its platfo rm information on legal 
name, principal geographic address of its headquart ers and all branches; name and 
details of website; and contact details like e-mail  address, fax, landline and mobile 
numbers of customer care as well as of grievance officer. 
b. Marketplace e-Commerce entity is to provide details  about the sellers including the 
name of their business, whether registered or not, their geographic address, customer 
care number, any rating or other aggregated feedback about such seller. 
c. Both Marketplace and Inventory e-Commerce entities are to provide information 
relating to return, refund, exchange, warranty and guarantee, delivery and shipment, 
modes of payment, and grievance redressal mechanism  information on available 
payment methods, the security of those payment meth ods, any fees or charges payable 
by users, the procedure to cancel regular payments under those methods, charge-back 
options, if any, and the contact information of the relevant payment service provider. 
  (iii) Grievance redressal mechanism:  
a. Every e-Commerce entity shall establish an adequate  grievance redressal mechanism 
and shall appoint a grievance officer for consumer grievance redressal, and shall display 
the name, contact details, and designation of such officer on its platform. 
 

b. The grievance officer is to acknowledge the receipt  of any consumer complaint within  
forty-eight hours and redress the complaint within one month from the date of receipt of 
the complaint. 
• Cancellation charges: No e-Commerce entity shall impose cancellation charges on 
consumers cancelling after confirming purchase unle ss similar charges are also 
borne by the e- Commerce entity, if they cancel the  purchase order unilaterally for 
any reason. 
• Recording consent of consumer: Every e-Commerce entity shall only record the 
consent of a consumer through an explicit and affir mative action for the purchase 
of any good or service offered on its platform and not automatically, including in 
the form of pre-ticked checkboxes. 
c. Effecting payments towards accepted refund requests : Every e-Commerce entity 
shall effect all payments towards accepted refund r equests of the consumers as 
prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India or any othe r competent authority under any 
law for the time being in force, within a reasonabl e period of time, or as prescribed 
under applicable laws. 
d. No manipulation of price: No e-Commerce entity shall manipulate the price of the 
goods or services offered on its platform in such a  manner as to gain reasonable profit 
by imposing on consumers any unjustified price havi ng regard to the prevailing market 
conditions, the essential nature of the good or ser vice, any extraordinary circumstances 
under which the good or service is offered, and any  other relevant consideration in 
determining whether the price charged is justified.  Sellers have also been strictly 
warned against “manipulating the price” of the good s and services offered on 
their platforms to gain unreasonable profit.  
e. Record of sellers: Every marketplace e-Commerce entity shall take reas onable efforts 
to maintain a record of relevant information allowi ng for the identification of all sellers 
who have repeatedly offered goods or services that have previously been removed or 
access to which has previously been disabled under the Copyright Act, 1957,  the Trade 
Marks  Act, 1999 or the Information  Technology Act, 2000.  
f. Prohibition of fake reviews : These rules prohibit inventory e-Commerce entities and 
the sellers from posting fake customer reviews abou t their own goods or services, or 
misrepresent their qualities or features.  
g. Advertisements for marketing of goods or services: Every inventory e-Commerce 
entity and seller on marketplace are to ensure that  the advertisements for marketing of 
goods or services are consistent with the actual ch aracteristics, access and usage 
conditions of such goods or services.  
h. Importer/country of origin: Where an e-Commerce entity offers imported goods or  
services for sale, the name and details of the importer have to be mentioned. A seller on 
a marketplace has also to provide all relevant deta ils about the goods and services 
offered for sale including country of origin which are necessary for enabling the 
consumer to make an informed decision at the pre-purchase stage.  
i. Taking back defective goods/deficient services: In case of defective or  spurious 
goods, or deficient  services, or goods/services no t conforming to characteristics as 
advertised, or late delivery of the goods/services,  no inventory e-Commerce entity shall 
refuse to take back such goods, or withdraw or disc ontinue such services or refuse to 
refund consideration, if paid. 

 V. ORAL EVIDENCE TENDERED BY THE MINISTRY AND OBSE RVATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE THEREON.  
 7. The Consumer Protection (e-Commerce) Rules, 202 0, placed at Annexure I , was taken up 
for examination by the Committee and a questionnair e on the subject was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distrib ution on the subject. The Ministry 
furnished their comments/clarification on each ques tion, a copy of which has been included as 
Annexure II  of the Report. During the examination of the rules , the Committee held a meeting 
on the 19 th  August, 2020 to deliberate upon the subject matter , Minutes of which has also been 
provided in the Report. The Committee heard the Sec retary, Department of Consumer Affairs 
alongwith other officials of the Department and the  subject was examined and discussed in 
depth. The following points raised by the Committee  and the Ministry’s comments-thereon are 
given below:- 
• Protection of Personal Data  
8.  The Committee, first took up the issue of prote ction of personal data of the consumers, 
which has become a burning topic during the recent times. The Committee raised concerns 
over the leakage of consumer data by the e-Commerce  call-centres and the lack of law to deal 
with this leakage. The e-Commerce service provider,  for initiating the payment on their 
platform tends to save the details of credit/ debit  cards of the customer. The Committee 
enquired about the safety of the transaction/ payme nt related data of the consumers. The 
Committee also enquired about the steps that are be ing taken to address the issue of data 
security. The Secretary informed the Committee that  the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 are fully applicable to address these kind of issues. She further informed 
that a Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA)  has been set up under the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019, whose mandate includes inquir y into such kinds of leakages of data 
privacy and also to recommend appropriate penal act ion against the culprits. On a query raised 
by the Committee regarding safety of the financial data like credit card details and payment 
related information of customers, the Ministry replied that issues in relation to the protection of 
personal data of an individual is governed generall y under data protection laws wherein, these 
financial data of the customer are included within the definition of ‘sensitive personal data or 
information’ under the Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures 
and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011. The Committee then enquired about 
the number of cases of violation of personal data t ill now. The Ministry informed that the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019, itself was enforced on 20th July 2020 and the CCPA was 
constituted only on 24th July, 2020 and hence, no such cases have been reported as yet. 
  

 Recommendation:  
 9. The Committee felt that the privacy of users and  their data security are of utmost 
importance and the citizen’s ‘right to be forgotten’ online are paramount. The Committee 
appreciates that these rules have provision mandati ng the record of the consent of a 
consumer through an explicit and affirmative action  for the purchase of any good or 
service offered on its platform and not automatical ly, e.g., in the form of pre-ticked 
checkboxes. However, the Committee feels that this itself is not sufficient for protecting 
the users' personal data. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that user’s personal 
data may be categorized as per their level of sensi tivity and appropriate protection level 
may be assigned for each level. The Committee furth er recommends that the Ministry 
should ensure that a secured and robust system of p ayment gateway is made available to 
the Consumers so that the transaction related data of the users is not compromised in any 
way.  
10.  Further, the Committee felt that all major e-m arketplace entities should establish 
their data centre in India, so that the Consumer da ta are not hosted in a server located 
beyond the borders of the Country, which may be mis used by an enemy Country. The 
Committee also felt that Hyperscale Data Centres, w hich are data centre hubs, can be 
established in India that can empower India as a Gl obal IT hub in near future. In view of 
this, the Committee recommends innovating new econo mic models that promote 
establishment of global hyperscale data centres in India and it also recommends to make 
all major e-marketplace entities to establish their data centres locally.  
11.  The Committee recommends that a provision may be given in the Consumer 
Protection Rules itself stating that the protection  to the personal data of the consumers 
using e-marketplace, will be given under the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019.  
  
• Unfair Trade Practices/ Monopolies  
12.  The Committee observed from International expe riences that the e-Commerce platforms 
initially offer a good discount and sell goods at c heap prices. However, after destroying all 
smaller retailers/ MSMEs in the market, they manipu late the prices of commodities; employ 
unfair trade practices and monopolies. The Committe e enquired whether this price advantage 
remains there in the long term or is it only a meth od of inducing the customers or getting him 
hooked so that they can charge whatever they like l ater on, which is also popularly called as 
"Predatory Pricing" and whether such unfair trade p ractices be identified and dealt with under 
the present Rules. The Secretary clarified that thi s is a crucial element in the entire legislation 
and through the new Consumer Protection Act, 2019; the Ministry has tried to define what the 
unfair trade practices are. The Ministry further in formed the Committee that the Competition 
Act, 2002 defines that offering products or service s at an unfair or discriminatory price either 

directly or indirectly constitutes abuse of dominan t position and prohibits the abuse of 
dominant position under Section 4 of the Act. The M inistry also informed that Clause (ix) of 
Press Note 2(2018) issued by DPIIT on FDI policy on  e-Commerce sector, stipulates that an e-
Commerce entity providing marketplace will not, dir ectly or indirectly, influence the sale price 
of goods or services. The Secretary assured that th e Ministry will certainly study and 
incorporate the lessons learnt in the implementatio n of the Act so that while going forward, the 
Ministry will come out with exhaustive explanation of what practices could constitute Unfair 
Trade Practices and the Consumer Redressal Commissi ons or the CCPA are able to identify 
any unfair trade practices and how to deal with it. 
13.  The Committee noted that exclusive sales tie-u ps of seller and the e-marketplace has 
become a new upcoming trend. The exclusive tie-ups that are happening can be broadly 
classified into two categories, totally exclusive a nd exclusive only online. This considerably 
reduces the choices available to consumers, apparen tly creating a situation of monopoly. 
Exclusive agreements are not per se anti-competitiv e. However, they raise potential 
competition concern when used as an exclusionary tactic to foreclose competition to rivals. The 
Committee is of considered view that such practices  by the e-marketplace entities of holding 
exclusive tie ups with the sellers should be discou raged. The Committee noted that a firm’s 
ability to raise its prices is usually constrained by competitors and the possibility that its 
customers can switch to alternative sources of supp ly. When these constraints are weak, a firm 
may gain market power. 
 Recommendation:  
 14.  The Committee is of the considered view that p redatory pricing as a short term 
strategy, adopted by some of the market giants with  deep pockets to sustain short-term 
losses and reduce the prices of their products belo w the average variable costs may lead 
to wiping out competition from the market and could  be detrimental to the consumers in 
the long run. However, the Committee observes from a legal standpoint that it is very 
hard to substantiate allegations of predatory pricing against e-Commerce giants, since the 
impact of such practice on the competition in the m arket would be very difficult to prove. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there sho uld be a more clear-cut definition 
of what constitute Unfair Trade Practice and practi cal legal remedy to tackle such 
circumventing practices by e-Commerce entities spec ifically Multinational Companies 
and Kirana Small Vendors.  
15.  The Committee observes that the tremendous gro wth of e-Commerce is a major threat to 
traditional stores. Many retail enterprises are stepping up by opening online stores and adopting 
tech solutions to offer e-payment options, quicker deliveries, and better customer experiences. 
However, small-scale brick-and-mortar stores with l imited capitals and infrastructure 
accessibilities are struggling to keep up. This is hurting the interests of local vendors and may 
ultimately lead to closure of such shops with low c apitals. The Committee is of the considered 
view that wiping out of small/local vendors from th e market may lead to reduced choices 
available to the consumer, which in turn will put c onsumers in a disadvantageous position in 
the long run. The Committee enquired about the step s taken by Ministry to strike a balance 
between the two, so that the dominant e-marketplace  entity does not hurt the interest of the 
small/local vendors and a level-playing field is av ailable to them. However, no satisfactory 

response in this regard was received from the Minis try. The Committee gave an excellent 
example of necessity becoming mother of invention i n favour of the small vendors, which can 
be seen in the testing times of COVID-19, as many l ocal vendors/shops started serving via 
various means of telecommunication and e-Commerce p latforms like Swiggy, Urbanclap etc. 
These small scale e-Commerce entities largely remain unorganized, unregulated and unnoticed. 
 Recommendations:  
16.  The Committee noted that many MNCs as well as off-shore based companies are 
involved in the market e-Commerce entity model of t he e-Commerce. The Committee 
feels imperative to devise some regulatory mechanis m so that the local vendors/ 'kirana’ 
shops are not wiped out of the market. It is also c rucial in view of the employment 
opportunities to small scale/local vendors. The Com mittee, therefore, recommends that 
sufficient protection to such small/local vendors should be given in the Rules itself and the 
Ministry should devise out ways in which such small  retailers may also become part of e-
Commerce.  
• Manipulation of Algorithm, Fake reviews and other malpactices  
 17.  The Committee then enquired about the steps t aken to ensure that certain companies do 
not benefit from algorithm (i.e. a computer program me which displays certain products 
favourably and more frequently than the others). Th e Secretary informed the Committee that 
the Rules stipulates that the E-Commerce entity shall not display undue bias towards any of the 
sellers or manipulate the rankings to show the consumer that a certain product is more favoured 
among consumers or is more beneficial. The Secretar y clarified that in order to enable the 
consumers to make an informed decision on the produ cts being purchased by them, all the 
terms and conditions, the MRP, packaging date, etc. , have to be necessarily included in the 
information given on the product labels. The Commit tee then raised the issue of fake reviews 
or sponsored reviews posted on the e-Commerce platforms. The Committee noted that the Rule 
6 of the Consumer Protection (e-Commerce) Rules, 20 20 states that “No such seller shall 
falsely represent itself as a consumer and post rev iews…”. The Committee, then enquired 
about the mechanism available with the regulator to  check this malpractice by the e-service 
providers. The Secretary informed the Committee tha t the Central Consumer Protection 
Authority (CCPA) is going to have an investigation wing headed by, Director General 
(Investigation) assisted by a team of experts havin g the required expertise and domain 
knowledge to investigate such matters. She further informed that when it is sufficiently proved 
that any e-Commerce entity has posted fake reviews or tinkered with the algorithm, class action 
against it would be initiated by CCPA. 
 

 Recommendation:  
 18.  The Committee noted the clarifications provide d by the Ministry regarding the legal 
provisions to deter deceptive tactics used by the m erchants in order to gain competitive 
advantage over others. The Committee, is however, n ot inclined to agree with the 
comments of the Ministry as the cases of fake reviews, unfair favouritism in the display of 
goods are still increasing every day. The Committee , therefore, recommends that some 
corrective mechanism to discourage deceptive tactic s including manipulation of 
algorithms, fake product reviews & ratings must be created so that the consumer interest 
is not harmed in any way.  
19.  The Committee then raised its concern over the  Drip pricing, which is a technique used by 
online retailers of goods and services whereby a headline price is advertised at the beginning of 
the purchase process, following which additional fe es, taxes or charges, which may be 
unavoidable, are then incrementally disclosed or "d ripped". The Committee considers this 
practice of misleading and/or inadequately disclose d fees at the time of final checkout as a 
breach of rights of consumers. The Secretary inform ed the Committee that the Consumer 
Protection (e-Commerce) Rules, 2020 provide that al l the additional charges, has to be 
mentioned upfront on the platform, so that it does not get added later on, without the 
knowledge of the consumer. However, the Ministry di d not clarify as to how they keep check 
on such activities on e-platform and what is the pe nalty imposed on the e-marketplace entity 
which is involved in drip pricing. 
 Recommendations:  
 20.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld clearly define the Drip pricing 
in the Rules and sufficient protection to consumer should be given as a provision in the 
Rules itself including penal provisions for violation.  
21.  In the e-Commerce context, the Committee obser ves that there are many ‘click 
farms’ that are used to click a merchant’s advertisement without any intention of actually 
purchasing the advertised product. The Committee no ted that such an exercise tends to 
inflate the web traffic to a particular product, wh ich ultimately affects the decision 
making of the consumer. The Committee is of the vie w that the Ministry should take 
strict actions against such click farms which inten d to distort the healthy market 
practices.  
  

 
• Greivance Redressal & Consumer Helplines  
22.  The Committee then enquired about the mechanis m set up by the Ministry for grievance 
redressal of the consumers. The Ministry informed the Committee that an e-Commerce entity is 
required to appoint an easily accessible nodal pers on of contact or a senior designated 
functionary who is resident in India, for ensuring compliance with the Consumer Protection 
Act, 2019. The Secretary also informed that the Rule 5 of the Rules talks about liabilities of the 
marketplace entities wherein every marketplace enti ty is required to provide a dedicated 
customer care number. However, the Committee noted that the duties and responsibilities of 
the customer care service provided by the marketplace entity is not included in the Rules.  
Recommendations:  
23.  The Committee recommends that the duties and r esponsibilities of customer care 
service provided by the marketplace entity should b e clearly spelt out in the Rules itself. 
Further, the Rules should explicitly mention differ ent levels at which a customer can 
approach eventually, if his/her grievance is unresolved.  
24.  The Committee noted that often inordinate delays in contacting customer care service 
and long call delays are tiring and irritating. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should not only direct the e-Commerce entities to provide dedicated 
customer care number but also should direct the ent ities to create mechanism to monitor 
the time taken by the customer care executives to r esolve an issue. The entities may be 
directed by the Ministry to maintain a record of th e same which may be presented by the 
entities when asked upon.  
• Regulation of Delivery Charges  
25.  The Committee observes that there is no clear mechanism to monitor the delivery charges 
paid by the consumer for delivery of products bough t by them online. The Committee raised 
concerns over the unregulated delivery charges paid  by the consumers. The Committee 
enquired whether the Ministry can put a cap on the highest limits of delivery charges. The 
Secretary informed that rules provide that all additional charges, as to what is the postal charge, 
what is the delivery charge, that has to be mention ed, so that it does not get added on without 
the knowledge of the consumer. 
  

 Recommendations:  
26.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld issue broad guidelines for the 
fixation of delivery charges charged by the marketp lace entities. Further, the Committee 
recommends that a cap on the highest limits of the delivery charges in peak hours of 
service should also be ensured by the Ministry.  
• Product Information and related Issues  
27.  There is a growing concern that the first gene ration internet users may not have adequate 
digital-education, which makes them more vulnerable  to internet based frauds. Under such 
circumstances, the Committee feels that the consume r must have access to accurate, unbiased 
information about the products and services they pu rchase. The Committee enquired about the 
standards and formats set up by the Ministry for th e purpose of product labelling so that a 
consumer may take an informed decision before the p urchase. The Secretary clarified that in 
order to enable the consumers to make an informed d ecision on the products being purchased 
by them, all the terms and conditions, the MRP, pac kaging date, etc., have to be necessarily 
included in the information given on the product la bels. She further informed that all e-
Commerce entities have been directed to ensure that  the products, which are for sale on their 
platforms, must necessarily include information reg arding their country of origin. The 
Committee appreciates the Ministry for including pr ovision for mandating display of product 
information in the rule 4 of the Rules. However, th e Committee feels that the Ministry should 
create a mechanism to monitor that the provisions o f this rule is followed by the e-Commerce 
entities in its letter and spirit. 
 Recommendations:  
28. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld clearly distinguish in the 
Rules itself the cases of misinformation, no inform ation and the information which is 
otherwise correct but creates a false impression an d provide for penal provision for each 
case in the Rules itself.  
29. The Committee recommends to either lay down in the Rules itself or to publish 
supplementary guidelines for the consumers to educa te them in simpler words about how 
to and whom to approach, in case their grievances a re not being satisfactorily addressed 
by the customer care service. The Committee recomme nds that the steps to be followed 
by the Consumer, if he/she is misled by the product  information or the product was not 
delivered as promised by the seller in the contract  should be clearly spelt out in the 
rules/guidelines thereunder.  

 SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
1.  The Committee felt that the privacy of users an d their data security are of utmost 
importance and the citizen’s ‘right to be forgotten’ online are paramount. The Committee 
appreciates that these rules have provision mandati ng the record of the consent of a 
consumer through an explicit and affirmative action  for the purchase of any good or 
service offered on its platform and not automatical ly, e.g., in the form of pre-ticked 
checkboxes. However, the Committee felt that this itself is not sufficient for protecting the 
users' personal data. The Committee, therefore, rec ommends that user’s personal data 
may be categorized as per their level of sensitivit y and appropriate protection level may 
be assigned for each level. The Committee further r ecommends that the Ministry should 
ensure that a secured and robust system of payment gateway is made available to the 
Consumers so that the transaction related data of t he users is not compromised in any 
way.  
2.  Further, the Committee felt that all major e-marketplace entities should establish their 
data centre in India, so that the Consumer data are  not hosted in a server located beyond 
the borders of the Country, which may be misused by an enemy Country. The Committee 
also feels that Hyperscale Data Centres, which are data centre hubs, can be established in 
India that can empower India as a Global IT hub in near future. In view of this, the 
Committee recommends to innovate new economic model s that promote establishment of 
global hyperscale data centres in India and it also  recommends to make all major e-
marketplace entities to establish their data centres locally.  
3.  The Committee recommends that a provision may b e given in the Consumer 
Protection Rules itself stating that the protection  to the personal data of the consumers 
using e-marketplace, will be given under the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019.  
4.  The Committee is of the considered view that pr edatory pricing as a short term 
strategy, adopted by some of the market giants with  deep pockets to sustain short-term 
losses and reduce the prices of their products belo w the average variable costs may lead 
to wiping out competition from the market and could  be detrimental to the consumers in 
the long run. However, the Committee observes from a legal standpoint that it is very 
hard to substantiate allegations of predatory pricing against e-Commerce giants, since the 
impact of such practice on the competition in the m arket would be very difficult to prove. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there sho uld be a more clear-cut definition 
of what constitute Unfair Trade Practice and practi cal legal remedy to tackle such 

circumventing practices by e-Commerce entities spec ifically Multinational Companies 
and Kirana Small Vendors.  
5.  The Committee noted that many MNCs as well as o ff-shore based companies are 
involved in the market e-Commerce entity model of t he e-Commerce. The Committee 
feels imperative to devise some regulatory mechanis m so that the local vendors/’kirana’ 
shops are not wiped out of the market. The Committe e, therefore, recommends that 
sufficient protection to such small/local vendors should be given in the Rules itself and the 
Ministry should devise out ways in which such small  retailers may also become part of e-
Commerce. 
6.  The Committee noted the clarifications provided  by the Ministry regarding the legal 
provisions to deter deceptive tactics used by the m erchants in order to gain competitive 
advantage over others. The Committee, is however, n ot inclined to agree with the 
comments of the Ministry as the cases of fake reviews, unfair favouritism in the display of 
goods are still increasing every day. The Committee , therefore, recommends that some 
corrective mechanism to discourage deceptive tactic s including manipulation of 
algorithms, fake product reviews & ratings must be created so that the consumer interest 
is not harmed in any way.  
7.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld clearly define the Drip pricing 
in the Rules and sufficient protection to consumer should be given as a provision in the 
Rules itself including penal provisions for violation.  
8.  In the e-Commerce context, the Committee observ es that there are many ‘click farms’ 
that are used to click a merchant’s advertisement w ithout any intention of actually 
purchasing the advertised product. The Committee no ted that such an exercise tends to 
inflate the web traffic to a particular product, wh ich ultimately affects the decision 
making of the consumer. The Committee is of the vie w that the Ministry should take 
strict actions against such click farms which inten d to distort the healthy market 
practices.  
9.  The Committee recommends that the duties and re sponsibilities of customer care 
service provided by the marketplace entity should b e clearly spelt out in the Rules itself. 
Further, the Rules should explicitly mention differ ent levels at which a customer can 
approach eventually, if his/her grievance is unresolved.  
10.  The Committee noted that often inordinate delays in contacting customer care service 
and long call delays are tiring. The Committee, the refore, recommends that the Ministry 
should not only direct the e-Commerce entities to p rovide dedicated customer care 

number but also should direct the entities to creat e mechanism to monitor the time taken 
by the customer care executives to resolve an issue . The entities may be directed by the 
Ministry to maintain a record of the same which may  be presented by the entities when 
asked upon.  
11.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld issue broad guidelines for the 
fixation of delivery charges charged by the marketp lace entities. Further, the Committee 
recommends that a cap on the highest limits of the delivery charges in peak hours of 
service should also be ensured by the Ministry.  
12.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry sho uld clearly distinguish in the Rules 
itself the cases of misinformation, no information and the information which is otherwise 
correct but creates a false impression and provide for penal provision for each case in the 
Rules itself.  
13.  The Committee recommends to either lay down in  the Rules itself or to publish 
supplementary guidelines for the consumers to educa te them in simpler words about how 
to and whom to approach, in case their grievances a re not being satisfactorily addressed 
by the customer care service. The Committee recomme nds that the steps to be followed 
by the Consumer, if he/she is misled by the product  information or the product was not 
delivered as promised by the seller in the contract  should be clearly spelt out in the 
rules/guidelines thereunder.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA  
  
VI  
SIXTH MEETING  
  
The Committee met at 03:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 1 9 th  August, 2020 in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New De lhi. The following 
Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:-.  
  
Present  
1. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa         Chairman  
2. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy  
3. Dr. Vikas Mahatme  
4. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
5. Shri G.V.L Narsimha Rao  
6. Shri Amar Patnaik  
7. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
8. Shri Pradeep Tamta  
  
Secretariat  
1. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Rakesh Anand , Additional Director  
3. Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Under Secretary  
4. Smt. Anju Bala Nayar, Committee Officer  

  
Witnesses:  
 Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distrib ution (Department of 
Consumer Affairs)  
1. Ms. Leena Nandan, Secretary  
2. Ms. Nidhi Khare, Additional Secretary  
3. Shri Anupam Mishra, Joint Secretary  
  
2.  The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed the Membe rs and Officers to the 
meeting of the Committee. Explaining the mandate of  the Committee, he stated 
that the main function of the Committee is to exami ne and report to the House 
whether the powers to make rules, regulations etc.,  given to the Government by 
the Constitution or by an Act of the Parliament, ha ve been properly exercised, 
both in letter and spirit. 
 
3.  x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
 x  x  x  x  x  x  x 
 10.  The Committee then took up discussion with th e Secretary, Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Dep artment of Consumer 
Affairs) on the Consumer Protection (e-Commerce) Ru les, 2020. The Additional 
Secretary, Department of Consumer Affairs gave a br ief Power Point 
Presentation on the subject. Thereafter, The Secret ary, Department of Consumer 
Affairs invited the Committee to raise any query on  the said subject. The 
Committee at the outset, raised concerns about the leakage of consumer data by 
the e-Commerce call centers and the lack of law to deal with this leakage. The 
Committee then enquired about the steps that are be ing taken to address this 
issue. The Secretary informed the Committee that th e provisions of IT Act, 2000 
are fully applicable to address these kinds of issu es. She further informed that a 
Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) has be en set up under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019, whose mandate includ es inquiry into such kinds 
of leakages of data privacy and also recommend appr opriate penal action against 
the culprits. On a query regarding the number of su ch cases till now, she replied 
that the Act itself was enforced on 20th July 2020 and the CCPA was constituted 
only on 24th July 2020. 

11.  The Committee observed that from International  experiences, the e-
Commerce platforms initially offer a good discount and sell goods at cheap 
prices. However, after destroying all smaller retai lers/ MSMEs in the market, 
they manipulate the prices of commodities, employ u nfair trade practices and 
monopolies. The Committee enquired whether this pri ce advantage remains there 
in the long term or is it only a method of inducing  the customers or getting him 
hooked so that they can charge whatever they like a nd whether such unfair trade 
practices be identified and dealt with under the pr esent Rules. The 
Secretary clarified that this is a crucial element in the entire legislation 
and through the new Consumer Protection Act, 2019, the Ministry has tried 
to define what the unfair trade practices are and t he Ministry will certainly study 
and incorporate the lessons learnt in the implement ation of the Act so that while 
going forward, the Consumer Redressal Commissions o r the CCPA are able to 
identify any unfair trade practices and how to deal with it.  
 12.  The Committee then enquired on what basis it is decided as to whether a 
product is returnable or non-returnable on an E-Com merce website. The 
Committee felt that the rules are not uniform there in. The Secretary informed the 
Committee that the return policy may differ from pr oduct to product and it is not 
possible to envisage the entire range of products. However, she stated that 
whichever product is advertised for sale, its terms  and conditions, its warranty or 
guarantee, or whether it is returnable or non-retur nable, should all be there. She 
further stated that there will always be some products which cannot be returned if 
the consumer has utilized them. The Committee further observed that on return of 
certain products, the customers don’t get their har d cash but instead, they get a 
voucher for buying another product from the same pl atform. The Committee 
requested the Ministry to look into this issue.  
 13.  The Committee then enquired about the steps t aken to ensure that certain 
companies do not benefit from algorithm (i.e. a com puter programme which 
displays certain products favorably and more freque ntly than the others). The 
Secretary informed the Committee that the Rules sti pulates that the E-Commerce 
entity shall not display undue bias towards any of the sellers or manipulate the 
rankings to show the consumer that a certain produc t is more favoured among 
consumers or is more beneficial. The Secretary clar ified that in order to enable 
the consumers to make an informed decision on the p roducts being purchased by 
them, all the terms and conditions, the MRP, packag ing date, etc., have to be 
necessarily included in the information given on th e product labels. She further 
informed that it has also been communicated to all E-Commerce entities that the 
products, which are for sale on their platforms, mu st necessarily include 
information regarding their country of origin. She stated that the Legal Metrology 
Act prescribes the mandatory information that needs  to be complied with by E-
Commerce entities and sellers who are selling their  products on E-Commerce 

platforms. However, if there is any violation of th e Consumer's rights, then the 
consumer can go to the National Consumer Helpline o r directly access the e-
Commerce entity's consumer redressal mechanism thro ugh telephone or e-mail, 
which are required to be provided by the entity. 
14.  The Committee observed that the Consumer Prote ction Act per se  doesn't 
take care of data leakage or data breach and these result in compromise on 
consumer’s data privacy, which is ultimately used t o manipulate the rating of 
products. Moreover, the CCPA cannot take care of th is issue as its focus is only 
on the Consumers' rights. Hence, the Committee sugg ested that an umbrella kind 
of structure should be there encompassing various P ersonal data issues under 
other Acts/Regulators e.g., RERA Act, Competition C ommission of India Act 
and Personal data Protection Bill etc. The Secretar y informed that on issues like 
data privacy, there is much more detailing that has  to be done with the regulators 
on those fronts. She further stated that the Centra l Consumer Protection 
Authority, established to promote, protect and enfo rce the rights of consumers 
shall take note of instances and take appropriate a ction against E-Commerce 
entities, where the manipulation of data to influen ce consumers or to wrongly 
attract them to certain products, is brought to its attention. 
 
 15.  The Committee then raised issues like preventi on of fake reviews of 
products, transparent pricing, term of National Con sumers' Disputes Redressal 
Commission (CDRC) Members etc. The Secretary inform ed the Committee that 
the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) is  going to have an 
investigation wing headed by, Director General (Investigation) assisted by a team 
of experts having the required expertise and domain  knowledge to investigate 
such matters. She further informed that when it is sufficiently proved that any E-
Commerce entity has posted fake reviews or tinkered  with the algorithm, class 
action against it would be initiated by CCPA. As re gards the transparent pricing, 
all e-Commerce entities are required to display all  charges including price, taxes 
and delivery charges for the Consumer. She further informed that the term of the 
NCDRC Members is of 4 years as notified by the Fina nce Act, 2017 and the 
Tribunal Rules, 2020 and for the State and the Dist rict Commission also, the 
tenure is of 4 years and these are subject to the f inal decision of the Supreme 
Court, which is considering the matter. 
16.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of meeting was kept. 
 
17.  The Committee meeting adjourned at 05:16 P.M.  
  
-----x-------  

     
ANNEXURE II  
  
  ORAL EVIDENCE ON E-COMMERCE (CONSUMER PROTECTION) RULES, 2020  
REPLY TO QUESTIONNAIRE  
**** 
1. What were the reasons that led to the framing of  e-Commerce (Consumer Protection) 
Rules, 2020? What were the lacunas, if any, in the framework of e-Commerce that the 
present Rules seek to address?  
Reply  
The mandate of the Department of Consumer Affairs i s consumer advocacy.The overall policy 
on e-Commerce is the domain of the Department for P romotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
( DPIIT). The DPIIT has issued Foreign Direct Inves tment (FDI) policy on E-Commerce 
sector. The space of e-Commerce suffered from a lac k of consumer-oriented legislation which 
was specifically developed for the business models prevalent in this space. Accordingly, 
the Consumer Protection  (E-Commerce) Rules, 2020  was notified with a view to prevent 
unfair trade practices, with a view to protect and safeguard the ultimate interests and rights of 
consumers to enable the consumers to make informed decisions on purchases, prevent 
fraudulent transactions and unfair and deceptive trade practices, control sale of counterfeits etc. 
The e-Commerce Rules address various lacunas in the  present grievance redressal mechanism 
on e-Commerce trade such as those relating to fake non-delivery/ delay delivery, non-refund of 
the items in case found not upto the mark, fake goo ds etc, and put in place a robust grievance 
redressal mechanism. 
The E-Commerce rules clarify the liabilities of the platform both in a marketplace model and in 
inventory model, setting up of an adequate Grievanc e redressal mechanism, not refuse to take 
back goods, discontinue services or stop refunds if  the products are found to be fake, defective, 
delivered late or look different from description o n the platform etc.This would help the 
grievances to be resolvedat a pre-litigation stage as an Alternate Dispute Resolution 
mechanism thereby ensuring efficiency and reducing the cases in Consumer 
Commissions/other courts. In terms of Rule 6(4)(1) of the ibid rules, a grievance officer shall 
be appointed for consumer grievance redressal and it shall be ensured that the grievance officer 
acknowledges the receipt of any consumer complaint within forty-eight hours and redresses the 
complaint within one month from the date of receipt of the complaint; 
 
 
  

2. What has been the experience of the Ministry reg arding implementation of these Rules 
so far? What are the major challenges faced by the Ministry while implementing these 
Rules?  
Reply  
The rules have been notified recently on 23rd July 2020. It is too early to comment on the 
experience and challenges faced by this Ministry as  the rulesnotified is one month old and its 
implementation is at nascent stage. 
3. Are there any proposals for amendments to the Ru les? If so, then please explain the 
reasons that have necessitated an amendment to the Rules?  
Reply 
 
The Rules have been notified only on 23rd July 2020 . Government will assess the challenges 
and problems that may come up and if required, consider addressing the issues appropriately.  
4. Rule 3(b) of the e-Commerce (Consumer Protection ) Rules, 2020, defines ‘e-Commerce 
entity’ as any person who owns, operates or manages  digital or electronic facility or 
platform for electronic Commerce, but does not incl ude a seller offering his goods or 
services for sale on a marketplace e-Commerce entit y; whereas there is a slight difference 
in the definition of e-service provider in the guid elines pertaining to FDI regulations in e-
Commerce Sector. What are the reasons behind not in cluding marketplace e-Commerce 
entity under the definition of e-Commerce entity?  
Reply  
Rule 3(b) of the Consumer Protection (e-Commerce) R ules, 2020 defines e-Commerce entity 
as “E-Commerce entity means any person who owns, op erates or manages digital or electronic 
facility or platform for electronic Commerce, but does not include a seller offering his goods or 
services for sale on a marketplace e-Commerce entity;” 
Marketplace e-Commerce entities are therefore inclu ded within the definition of e-Commerce 
entity. It is only “sellers on a marketplace e-Comm erce entity” who have been excluded from 
the scope of this definition. The reason for this i s because the obligations of sellers are 
markedly different from the obligations of a market place e-Commerce entity. Marketplace e-
Commerce entities only offer the platform through which a seller sells goods owned by them to 
a consumer. Since these entities (i.e, marketplace e-Commerce entities, inventory e-Commerce 
entities and sellers on marketplaces) exercise diff erent levels of control over the goods and 
information related to the goods, there is a need t o recognise the distinction between them in 
the placement of any obligation on them. Therefore,  the rules specifically place certain 
obligations on sellers on marketplace e-Commerce en tities, which is done through the 
provisions of Rule 6. 
  
5. As per the Rule 4(10) of the said Rules, “every e-Commerce entity shall effect all 
payments towards accepted refund requests of the co nsumers as prescribed…..under 

applicable laws”. Does this clause include payments  made through 3 rd  party Payment 
Processors also? If not, how will such payments be regulated?  
Reply  
As per Rule 4 (10), every e-Commerce entity shall effect all payments towards accepted refund 
requests of the consumers as prescribed by the Rese rve Bank of India or any other competent 
authority under any law for the time being in force , within a reasonable period of time, or as 
prescribed under applicable laws. 
Thus Rule 4(10) makes a reference to any relevant o r applicable law or regulation that may be 
made by the Reserve Bank of India, or any other com petent authority. Therefore, the scope of 
this Rule and the manner of effecting the payment w ill be determined by the precise nature of 
such laws or regulations. The obligation placed by Rule 4(10) is to comply with such laws or 
regulations in the course of effecting payments towards accepted refund requests. 
 RBI has issued guidelines on Regulation of Payment Aggregators and Payment Gateways vide 
notification RBI/DPSS/2019-20/174 DPSS. CO. PD. No. 1810/02.14.008/2019-20 dated March 
17, 2020, which applies to all Payment System Providers and System Participants. 
6. Rule 3(g) of the said Rules defines ‘marketplace  e-Commerce entity’. It is established 
that many MNC’s as well as off-shore based companie s are involved in the market e-
Commerce entity model of the e-Commerce. The Wallma rt-Flipkart Deal, for example, 
had faced much revolt by the traders association an d small and domestic retailers as they 
have alleged that FDI norms have been violated by t hem. Under such circumstances how 
does this Regulations make sure that there is no po ssibility of predatory pricing by these 
industry-giants, which may lead to small enterprises running out of business?  
Reply 
 
The purpose of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 is  to protect and safeguard interests of the 
consumers. Various measures have been provided in t he Act to protect the interest of 
consumers such as establishment of the Central Cons umer Protection Authority to protect, 
promote and enforce the rights of consumers as a class, filing complaints from any place and e-
filing in consumer Commissions, product liability, etc.  
The E-Commerce Rules have been framed to ensure tha t the interests of the consumers are 
protected in the e-Commerce space by empowering con sumers. As per the rules, the e-
Commerce entities are required to set up a grievanc e redressal mechanism and acknowledge 
the consumer grievances within 48 hours and resolve  within a month. This will work as an 
alternate dispute resolution mechanism at pre-litig ation stage. The duties of E-Commerce 
entities under Rule 4(9) states that every e-Commer ce entity shall only record the consent of a 
consumer for the purchase of any goods or service o ffered on its platform where such consent 
is expressed through an explicit and affirmative ac tion, and no such entity shall record such 
consent automatically, including in the form of pre -ticked checkboxes. FAQs on e-Commerce 
rules will further enlighten the consumers to take informed decisions. 
The Competition Act, 2002 defines and prohibits the  abuse of dominant position in Section 4 
of the Act. Section 4(2) further states that offeri ng products or services at an unfair or 
discriminatory price either directly or indirectly constitutes abuse of dominant position. 

Further, Section 4(2) (a) (ii) mentions 'Predatory Pricing' as a form of unfair or discriminatory 
pricing and ultimately as abuse of dominant positio n. Predatory pricing is a competition issue 
and the Competition Commission of India (CCI) has a lso issued a set of self-regulation 
guidelines for the e-Commerce sector. 
Clause (ix) of Press Note 2(2018) issued by DPIIT s tipulates that an e-Commerce entity 
providing marketplace will not, directly or indirec tly, influence the sale price of goods or 
services, which also renders such business as an in ventory based model. The aforesaid Press 
Note on FDI policy on e-Commerce sector was issued to ensure that the rules are not 
circumvented. 
7. Rule 4 of the e-Commerce (consumer protection) R ules,2020, enumerates the Duties of 
e -Commerce entities. Further, the sub-rule (4) of this Rule states “Every e-Commerce 
entity shall establish an adequate grievance redres sal mechanism…”. As per the previous 
consumer protection Acts, a consumer can institute a complaint only in the place where 
the transaction took place. How does these Rules re gulates this issue of jurisdiction and 
place of complain in case of e-transactions?  
Reply 
 
As per Rule 5 of the Consumer Protection (E-Commerc e) Rules, 2020, a marketplace e-
Commerce entity shall, on a request in writing made  by a consumer after the purchase of any 
goods or services on its platform by such consumer,  provide him with information regarding 
the seller from which such consumer has made such p urchase, including the principal 
geographic address of its headquarters and all bran ches, name and details of its website, its 
email address and any other information necessary f or communication with the seller for 
effective dispute resolution.As per the rules, the e-Commerce entities are required to set up a 
grievance redressal mechanism and acknowledge the c onsumer grievances within 48 hours and 
resolve within a month. 
As per consumer protection Act, 2019, a consumer ca n file a complaint in a Consumer 
Commission having jurisdiction over his place of re sidence/work. Hence a consumer who 
purchased online can file complaint in the district where he resides or works. 
 
 
 8. As per the Rule 4(3) of the said Rules, “No e-C ommerce entity shall adopt any unfair 
trade practice, whether in the course of the busine ss on its platform or otherwise”. The e-
Commerce service provider, for initiating the payment on their platform tends to save the 
details of credit/debit cards of the customer. How does these Rules make sure that the 
digital data like card details and payment informat ion of the customer are not 
compromised by these e-service providers?  
Reply 
 
E-Commerce websites operating in India are required  to follow many laws of India including 
the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
The issues in relation with the protection of perso nal data (including financial data) of an 
individual will be governed generally under data pr otection laws. For instance, financial data 

such as credit card details and payment information , are included within the definition of 
‘sensitive personal data or information’ under the Information Technology (Reasonable 
Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Per sonal Data or Information) Rules, 2011. 
These rules place strict restrictions on how such data may be used by an e-service provider. 
These Rules will run parallelly with, and not in co ntradiction to any other law, rules or 
regulation that may be made with regard to the protection of financial data in India. 
9. As per the Rule 4(5) of the said Rules, “every e -Commerce entity shall ensure that the 
grievances officer acknowledges the complaint recei pt …”. What are the mechanisms put 
in place to monitor the implementation of these Rul e and to whom violations, if any, are 
reported?  
Reply  
As per the duties of sellers on market place stipul ated vide Rules 6(4) of Consumer 
Protection(E-Commerce) Rules, 2020, any seller offe ring goods or services through a 
marketplace e-Commerce entity shall: 
(a) have a prior written contract with the respective e-Commerce entity in order to undertake or 
solicit such sale or offer; 
 (b) appoint a grievance officer for consumer griev ance redressal and ensure that the grievance 
officer acknowledges the receipt of any consumer co mplaint within forty-eight hours and 
redresses the complaint within one month from the date of receipt of the complaint; 
(c) ensure that the advertisements for marketing of  goods or services are consistent with the 
actual characteristics, access and usage conditions of such goods or services. 
 (d) provide to the e-Commerce entity its legal nam e, principal geographic address of its 
headquarters and all branches, the name and details  of its website, its e-mail address, customer 
care contact details such as fax, landline, and mobile numbers and where applicable, its GSTIN 
and PAN details. 
Rule 8 of the E-Commerce Rules provides that Act sh all apply in the event of any violation of 
these Rules. The Central Consumer Protection Author ity (“CCPA”) established under the Act 
has been vested with the power and function to prot ect, promote and enforce the rights of 
consumers as a class, and to prevent violation of c onsumer rights or unfair trade practices. Any 
violation of these E-Commerce Rules affecting a cla ss of consumers can be reported to the 
CCPA, and the appropriate redressal mechanisms as e nvisaged under the Act will be set in 
motion. 
CCPA can also take suo motu cognizance of such comp laints& get it investigated through 
Director General (Investigations) for needful actio n where the Central Authority is of the 
opinion that the matter is to be dealt by a regulat or, it may refer such matter to the concerned 
regulator alongwith its report. 
10. Rule 5 of the said Rules mentions about the lia bilities of marketplace e-Commerce 
entities. How will the liabilities shared between t he e-service provider, physical store 
which holds the inventory and the third party payment processor?  

Reply  
Liabilities of marketplace e-Commerce entities will  be shared w.r.t. the area of the service 
provided by each viz. e-service provider, physical store which holds the inventory and the third 
party payment processor. 
Rule 5 provides that marketplaces should provide in formation on available payment methods, 
the security of those payment methods, any fees or charges payable by users, the procedure to 
cancel regular payments under those methods, charge -back options, if any, and the contact 
information of the relevant payment service provide r. Rule 6 provides the liabilities of Sellers 
on the platforms as indicated in response to question No. 9 
11. Rule 6 of the e-Commerce Rules, 2020 states tha t “No such seller shall falsely 
represent itself as a consumer and post reviews…”. What is the mechanism available with 
the regulator to check this malpractice by the e-se rvice providers? What are the penalties 
in case such malpractice is caught?  
Reply 
 
The reviews on products or services provided on e-C ommerce platform as customer reviews 
are to be genuine and verifiable and not tutored. Intermediary platforms are expected to provide 
those details on asking by the Regulator. The Centr al Authority can pass such order as may be 
necessary, including discontinuation of practices which are unfair and prejudicial to consumers 
‘interest. 
12. E-Commerce has no physical and political bounda ries. How are e-Commerce entities 
of foreign origin regulated or monitored? What mech anisms are available to ensure that 
these rules are followed by them in its letter and spirit?  
Reply 
 
The overall policy on e-Commerce is the domain of D PIIT. DPIIT has issued Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) policyon E-Commerce sector. Action  on such matters will be taken by that 
Department. 
  
As regards the Consumer Protection (e-Commerce) Rul es, 2020, an e-Commerce entity shall 
be a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or the Companies Act, 
2013 (18of 2013) or a foreign company covered under  clause (42) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18of 2013) or an office, branc h or agency outside India owned or 
controlled by a person resident in Indiaas provided  in sub-clause (iii) of clause (v) of section 2 
of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,1999 (42 of 1999); and appoint a nodal person of 
contact or an alternate senior designated functiona ry who is resident in India,to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of the Act or the ru les made thereunder.So a foreign company 
has to have a nodal person located in India to ensure compliance of these Rules. 
  
 