 1
 
 186 
 
  
 
 
                   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
                                                   RAJYA SABHA 
 
     COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
                        HUNDRED AND EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
                                  (Presented on 15th December, 2009) 
 
 
 
 
The Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
                                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                              NEW DELHI 
 
                            December, 2009/ Agrahyana 1931  (Saka) 
COSL 

 2
C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION  OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000 
 
1-15 
4. S
UMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 16-18 
 
5. MINUTES* 
 
6. 
ANNEXURE 
..... 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

 3
RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   24TH  SEPTEMBER 2009) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Shri Motilal Vora     
3. Shri Ishwar Singh 
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
5. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
6. Shri Balvant alias Bal Apte  
7. Shrimati Maya Singh 
8. Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta 
9. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
*10. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
11. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
12. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
13. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
14. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
15. Shri Kumar Deepak Das   
 
    
 
S
ECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.   Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
4.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
     
 
 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. from 27
th November, 2009 in place of Shri 
Shivanand Tiwari. 
 
 
 

 4
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby pr esent on its behalf, this One Hundred 
and Eighty Sixth Report of the Committee. 
 
 1.2     The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 
the10th December, 2009 
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arose in the process of scrutiny of 
the Municipal Solid Wastes (Managemen t and Handling) Rules, 2000 and issues 
relating to them along with the comments received from the Government.  The 
observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained in the 
succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
.  
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                            
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
10th December, 2009 
 

 5
  
 
 
The Municipal Solid Wastes (Management & Handling) Rules, 2000 
 
Introduction  
The Central Government enacted the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 2000 ( Annexure I)  under Environment Protection Act, 
1986 ( Annexure II) to regulate the management and handling of the municipal 
solid wastes in environmentally acceptable manner. The rules have come into 
force from 25
th September 2000. Salient Features of the Rules are as follows: 
 
●  Municipal solid waste includes commercial and residential wastes generated 
in municipal or notified areas in either  solid or semi-solid from excluding 
industrial hazardous wastes but including treated bio-medical wastes 
● Rules are applicable to every munici pal authority responsible for collection, 
segregation, storage, transportation, pro cessing and disposal of municipal solid 
wastes. 
● Every municipal authority within the te rritorial area of the municipality is 
responsible for the implementation of th e provisions of these rules and for any 
infrastructure development for collection, storage, se gregation, transportation, 
processing and disposal of municipal solid wastes. 
● Local bodies were required to set up waste processing and disposal facilities 
before 31.12.2003. 
 
Guidelines/norms to be followed for handling municipal solid wastes have been 
provided in the Schedules and these relate to; 
 
• Prohibition of littering of solid wastes 
• Organizing house to house collection of waste 

 6
• Proper collection of waste from slums and squatters, hotels, restaurants, 
office complexes and commercial areas 
• Waste not be burnt 
• Organising awareness programmes for segregation of wastes  
•  Proper maintenance of waste storage facilities 
• Covering of vehicles used for transportation of wastes 
• Adopting suitable waste processing technol ogies to make use of wastes so 
as to minimize burden on landfill. 
•  Restricting land filling for non-biodegradable inert waste 
•  land filling operations to  follow prescribed proce dure to prevent pollution 
problem 
 
 
2     The Rules were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Envir onment & Forests for their comments/ 
clarifications on the 9 th July, 2001.  The Ministry furnished their comments/ 
clarifications on the 27th July, 2001 (Annexure III). The Committee considered 
the matter at its meeting held on the 16 th May, 2002 and made certain 
observations.  The Ministry fu rnished their comments on the 6 th November, 
2002 (Annexure IV).   
 
3     Upon the query that as “ the local Government, P ublic Health and 
sanitation at matters covered under the State list of the 7 th Schedule of the 
Constitution of India, the extent to which the Central Rules can suo-moto 
prescribe the responsibilities for the State Government, its officers and 
municipalities”, the Ministry of Environment and Forest ( MoEF) submitted in 
written reply  
 
“At the time of framing of Mu nicipal Solid Waste Management ( 
MSW) Rules, it was felt that although municipal waste 
management is governed by the bye-laws framed by respective 
municipal bodies, ev en better equipped municipal bodies like 

 7
Mumbai and Kolkata had hardly any regulations to set up 
scientifically designed land fill sites. As a result, serious ground 
water pollution was noticed in and around the Metros. It was 
therefore a conscious decision on the part of MoEF to notify 
through MSW Rules, uniform procedure for various aspects of 
handling of municipal waste , spec ification for land fill sites, 
standards for composting, leacha tes and incineration including 
standards for drinking water and am bient air quality with sole 
objective to prevent pollution of air, water and soil for which 
MoEF is fully competent to notify rules under EP Act, 1986.” 
 
 
4     The Committee also recogni sed that Municipal Solid Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 were notified in exercise of 
powers conferred under Sections 3, 6 and 25 of the Environment Protection 
Act, 1986. However it was observed by th e Committee that Section 3 of the 
said Act did not confer any Rule making powers to the Central Government. 
The Ministry in its written submission stated- 
“Under Section 3, Central Go vernment has the powers to 
take all such measures as is necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of protecting and improving the quality of 
environment and preventing, controlling and abating 
environmental pollution.” 
 
 
5      The Committee recognized that  the Section 3 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, bestows sweep ing powers of setting standards, 
laying down procedures and supervis ion on the Central Government.  
However, the Committee underscored that  the Rules 4 (1) made municipal 
authority eventually responsible for the implementation of these Rules, 
under Rule 4(2) the State Pollution C ontrol Board has been entrusted with 
power of granting the authorization to  the municipal authority or other 
operator for setting up waste handling and processing facility. Rules 5 (1) 
and (2) puts overall responsibility of implementation of Rules on the Urban 
Development Department of the State Government and District 
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner.  

 8
 
6      Upon being asked whether any m echanism was in place to ensure that 
the implementation of Rules and the Schedules there of were complied 
with, the Ministry of Environment and Forest replied- 
“The Municipal authorities are required to comply with 
the    implementation schedul e and seek authorization for 
setting up of waste processing and disposal facilities. The 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has been given 
the task of review of implementation and detection of non-
compliance. The State Pollution Control Boards (SPCB)/ 
Committees have been delegated powers under the Section 
5 of the Environment (Protect ion) Act to give direction. 
This empowers the SPCB/Committees to give directions to 
ensure compliance by th e municipal authorities 
concerned. In case of non- compliance Section 19 powers 
to take cognizance of offence is already delegated to the 
State Government.” 
 
7     Upon being enquired as to what was meant by the “overall responsibility” 
to the Department of Urban Developm ent of the State Government and the 
District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner, the MoEF replied:  
 
“The word ‘overall responsibil ity’ means that the state 
authorities are required to en sure the implementation of 
provisions of the Rules. Since the subject of the legislation 
on municipal solid waste co llection, transportation and 
disposal is under the jurisdic tion of Department of Urban 
Development in the State and with the Deputy 
Commissioner at the District level, these authorities have 
been identified as officers responsible to oversee 
implementation.” 
 
8       Upon being enquired about the powers being conferred upon these 
officers under the Act and these Rules to  enable them to  discharge their 
responsibilities, it was further stated that “All these authorities have been 
delegated powers under Sections 5, 10, 11 and 19 of the Environment 

 9
(Protection) Act, 1986 which deals with powers to give directions, entry and 
inspection, sampling and taking cognizance of offence respectively.” 
 
9 Constraints in implementation of MSW Rules. 
 
• In a written submission to the Committee on 2 nd October 2002 ( Annexure 
V), the Ministry of Environment and Fo rest recognized th e constraints and 
difficulties faced in implementation of the Rules based on the feedback 
received from SPCBs and local bodies within two years of application: 
 
• Inadequate financial resources to undertake improvement in management of 
municipal solid waste as per Schedule-II, III and IV of the Rules; 
 
• Lack of technical assistance to loca l bodies for selection of appropriate 
waste processing and disposal technologies; and  
 
• Inadequate provision of training to all cadres of officials. 
 
10 Proposed Action Plan for the management of municipal solid waste:
 
 
      The Ministry of Environment and Forest informed the Committee that an 
Action Plan was prepared under which the urban clusters have been categorized 
according to population and waste-generation: 
 
Action Plan for cities generating waste- more than 500 tonnes/ day 
 
• For Cities generating municipal solid waste (MSW) more than 500 t/d, the 
action plan may include the following component; 
 
• Modernization/mechanization of waste storage and transportation facilities; 

 10
• Privatization/contract with 'opera tors' for collection of waste and 
transportation; 
• Private entrepreneurship in setting up of waste processing and disposal 
facility. 
 
Action Plan for cities generating waste between 100-500 tonnes per /day 
 
     There wee 70 cities (2002) in the country generating waste between 100-500 
t/d. The towns generating waste ra nging 100-500 tonnes per day, needed 
strengthening of collection, storage a nd transportation of waste. There was 
possibility that a single plant (up to 500 t/d) could serve the purpose of waste 
processing. 
 
Action Plan for towns generating waste less than 100 tonnes/day 
 
     There were 58 towns (2002) ha ving population more than 50000 and waste 
generation between 50 to 100 t/d. These to wns did not requir e high cost waste 
processing and disposal technologies. Such towns should organize proper waste 
collection, storage and transportation system considering local situation. 
Aerobic composting could be an appropriate option for these towns. 
 
Towns having waste generation less than 50 tonnes/day 
 
     Majority of towns fall under this category and these are around 4239 (2002). 
Out of these, 506 were in Class I and II category of cities and remaining 3733 
towns were having populat ion less than 50,000. These towns needed simpler 
technological options, which could be managed without high skill operations. 
Main emphasis in such towns should  be on proper collection of waste and 
motivating people on segregation of wast e. Collected waste could easily be 
composted and used locally. 

 11
 
 
11 Requirement/Pre-requisites for implementation of Action Plan 
 
     The Ministry also recognized th e pre-requisite for the implementation of 
Action Plan 
 
At State level:    
 
      State Pollution Control Boards a nd local bodies at th e State level would 
need necessary support for implemen tation of the Municipal Solid Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules. St ate government, local body and the 
concerned SPCB may collectively take up the following course of action: 
 
• Setting up of State level Steering Committee to oversee the progress of 
implementation of the Rules (under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary/or 
Secretary, Urban Development). 
• Setting up Monitoring Committee at District  level to review the progress of 
implementation of the rules of all the cities/towns at District level (under 
the Chairmanship of Development Commissioner/Collector) 
• Setting up State level Technology Adviso ry Group (STAG) to assist local 
bodies on selection of appropriat e waste processing and disposal 
technologies. 
• State Pollution Control Board may set up Advisory Group/Committee to 
assist the Board in; 
o Issuance of authorizations to local bodies 
o Identification of sites for future waste disposal si tes and sites for 
setting up of waste processing plan t in the State after taking public 
hearings into account. 
o Management of Accidents. 

 12
• SPCB will need to strengthen laboratory facilities to undertake monitoring 
of parameters stipulated for ensuring compliance to the standards. 
• State Government (concerned Department in the State) will need to 
formulate State Policy and Action Plan to prioritise the action required for 
compliance with the Rules. Such Polic y will address issues relating to; 
appropriate strengtheni ng of local bodies (techni cally and financially), 
waste processing and disposal facil ities including making provisions for 
future sites, and other relevant issues 
•  Preparation of State level directory containing information on institutions, 
experts, technology providers, consu ltants who could be approached for 
interaction on various issues. Howeve r, such directory will be only 
indicative and not bindi ng on the local body for finalizing the award of 
work, etc. 
• Identification of State level Instit utes for organizing training to the 
Municipal staff and other concerned of various cadres. 
• Enlisting NGOs, voluntary organizations in the State for seeking their 
participation including mass awarene ss and organizing proper collection, 
segregation and storage of waste. 
 
 
At Central level 
 
•  CPCB to set up Technology Apprai sal Committee (TAC) as required 
under Municipal Solid Waste Rules. 
• CPCB to undertake field studies relati ng to various aspects of management 
of MSW to back-up the Rules. Such st udies to cover technological aspects, 
environment impact assessment, epidemiological studies, review of 
standards, etc. 

 13
• CPCB to bring out codes, guidelines to assist State level organizations on 
issues like, review of technologies, identification of landfill sites, manual 
for analysis of parameters, etc. 
• Prepare an illustrative Directory on Technology providers, experts, 
institutions and consulta nts involved in manageme nt of municipal solid 
waste. Such Directory will be only for reference purpose and not for any 
award of work. 
•  Ministry of Environment and Forest s (MOEF) to provide technical and 
financial assistance to th e State governments. Such assistance may include; 
strengthening of infrastructure, sup port state-specific pr oject, organizing 
training programmes, etc. 
• Financial assistance to States/UTs on setting up of mode l facilities for 
demonstrating implementation of m unicipal solid waste Rules. Such 
assistance could be on the same lines  as has been done under NRCP and 
CETP schemes. 
•  Regular interaction meetings of co ncerned Ministries to up-date on the 
schemes formulated by them on solid waste management for local Bodies/ 
State Governments. 
• Convene interactive meetings with the local bodies of Metro cities and State 
Capitals along with concerned SPCBs for formulation of action plan for 
management of municipal solid waste. 
 
 
12    Thereafter, the matter was taken up for discussion with the representatives 
of the Department of Environmen t & Forests at Mumbai on the 8 th 
November, 2002. A study note was prepared. (Annexure VI). 
 
13    During the discussions the Committee was apprised that the said rules 
were under implementation. On Rule  4(2) regarding implementation 

 14
schedule, the representatives of th e State suggested for extension of 
deadline for providing suitable land  filling sites beyond December, 2003. 
On Rules 5 & 6 regarding inspection, the Committee reiterated its earlier 
suggestion that periodicity of inspectio n should be prescrib ed in the rules 
itself. The Committee also desired that  the Ministry should prescribe the 
manner in which a citizen could file a complaint, procedure of enquiry and 
the timeframe for completing the enquir y. On Rule 6(4) regarding period of 
authorization, the Committee had sugge sted that validity period of 
authorization should be prescribed at the earliest as time frame was a crucial 
aspect in this regard. On Rule 5 regarding criteria for complaints, it was 
suggested to the Committee that the local bodies should be provided with 
more powers as the existing State laws  were not effective. It was also 
suggested that strict punishment/penalty may be prescribed for the 
defaulting citizen. On schedule IV re garding terms and conditions of the 
agreement, the Committee was informed that due to variation in technology 
for treatment and disposal  of waste, it would not be possible to lay down 
terms and conditions governing the agreement. However, a draft agreement, 
indicating items to be negotiated, has been finalized. There was also an 
emphasis on proper equipment/technology and proper training as well. 
 
14      The Committee’s apprehensions regarding the efficacy of these Rules 
were confirmed during the meeting at Mumbai.  The representatives of the 
State Government sought more powers to the State Government and 
Municipal Corporations/Councils. Th ey sought waiver/relaxation in 
Customs Duty on the import of equipments. The Committee was informed 
that an amount of Rs 50 to 100 cr ores was required for the smooth 
implementation of the rules. The State representatives also asked for the 
subsidy from the Central Government as they were conve rting waste into 
bio-friendly manure whic h required huge capita l investment/support to 
make the project cost effective. The Committee was informed that there was 

 15
lack of adequate land filling sites in Mumbai and nearby. As a result the 
implementation of Rules was not up to th e mark. It was also informed that 
identified site is often subjected to  litigation. Regarding the implementation 
of Rule 7 pertaining to management of  municipal solid waste in compliance 
with the Schedules II, III and IV, the Committee asked the State 
Government to look into the suggestion that local bodies should be provided 
with more powers as the State Laws were not effective.  
 
15    Subsequently the Committee proceeded on its study visit to 
Bhubaneshwar on the 11
th November, 2002. The Study note was prepared 
(Annexure VII). 
 
16    During its interactions with the Committee, the representatives of 
Government of Orissa conveyed that they faced constraints pertaining to 
finances, lack of suitable and adequate landfill sites, time consuming 
process of acquisition of land, inad equate technical and managerial 
expertise. They proposed to seek priv ate participation, scope for resource 
generation and involve Dist rict Collectors. They also suggested that there 
was a need for financial support from the Centre and subsidy to the local 
bodies for the implementation of the Rules. However, the representative of 
the Union Ministry of Environment and Forest informed the Committee that 
the Central Government did not propos e any direct subsidy to the local 
bodies for the creation of facilities for treatment and disposal of municipal 
solid waste though the Central Government had provided adequate financial 
support for sensitization. In view of such constraints the State Government 
suggested the extension of deadline for suitable landfill sites. Regarding the 
Rule 7 pertaining to compliance, th e Committee was told that punitive 
provisions of the Environm ent (Protection) Act, 1986 would also apply to 
any non-compliance under these Rules. 
 

 16
17     Thereafter, the Committee took up the subject matter for discussion with 
the representatives of the State Government of Tamil Nadu and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands Administration and the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
at Chennai on 28th January, 2003 and at Port Blair on 29 th January, 2003. A 
background note was provided on the issue. (Annexure VIII).  
 
18     Regarding Implementation Sc hedule Rule 4(2), the Committee was 
informed that the compliance of the implementation schedule was not likely 
to be achieved and it was suggested that dead-line for providing land filling 
sites as well as providing  disposal facilities should be extended beyond the 
December, 2003 dead-line. For th e Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Administration, disposal of plastic wa ste was posing a serious problem and 
they suggested that plastic waste may be re exported. Another problem was 
disposal of saw dust. In the Andaman and Nicobar, Port Blair was the only 
urbanized pocket with a Municipal Counc il. It was informed that of 85 
metric tones of solid waste generated every day, only 65 metric tones could 
be collected and transported to disposal site which was  13 Km away from 
Port Blair.  The Committee noted that  the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest were providing financial assistance to the Andaman Pollution 
Control Committee.  
 
19     As regards the progress made in implementation of these Rules in Tamil 
Nadu, the Committee noted that efforts have been made to sensitise the 
local bodies and administration of the provisions made in the Rules. The 
Department of Municipal Administration of the State Government has been 
regularly interacting w ith the municipal loca l bodies and district 
administration. The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has conducted 
workshops on ‘Towards Zero garbage’  for stakeholders. The Committee 
was informed that under Section 5 of  the Environment (Protection) Act, 

 17
1986, the Tamil Nadu Pollution Contro l Board had issued notice and 
direction to the local bodies against whom it received complaints. 
 
20     The Committee then discussed the matter with the representatives of the 
State Government of Gujarat and the Mi nistry of Environment & Forests at 
Ahmedabad on 1st July, 2003. The study note on the said visit was prepared 
(Annexure IX). 
 
21    The representative of the Governme nt of Gujarat informed that regarding 
‘overall responsibil ity for the enforcement of rules as per Rule 5, the 
Secretary, Urban Development and Urban Housing Development was 
responsible for the enforcement of Ru les in Municipal Corporations and 
that the District Magistrates were over all responsible in respect of 
Municipalities. It was conveyed that the State Government accordingly 
proposed an amendment to the Rule 5.  
 
22     The Committee was informed that the main hurdles in implementation of 
the Rules by the Urban Local Bodies  (ULB) in the St ate was lack of 
financial resources with the ULBs. The State Government accordingly 
recommended amendments in the Rules/Sc hedules to facilitate their phased 
implementation starting from the bigge r municipalities. The norms for the 
smaller cities should be relaxed c onsidering their limited resources. The 
amendments to the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2000 as proposed by the State Government of Gujrat is enclosed as 
(Annexure X) 
 
23     In the light of the discussions held with the State Governments along 
with the Ministry of Environment & Forests, the matter was pursued with 
the Ministry of Environment & Forest s. After a couple of reminders, the 
Ministry furnished their replies on 24
th April, 2007 (Annexure XI). 

 18
 
24    From the replies the Committee wa s informed that the Government had 
constituted a Committee to recommend amendments to the Rules including 
the modification in the Schedule I re garding the compliance of the Rules 
and to provide the periodicity of inspections under Rules 5 and 6.. It was 
also informed of the proposal to include punitive provisions under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, upon non-compliance of Rules.  The 
Committee observed distinct disjoint in the stands taken by the Center and 
the State Governments on operational issues.  
 
25     Considering the specific requirem ents of the solid waste management in 
the urban centers in hill areas, the Committee decided to hear the 
representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests, State 
Government of Himachal Pradesh and Municipal authorities of Shimla and 
Manali on 12
th June, 2009 and 16 th June, 2009, respectively. Study notes 
were prepared on the discussions at the two places. (Annexures XII and 
XIII). 
 
26      The Schedule III of the Rules has specific provision for the hilly areas. It 
has been provided that the municipal au thorities in such areas shall set up 
processing facilities for utilization of  biodegradable organic waste. The 
inert and non-degradable waste shall be  used in building roads or filling up 
appropriate areas on the hi lls. Because of constrai nts in finding adequate 
land in hilly areas, waste not suitable fo r road laying or filling up shall be 
disposed off in specially designed landfills.  
 
27      The Committee was informed that  the State Government had put a ban 
on the usage of plastic bags. A project  to use polythene waste in cement 
kilns was under submission to the Central Pollution Control Board. Further 
four roads have been identified by the PWD for the use of plastic waste in 

 19
road construction. The project propos al in this respect was under 
submission for financial assistance.  
 
28     The Committee was informed that in Himachal Pradesh only Shimla was 
covered under the JNNURM. Further entire  land in State was classified as 
forest, therefore as per the Forest Conservation Act, it can not be put to any 
non-forest use. As such the urban areas  were finding it difficult to dispose 
off non-bio-degradable urban waste, hence there was a problem of illegal 
dumping of urban debris in forest area.   
 
29     The Committee noted the demand to  cover more municipalities under 
JNNURM. The massive tourist influx imposed greater burden on the fragile 
ecology of the hilly State. The Committ ee noted that municipalities and the 
State Government faced financial constr aints and technological handicap in 
managing and processing the munici pal waste without disturbing the 
ecology.  
 
30     The Ministry of Environment a nd Forest informed the Committee that 
out of 56 municipalities, 41 were given authorizati on for setting up 
municipal solid waste management fac ility. However, none of those have 
been developed.  
 
31    As for the financial constraint faced by the municipalities, the Committee 
was informed that the Twelfth Finance Commission recommended 
devolution of grants of Rs. 5000 cror es to the Urban Local bodies during 
the period of 2005-2010 out of which half i.e. Rs 2500 crores was to be 
devolved exclusively for management  of municipal solid waste in 
accordance with these Rules.   
 

 20
32    Upon inquiring about the amendm ents that were supposed to be 
recommended by the Committee set up by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest in 2007, the Ministry in its reply of the 4th November 2009, informed 
that the proposed amendments were still in the Draft Stage.  
 
 
General observation and recommendations of the Committee
 
 
33 Considering the tardy implementation of Rules and having analysed the relevant 
inputs and interactions with the Union Mini stry of Environment and Forest and the 
representatives of the select State G overnments, the Committee observes the 
following: 
 
34 The Committee, though in broad ag reement with the objectives of the 
Rules, considers that these Rules are no t in keeping with our Constitutional 
Scheme. The solid waste management is  included in Twelfth Schedule to the 
Constitution and Article 243W, empowers  the State Legislatures to frame 
legislations in respect of subjects incl uded in Twelfth Schedule. As such waste 
management is the primary responsib ility of the Municipal corporations/ 
Municipalities. 
 
35 The Committee also noted with concern that the State laws in respect of 
solid waste management were neither adeq uate nor effective.  The Committee 
is also aware of the financial and t echnological constraints faced by the 
Municipalities in implementing these Ru les, as was submitted by most of the 
State Governments before the Committee. 
 
36. The Committee also recognizes that the Union Government has framed 
these Rules under Section 3 of the Envi ronment ( Protection) Act, 1986, which 
bestows upon it sweeping powers to “ take  all such measures as is necessary or 
expedient for the purposes of prot ecting and improving the quality of 
environment and preventing, contro lling and abating environmental 
pollution”.  
 
37 During the meetings, the representa tives of the Central Government, 
however,  expressed inability for reaso ns not known to the Committee, to 
provide financial support or subsidy to the municipalities for the purposes of 
these Rules.  
 

 21
38 The Committee is at a loss to find a situation where the states/municipalities 
are required to implement Rules made  by the Central Government but 
without necessary financial, physical a nd technical support, which, as we all 
know, they can ill-afford. In such a scenario, the position of solid waste 
management in the country is pa thetic.  The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the Central Government should engage the State 
Governments and municipalities to a ddress the issue of funding through a 
mutually agreed institutionalised mechanism.  
 
39 The Committee is also of the view th at the Rules prescribe a complex and 
disjointed system of monitoring at District, State and Central levels. The 
elected bodies like municipalities are made accountable to Central and State 
Governments and the collateral authorit y like District Magistrate/Deputy 
Commissioner. As such the above structure is top heavy where single 
implementing agency is supposed to implement the rules without much 
resources and is accountable to layers of monitoring agencies. Such inverted 
system is perilous for the implementati on. The rules have identified District 
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner as res ponsible for the implementation, 
without providing for delegation of power. The Committee wonders if the 
DM/DC beyond their routine revenue/administrative duties can monitor the 
implementation. Committee’s apprehensi ons are justified by the state of 
affairs in the Districts.   
 
40 The lack of earnestness in implementati on is reflected in the fact that the 
municipalities have repeatedly missed the deadlines as prescribed in Schedule 
I of the Rules. The Committee has been  informed that the Government now 
proposes to amend the Schedule I to extend the deadline till 2012. The 
Committee finds it unacceptable that the Rules framed in the year 2000 would 
not be implemented till 2012. The Committee recommends that the 
Government must take all the necessary measures as prescribed in Section 3 of 
the parent Act, to ensure that the proposed deadline of 2012 is not missed 
 
41 The Committee notes that the Ministry had prepared an Action Plan for 
the phase-wise implementation of these Rules. However, the Rules themselves 
did not provide for such phased implementation. The Action Plan also provide 
for a complex network of advisory and regulatory structure at the State and 
Centre levels which is extraneous to what has been provided in the Rules.
  
.  
 
42 The Committee also acknowledges that wi th the urbanization, it is difficult 
to find landfill sites for ever increasing volumes of solid waste. It has to be 
appreciated by the concern ed Governments that in  the interest of public 
health, such landfill sites should be loca ted at distant isolated places. However 
, the experience shows that with time urban settlement expands up to these 

 22
landfill sites. The existing Rules must provide for a safe buffer between such 
land fill sites and the human settlement . The Committee also feels that it is 
equally important that the facility of  composting and reprocessing of waste 
should be concurrently developed so as to evacuate the landfill sites. 
 
43 The Committee also recommends that the solid waste management and 
reprocessing should be an integral part of the present and future urban 
development and renewal schemes and programmes. And the finances out of 
these schemes/programmes should be de volved to the municipalities to fund 
the solid waste management and reprocessing.  
 
44 The solid waste management and re processing would require capital 
intensive technology. Going by the current status, the Committee is dissatisfied 
with the performance of Central Polluti on Control Board and State Pollution 
Control Boards, that were supposed to  provide technical support to the 
municipalities. The Committee recomme nds that the CPCB should present 
annual status report regarding implementation of Rules, to the Parliament. 
 
45 The Committee made an appraisal of the Action Plan prescribed by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest a nd the amendments suggested by the 
Government of Gujrat. However, the Committee noted that these pragmatic 
suggestions have not been included in the Draft Amendment Rules. 
 
46 The Committee recommends that the ex perience of last ten years in the 
implementation of the Rules should be reflected in the proposed amendments. 
As such the financial, administrative and technical constraints faced by the 
State Government should be addressed in the amendments. 
 
47 The Committee recommends that the Government consider the above 
observations made by the Committee to  incorporate the same in the Draft 
Amendment Rules, it proposes to bring.  
 
 
 
 
 