  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND FORTY NINTH REPORT 
  
(Presented on 19th August, 2003) 
                                                                          
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
August, 2003/Sravana, 1925 (Saka) 
 
CONTENTS 
   1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
   2. INTRODUCTION 
   3. REPORT 
   I. The Press Council Act, 1978----Implementation of 109th Report of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha  
  II. The Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation Rules, 2000----
Implementation of the 138th Report of the Committee  
 III. The Jute Manufactures Development Council(Procedural) Rules, 1984----
Implementation of 136th Report of the Committee 
 IV. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of 
Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000. 
  V. The Railways (Opening for public Carriage of Passengers) Rules, 2000  
 VI. The Companies (Issue of Share Capital with Differential Voting Rights) Rules, 
2001. 
VII. Summary of recommendations 
 4. MINUTES 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 26TH JUNE, 2003) 
   1.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan------Chairman 
   2.  Shri Kapil Sibal 
   3.  Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
   4.  Dr. A. R. Kidwai 
   5.  Shri G. K. Vasan 
   6.  Shri B.P. Singhal 

   7.  Shri Dina Nath Mishra 
   8.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
   9.  Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
10.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
11.  Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
12.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
13.  Shri Drupad Borgohain 
14.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
15.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh 'Lalan' 
       
SECRETARIAT 
   1.  Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Secretary 
   2.  Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
   3.  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
   4.  Shri Arun Sharma, Committee Officer 
 
INTRODUCTION 
       I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Forty Ninth Report of the Committee. 
1.2The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on 7 th August, 
2003. 
1.3The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, related therewith, along with Governments comments 
received thereon. The observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the 
Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
  
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN 
Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha 
 
REPORT 
I 
THE  PRESS  COUNCIL  ACT,  1978 ---- IMPLEMENTATION  OF  109TH 
REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION, 
RAJYA  SABHA 
      The Committee examined framing of the subordinate legistation under the Press 
Council Act, 1978 and in its 57th Report, presented to the House on the 22nd December, 
1983. recommended as under: 
"20.      The Committee recommends that in case where multiple agencies are 
involved in the matter of finalisation of rules, the practice should be to call the 
representatives of all the concerned Ministries, Departments, etc. simultaneously, 
round the table, for discussion instead of writing to one authority or the other. Such 

a meeting may be repeated if necessary for speedy decisions and expeditious 
finalisation of the rules and regulatons. 
21.The Committee finds it difficult to agree with the Gove rnment's plea that in the 
absence of regulations duly framed by the Press Council, and approved by 
Government, there was no vacuum in so far as conditions of services of the Council's 
employees were concerned and that until the regulations are so made and notified 
the conditions of service governing the Central Government employees were being 
applied to the Council's employees. The Committee feels that the Press Council has 
a specific and autonomous role to perform and conditions of service of its employees 
have to be drawn up independently in consonance with the nature of its functions. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the rules and regulations for 
the Press Council's employees be finalised with utmost expeditiousness, eliminating 
all delay."  
2.   The Committee, in its 109th Report, presented to the House on the 29th May, 1995, 
took an adverse note of the very slow pace of the action being taken on its above 
recommendations by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The Committee 
reiterated its earlier recommendations stating that the Ministry should frame the 
regulations relating to service conditions of the employees of the Press Council of India 
(PCI) under Section 26 of the Press Council Act, 1978 expeditiously. 
3.   In response, the Ministry in their communication dated the 2nd August, 1995 accepted 
the Committee's recommendations and stated that efforts were being made to implement 
the same. The Ministry sought extension of time up to the 31 st July, 1996 vide their 
subsequent communication dated the 8 th July 1996. Being not able to get a satisfactory 
reply from the Ministry despite exchange of a number of communications, the Chairman 
of the Committee, on the 22nd June, 2000, addressed a letter to the then Minister of State 
for Infor mation & Broadcasting drawing his attention to the Committee's 
recommendations on the subject in the past and requesting for expediting action thereon. 
In response thereto, the Hon'ble Minister vide, communication dated the 6th September, 
2000, responded as follows : 
       "I would like to assure you that this Ministry has been making continuous efforts 
to finalize the regulations in consultation with the Press Council of India. The 
provisions of Section 26 of the Press Council Act enjoin upon the Press Co uncil of 
India to frame regulations, specifying the terms and conditions of service of its 
employees, with the approval of the Ministry. Time and again, the proposals have 
been examined and forwarded to the Press Council of India for notification but no 
finality could be reached. Despite several inter -ministerial meetings, the areas of 
difference have narrowed down but have not been eliminated. It will be appreciated 
that if the regulations have to be framed in consultation with the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and the Ministry of Finance, then they will have to 
conform to the pattern that exists for employees of other autonomous bodies. 
       I would like to suggest that the Committee should direct the Council, which is 
directly responsible for taking action in terms of the statute, to notify the regulations 
as approved by the Ministry. Minor differences, if any that remain, can be discussed 
separately and suitably incorporated later on." 
4.   Thereafter, in pursuance to a communication, a backg round note was received from 
the Press Council of India on the subject on the 3rd November, 2000 (Annexure I) wherein 
it was explained that the Council prepared the draft regulations for regulating the terms 
and conditions of service of its employees and forwarded the same to the Ministry as early 
as in 1982 but no clearance could be received due to absence of consensus on some of its 

provisions. The Council, in between, revised the regulations in 1997 and again in early 
2000 and forwarded the same to the M inistry for clearance but there was no positive 
response from the Ministry. 
 5.  Keeping in view the status of the matter, the Committee heard the representatives of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as well as the Press Council of India on the 
8th January, 2001. During the course of the oral evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, explained to the Committee the points on which there was 
a difference of opinion with the Press Council of India resulting in delay in finalization of 
the rules. According to the Ministry of Finance, autonomous bodies funded by the 
Government could not be allowed to create posts and fix pay scales of their own, without 
the concurrence of the Government. Another point on which there was a diffe rence of 
opinion was that the Press Council wanted their employees to be given the benefit of 
pension but, in the opinion of the Ministry of Finance, this could not be done through 
regulations without Government's concurrence. On the contrary, Secretary, t he Press 
Council of India, while pleading the cause of autonomy for the Council, pointed out that 
the Council had already more or less conceded to all the objections of the Ministry with 
regard to the provisions of the draft regulations and it was not poss ible for them to 
concede to a total abrogation of its powers which have been conferred upon the Council 
by the Parliament. The Council, being a quasi -judicial body, could not be reduced to an 
appendage of the Government of India or treated as a subordinate /attached office of the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. In support of this contention of the Press 
Council of India, the Committee's attention was also invited towards the provisions of 
Rule 8 and 8A of the Press Council of India Rules. Rule 8 stip ulated that the employees 
of the Council would enjoy the same terms and conditions of service and rights and 
privileges as the employees of the Central Government. Later on, Rule 8A had been 
inserted in the rules which provided that all proposals relating to emoluments, structure 
including adoption of pay scales, allowances and revision of scales and creation of the 
posts, where maximum of the pay scales exceeded Rs. 15,200/ - per month, shall be made 
only with the prior approval of the Central Government. T he contention of the 
representatives of the Press Council of India before the Committee was that the 
conditions being spelt out by the Ministry of Finance were a direct negation of the 
provision of Rule 8A. 
6.   The Committee, after hearing the view point of the Government as well as the Press 
Council of India, directed the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to 
send a note giving the extent to which Government were agreeable for allowing financial 
autonomy to the Press Council of India. The  Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, agreed to furnish the note by the first week of Ferbruary, 2001. 
7.   In the absence of any substantial response from the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, the Committee again heard the represen tatives of Information and 
Broadcasting as well as the Press Council of India on the 28 th January, 2002. The 
Committee, at the outset, took a strong exception on the failure to furnish the promised 
note on the financial autonomy even after the lapse of almost one year. During the course 
of oral evidence, the Committee was apprised of the efforts made by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcating for arriving at a consensus on the pending issues of the 
Press Council of India. It was stated that the Ministry were trying their level best to sort 
out the issues and, in fact, the difference of opinion had really narrowed down on the 
question of freedom to be given to the Press Council of India to create posts. In this 
context, the Ministry of Finance had gone al ong with the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to a very large extent by agreeing that if the Press Council of India effected 
matching savings in respect of the salaries, they could create posts meaning thereby that 

the Press Council of India could create some posts by abolishing some other posts so that 
there were matching savings. But, the Press Council of India wanted some more flexibility 
in this regard by allowing them to show matching savings under the other Heads and not 
necessarily under sala ry Head as otherwise they would not be able to create any new 
posts. 
8.   The Committee finally asked the Secretary, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to furnish a note within ten days stating the extent to which they can agree 
to the view point of the Press Council of India and within what time the pending issues 
would be resolved. 
9.   In response to the oral evidence, the Ministry of Information and Broadcating vide 
their communication dated the 7 th February, 2002 furnished a detailed note giving the 
action taken by Government for resolving the outstanding issues as well as a comparative 
statement on the points under dispute in respect of the service regulation of the PCI 
Employees giving inter alia  the proposal of the Ministry, the counter proposa l of the 
Chairman, PCI and the proposal as approved by the Ministry of Finance (Annexure-II). 
In continuation of the status note, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on the 12th 
February, 2002 informed that the Ministry of Finance had agreed to the following 
formulation :- 
      ".... the Council may create other posts by effecting matching savings primarily 
from saving from salaries, but if the requirement of the post is extremely urgent, then 
from any head in the budget. 
      The powers to create such posts by the Council shall be subject to and be exercised 
in accordance with the General Financial Rules, 1963. Delegation of the Financial 
Powers Rules, 1978 and the extant orders/instructions of the Finance Ministry issued 
from time to time on the subject". 
10.On the 22nd October, 2002, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished a 
copy of the Gazette notification containing the Press Council of India (Terms of Service 
of Employees) Regulation, 2002. 
11.The Committee notes that the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting have finally 
been able to publish the Press Council of India (Terms of Service of Employees) 
Regulation, 2002. The Committee is, however, pained over the long delay that has taken 
place in this whole exercise despite its constant pursuance. The Committee would have 
appreciated if the initiative taken by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
during the last 2-3 years had been taken earlier, in which case, the regulations would 
have come in place much earlier. 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
The Press Council Act, 1978----Implementation of 109th Report of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
      The Press Council of India is a statutory autono mous body established by the Press 
Council of India Act, 1978 (37 of 1978) for the purpose of preserving the freedom of the 
Press and maintaining and improving the standards of newspapers and news agencies in 
India. The Council is not only independent of g overnment control, but exercises quasi -
judicial authority by virtue of the provisions of the above mentioned Act. Its functions 
are governed by the rules which the Govt. has to make in consultation with it once the 
Council is established. The Council is al so empowered to make regulations, not 

inconsistent with the Act and the Rules, regarding its functioning in respect of the matters 
enumerated in clauses (a) to (e) of Section 26 of the Act. As far as the employees of the 
Council are concerned, however, clause (b) and the proviso to Section 26 read with sub -
section (2) of Section 11 of the Press Council Act provide that the Council may make 
regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the Rules, specifying the terms and 
conditions of service of the employees appointed by the Council under sub -section (2) of 
Section 11 with the prior approval of the Central Government. The terms and conditions 
of such employees shall by determined by the said regulations. 
      In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b ) and the proviso to Section 26 read 
with sub-secton (2) of Section 11 of the Press Council Act, The Press Council of India 
(Terms & Conditions of Service of the Employees) Regulations were drafted by the 
Council. The said draft Service Regulations were fo rwarded by the Secretariat of the 
Council, specifying the terms and conditions of service of its employees, way back in the 
year 1982 to the Government of India in the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting for 
its prior approval, before notifying the same  in the Official Gazette. The said approval 
has yet to be received by the Press Council on account of the fact that despite several Inter 
- Ministerial meetings held from time to time between the officers of the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting, the Ministry of Finance and the Council to discuss and sort 
out the matter, no consensus could be arrived at on some of the regulations. At this 
juncture, it would be pertinent to reproduce certain observations from the 57th Report 
of the Committee on Subordin ate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, presented to the House on 
22nd December, 1983 after examining the Press Council Act, 1978. 
21."The Committee finds it difficult to agree with the Government's plea that in the 
absence of regulations duly framed by the Press Co uncil, and approved by 
Government, there was no vacuum in so far as conditions of services of the Council's 
employees were concerned and that until the regulations are so made and notified 
the conditions of service governing the Central Government employee s were being 
applied to the Council's employees. The Committee feels that the Press Council has 
a specific and autonomous role to perform and conditions of service of its employees 
have to be drawn up independently in consonance with the nature of its functions...." 
      Subsequently, the Committee on Subordinate Legislation in its meeting held on 9th 
August 1995, expressed a deep sense of anguish over the situation that the government 
had taken nearly ten years in approving the regulations relating to the  terms and 
conditions of service of the employees of the Council despite the Committee having 
forwarded extracts of its Reports to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on 11th 
January, 1984. This was followed by the 109th Report of the Committee on S ubordinate 
Legislation presented to the House on 29.5.1995 wherein the Committee reiterated the 
observations made by it in the 57th Report, strongly recommending the notification of 
the draft service regulations at the earliest. 
      An Inter-Ministerial meeting was accordingly held on 1.8.1997 and the secretariat of 
the Council, as per the outcome of the said meeting, once again sent the draft regulation 
to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting for its approval and thereafter notifying 
the same in the Official Gazette. A similar exercise was repeated by the Council after the 
Ministry again asked the Council to amend certain provision in the draft regulations, and 
on 24.1.2000 revised draft regulations were yet again sent to the Ministry. The approval 
of the Ministry concerned is, however, yet awaited. 
      It appears to the Press Council that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is 
desirous of curtailing the powers of the Council with regard to the creation of posts and 
amendment of the schedu le as incorporated in regulation 3(2). Regulation 3(2) reads as 
follows: 

"3(2)    The Council may make such amendments in the Schedule from the time to 
time as it thinks necessary, provided all proposals relating to emolument structure, 
including adoption of pay scales, allowances, and revision of pay scales, allowances 
and revision thereof, and creation of posts where the maximum stage of a pay scale 
exceeds Rs.15,200/- per month, shall be made with the prior approval of the Central 
Government". 
      It may be pointed out the Regulation 3(2) has its genesis in Rules 8 and 8A of the Press 
Council Rules, 1979 framed by the Central Government. Rule 8 stipulates that the 
employees of the Council shall enjoy the same terms and conditions of service and rights 
and privileges as the employees of the Central Government. By Notification dated 
2/8/1998, in exercise of the powers conferred on it by Section 25 of the Press Council Act, 
the Central Government, in consultation with the Press Council, inserted Rule 8A to the 
Press Council Rules, which reads as follows:- 
"8A(1) All proposals relating to emolument structure including adoption of pay 
scales, allowances, and revision of scales, allowances and revision thereof, and 
creation of posts where the maximum of pay scale exceeds Rs. 15,200/- p.m., shall be 
made only with the prior approval of the Central Government." 
      A bare reading of Rules 8 and 8A shows that, harmoniously construed, the effect of 
the said rules is that the Parliament in its wisdom gave autonomy to the Council in respect 
of the emolument structure, etc., of its employees, where the maximum of pay scale was 
below Rs. 4,500/- p.m. (i.e. Rs. 15,200/- p.m. under the Fifth Central pay Commission). In 
view thereof, regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of Rule 8A cannot 
be framed; nor can any executive instruction issued by the Ministry of Finance or by any 
other Ministry override the express provision of the Act and the Rules framed by the 
Legislature. Any attempt to do so will not  only have the effect of undermining the 
administrative autonomy granted to the Council by the Parliament having faith in its 
judiciousness, but will be contrary to the mandate of the legislature. 
      It is relevant to point out at this stage that the Co uncil has not resorted to 
indiscriminate augmentation of staff despite the onerous increase in its workload and its 
staff growth over the past 20 years has been quite meager. The Council has also more or 
less conceded to all the objections of the Ministry with regard to draft service regulations. 
The Council cannot, however, concede to a total abrogation of its powers, the Parliament 
having provided for the autonomy of the Council, nor it can consent to being treated as a 
subordinate/attached office of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. This would 
reduce the Council to an appendage of the Government of India and altogether negate its 
functioning, which as stated above, is of a quasi -judicial nature and is meant to ensure 
the freedom of the press. 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Developments in the matter of finalisation of service regulations 
of  PCI employees during the last one year 
      In view of delay in finalisation of service regulations of PCI employees, Chairman of 
the Raj ya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation, had in June 2000, desired 
intervention of the then IBM for resolving the deadlock. The IBM met the Chairman, 
PCI, but on finding that agreement was not becoming possible, he replied in September, 
2000 that the Committee may direct the Press Council to notify regulations as approved 
by the Government. On 8th January, 2001, Secretary (I&B) and Secretary, PCI were 
called to appear before the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation for 

explaining the reasons for delay in finalization of service regulations. The Committee was 
agreeable to issue the directions for notifying such regulations, as they find reasonable, 
provided both the Government and PCI undertake to abide by such directions. As the 
matter regarding creation of posts and Fixation of pay scales pertained to Ministry of 
Finance and Deptt. of Personnel & Training, no commitment was given by Secretary 
(I&B) to the Committee. The Committee desired this Ministry to indicate the extent of 
financial autonomy in regard to creation of posts and determination of pay scales, which 
could be granted to the Press Council. Besides, they also desired to know as to whether 
powers for creation of posts and determining pay scales can be made available to PCI to 
the extent it raises resources itself. 
      In pursuance thereof, on 10th January, 2001, Secretary (I&B) wrote to Secretary 
(Expenditure) and Secretary (DP&T) regarding giving a commitment to the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation in the matter of direction s to be given by the Committee 
regarding power to create posts and fixation of pay scales. DP&T informed that the 
matter essentially concerned Ministry of Finance. On 1st February 2001, Ministry of 
Finance informed that the regulations to be issued in resp ect of PCI are required to be 
consistent with the Govt. policy with regard to statutory/autonomous bodies, as contained 
in Deptt. of Expenditure's O.M. of 15th October, 84 and 15th April, 94. These O.Ms. 
defined the limits of autonomy to be granted to autonomous bodies in matters concerning 
creation of posts and determining pay scales. M/o Finance advised that the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation may keep these guidelines in view while giving any directions 
and it would not be desirable to deviate from general guidelines in respect of Press 
Council. On 23rd February, 2001, Secretary (I&B) discussed the issue with Chairman, 
PCI. During the meeting, Chairman, PCI was willing to place the concerns of the 
Government regarding the power to create posts before  the Council and was also 
agreeable to the suggestion that reference to the power to decide the emolument structure 
of PCI employees be deleted in the draft regulations. The Chairman suggested as a via 
media that while in principle the Government should agree to retain the power to create 
posts in the proposed regulations with the Council as provided in Rule 8A of Press 
Council Rules, a rider could be added that this power would be exercised with the prior 
approval of the Govt. whenever orders banning creation of posts are in force. Taking this 
as a reasonable suggestion, Secretary (I&B) forwarded modified regulations prepared 
accordingly (column 3 of the annexure) to Secretary (Expenditure) on 5th March 2001, 
for concurrence of Ministry of Finance. On 28th May, 2001, Ministry of Finance conveyed 
their concurrence to the proposed regulations. Immediately, thereafter, Chairman, PCI 
was requested by Secretary (I&B) to confirm discussions of 23rd February, 2001. On 12th 
June, 2001, the former Chairman, PCI infor med that there had been some 
misunderstanding about the discussions and that there was no question of the Council 
seeking prior approval from the Government for creation of posts at all levels, nor can 
there be any question of modification of the proposed regulation 3(2) as this would 
amount to total negation of the autonomy granted to the Council. He further mentioned 
that the maximum extent to which the Council may perhaps agree to vary the regulations 
is that it may consent to informing the Government about the creation of posts during the 
period the ban on creation of posts exists. 
      On 8th August, 2001, the present Chairman of Press Council, Shri Justice K. 
Jayachandra Reddy joined. Secretary (I&B) discussed the matter with the Chairman, 
PCI on 19th  September 2001. On 1st November, 2001, Chairman, PCI handed over a 
revised version of disputed service regulations (column 4 of the annexure) which was 
examined in the Ministry and slightly modified regulations (column 5 of the annexure) 
were sent to Chairman, PCI for confirmation. On 28th November, 2001, Chairman, PCI 
while agreeing to the formulation of regulations mentioned about changing the words 

'expenditure on salaries' to 'expenditure or salaries'. The draft regulations as suggested 
by Ministry and  corrected by Chairman, PCI did not find favour with Ministry of 
Finance. Secretary (I&B) discussed the matter with Secretary (Expenditure) and 
accordingly, on 25th January 2002, Ministry of Finance has agreed to the service 
regulations as indicated in column 7 of the annexure. 
          PCI has however not agreed to this as evident from the deliberations during the 
evidence of Secretary (I&B) and Secretary, PCI before the Rajya Sabha Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation on 28th January, 2002. The Committee has given ten days time 
to convey to them the final position of the Government on the matter. Secretary (I&B) 
had immediately moved Secretary (Expenditure) to consider that for creation of posts 
in PCI, matching savings may be offered primarily from savings from salaries, but, if 
the requirement of a post is extremely urgent, from any head in the budget and to delete 
the condition requiring that the posts against which matching savings are shown be 
vacant for less than one year. As desired, the crux of the sentiments expressed by the 
Hon'ble Members of the Committee were also brought to the notice of the Finance 
Ministry with the request that they be brought to the notice of the authority competent 
to take a decision in the matter. Response is awaited. 
Comparative Statement on points of dispute in respect of Service Regulations of PCI 
employees 
Proposal Submitted 
by PCI in June 
2000 
  
  
  
               (2) 
(1)     The strength 
of the posts under 
the Council and 
scales of pay 
attached to the 
posts shall be as 
specified in the 
Schedule. 
  
(2)     The Council 
may make such 
amendments in 
the Schedule 
from time to time 
as it 
thinks  necessary, 
provided all 
proposals 
relating to 
emolument 
Proposal as per 
discussions of 
23.2.2001 of 
Secretary (I&B) 
& Chairman PCI 
               (3) 
(1)     The 
strength of the 
posts under the 
Council and 
scales of pay 
attached to the 
posts shall be as 
specified in the 
Schedule. 
(2)     Subject to 
Government's 
orders banning 
creation of 
posts and 
orders fixing 
the emoluments 
of employees, 
the Council 
may make such 
amendments in 
the Schedule 
from time to 
Draft proposal 
given by Chairman, 
PCI in November 
2001 
  
  
               (4) 
(1)     The strength 
of the posts under 
the Council and 
scales of pay 
attached to the 
posts shall be as 
specified in the  
Schedule. 
(2)     The Council 
may make such 
amendments in 
the Schedule 
from time to time 
as it 
thinks  necessary, 
provided all 
proposals 
relating to 
emolument 
structure 
including 
Proposal as modiffied 
by Ministry 
  
  
               (5) 
(1)     The strength of 
the posts under the 
Council and scales of 
pay attached to the 
posts shall be as 
specified in the 
Schedule. 
(2)     The Council may 
make such 
amendments in the 
Schedule from time 
to time as it 
thinks  necessary, 
provided all 
proposals relating to 
emolument structure 
including adoption of 
pay scales, 
allowances, and 
revision of pay scales, 
and allowances and 
revision thereof, and 
creation of posts 
Counter proposal by 
Chairman, PCI 
  
  
  
               (6) 
(1)     The strength of 
the posts under the 
Council and sc ales 
of pay attached to 
the posts shall be 
as specified in the 
Schedule. 
(2)     The Council 
may make such 
amendments in the 
Schedule from 
time to time as it 
thinks  necessary, 
provided all 
proposals relating 
to emolument 
structure 
including adoption 
of pa y scales, 
allowances, and 
revision of pay 
scales,   allowances 
Proposal as approved by 
Ministry of Finance 
  
               (7) 
(1)     The strength of the posts 
under the Council and scales 
of pay attached to the posts 
shall be as specified in the 
Schedule. 
(2)     The Council may make 
such amendments in the 
Schedule from time to time 
as it thinks   necessary, 
provided all proposals 
relating to emolument 
structure including 
adoption of pay scales, 
allowances, and revision of 
pay 
scales,  and  allowances  and 
revision thereof, and 
creation of posts where the 
maximum of pay scale 
exceeds Rs. 15,200/ - per 
month, shall  be made with 
the prior approval of the 
Central Government 
provided        further that 

structure 
including 
adoption of pay 
scales, 
allowances, and 
revision of pay 
scales, allowances 
and revision 
thereof, and 
creation of posts 
where the 
maximum stage 
of a pay scale 
exceeds 
Rs.15,200/- per 
month, shall be 
made with the 
prior approval of 
the Central 
Government 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Provided that the 
power of creation 
of posts shall be 
exercised by the 
Council itself and 
that the Council 
shall not delegate 
this power to 
Chairman, 
time as it thinks 
necessary, 
provided that 
all proposals 
relating to 
emolument 
structure 
including 
adoption of pay 
scales, 
allowances, and 
revision 
thereof, and 
creation of 
posts where the 
maximum of 
pay scale 
exceeds 
Rs.15,200/- per 
month, shall be 
made with the 
prior approval 
of the Central 
Government 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Provided that 
the power of 
creation of posts 
shall be 
exercised by the 
Council itself 
and that the 
Council shall not 
delegate this 
power t o 
Chairman, 
Secretary or any 
other Officer. 
  
adoption of pay 
scales, 
allowances, and 
revision of pay 
scales, allowances 
and revision 
thereof, and 
creation of posts 
where the 
maximum stage 
of a pay scale 
exceeds Rs. 
15,200/- per 
month, shall be 
made with the 
prior approval of 
the Central 
Government 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Provided that the 
power of creation 
of posts shall be 
exercised by the 
Council itself and 
that the Council 
shall not delegate 
this power to 
Chairman, 
Secretary or any 
other Officer. 
  
  
  
  
  
where the maximum 
of pay scale 
exceedsRs. 15,200/ - 
per month, shall be 
made with the prior 
approval of the 
Central Government 
provided         further 
that proposed 
alterations in the 
scale of pay shall not 
adversely affect the 
interest of any 
persons working 
against such posts. 
  
Further, the Council 
may create other posts 
by effecting matching 
savings, the 
expenditure on 
Salaries or against 
vacant posts without 
approval of the 
Government but 
under intimation to it. 
  
  
  
The power to create 
such other posts by the 
Council shall be 
subject to and be 
exercised in 
accordance with 
General Financial 
Rules, 1963, 
Delegagion of 
Financial Powers 
Rules, 1978 and extant 
orders/instructions of 
the Finance Ministry 
issued from time to 
time on the subject. 
  
(2)     The allowances 
indicated in sub -
regulation (1) shall be 
drawn at such rates and 
subject to such 
conditions as laid down 
by the Central 
and revision 
thereof, and 
creation of posts 
where the 
maximum of pay 
scale exceeds Rs. 
15,200/- per 
month, shall be 
made with the 
prior approval of 
the Central 
Government 
provided further 
that         proposed 
alterations in the 
scale of pay shall 
not adversely 
affect the interest 
of any persons 
working against 
such posts. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Further, the 
Council may create 
other posts by 
effecting matching 
savings, the 
expenditure or 
Salaries or against 
vacant posts 
without approval of 
the Government 
but under 
intimation to it. 
  
  
  
  
  
The power to create 
such other posts by 
the Council shall be 
subject to and be 
proposed alterations in the 
scale of pay shall not 
adversely affect the interest 
of any persons working 
against such posts. 
  
Further, the Council may 
create other post s by 
effecting matching savings in 
the expenditure on Salaries 
or against posts vacant for 
less than one year without the 
approval of the Government 
but under intimation to it. 
  
The power to create such 
other posts by the Council 
shall be subject to and b e 
exercised in accordance with 
the General Financial Rules, 
1963, Delegagion of 
Financial   Power Rules, 1978 
and extant 
orders/instructions of the 
Finance Ministry issued from 
time to time on the subject. 
  
   Same as in column (5) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Secretary or any 
other Officer. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Provided further 
that the alterations 
in the scales of pay 
shall not adversely 
affect t he interest 
of any persons 
working against 
such posts. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(2)     The 
allowances 
indicated in sub -
regulation (1) 
shall be drawn at 
such rates and 
subject to such 
conditions as laid 
down by the 
Central 
Government for 
its employees 
from time to 
time. 
  
Provided that the 
emolument 
structure of the 
employees of the 
Council (relating 
to pay and 
conditions of 
  
  
  
  
  
Provided 
further that the 
alterations in the 
scales of pay 
shall not 
adversely affect 
the interest of 
any  
persons working 
against such 
posts. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(2)     The 
allowances 
indicated in 
sub-regulation 
(1) shall be 
drawn at such 
rates and 
subject to such 
conditions as 
laid down by 
the Central 
Government 
for its 
employees from 
time to time. 
  
Provided that 
the emolument 
structure of the 
employees of the 
Council 
(relating to pay 
and conditions 
of service) shall 
  
Provided further 
that the alterations 
in the scales of pay 
shall not adversely 
affect the  interest 
of any persons 
working against 
such posts. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(2)     The 
allowances 
indicated in sub -
regulation (1) 
shall be drawn at 
such rates and 
subject to such 
conditions as laid 
down by the 
Central 
Government for 
its employees 
from time to 
time. 
  
Provided that the 
emolument 
structure of the 
employees of the 
Council (relating 
to pay and 
conditions of 
service) are 
exactly the same as 
are applicable to 
Central 
Government 
employees. 
  
  
  
Government for its 
employees from time to 
time. 
  
Provided that the 
emolument structure 
of the employees of the 
Council (relating to 
pay and conditions of 
service) shall be as 
made applicable by the 
Central 
Government  for 
autonomous 
organizations from 
time to time 
The pay scales of the 
employees of the 
Council shall be as 
made applicable by the 
Central Government 
for autonomous 
organizations from 
time to time 
exercised in 
accordance with 
General Financial 
Rules,    1963, 
Delegation of 
Financial Powers 
Rules, 1978 and 
extant 
orders/instructions 
of the Finance 
Ministry issued 
from time to time on 
the subject. 
  
  
   None 
     
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   None 
  
  
  
  
  
  
     Same as in column (5) 
  
  
  
  
  

service) are 
exactly the same as 
are applicable to 
Central 
Government 
employees. 
  
  
  
  
  
(2)     The pay scales 
of the  employees 
of the Council 
shall be on the 
pattern of pay 
scales of Central 
Government 
employees. 
  
be as made 
applicable by the 
Central 
Government  for 
autonomous 
organizations 
from time to 
time 
  
  
(2)     The pay 
scales of the 
employees of the 
Council shall be 
as made 
applicable by the 
Central 
Government for 
autonomous 
organizations 
from time to time 
  
(2)     The pay 
scales of the 
employees of the 
Council shall be on 
the pattern of pay 
scales of Central 
Government 
employees. 
  
Foot Note :  Recruitment Rules for various posts in PCI are yet to be finalized. PCI had sent the 
draft Recruitment Rules for the posts in the end of April 2001, PCI was advised 
to provide copies of Recruitment Rules applicable in similar autonomous 
organizations for equivalent posts. These have been furnished by PCI in 
December 2001, and are under examination in theMinistry.           
 
THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE (TENURE OF POSTING AND DEPUTATION) 
RULES, 2000-IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 138TH REPORT OF COMMITTEE 
      The Committee in its 138th Report, which was presented to the House on the 14th 
March, 2002, had examined the Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and 
Deputation) Rules, 2000 and made the following observations :- 
"3.  The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Home Affairs did not 
frame statutory rules as contemplated under section 141 (2) of the Border Security 
Force Act, 1968 all this time upto the year 2000 and the executive instructions on 
posting/transfer of Border Se curity Force personal also appear to have been issued 
as late as in 1991-92 wherein it became difficult to manage the postings/transfers in 
the absence of statutory rules, The Ministry of Home Affairs should have gone in for 
statutory rules in the beginning itself. The Committee hopes that such situations will 
not reoccur. Further the Committee is not satisfied with the comments of Ministry 
of Home Affairs on Rule 2 (J) regarding definition of "family" and it recommends 
that dependent parents be made a part of 'family' after ascertaining the position with 
respect to other similarly situated organisations and the definition be amended 
suitably." 
2.   Relevant extracts from the 138th Report were frowarded to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for compliance/necessary action on the 21st March, 2002. The Ministry on the 3rd 

April, 2002 sought extension of time till the 31 st August, 2002 to re -examine the matter. 
Thereafter, on the 10th October, 2002 they informed as under :- 
"As regards point no. III regarding inclusion of dependent parents in the definition 
of the family in rule - 2 (j) of the tenure rules, it is stated that the definition of family 
as given in the CCS Rules i.e. spouse, dependent children and dependent parents has 
been accepted and in order to  effect this amendment and certain problems in 
implementing different rules and provisions of the BSF (Tenure of Posting and 
Deputaion) Rules, 2000, a notification has been published in the Gazette of India on 
4.7.2002 amending the Principal Rules of 2000." 
3.                The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs 
vide their notification G.S.R. 264 dated 20th July, 2002 have since published 
the Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation Amendment) 
Rules, 2002 (Annexure), Amending rule 2(j) of theBorder Security (Tenure of 
Posting and Deputation) Rules, 2000 by adding the dependent parents within 
the definition of the term "family". 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : PART II, SECTION 3, SUB SEC. (i) 
Appearing on Page No. 1422-1423 
Dated : 20-7-2002 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 4th July, 2002 
      G.S.R. 264.-In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of Sub-section 
(2) of Section 141 of the Border Security Force Act 196 8 (47 of 1968), the 
Central Government hereby make the following rules to amend the Border 
Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputaion) Rules 2000, namely :- 
1.  (1)  These rules may be called the Border Security Force (Tenure of 
Posting and Deputation amendment) Rules, 2002. 
      (2)  They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
2.  In the Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation) Rules 
2000, (herein after referred to as the said rules) in Rule 2,  for clause (j) 
the following clause shall be substituted namely :- 
      "(j)  'Family' means the spouse, dependent children and dependent 
parents of thg members of the Force." 
3.  In the said rules in rule 5, in sub -rule (1) after the proviso, the follow ing 
proviso shall be inserted, namely : 
      "Provided further that in the case of the members of the Force appointed 
as instructors in the training institutions of the Force, there tenure with 
a static formation shall be four years." 
4.  In the said rules, in rule 8, in sub rule (2), after the proviso, the following 
proviso shall be inserted namely : 
      "Provided further that in the cases of the members of the Force, who have 
been empanelled as instructors may, in public interest, be' considered 

for po sting from one training institute of the Force to the other for 
performing the instructional  duties." 
5.  In the said rules, in rule 11, the second and the third proviso shall be 
omitted. 
6.  In the said rules, after rule 18, the following rule shall be added, namely 
:- 
19.    Power to extend or reduce tenure of a member of the Force in certain 
cases. Where the Director General, of the Force is satisfied that in the 
interest of the Force or in the cases of hardship, it  is necessary or 
expedient so to do, he may, by order and for the reasons to be recorded 
in writing extend or reduce the tenure of a member of the Force." 
  
[No. 17/113/2001-Pers/BSF/Part File] 
  
DURGA SHANKAR MISHRA, 
Director (Pers.) 
Note :         The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide number 
GSR-100 dated 15th March, 2000. 
 
III 
THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (PROCEDURAL) 
RULES, 1984----IMPLEMENTATION OF 136TH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE 
      The Committee in its 136 th Report presented to the House on the 29 th August, 2001 
dealt with the Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984 and 
made the following recommendations : 
"The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Textiles have agreed to 
carry out amendment in rules as follows on the basis of Committee's 
suggestions/recommendations : 
      (i)   Rule 4(1) by providing that the Chairman shall preside over the Meeting   of the 
Council. 
      (ii)  Rule 6(3) by providing that minutes containing a record of the business    would 
be circulated to the members for confirmation in the next meeting. 
      (iii)Rule 14(9) by providing for maintenance of a record of the business transacted by 
the Council. 
      (iv)Rule 11(1) by providing a period of three months for filling up a casual vacancy. 
      (v)  Rule 12 by deleting the provision with regard to appointment of the substitute 
member of the Council. 
      (vi)Rule 14(6) by providing that one third of the total number of members of the 
Council but not less that eleven members p resent shall form a quorum at a 
meeting of the Council. 
      (vii)      Rule 16(1) by revising salary limit from Rs. 1300 (pre-revised) to Rs. 13,500/- 
for purpose of creation and filling up of a post. 

      (viii)     Rule 16(2)(iii) by raising the limit of expenditure to be incurred outside India 
to the extent permissible under the Exchange Control Regulations or other 
relevant regulations and guidelines in place of the existing limit of   Rs. 10,000/-
. 
      (ix)Rule 19(2) by raising the ceiling on payme nts by the Council upto Rs. 5000/ - 
ordinarily and Rs. 20,000/ - extraordinarily in place of existing ceilings of Rs. 
1000/- and Rs. 2500/-, respectively. 
      (x)  Rule 19(6) by doing away with the provision requiring approval of Chairman/Vice 
Chairman for disposal of money placed in fixed deposit. 
       The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Textiles should carry out the 
above amendments expeditiously under intimation to it." 
2.   Extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Textiles for 
implementation of the Committee's recommendations on the 5 th September, 2001. The 
Ministry of Textiles vide their O.M. dated the 4th June. 2002 informed that the rules as 
suggested by the Committee had been amended and notified vide notification G.S.R. 808 
(E) dated the 29th October, 2001 (laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the 13th March, 
2002) containing the Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 2001. 
These rules were, however, found to be improper in its format. Hence, the Mi nistry of 
Textiles were asked to get them rectified vide this Secretariat O.M. dated the 2nd August, 
2002. After a couple of reminders, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 24th 
January, 2003 furnished a notification G.S.R.836 (E) dated the 24th  December, 2002 
publishing the Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 2002 
(Annexure). 
3.   The Committee is satisfied to note that the Ministry of Textiles have notified the 
following amendments as per its suggestions: 
(i)  in Rule 12(2) it has been incorporated that the Chairman will convene the meeting 
of the Council; 
(ii)in Rule 5(3)(iv) a provision has been made for circulation of minutes of the 
meeting; 
(iii)       in Rule 5(iv) it has been made mandatory to maintain minute books 
containing a record of the business transacted by the Council; 
(iv)       in Rule 10(1) it has been made mandatory that any casual vacancy in the 
membership of the Council by any reason shall be filled up by appointment by 
the Central Government within a period of three months from the date of arising 
of such vacancy; 
(v)Rule 12 regarding appointment of substitute member has been deleted; 
      (vi)in Rule 12(6) it has been provided that one -third of the total number of members 
of the Council but not less than eleven members present shall form a quorum at 
a meeting of the Council; 
      (vii)      in Rule 14(1) a provision has been made that no posts carrying the maximum 
salary beyond Rs. 13,500 per mensem shall be created or filled without the 
previous approval of the Central Government; 
      (viii)     in Rule 14(1)(iii) by giving powers to incur expenditure outside India upto an 
amount, as may be permissible under the exchange control regulations or other 
relevant regulations, and guidelines of the Central Government on each 
individual item; 

      (ix)in Rule 17(2) the ceiling on payments by or on behalf of the Council has been raised 
upto Rs.5000/- ordinarily and Rs.20,000/- in extra- ordinary conditions; and 
      (x)  in Rule 17(5) the provision requiring approval of Chairman/Vice Chairman for 
disposal of money placed in fixed deposits has been done away with. 
          The Committee, further, observes that there is a typographical error in the 
numbering of rule 14(2) which has been wrongly numbered as 14(1). The Committee 
desires the Ministry to issue a corrigendum to remove this error. 
ANNEXURE 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 24th December, 2002 
      G.S.R. 836 (E). -In exercise of the powers c onferred by section 25 of the Jute 
Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983 (27 of 1983), and in supersession of the 
Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984 published in the 
Government of India, Ministry of Commerce, Department of Textiles vide G.S.R. No. 
658(E) dated the 15th September, 1984, in the Gazette of India, Part II, Section 3, sub -
section (i), except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, 
the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
1.   Short title. - These rules may be called the Jute Manufactures Development Council 
(Procedural) Rules, 2002. 
2.   Commencement. - They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
3.   Definitions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
(a)"Act" means the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983 (27 of 1983); 
(b)"Jute Fund" means the fund created under sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act; 
(c)"Secretary" means the Secretary  cum Chief Executive Officer of the Council 
appointed under rule 5 to carry out the functions of Secretary of the Council; 
(d)"Vice-Chairman", means the Vice-Chairman of the Council elected in accordance 
with sub-section (5) of section 3 of the Act; 
(e)all other words and expressions used but not defined in these rules, but defined in 
the Act or in the Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983 (28 of 1983) shall have the 
meaning respectively assigned to them in those Acts. 
4.   Filling up of casual vacancy of Vice-Chairman- If a casual vacancy occurs in the office 
of the Vice -Chairman on account of his resignation or his ceasing to be a member or 
otherwise, the Council shall elect at its next meeting another member as the Vice -
Chairman who shall hold office for the u nexpired period of the term of office of the 
previous Vice-Chairman. 
5.   Powers and  duties of Secretary.- (1) The Secretary shall be appointed by the Central 
Government. 
(2)The Secretary shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Council and shall work 
under the supervision of the Chairman. 
(3)It shall be the duty of the Secretary to - 
(i)  implement all decisions taken by the council; 

(ii)co-ordinate and supervise the work of the other officers and t he 
esatablishments of the Council; 
(iii)convene under the directions of the Chairman meetings of the Council; 
(iv)maintain the minute books containing a record of the business transacted by 
the Council and get it circulated to the members for confirmation in the 
next meeting; 
(v)furnish to the Central Government all reports, returns and other necessary 
documents required to be furnished to it under the Act; 
(vi)prepare every year the Budget Estimates and Accounts of the Council for its 
approval; 
(vii)         sanction re -appropriation of grants under such powers as may be 
delegated by the Council and within such limits as may be specified by it; 
(viii)        administer the Provident Fund of the Council; 
(ix)undertake such other duties and exercise such othe r powers, as may, from 
time to time, be entrusted or delegated to him by the Council or the 
Chairman. 
6.   Tenure of appointment of member. - (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -rule (2), a 
member of the Council shall hold office for a period of two years. 
      (2) It shall be competent for the Central Government to appoint another person in the 
place of a member appointed under sub -section(4) of section 3 of the Act before the 
completion of two years if it is of opinion that such member has ceased to repr esent the 
interests he was appointed to represent. 
7.   Resignation of member.- (1) A member of the Council may resign his office by writing 
a letter under his hand addressed to the Chairman of the Council. 
      (2) The office of a member shall fall vacan t from the date on which his resignation is 
accepted by the Central Government or on the expiry of 30 (thirty) days from the date of 
receipt of resignation, whichever is earlier. 
8.   Absence of members from India. - If a member intends to leave India for m ore than 
one month, he shall intimate the Chairman the date of his departure and the date of his 
expected return to India and if such member intends to be absent from India for a period 
longer than 6 (six) months, he shall tender his resignation. 
9.   Cessation of membership. - (1) A member shall cease to be a member if he fails to 
attend three consecutive meetings of the council without leave of the Chairman. 
(2) A member shall cease to be a member, if he - 
(i)becomes of unsound mind and is declared so by a competent court; or 
(ii)        is an un-discharged insolvent; or 
(iii)       is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude. 
10.Filling up of casual vacancy of members :- (1) any casual vacancy in the membership 
of the Council by any reason shall be filled up by appointment by the Central Government 
within a period of three months from the date of arising such vacancy. 
      (2) A member appointed to fill up a casual vacancy shall hold office for so long as the 
member, whose place he f ills up, would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy 
had not occurred. 

11.Change of address.- A member shall keep the Secretary informed of any change in his 
address and on failure to inform the change to his address, the address given in the fi rst 
instance shall for all purposes be deemed to be his correct address. 
12.Procedure for meetings of the Council. - (1) Not less than one meeting of the Council 
shall be held in each financial year. 
      (2) The Chairman may, at any time, convene a meeting of the Council: 
      Provided that it shall be the duty of the Chairman to convene a meeting of the Council 
if a requisition for such meeting is presented to him in writing by at least eleven members: 
      Provided further that it shall be competent for the Central Government to require the 
Chairman to convene a meeting at any time: 
      Provided also that in cases of emergency, a special meeting may be summoned at any 
time by the Chairman who shall inform in advance the Central Government and 
members of the subject matter for discussion and the reasons for which he considers it 
urgent. No other business shall be transacted at such special meeting. 
      (3) The Secretary shall, with the approval of the Chairman, or, in the absence of the 
Chairman, the Vice-Chairman, fix the date, time and place of every meeting of the 
Council and issue notice of the meeting giving at least ten clear days' notice. 
      (4) The Secretary shall, with the approval of the Chairman, or in the absence of 
Chairman, the Vice -Chairman, prepare and circulate amongst the members, at least 
seven days before a meeting of the Council, a list of the business to be transacted at such 
meeting. No business, not included in the agenda shall be considered at a meeting of the 
Council, without permission of the Chairman of the meeting. If any member desires to 
suggest any subject for discussion by the Council, he shall give at least ten clear days' 
notice. 
      (5) The Chairman, or in his absence, the Vice -Chairman, shall preside over the 
meetings of the Council: 
      Provided that where both the Chairman and Vice-Chairman are absent, the members 
present shall elect a member from among themselves to preside over the meeting. 
      (6) one-third of the total number of members of the Council bu t not less than eleven 
members present shall form a quorum at a meeting of the Council. 
      (7) In case of difference of opinion amongst the members of the Council present at a 
meeting, the opinion of the majority shall prevail. Each member of the Council shall have 
one vote. In case of any equality of votes, the Chairman, or the Vice-Chairman, or in the 
absence of both, the member presiding over such meeting shall have a second or a casting 
vote. 
      (8) Any proposal, which the Council is required to consider, may be referred to all its 
members either at its meeting or by circulation among all its members and any proposal 
so circulated and approved by a majority of members shall be as effectual and binding as 
if such proposal had been passed at a meeting of the Council: 
      Provided that at least one third of the total number of members of the Council have 
recorded their views on the proposal. 
      (9) When business is transacted by circulation of papers, a record of business so 
transacted shall be signed by the Chairman or the Vice- Chairman of the Council. 
      (10) A record shall be maintained of all business transacted by the Council. Copies of 
such record shall be submitted to the Central Government and circulated to the members 

for confirmation in the next meeting. The record of business transacted at a meeting of 
the Council shall be signed by the Chairman presiding over such meeting. 
13.Validity of the acts and proceedings. - No act or proceedings of the Council shall be 
invalid or questioned o n the ground merely of any vacancy in, or any defect in the 
constitution of the Council. 
14.Powers of the Council: (1) Power of appointment. - Subject to the provisions of section 
6 of the Act, the Council may create new posts and make appointments thereto as may be 
necessary for the efficient performance of its functions: 
      Provided that no posts carrying the maximum salary beyond Rs.13,500 per mensem 
shall be created or filled without the previous approval of the Central Government. 
      (2) Other Po wers : (i) Subject to the provisions of rule 17, the Council may, by 
resolution, sanction any expenditure or enter into any contract involving expenditure 
from the jute Fund in the discharge of its functions under the Act: 
      Provided that the Council s hall not sanction any expenditure or enter into any 
contract involving expenditure in excess of the budget allotments: 
      Provided further that the Council shall not enter into any contract involving any 
expenditures in excess of twenty five lakhs of ru pees, or extending over a period of five 
years, without the previous approval of the Central Government. 
      (ii) The Council shall have power to write off all the losses arising out of normal wear 
and tear of assets (in lieu of depreciation) and in other individual cases, losses upto twenty 
five thousand rupees. 
      (iii) The Council may incur expenditure outside India upto an amount, as may be 
permissible under the exchange control re gulations or other relevant regulations, and 
guidelines of the Central Government on each individual item. 
15.Register of members - (1) The Secretary shall maintain a register in which the name 
and address of each member of the Council shall be entered. 
      (2) The names and addresses of members of any of the Committees of the Council 
shall be kept in a separate register. 
      (3) If a member of the Council or any of its committees changes his address, he shall 
notify his new address to the Secretary and the Secretary shall amend the relevant entry 
in the register accordingly. 
16.Annual budget estimates- 
      (a) Preparation and submission. - The Council shall in each year prepare, in such 
manner as the Central Government may from time to time direct, budg et estimates for 
the ensuing financial year and revised estimates for the current year and shall submit 
them for the approval of the Central Government on or before such dates as may be fixed 
by that Government. The budget as approved by the Central Govern ment shall be the 
sanctioned budget for the year. 
      (b) Re-appropriation- (i) If the Council finds in the course of the year that there is 
likely to be an excess of expenditure over the sanctioned budget estimate under any head, 
it shall examine the allotment under each head of the budget estimate with the object of 
finding probable savings under any other head and effecting a re -appropriation. Where 
such re-appropriation is feasible, it may sanction the re -appropriation subject to such 
conditions as may be laid down by the Central Government from time to time. 

      (ii) The funds shall not be re -appropriated to meet expenditure on a new service not 
contemplated in the budget estimates except with the prior approval of the Central 
Government. 
17.Maintenance and operation of bank accounts and investment of funds of the Council- 
      (1) All moneys received by the Council shall, as soon as possible, be deposited in the 
State Bank of India or such other nationalised banks as may be approved by the Council, 
and shall not be utilised for any purpose other than the purposes of the Act. 
      (2) All payments by or on behalf of the Council shall be made by cheques except for 
amounts not exceeding ordinarily Rs. 5000/ - and extraordinarily Rs. 20,000/ - under 
special sanction of the Secretary, which may be paid in cash. 
      (3) Such cheques and all orders for making deposits or investments or for the 
withdrawal of the same shall be signed jointly by the Secretary and the chief accounts 
officer, or by any two officers authorised by the Council, in this behalf. 
      (4) No payment shall be made out of the funds of the Council unless the expenditure 
is covered by the sanctioned budget. 
      (5) All Payments by the Council shall be made on bills or other documents d uly 
prepared and passed by the Secretary or other officer authorised by the Council in this 
behalf. The paid vouchers shall be stamped "Paid" or so cancelled that they cannot be 
used a second time. 
      (6) All funds not required for current expenditure m ay be placed in suitable term 
deposit with State Bank of India or other nationalised banks. 
18.Sending persons abroad - The Council shall not send any member of the Council or 
any of its officers or employees to places outside India without the previous san ction of 
the Central Government. 
  
(F.No. 6/6/2000-Jute Export) 
Sudhir Bhargava. Jt. Secy. 
 
IV 
INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
(LICENSING OF INSURANCE AGENTS) REGULATIONS, 2000 
      The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of Insurance 
Agents) Regulations, 2000 framed under the Insurance Act, 1938 were examined and a 
questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance on the 18th December, 2000 for 
furnishing t heir comments. The Ministry had furnished their comments on the 23rd 
January, 2001. The points referred to the Ministry and their comments thereon are 
enclosed (Annexure). 
2.   The Committee considered the subject matter in its meeting held on the 23rd Apr il, 
2002 and on the basis of the deliberations a reference dated the 15th may, 2002 was sent 
to the Ministry as follows: 
"the matter was placed before the Committee for considerations and it felt in relation 
to rule 3 (2) that a time limit (say, 3 months o r so) must be incorporated in the rule 
for grant of license and its renewal. The Committee added that in case the 
grant/renewal of license could not be done within the time limit the applicant should 
be informed of the reasons and the likely time by when t he processing would be 

completed. The Committee also expressed a view that whenever an application was 
rejected, the reasons should be informed to the applicant." 
3.   The Ministry, in their reply dated the 16th September, 2002, informed as under:- 
"the ob servations of the Committee that whenever an application is rejected, the 
reasons should be informed to the applicant, has already been taken care of vide Rule 
3(3) of Insurance Agents Regulations, 2000 which is reproduced below: 
'If the designated person refuses to grant or renew a license under this Regulation, 
he shall give the reasons therefor to the applicant.' 
As regards remaining two points the Authority has mentioned that these points will 
be taken up and be incorporated when they take up the modifi cation of licensing of 
Insurance Agents Regulations after going through due process." 
4.   The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions 
(i) for incorporation of a time limit of three months for grant/renewal of lic ence and (ii) 
intimation of the reasons for the delay in grant/renewal of licence to the applicant and the 
likely time for completing the process in regulation 3(2). The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would carry out the above amendments, expeditiously. 
ANNEXURE 
Questionnaire and Comments 
On 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(Licensing of Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000 
SL. No.1 Regulation 3(2) 
      The designated person may, on recept of the application along with the evidence of 
payment of fees to the Authority, and on being satisfied that the applicant,  
(i)Possesses the qualifications as specified under Regulation 4; 
(ii)        Possesses the practical training as specified under Regulation 5; 
(iii)       has passed the examination as specified under Regulation 6; 
(iv)       has furnished the application complete in all respects; 
(v)        has the requisite knowledge to solicit and procure insurance business; and 
(vi)       is capable of providing the necessary service to the policyholders; 
grant or renew, as the case may be, a license in Form IRDA -Agents-VB, along with 
identity card in Form IRDA-Agents-VZ: 
      The time limit within which designated person should grant or renew a license to act 
as an insuranc e agent is not mentioned in the regulation. Whether Ministry have any 
objection in incorporating a specific time period in this regard? 
COMMENTS 
      The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) has mentioned that 
they have set up a procedure  for grant of a licence quickly. The entire system of grant 
and renewal of a licence to an agent has been put on the website by the IRDA. Designated 
Officers of the insurers have been given code words for access to the website. The 
Designated Officer of th e concerned insurer, who is responsible for checking up of the 
requirements of the person, who applies for licence as an agent, approaches the IRDA for 
grant of the licence, after such verification, through the website. The IRDA has informed 

that the Designated Officer, at the time of access to the website, if all things are satisfied, 
gets an immediate response from the site on the grant of an agency number. This 
automatic grant of a number enables the Designated Officer to issue a licence or renew it 
as soon as he approaches the website. The IRDA has put the procedure for a grant of 
licence in operation from 23rd October, 2000. They have informed that till now more 
than 60,000 agents have either been granted licences or their licences have been renewed. 
Only those licences which are not renewed in time are sent to the Authority for 
examination by the insurer for grant of a renewal. The IRDA has informed that such 
delayed applications are also attended to immediately by the Authority. 
SL:No. 2.   Regulation 4; Qualifications of the applicant 
"The applicant shall possess the minimum qualification of a pass in 12th Standard 
or equivalent examination conducted by any recognized Board/ Institution, where 
the applicant resides in a place with a population of five thousand or more as per the 
last census, and a pass in 10th Standard or equivalent examination from a recognized 
Board/Institution if the applicant resides in any other place." 
      The provisions of the above regulation are discriminatory for the applica nt residing 
in places with population of 5 thousand or more and those residing in other places. What 
is justification for this discrimination? In what manner the applicant residing in places 
with a population of less than five thousand will justify his cap ability to act as an agent 
with less justification? 
COMMENTS 
      One of the functions of the IRDA is to ensure development of insurance business in 
the rural areas and amongst the socially weaker sections of the society. As per the 
provisions of the Insu rance Act, the Authority has also notified the specific percentages 
of business that must be procured by an insurer from the rural areas and social sectors. 
Failure to adhere to this requirement would mean a levy of  a heavy penalty of Rs. 5 lakhs 
for the first breach and also cancellation of the registration of the insurer if there happens 
to be a persistent breach. Since rural areas constitute a large part of the country, the 
IRDA felt that a person who has to qualify to be an agent in those areas should have an 
education level which is commonly available in such localities. Since many schools in the 
rural areas offer education upto 10th standard, to encourage local people to get gainfully 
employed and also to assist the development of business of an insur er in these areas, the 
educational qualification has been kept lower for the rural areas. The development of 
business in rural areas calls for not only knowledge of local language but also local 
affinity. Agents qualified by higher educational standards ar e not prevented from 
operating in the rural areas. The quality of business in non rural areas would be distinctly 
different and calls for interaction with different sections of people and marketing of 
sophisticated products. It is felt that keeping a lower  educational qualification for rural 
areas is not discriminatory as it would be beneficial in getting more local agents for 
procuring insurance business. It is pertinent to mention that in LIC Agents Rules, 1972 
also lower educational qualification has been prescribed for rural areas. 
SL. No.3.   Regulation 5: Practical Training 
(i)         The applicant shall have completed from an approved institution, at least one 
hundred hours' practical training in life or general insurance business, as the case 
may be , which may be spread over three to four weeks, where such applicant is 
seeking license for the first time to act as insurance agent. 
    Provided that the applicant shall have completed from an approved institution, at 
least one hundred fifty hour's pract ical training in life and general insurance 

business, which may be spread over six to eight weeks, where such applicant is 
seeking license for the first time to act as a composite insurance agent. 
      Whether IRDA has since notified epproved institution for the purpose? What criteria 
is being adopted in notifying these institutions and how their performance is being 
monitored? 
COMMENTS 
      The IRDA has already notified 50 institutions accredited for the purposes of training. 
The list of institutions is at Annexure. The criteria for selection and approval of these 
institutions is availability of adequate infrastructure for training, faculty for training, 
library books, facilities like computers to impart training etc. Each of these various 
attributes has been awarded a marking and on the basis of a one to 100 scale points, 
institutions which secure ranking of 65 or above are recognized. The IRDA has informed 
that the process of accreditation is continuous. The IRDA wants to approve institutions 
in different parts of the country on a spread out basis. After receipt of the applications 
from the institutions actual inspection is carried out by a team from the Authority to 
satisfy the existence of prerequisites. 
SL. No.4.  Regulation 6: Examination 
"The applicant shall have passed the pre-recruitment examination in life or general 
insurance business, or both, as the case may be, conducted by the insurance Institute 
of India, Mumbai, or any other examination body." 
      What is the meaning of any 'other examination body' which can conduct the pre -
recruitment examination in addition to Insurance Institute of India? Is there any 
objection in specifying such other examination bodies; what are details of this 
examination, how many times this examination will be conducted in a year? Whether the 
centre is Mumbai only or in any other cities of the country also? 
COMMENTS 
      The Insurance Institute of India has been set up by the life Insurance Corporation of 
India and the Gener al Insurance Corporation of India and its subsidiaries. Till April 
2000, when the IRDA got established, this body was acting as an examining body for the 
insurance industry to certify in -house training and qualifications. As part of its efforts, 
the Instit ute has developed literature, books, publications etc. on various aspects of 
underwriting. The Insurance Institute of India has modelled itself on the Chartered 
Insurance Institute of UK and the British Institute has recognised the Insurance Institute 
of India for purposes of equivalence in certain examination subjects. 
      The Insurance institute of India has been recognized by the Authority for the purpose 
of holding the examination for agents to qualify. The syllabus for the examination to be 
conducted by the Institute has been prepared by the IRDA. The reading material has 
been vetted by the Authority. At present, the Institute has prepared books for the syllabus 
prescribed by the Authority in English and Hindi. Attempts are now being made to 
prepare these books in other Indian languages so that the Agents community all over the 
country could be benefited from these books in vernacular languages. 
      The present system of examination is for an agent offered by the insurance company 
to be examined in a paper for three hours. Some of the questions are objective and one or 
two questions are being set for a detailed answer. 
      The IRDA has informed that the Institute will hold the examinations as frequently as 
possible and most certainly on the 1st Sund ay of every month. The Institute has also 
offered to hold examinations at any time an insurer wants, provided the minimum of 50 

candidates are offered for examination. Since the training period of agents with different 
companies need not coincide, the opportunity to hold examinations at different points of 
time is being ensured. Presently, the system of examination is on traditional lines and the 
examination papers are collected by the Institute and distributed to the various examiners 
with the commitment t hat the results are declared within 72 hours of the holding of 
examination. At present the Institute is conducting examination of agents at all 100 
Divisional Offices of LIC. 
      IRDA has informed that there is a proposal to conduct the examination throu gh 
computers. The Insurance Institute of India is in touch with the National Stock Exchange 
for running its examination system. The plan is that any candidate offering himself or 
herself for examination at any of the places where the National Stock Exchang e has an 
outlet (at present the NSE has 8 outlets in the country) will be able to appear at any of the 
centres, get examined through the computers and have the result immediately thereafter. 
Even the three days of waiting which a prospective agent has to g o through will be 
avoided. IRDA expects that this procedure will be put into effect from January 2001. It 
is likely that this procedure would also be extended to centres other than the 8 where NSE 
has its presence now. 
      IRDA has informed that at present there is no other institute in the country which has 
the expertise, ability and reach to conduct insurance examination on a large scale. As and 
when other examination bodies develop the necessary expertise and infrastructure, they 
will be considered for  conducting such examinations. Therefore, an enabling provision 
has been made under Regulation 6. 
Sl. 5. Regulation 7(1)   Fee payable 
      The fees payable to the Authority for issue or renewal of license to act as insurance 
agent or a composite insurance agent shall be rupees two hundred and fifty. 
      What is the mode of payment of fees for issue or renewal of license? Will it be cash or 
through Demand Draft or through some other mode; whether there is any objection in 
specifying the mode of accepting payment in the Regulation? 
COMMENTS 
      The IRDA has informed that they have designed a system whereby moneys due from 
the individual agents are collected by the Designated Officer and remitted to a control 
account with HDFC Bank Limited in all places. In places where HDFC Bank do not have 
a branch the Designated Officer collects money and remits it to the Authority. In rare 
cases where the applications have to come to the Authority such as applications beyond 
the date of expiry of current licence etc., drafts drawn in the name of the Authority on a 
Delhi bank are accepted. 
Sl.6   Regulation 8 
      Regulation 8 which deals with the code of conduct of the person holding a license, 
enumerates a number of Do's and Don'ts for the Insurance Agents. 
      Whether the Ministry have any objection if there is a provision in the Regulations that 
require a fair publicity of the code of conduct expected of the insurance Agent for the 
benefit of the public at large? 
COMMENTS 
      There is no objection to a fair publicity of the Code of Conduct expected from an 
insurance agent. The IRDA has informed that the draft regulations have been discussed 
at different centres covering different groups including members of the public, insurers, 

agents, their associations, federations etc. The draft of the regulations  were published on 
the website of IRDA for comments and all the inputs received from various sources have 
been considered by the Insurance Advisory Committee of IRDA before finalizing the 
regulations. 
Sl. No.7     Regulation 8(1) 
      There appears to be some printing mistakes, for example, there are no sub regulations 
of the Regulation 8 and therefore there is no justification to have Regulation 8(1). 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in rectifying the same? 
COMMENTS 
      The IRDA has informed that this is a typographical error which is being corrected. 
Sl.No.8      Regulation 9: Cancellation of License 
    The designated person may cancel a license of an insurance agent, if the insurance 
agent suffer s, at any time during the currency of the license, from any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in sub -section (4) of section 42 of the Act, and recover 
from him the license and the identity card issued earlier. 
      Whether the authority shall (record the reasons for cancellation of license or) give the 
person concerned an opportunity of being heard before cancelling his license. What are 
the comments of the Ministry? 
      Whether there is any provision in the Act/Regulation wherein a person can appeal 
against the order of the designated person, if not, the justification therefor? 
COMMENTS 
      The disqualifications mentioned in sub section (4) of Section 42 of the Insurance Act 
are basic and fundamental and these are arrived at by these Authorit ies which are 
independent and are not within the control of the insurer. Some of the disqualifications 
are of a nature which are decided by the Court of competent Jurisdiction. The possession 
of qualification and practical training are things which can be supported by relevant 
certificates and also can be evidenced by the conduct of the agent. The IRDA is of the 
opinion that there may not be any occasion where there will be discretionary exercise of 
the power and cancellation of licence by  a Designated Person. However, in the IRDA Act, 
1999 in prescribing the duties, powers and functions of the Authority under Section 14, 
one of the powers mentioned is adjudication of disputes between insurers and 
intermediaries or insurance intermediaries. Agents belong to  the category of insurance 
intermediaries and therefore the IRDA has the powers to intervene and correct the 
situation when its attention is drawn to any contumacious conduct on the part of a 
Designated Person. The IRDA regulations are model regulations. Every insurer would be 
having their own rules/regulations/terms and conditions relating to the agents. 
Relationship between an agent and insurer is personal. Since the insurance companies 
are recruiting the agents, training them and appointing them, individ ual companies 
would be having their own rules/regulations/terms and conditions. For example, the 
Agents Rules, 1972 of Life Insurance Corporation of India has got separate provisions 
for appeals which gives the right of appeal to an agent to the relevant appellate authority 
against an order terminating the appointment. These appeals can be preferred against 
termination of agency on account of certain disqualifications, certain lapses, termination 
of agency by notice, insolvency cases etc. In addition to the  appeal in LIC Rules, 1972 
provision has also been made for an agent to prefer a memorial to the Chairman of the 
Corporation when he is aggrieved by the rejection of his appeal by the appellate 
authority. LIC for quite some time would remain as the biggest  employer of agents. It is 

expected that the new insurance companies also would be having such provisions of 
appeal in their regulations/terms and conditions relating to agents. In addition as 
mentioned above the IRDA has the power of adjudication. 
Sl. No. 9     
The regulations are silent over the procedure for entertaining complaints against breach 
of code of conduct by the Insurance Agent. Should the procedure not be laid down? 
Should there also not be a provision for appeal   against the decision to infli ct penalty in 
cases of breach of code of conduct? Whether Ministry have any objection in prescribing 
the procedure to be followed while taking action in case of breach of code of conduct?   
COMMENTS 
      As mentioned above the IRDA has got the powers of settling the disputes between the 
insurers and insurance agents. Any such complaint that might come from the members 
of the public on the conduct of an insurance agent would also be dealt with by the 
authority. 
Sl. No. 10 
Should the renewal of license to act as an Insurance Agent not depend upon the business 
transacted by the Insurance Agent in the previous years? What are the comments of the 
Ministry in this regard; what parameters are actually applied for renewal of a licence? 
COMMENTS 
The present agency system in the insurance sector envisaged by the IRDA would be that 
of a tied agent. An insurance agent can represent only one insurer. However, to develop 
the profession of agency it has been permitted by the IRDA that the agent can become a 
composite agent when he can represent one life insurer and one general insurer. The 
relationship between an agent and insurer is personal. It is for the insurance companies 
to recruit agents and train them. Since there are expenses involved in recruiting and 
training an agent and to ensure that an agent after receiving his training from one 
insurer does not shift his loyalty to another, the IRDA has prescribed the tied agency 
principle. In addition to the regulations of IRDA, there will be a vast area where an 
understanding should be reached between insurer and the agent. This would pertain to 
other terms and conditions which would differ from insurer to insurer and would 
contain the area of minimum business to be developed by an insurance agent in a 
particular area, rural  business to be developed by the agent, the quantum of premium 
that has to be procured by the agent, staff conditions, leave, other perquisites etc. These 
are all to be negotiated between the agents and the insurer and therefore do not find a 
place in the IRDA regulaions. 
 
                                                                                          V 
THE RAILWAYS (OPENING FOR PUBLIC CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS) 
RULES, 2000 
      The Railways (Opening for Public Carriage of Passengers) Rules, 2000 framed under 
the Railways Act. 1989 were examined and certain points were referred  to the Ministry 
of Railways for their comments/clarifications on the 2 nd May, 2001. The Ministry 
furnished their comments/clarifications on the 26th June, 2001. The points referred to the 
Ministry and their comments/clarifications thereon are reproduced below : 
I.    Point referred 

      The Rules have been framed under sections 28, 29, and 198 of the Railways Act, 1989. 
What are the reasons for framing the rules after a period of 11 years; In what manner 
Government have been regulating this area of activi ty so far. What are the reasons that 
necessitated the framing of these rules now? 
Minstry's reply 
      There existed "Rules for the Opening of a Railway or a Section of a Railway for the 
Public Carriage of Passengers of 1933" and they were in force till New Rules (2000) came 
into force. The new rules have been framed so as to bring them in line with new Railway 
Act of 1989. The exercise for framing of new rules took some time and hence the delay. 
II.  Point referred 
      Rule 2 (g) refers to the Indian Ra ilways (Open Lines) General Rule, 1976. Whether 
these rules have been validated under the Railways Act, 1989. If so, whether there was a 
similar Opening for Public carriage of passengers Rules under the old Act?. 
Ministry's reply 
      Yes, General Rules, 1976, have been validated under a notification in the official 
Gazette, as required under Section 60 & 87 of Indian Railway Act, 1989. 
      It is clarified that the General Rules are for guidance in the safe operation of Railways 
whereas "Rules for the Opening of a Railway or a section of a Railway for Public carriage 
of Passengers" are for guidance in checking and regulating fitness of a Railway line to 
run trains. 
General Rules existed before 1976 and were revised/updated in 1976. 
III.Point referred: Rule 15(2) List of questions and answers- 
"The Commissioner may, if he considers it necessary, modify the requirements 
specified in answers in accordance with the circumstances of each case." 
      Whether Government have any objection in prescribing that the Commissioner shall 
give in writing the reasons for modifying the requirements specified in the answers 
provided by the General Manager for consideration of the Commissioner in accordance 
with the circumstances of each case? 
Ministry's reply 
      Under Rule 15(1), the General Manager is required to submit answers to a list of 
questions regarding the Railway line. These questions concern the safety requirements. 
If Commissioner is not satisfied with the answers indicating the ground s ituation, the 
Commissioner can ask the General Manager to improve/modify the situation. No reasons 
are required to be stated by the Commissioner as the Commissioner checks the ground 
conditions only with respect to standards laid down by Railway Board. 
IV.Point referred: Rule 19 Documents accompanying Inspection Report- 
      "The following documents shall accompany the Inspection Report, namely:- 
(i)  Index Plan and Section of Railways; 
(ii)Tabulated details in Forms I to XIV; 
(iii)       List of Questions and Answers in Form XV; 
(iv)       Certificate by the General Manager of the concerned Railway in Form XVI; 
(v)List of infringements of Maximum and Minimum Dimensions in Form XVII; 
(vi)       Results of the Bridge Test in Form XVIII. 

Explanation- When sanction is required for the initiation of electric traction on a line 
already opened for passenger traffic, only such of the documents, as are required by 
the Commissioner, need be forwarded to him." 
      Whether the provision may be modified so as to speci fy the documents or type of 
documents required to be forwarded to the Commissioner for initiation of electric 
traction on a line to bring about uniformity in the rule? 
Ministry's reply 
      Explanation is slightly modified as under which explains the query:- 
Explanation-When sanction is required for the initiation of electric traction on a line 
already opened for passenger traffic, documents listed in Rule 5(1) at items (j), (k), 
(l), (m), (n) and rules 5(2) at (a) and 4(a)(vii) and as are required by the 
Commissioner, need be forwarded to him. 
V.  Point referred: Rule 20 Sanction of Report to Central Government- 
"In respect of every reference made to him under sub -fule (3) of rule 3, the 
Commissioner shall submit an Inspection Report to the Central Government." 
      Whether under this rule it is possible to prescribe a maximum time limit which the 
Commissioner may be required to submit the Inspection Report so that there is timely 
opening of the railway line? Should provision be made for extension of time only after 
giving reasons for the same? Whether also the Inspection Report may be considered to 
be a public document and whether a copy thereof should be given to   the General 
Manager of the Zonal Railway/Chief Engineer of non-Government Railway? 
      Whether Government should not give opportunity to Chief Engineer of non 
Government Railway before modifying or cancelling a sanction? 
Ministry's reply 
      It is not proposed to specify a time limit as Commissioner will submit his report within 
a reasonable time. Besides CCRS oversees the work of Commissioner. As far as opening 
of railway is concerned, the powers are proposed to be conferred on Commissioner to 
open the railway under Section 28 of IR Act, 1989 by modifying rule 22. 
      While the Report of Commissioner on inspection of a railway is not a public document 
and is not recommended to be made so, a copy is always given to General Manager of 
Zonal Railway/Non-government Railway. 
      The matter concerns safety. Only in extreme situation, act ion of cancellation of 
sanction will be taken by Commissioner/Government. 
VI.Point referred: Rule 21(3) Sanctioning of Opening of Railway- 
      In respect of non Government railway in fule 21(3) the words "General Manager" 
appear to be an error. 
Ministry's reply 
      There is no error. The definition of 'General Manager' as per rule 2(f) covers the Chief 
Executive of Non-government Railway. 
VII.   Point referred: Rule 22(2) Temporary opening of railways by Commissioner- 
      "On receipt of the Inspection Report of Commissioner, the Central Government may 
confirm, modify or cancel the sanction given under sub - rule (1) subject to such 
conditions, alterations or relaxation as may be considered necessary." 

      Whether the provision may be modified so that the Central Government shall record 
reasons for modifying or cancelling the sanction given under sub-rule (1)? 
Ministry's reply 
      This being a matter of safety, decision of Government is final and binding. No 
reasoning need be given for Government decision. 
VIII.Point referred : Rule 24(4) Notice of construction of deviation lines, etc.- 
"In case of an accident, temporary diversions may be opened under section 24 after 
a responsible officer of the concerned railway certifies that the use of such diversion 
will not be attended with danger to passengers or to the railway servants." 
      The use of the term "responsible" in the rule is vague. Should the designation/rank of 
the responsible officer as provided for in the rule may not be specified? 
Ministry's reply 
      Section 24 of Indian Railways Act, 1989 states that this certificate has to be given by 
Railway servant in charge of works undertaken. The rule is framed under Section 24 of 
IR Act, 1989 and therefore the connotation of "responsible officer" h ere is "Railway 
servant in charge of works". 
IX.Point referred : Rule 24(5) Notice of construction of deviation lines, etc.- 
    "Where the use of the temporary diversion is likely to be extended to for more 
than three days, the Commissioner shall take act ion to inspect the diversion at the 
earliest opportunity." 
      The term "earliest opportunity" as used in the rule is vague. Whether the term may 
be substituted with words which may specify that action is taken within a time frame 
between period of intimation of diversion and use of such temporary diversion to ensure 
prompt action on the part of the Commissioner? 
Ministry's reply 
      It is proposed to modify this rule. The modified version will follow. 
X.  Point referred: Rule 25(1) Power of Commissioner to open minor works- 
    "The Commissioner may, without previous notice, sanction the opening of any 
minor work for passenger traffic, if he is satisfied. either with or without inspection, 
that the provisions of clauses (b), (c) and (d) of sub section (1) of section 22 have been 
duly fulfilled." 
      What is the definition of "minor work" needs to be defined or referred to? 
Ministry's reply 
      The minor works are defined in Rule 24. 
XI.Point referred: Rule 31(5) Signals 
"It is desirable that the signaling at all block stations and interlocked level crossings 
in the same section shall conform to the same standard and type." 
      Whether Government have any objection in deleting the words "It is desirable that" 
to make it comp ulsory for signaling at all block stations in the same section and inter 
locked level crossings to conform to the same standard and type.? 
Ministry's reply 

      Signaling improvements cannot be implemented in one go. Therefore, such a 
compulsory provision cannot be made. 
XII.   Point referred: Rule 38(2) (a) Designs of electric installations- 
    "Adequate protective arrangements shall be made to ensure that the public cannot 
come in contact with the electric equipment on line within the railway premises." 
      The term "adequate protective arrangements" is vague. Whether Government have 
any objection if arrangements or at least their nature required to be fulfilled for public 
safety are enlisted/stated in the rule itself? 
Ministry's reply 
      Need to changes is not felt as it is difficult to define the precautions to be taken in each 
and every situation nor it is the purpose of the rules. 
2.   The Committee considered the comments of the Ministry on the questionnaire at its 
meetings held on the 7th May 2003. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the 
Ministry of Railways have accepted the Committee's suggestions on (i) Rule 19 
Explanation to modify the provision so as to specify the documents or types of 
documents required to be forwarded to the Commissioner for initiation of electric 
traction on a line; and (ii) Rule 24(5) to substitute the words earliest opportunity with 
suitable words so as to specify that the action is taken within a time frame between 
period of initiation of diversion and use of such temporary diversion to ensure prompt 
action on the part of the Commissioner. The Committee however, recommends that 
Rule 24(4) may be amended by substituting the words "responsible officer" with the 
words "Railway servant in charge of the work" in view of their comments. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out these amendments expeditiously 
under intimation to it. 
 
VI 
THE COMPANIES (ISSUE OF SHARE CAPITAL WITH DIFFERENTIAL VOTING 
RIGHTS) RULES, 2001 
      The Committee examined the Companies (Issue of Share Capital with Differential 
Voting Rights) Rules, 2001 framed under the Companies Act, 1956. Certain points were 
referred to the Department of Company Affairs for their comments on the 5th October, 
2001. The points raised and the Department's commen ts thereon received on the 29th 
October, 2001 are reproduced below. 
I.  Point referred Rule 2(I)(b) 
    "Differential voting rights includes rights as to dividend or voting". The meaning 
of words, 'Differential Voting Rights' is not clear. A detailed note explaining the same 
may be furnished. 
Department's reply 
      Shares with Differential Voting Rights means shares which carry different rights from 
that of one -share one-vote. It may be even non -voting shares i.e. persons having such 
shares shall have no right to vote at the time of poll in a meeting of the share holders. The 
financing needs of the companies have become too complex to be met only with two types 
of shares i.e. equity shares and preference shares . In many countries, corporate growth 
has been accompanied by introduction of various forms of securities including issue of 
shares with differential rights. On demand of trade and industry and in view of that some 

of shareholders are not interested in exe rcising their voting rights like other equity 
shareholders, it was provided in the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2000 to allow 
companies to issue shares (i) with voting rights or (ii) with differential rights as to 
dividend voting or otherwise. Before this amendment companies were not allowed to issue 
equity shares without or with voting rights less than one vote per share. It is expected that 
introduction of shares with differential voting rights will permit the growth and 
expansion of companies. The shares w ith differential voting rights would bring in more 
share capital for companies for their projects and activities from those sections of 
investors also are basically interested in higher rate of dividend and are prepared for a 
trade off between dividend and voting power since shares with differential voting rights 
could carry higher dividend than that of equity shares with full voting rights. This concept 
is not entirely new since Indian companies are already allowed to raise capital through 
preference shares and debt instruments which have no voting rights. Such shareholders, 
excepting for their difference in voting rights, will enjoy all other rights like any other 
shareholder including right for bonus shares. right shares and to have annual returns, 
etc. of the company. Such shares will be quoted in Stock Exchanges and, therefore, there 
will be a right market for them specially when they are offered higher dividend. 
II.  Points referred Rule 3(1) & (2) 
    "The Company has distributable profits in terms of Section 205 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 for Preceding three financial years preceding the year in which it was 
decided to issue such shares". The word 'preceding' before the words 'three financial 
years' appears to be superfluous, Whether the Ministry have any objection in 
deleting it? 
"The company has not defaulted in filing annual accounts and annual returns for 
three financial years immediately preceding the financial years of the year in which 
it was decided to issue such shares". The words 'of the year' after the words 'financial 
year' appear to be superfluous; whether the Ministry have any objection in deleting 
these words? 
Department's reply 
      Department accepts the suggestion to delete the word "preceding" before the words 
"three financial years" in Rule 3(1) and the words "of the year" after the words 
"financial year" in Rule 3(2) of the said Rules. Action is being taken to amend the said 
Rules. A copy of Notification of amended Rules shall be furnished to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat after the Notification is issued to amend the said Rules. 
2.   The Department of Company Affairs furnished a copy of the Notification G.S.R. 27 
(E) dated 12th January, 2002 notifying the amendments as suggested by the Committee. 
3.   The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 25th October 2002. 
The Committee is satisfied to note that the Department of Company Affairs have 
notified the amendments as suggested by the Committee by deleting the word 
"preceding" in rule 3(1) and the words "of the year" in rule 3(2) which were 
superfluous. 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
The Press Council Act, 1978--- Implementation of 109th Report 
of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 

      The Committee notes that the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting have finally 
been able to publish the Press Council of India (T erms of Service of Employees) 
Regulation, 2002. The Committee is, however, pained over the long delay that has taken 
place in this whole exercise despite its constant pursuance. The Committee would have 
appreciated if the initiative taken by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting during 
the last 2-3 years had been taken earlier in which case the regulations would have come 
in place much earlier. 
II 
The Border Security Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation) 
Rules, 2000---  Implementation of the 138th Report of the Committee 
      The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Home Affairs vide their 
notification G.S.R. 264 dated 20th July, 2002 have since published the Border Security 
Force (Tenure of Posting and Deputation Amendment) Rules, 2002 amending rule 2(j) of 
the Border Security (Tenure of Posting and Deputation) Rules, 2000 by adding the 
dependent parents within the definition of the term "family". 
III 
The Jute Manufactures Development Council (Procedural) Rules, 1984---  
Implementation of 136th Report of the Committee 
      The Committee is satisfied to note that the Ministry of Textiles have notified the 
following amendments as per its suggestions: 
(i)  In Rule 12(2) it has been incorporated that the Chairman will convene the meeting 
of the Council; 
(ii)in Rule 5(3)(iv) a provision has been made for circulation of minutes of the 
meeting; 
(iii)       in Rule 5(iv) it has been made mandatory to maintain minute books 
containing a record of the business transacted by the Council; 
(iv)       in Rule 10(1) it has been made mandatory that any casual vacancy in the 
membership of the Council by any reason shall be filled up by appointment by 
the Central Government within a period of three months from the date of arising 
of such vacancy; 
(v)Rule 12 regarding appointment of substitute member has been deleted; 
(vi)       in Rule 12(6) it has been provided that one -third of the total number of 
members of the Council but not less than eleven members present shall form a 
quorum at a meeting of the Council; 
(vii)      in Rule 14(1) a provision has been made that no posts carrying the maximum 
salary beyond Rs. 13,500 per mensem shall be created or filled without the 
previous approval of the Central Government; 
(viii)     in Rule 14(1)(iii) by giving powers to incur expenditure outside India upto an 
amount, as may be permissible under the exchange control regulations or other 
relevant regulations, and guidelines of the Central Government on each 
individual item; 
(ix)       in Rule 17(2) the ceiling on payments by or on behalf of the Council has been 
raised upto Rs.5000/ - ordinarily and Rs.20,000/ - in extra ordinary conditions; 
and 
(x)in Rule 17(5) the provision requiring approval of Chairman/Vice Chairman for 
disposal of money placed in fixed deposits has been done away with. 

      The Committee, further, observes that there is a typographical error in the numbering 
of rule 14(2) which has been wrongly numbered as 14(1). The Committee desires the 
Ministry to issue a corrigendum to remove this error. 
IV 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Licensing of 
Insurance Agents) Regulations, 2000. 
      The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions 
(i) for incorporation of a time limit of three months for grant/renewal of licence and (ii) 
intimation of the reasons for the delay in grant/renewal of licence to the applicant and the 
likely time for completing the process in regulation 3(2). The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would carry out the above amendments, expeditionsly. 
V 
The Railways (Opening for Public Carriage of Passengers) Rules, 2000 
      The Committee considered the comments of the Ministry on the questionnaire at its 
meeting on the 7th May 2003. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Railways have accepted the Committee's suggestions on (i) Rule 19 Explanation to modify 
the provision so as to specify the documents or types of documents required to be 
forwarded to the Commissioner for initiation of electric traction on a lin e; and (ii) Rule 
24(5) to substitute the words earliest opportunity with suitable words so as to specify that 
the action is taken within a time frame between period of initiation of diversion and use 
of such temporary diversion to ensure prompt action on t he part of the Commissioner. 
The Committee however, recommends that Rule 24(4) may be amended by substituting 
the words "responsible officer" with the words "Railway servant in charge of the work" 
in view of their comments. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out these 
amendments expeditiously under intimation to it. 
VI 
The Companies (Issue of Share Capital with Differential Voting Rights) 
Rules, 2001. 
          The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on 25th October. 2003. 
The Committee is satisfied to note that the Department of Company Affairs have 
notified the amendments as suggested by the Committee by deleting the word 
"preceding" in rule 3(1) and the words "of the year" in rule 3(2) which were 
superfluous. 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH   MEETING 
      The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday the 7th August, 2003 in Room No. 126-
C (Chairman's Room), Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri A. Vijayaraghavan,   -------         Chairman 
2.   Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi 
3.   Shri G.K. Vasan 
4.   Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
5.   Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
6.   Shri Doupad Borgohain 

SECRETARIAT 
1.   Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
3.   Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
4.   Shri Arun Sharma, Committee Officer 
      The Committee considered its draft 148th and 149th Reports. After some discussion, 
the Committee adopted both the Reports. The Committee decided to present the Reports 
to the House on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2003. In this regard, the Committee authorized 
the Chairman and, in his absence, S/Shri Harendra Singh Malik and G.K. Vasan, 
Members, to present the reports. 
2.   The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet again during the 1st week of September, 
2003. 
3.The meeting adjourned at 3.45 p.m. 
 