Com. I- lOS 
• 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
NINETY -NINTH REPORT 
(Presented on the 22nd March, 1993) 
........ 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
Marclr, /993 1 Plralguna. 19/4 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
CoMPOSmo~ OF nU! COMMrrTEE 
2. THE REPORT 
tnuodllruoo. 
PAGES 
(iii) 
II . Nthon.al SaVJnp Sc.hc:me Rutc.s. 1981-lmplementarJOa. of 89th 
Repon of the Comm1ttcc • • • • 2--4 
Ul 8uruu of lndtan Standards Rules, 1981--tmplcmcntllion of 8S1h 
Repon of che Commiucc ~7 
IV . Jawaharbl Nehru l,on Trun Ernrtoyee~ (Wdfarc- F"'nd) Regula-
tion•. 1990 8--LI 
V Tea Board (Recnmment and CondlhOM c>f Sef"\'tee of Oireecon: of 
Tu Promouon Appolnt~d b)' Ciovcrnmcnt) Rules. 1988 
VJ The C.lc:uua Metro Railway (Temporal')' Provitions) General 
RuleJ, 19sc-JmpJtmentalion of 9Jrd Rtpcm of rhe Committee. 
VIJ, ManufaC:1UCCI, Stora,e and Import or HIUirdous Chemicals Rules, 
1989 
Vll1 , Oeponmcm of Personnel and Adminlsllarivc Reforms 0£6~ 
Memor•ndo No. ~(5)/Pension Unit/79 doted the 9th January, 
198-& lind the •Hh February. 1986, regarding cnrry forward or 
leove-lmplcmcnull;(ln or 901h Report of the Comrrunee: , 
IX. C:.ntr•l SilL O~ard l!mploycc• Pension Fund Rul.,, 
1966--lfnplcmentlllon or 86th Re!port or th~ Committee 
3. 1\NNEXURES , 
4. MINITT'ES OF TilE MEETINGS OF "mE COMMITT£E. 
(i) 
12-15 
16-17 
111-22 
23-27 
28·29 
30-37 
41----46 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
I Shn 8hub3ncswtu Kalita - ChamtiiUI 
2. Shn Satyanarayana Oron3mruJu 
3. Shn Sangh Pnya Gautam 
4 Shn Ghufl'l\n Alam 
·s Shn Jagmohan 
b. Shrt Prabhakar B. ~ore 
7 Shu Chtn1.1nhhao Mehta 
8. Shri Mu Sahm 
9 Slut Prav;tl Kumar Samantaray 
to Shn Vcnnd Sharma 
II Dr Y clamunduli SivaJI 
12. Shri (.opa1Mnh G. Sulanki 
13. Shri P llpcnurn 
1~. Shn Tmdii'Unum G Venkatramun 
15 Shrl Ramcndra Kumar Yatlav 'Ravi' 
.Sr:CRETARIAT 
Shu R.C Sop.:rna. D<pllly Sarttmy 
Shr1 Om Pnrkash, Undtr Secrttarr 
Shri A K Singh. Commllt<t Of{ictr 
• 

• 
REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
l, the Chairman or the Commiuee on Subordinate Legislation, having 
been authorised by the Comminee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Ninety·ninth Report or the Commiuee . 
1.1 The Commiuee considered and adopted tbe Repon at its meetin& held 
on the 12th March, 1993. 
1.2 The mauers examined by the Committee arising out of the setutiny of 
various Rules/ Regulations and the issues related therewith, alongwitb the 
comments or the Government received thereon and the observations and 
recommendations, which in the opinion of the Commiuec, should be 
brought to the noricc of the House, are contained in the succuding 
paragraphs of tho Report. 

• 
11 
I'ATIONAL SAVINGS SCHEME RljLES, 198i-IMPLEMENTATION 
OF 89TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
~- The Commonec on Subordinate Lcg~>lauon had con<idered the N3Uonal 
Savings Scheme Rules, l<JS7 and made the folloWing ob"rv-.uons I 
rccommendalion< wnkh were mduded in the 79th Repor1 (Pre,enrcd IO 
the Bouse on the 28th December. 1989):-
"!,7 The Comminee " happ) 10 note that the Monostry oi Fman<e 
though belatedly ha< agreed to the suggesuon regarding calculation of 
inrcro<r •nd hope> that ot woul<l amend Rule 6(2) of the National 
Sa viog< Scheme Rucl>. 1987 on the lines oi Rule 6( 1) oi the Post 
Offico: Savong' AwJunrs Rules, 1981, retrospectively. w.e.!. lst April, 
19~7 1.c the dare ol 1hc commcnccn1cnt of ohe Scheme, wiohoul any 
further dciJy. The Conomiucc (eel> thai there •hould not be any 
difloculty on doing so a> G<>vcmmeno eurlier raised ohc interest 
pnyab lc under the Scheme- from 9 per cent to II per cent 
retrospective ly frc>m thr date of the commcncemcnl ot 1he Scheme. 
2.8 The Committee. however. c.mnot help but place on rccnrd I hill 
the lranung of rules on such vital mailers which arc intended to 
nool>ilbc snvongs, for nauunnl development. is not given scnous 
consideration, so much so that frequent amendment' have to be 
made thcrcrn In tbos Scheme, inotoally only one dcpo,il on • month 
was nllnwed Therctolter, amcndmcno was mad<· to all<>w 1wo deposits 
in a month. TI1crc i> hardly any need to restrict the deposits in a 
month \Oohen an annual rcstricoion has been applied Originally. the 
dcpo>il in u )Car were limotcd to twenl~ thousand ropecs which wa> 
taler rabc<l to thor1y thousand rupees w.c.l lsi April, 19~8" 
2.1 The m91lcr was fur1her con;odered b) the Commincc and follo,.ing 
obscf'\·atoons/ rc.-ommendations were made whocb were mcludcd m 89th 
Rcpor1 (Presented to the House on the 18th Scp1ember, 1991)-
"3.8 The Commiucc notes wooh satl!'factton that the l\-llmstry of 
Fonancc have accepted oo< recommcnd:llion 'nth regard to the 
amendment of rule 6(~) oi the Nooional $a\lngs Scheme Rules 1987 
on the lines of the Rule 6(1) of Post Office Savonp Account Rules. 
1981. to the cllect 1hat all deposillo made in the Scheme upro the lOth 
Oay of,, p11111~ular month will bear interest for 1ha1 month, w c.( the 
1st Apnl, 1987 o.c. the date of the commenccrncnt of the Scheme • 
. md have amended the Rules accurdingly. 

3 
~ 3.9 The Commottcc further notes that tlic Ministry have de.:ided to 
remove the restriction on the number of depositS in ·a month under 
the Scheme, amendment to thts effect if not. earlier carried out may 
be done now under intimation to it 
3.10 The Commmcc, however, feels that the Ministry of Law and 
Ju,toe<: should take special care while tendering adYiec to the 
Mtni>trics. particularly where ma~ing/amcnding of the rules is 
concerned. The Commiucc ;. not happy the way the l\llinistry of Law 
gave an oponion th>t the enhancement of the rate of interest w.e.f. 
lst Apnl, 19S7. b)· an order issued in March, 1988 was not re· 
trospe<tivc :ts the ontcrc" for the year "'as to be calculated only on 
April. 1981\. It appears that proper applicability of mind was not 
thcre.fl 
~.2 The above obscrvatoons / recommendations were forwarded to the 
l\1uuMry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for implementation 
thereof on the 18th September. 1991. These observations I 
recommcndauon~ were also forwarded to the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Department or Legal Affairs) for their views, on the 25th Septembe1, 
1991 
2.3 The Ministry of Finance ••itlc their Office Memorandum dated 11tc 26th 
September, 1')<)1 (copy of which was received on the 31st December, 1991) 
stated lhat 1hey have noted the obscrvntions of the Committee cotttaoned 
in pnl'a 3.8 of I he 89th Report. In regard to the reC<Jml]'lcndation contamcd 
in p~rn 3.9 of the Report, the Mimstry stored that a Notifica110n GSR No. 
988(E), da1ed the 201h December, 1990 (Annexure·!) has already been 
issued amending Rule 5(3) of the National Savings Scheme Rules , 1987 10 
remove the reMriction on the number of deposits in a mon1h. 
2.4 The Min1Mry of Law and J1"ticc (Department of Legal Affairs) •·itlt 
thcor U 0 No1c dated the lOth January. 19~ furnished their vie"'' ~> 
under;-
''The maner "as c~amincd in th1:. Dep~rtment and it was found that 
the Notilkation l<<ued '" :-larch, 1988 regarding enhancement of the 
rate of IOtCrest with effect from the Lst April, 1987 wao; not shown to 
thl$ Department before Jssuong the same i.e. the opinion ol the 
Department of Legal Affairs was not obtained regarding that 
notification Monmry of Finance (Department of Economic Affair.) 
got the noti!J,·auon dated 18th March, 1988 \etted by the Legislati,·c 
Department of tim Mini>try on!) !n the circumstances, the reference 
has been forwa•ded to the Legislattvc Depanment for information 
and ncce!.~ary a..:uon." 

4 
2.S Thereafler, the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
(Legislative Department) vide their U.O. Note dated the 30th Januar;, 
1992 also furnished their comments on the observations contained in para 
3.10 of the 89th Repon. The Comments are reproduced below:-
"The subject matter relates to the examination of the Notification 
No. GSR 35l{E). dated the 8th March, 1988. whereby rate of interest 
was increased .from 9% tO 11% with effect from the lst April, 1987. 
h may be recalled that the then Miniiter of Finance in his Budget 
speech for 1988-89 bad announced thiu the rate of interest on 
deposits in the National Savings Scheme is to be raised from 9% to 
11 "•· The revised rate of interest will be applicable to existing 
deposits also with effect from the 1st April. 1987. The draft 
notificatton to give effect to the said proposal was accordingly vetted 
in this Deportment. h was clear from the notes of the Administrative 
Ministry that the said notificauon will amount to retrospective effect. 
However. as decision had already been taken and made known 
through the speech of the tb.en Finance Minister and as nobody 
would have been adversely affected by the said decision, the 
nolilication had been cleared by this Department without referring 11 
to the Department of Legal Affairs. 
The circumstances leading to the issue of the said notification may 
be brought to the notice of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. It m:1y further be added that though the officers of this 
Deportment ore conversant that retrospec tive effect should only be 
given in cases where the parent Act authorises such retrospective 
cHcct to be given to nny rules or orders made under that Act, yet 
these aspects are again brough t to their notice so that due and proper 
core is taken in vetttng such rules, orders and notifications." 
2.6 The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 22nd 
September, 1992 and decided to report the same to the House. 
2.7 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance 
have amended Rule 5(3) and Rule 6(2) of the National Savings Scheme 
Rules, 1987 so a.~ to give retrospective effect to the revised rate of interest 
on depo~ts in the National Savings Scheme and to remove the restriction 
on the number of deposits in a month, respectively, as suggested by it. The 
Comm•ttec also notes the reply of the Ministry of Law. Justice and 
Company Affau'S (Lcg~slative Department) and decides not to pursue the 
matter further. 

m 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS RULE, 1987'­
IMPLEMENTATION OF 8STii REPORT OF THE- COMMITI'EE 
3. The Comminee on Subordinate legislation had examined the Bureau of 
Indian Standards Rule, 1987 and made certain observations / 
recommendatioM in regard thereto, which were included in the 85th 
Report (Pre$Cnted to the House on 25th July, 1991). 
3.1 The ob$ervations/recommendalions made in the manor arc 
reproduced below:-
"5.5 The Commince notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Food 
and Civil Supplies (Department of Civil Supplies) have amended the 
Bureau of Indian Standarils Rules, 1987 and have increased the 
number of representatives from the Rajya Sabha on the Bureau of 
Indian Standards from one to two and have also incorporated the 
guidelines for $C)ection of representatives on the Bureau from States / 
Union Territories and various Organisations/Undertakings . The 
Com mince, however, recommends that the time-limit prescribed in 
Rules 4(3) and 6(5) for filling up of the vacancies be reduced from six 
montlls to lhree months. The Commiuee a~ rcconimends that 
guidelines for nomination of members on the Executive Comminee 
from amongst the Members of the Bureau should be prescribed so as 
to ensure that all interests are represented thereon and Rule 6(2) be 
amended accordingly. The Committee further recommends that there 
should be suitable guidelines on the maners whicb are to be mutually 
agreed upon under Rule 12(4)." 
3.2 The above observations / recommendations were referred to the 
Ministry of Civil Supplies and Public Distribution on the 30th July, 1991 
for implementation . After a couple of reminders, the Ministry vide their 
O!fice Memorandum dated the 20tb November, 1991, furnished their 
comments. The comments of the Ministry are reproduced below:-
(1) Time-lu11i1 prescribed in RuleJ 4(3) and 6(5) : 
So far as the time-limit of three months instead of six months for filling 
up the vacancoes in the Bureau as recommended by the Committee is 
concerned, it is submitted that it may nol be possible to implement this in 
the ca$C of nominations to be made by the State GovernmentsAlnion 
Territory Administrations. This may happen when elections to the 
Legislative Assembly in a State or several States have been ordered by the 
Election Commission. The concerned Slate / State Governments will be 
5 

6 
able to imimate the nomination or their concerned Minister on the 
Bureau only after the results of the election(s) are over llltld 
Oovernmems formed in that State/States. A d.o. lener has to b. 
addressed by the Minister in-charge of the Ministry having 
administrative control or the Bureau of Indian Standards to the 
concerned Chief Minister(s). The exercise very often takes more than 
three months. In view of this, the time-limit of six months for filling up 
of vacancies 1n the Bureau would be more practical. 
The recommendation of the Committee for fiXing a time-limit of 
three months for filling up of vacancies in the Executive Committee of 
the Bureau are acceptable to this Ministry. 
(2) Amtndmtnt 10 R11lt 6(2): 
This Ministry is willing to make arnendmeru to Rule 6{2) to provide 
guidelines for nominations of the Members of the Executive 
Commincc of the Bureau. The suggested text ts given .below:-
"Thc Executive Commince shall consist of the Director General as 
tJt·offlcio Chairman and 161-Members representing the following 
cacegorics tO be appointed by the Bureau from amongst tho Mem bcrs 
of the Bureau with prior approval of the Central Government: 
(n) 2 persons representing the Ministry or Department of the Cen~ral 
Govcrnmcm having administrative control of the Bureau­
-Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser; 
Joint Secretary dealing with the work of the Bureau 
(b) 2 persons representing Ministries or Dcpanmems of the Central Government; 
(c) 2 persons representing lndusrry. Trade and their associations; 
(d) 2 persons representing Pubic Sector Enterprises: 
(c) 2 persons representing Scientific and Research lnstitulions: 
(f) I person representing a recognised consumer organisation ; 
(g) I person representing Small Scale Sector; 
(h) 1 person representing a technical, educational or professional 
organisation ; , 
(i) 3 Other Members or the Bureau. 
(3) Amrndmenr of Rule 12{4): 
As recommended by the Commillce, it is proposed to amend Rule 12(4) 
to provide guidelines for levying fee for inspection of amclcs or process. 
The proposed text suggesting tire guidelines ~ 6iveo below:-
"The Bureau shall be paid fees for such inspections as may be 
mutually agreed and shall include the following expenses: 
• ·, (a) travelling cost, 

Jtb) daily allowance; and 
(c) other incidentals. 
7 
The (U$ shall be payable in advance." 
(2) It is requested that the informationlclarifiCDtions given abovo may 
kindly be placed before the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha for its perusal and further examination. It is requested !hat the 
concurrence/approval of the Committee in respect of !he consequential 
amendments to be made to the BIS Rules, 1987, may kindly be conveyed 
so that this Ministry may initiate necessary action for amending !he BIS 
Rules accordingly in consultation with the Legislative Department. 
3. • • • • 
4. This issues with the approval of the Minister of State for Civil 
Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution. 
3.3 The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 23rd 
September, 1992 and decided to report the same to the House with 
suitable recommendations. 
3.4 The Committee notes wltb sallstacllon that tbe Ministry ot Civil 
~upplles, Consumer Affairs and Public: Distribution ha,·e accepted Its 
recommendation to reduce the time ltmU froll} six months to three months 
for Oiling up of ncancles In the Executive Commltlee or !he Bureau under 
Rule 6(5) or the Bureau or Indian Standards Rules, 1987. As rqards 
red'!ctlon or time Umll from 6 months to 3 months tor Oiling up vacanclu In 
l,be Bureau under Rule 4(3), the Commlllee aerept the contention or the 
Ministry, Dod decides nol lo press Its earlier recommendation for 
amendment or Rule 4(3). 
3.5 The Committee also notes wllb..satlsfacllon that the Ministry have 
proposed to amend Rule 6(2) to pro>'lde &uidellnes tor nomlnatln& the 
Members or tht Executive Committee of the Bureau as recommended by II 
.arlier. The Commlllee, however, recommends that In proposed sub-douse 
(I) Of Rule 6(2) there should be 2 persons represenllne rtco&nlstd consumer 
organisation instead of I person and In sub-c:lau~ (I) the number be 
reduced from 3 to l. 
3.6 The Committee furlher notes with satlstoclion thai, as per Its 
recommendation. the Ministry have proposed to amend Rule 12(4) to 
provide guld<llnes tor levyln& fee for Inspection of articles or processes. 
3. 7 The Committee recommends that Rules 6(2), 6(5) •nd 12(4) of the 
Burtau or Indian Standards Rules, 1987 be amtnded, as •&reed to by the 
Ministry, expeditiously and under lnllmatlon to h. 

IV 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU PORT TRUST EMPLOYEES (WELFARE 
FUND) REGULATIONS, 1990 
4. The Jawabarlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) 
Regulations. 1990 were examined and certain points were referred to the 
MiQi$try of Surface Transport on the lOth September, 1991 for comments! 
clarifications. 
4.1 The Ministry vidt their Office Memorandum dated the 14th January, 
1992 furnished their comments on the points refen:ed to them. 
4.2 The points referred and comments of the Ministry thereon are 
reproduced below:-
(!) Poinr referred: 
Whether all the rules/regulations to be framed in respect or 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, 
have been framed; if so. the details thereo{ may be furnished? In case 
all the regulations have not been framed, what nrc the areas in 
respect of which rules/regulations are yet to be framed and how the 
mallets are being dealt with in 1he absence of proper rulesr 
regulations? 
Minlsrry's comments: 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust has so far framed the following rules 
and regulations under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963: 
a) Nhava Sbeva Port Trust Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1968. 
b) Nhava Sheva Port Employees (Classification, Control and Appeal) 
Regulations, 1987. 
c) Nhava Shcva Port Trust Employees (Temporary Service) 
Regulations. 1988 
d) Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) 
Re&ulations, 1990. "' 
And other rule$ under the provisions of Major Port Trusts Act. 1963 
are also applicable to Jawaharlal Neltftl Port Trust . 
It is proposed to frame regulations on the following subjects and 
arc under active process in the Ministry: 
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees (General Conditions of 
Scrvicc:l Regulations, \991. 

9 
2. Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employee$ (Grant of Festival 
• Advance) Regulations, 1991. 
(2) Point Rtfurtd: 
Whether the Jawaharlal Nehru Employees (Welfare Fund) 
Regulations, 1990 have bun laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha? U 
so. the details thereof and if not. what are the reasons therefor? 
Ministry's commtnu. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Pon Trust Employee$ (Welfare Fund) Regulations, 
1990 was laid on the Tables of both Houses of Parliament on the 6th Mareb, 1991. 
(3) Pomt rtft"td: 
The term 'any other class of employee$ or labour' appearing in 
Regulation !(C) is not clear. The Ministry may clarify the scope of 
the term. 
Ministry's commtms; 
The term 'any other class of employees or labour' in Regulation I (C) 
- means the regulations arc applicable to regular employees or the 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust only. 
{4) Point rtftrred : 
Sub-Regulations (B) to (D) enlists the receipts creditable to the 
Fund. Provisions of transferring unclaimed paymems. wiJhheld 
Contributory Provident Fund and fine to the Fund is not reasonable. 
It I! felt that such unclaimed dues should go to respective accounts. 
Whether the Ministry have any objection if sub-regulations (B) to (D) 
are deleted and the mcmbel'l may also be asked to contribute to the 
Fund? ln view of the foregoing, Regulation IV(A) which stipulates 
that money from the Fund shall also be used to make payment to 
employee his unclaimed salaries, wages etc. transferred to the Fund 
under Regulation IV(C). may also be deleted. 
Ministry's commtnts: 
Sub-Regulations B, C and D on the reoeipt side are:-
(B) Fine realised from other than the employee employed in 
"Factory" u defined in Section 2 (m) of Factory Act, 1948. 
(C) Salaries. wages, allowances and other payments d1te to 
employees employed in a 'Factory' as defined in Seetion 2(m) of 
the Factories Act, 1948 remained unclaimed for over three years 
from the dale they become due. 

10 
(D) Contribution to the Contributory Provident Fund withheld under 
the revisions of the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Regulatio~ 
~ 
Ministry" of Surface Traniport have no objection if B to D are 
deleted. , NecCisary corrigendum will be issued on receipt of 
oonlirmatlon from Rajya Sahha Secretariat. 
(5) Point nf~rud: 
Whether any guidelines have been framed by the Cbairm&Q for 
incurring expenditure from the Fund under Regulation V? 
MiniJtry's comments: 
No guidelines so far have been framed by the Chairman for incurrin1 
e•penditure from the Fund under Regulation V. 
(6) Point refemd : 
Whether any guidelines have been prescribed by the Chairman for 
utilising the money from Fund by the Deputy Chairman under 
Regulation V(B)? If so, the details thereof. 
Ministry's comment~: 
No powers have been delegated to any or the Head of Departments. 
(?) Point referred: 
The term 'Bhajans' appearing In the Regulations V(C)(f) is not in 
conformity with secular character of our Constitution and hence be 
dclclcd. 
Mlnistry'i comments: 
Sugge11ion to delete "Bhajans" appearing in the Regulations V(C)(f) 
Is accepted. 
NecCisaty corrigendum would be issued after the receipt of 
oonfirmation from Rajya Sabha Secretariat. 
(8) Point rt{trrtd: 
Regulations vn provides for a maximum limit for accumulation in 
the Fund. What is the rationale behind it? Whether any limit has 
been ftxed for the purpose? 
Ministry's comments.· 
At present rbere is a ceiling of Rs. 7.5 lakhs on the maximum 
accumulation in the Fund, which is only for checking the expenditure 
from the Welfare Fund . 
. , 

11 
~ On being asked about the latest position with regard to framing of 
the (i) Jawabarlal Nebru Port Trust Employees General- Conditions of 
Servi~e Regulations, 1991 and (ii) Jawaharlal Nebru Port Trust Employees 
(Grant of Festival Advance) Regulations, 1991. the Ministry vid~ their 
Office Memorandum dated the 17th September, 1992 stated as under:-
"(i} The Port Trust have since furnished the required papers alongwith a 
Certificate from their legal advisor in which it has been mentioned 
that only legal aspects have been taken care of and not the financial 
aspects. For the financial Implications, the ~ase is being examined in 
consullation with the Finan~c Wing of this Ministry. Hence to finalise 
the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust Employees General Conditions of 
Service Regulations, 1992, it may take some time. 
(ii) Jawaharlal Nehru Port Tru&~ (Grant of Festival Advance) 
Regulations, 1992, have been placed on the Tables of both Houses or 
Parliament on the 5th August, 1992 under GSR No. 426(E) dated the 
20th April, 1992. 
4.4. The Commiuee considered the mauer at its meeting held on the 
2Jrd S~pt~mber, /992 and decided to report the same to the House with 
suitable recommendations. 
4.5 The Committee observed that the term •any other class or employees 
or labour' appearina In Reaulallons l(C) It vaaue and rKommends that It 
should be .suitably amended so as to provide these Regulations are 
applicable to aU the re&ular employees or Port Trust . 
4.6 The Committee after some discussion decided not to press for the 
delellon of Sub-re&ulatlons (8) to (D) lo Re&ulatlons Ill and directed '!hat In 
respect thereof status-quo be maintained. ' .' 
4.7 The Committee reels that the term 'Bbe,Jans• appearlna In Reaulatlons 
V(C)(t) Is not In consonance with the secular spirit or our Constitution, 
hence, recommends that the same be deleted soon, under lotlmallon to It. 
4.8 The Committee also recommends that the Jawabarlal Nehru Port 
Trust Employees' General Conditions or Service Reiuladons be framed 
txpedltlously, as assured by the Ministry, under Intimation to II. 

13 
jii) Poinr rtferrecl: 
Rult II, Period of Ptobarion: 
The Rule, lflftr·alia, says.... "Provided tbat tbe appointing 
luthority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the 
period of probation by such period or periods as it deems fit." 
ft is felt that some time limit should be prescribed in tbe Rule upto 
which the period of probation can be extended. Normally, lhe 
maximum period of probation after extension sbould not be more 
than double the period of normal probation. 
It is al~o felt that • provtsion to the effect that "when the probation 
period is to be extended, the Qlncerned officer shall be informed of 
such extension within a reasonable period" should be included in the Rules. 
Minisrry's commtnrs. 
An amendment will be made in line with the reply of the 
representatives of the Tea Board as incorporated in the minutes. 
(iii) Poinl referred: 
Rille ~2. Terminlllilln of Serv~ee on Proba1ion: 
(i) The appointing authority may terminate the services of any officer 
appointed to a post by dirccc recruitment or revert without assigning 
any reasons any officer appointed 10 a post by promotion to the post 
held by him before sych promotion during or at the end of the period 
of probation or the extended period of probation, if his work or 
conduct in that post is found lo be unsatisfactory . 
ft is felt that when a direct recruit with a degr~ in Businesv 
Marketing Management and with at least 1013 years experience at 
the executive level is appointed as Director Grade I or Grade ll, the 
quest{Q/1 of termination should arise only if not found suitable even 
after rhe-tolnpletion of the extended pe1iod of probation. 
Minu1ry 's commtnls: 
There is no need to change rhe Rule as viewed by the 
representatives of the Tea Board. The words "during or at rbe end of 
the period of probation or the extended period o~ probation" alreJ~dy 
exist in the rule and meet the observation of the Commirtec. 

14 
(iv) Pomt refurtd: 
Schedule 
Under Column ll of the Schedule. there is no mention of any 
percentage of vacancies to be filled up by various methods. Such 
percentage should be provided in the Schedule. 
"-lmistry's comm~nts. 
The Schedule does not require any amendment as opined by the 
representatives of the Board. 
(v) Po1111 reft"td • 
Composition of Stltction Commillu: 
The composition of the Selection Committee should be specified 
wherever it has not been specified while selecting members from the 
Executive Commillec. 
Mmi.stry's comments· 
Col. 13 of Schedule does not require any amendment as per reply 
of Tea Board's representatives during the discussion. 
5.3 The Commiuee considered the above reply of the Monimy on the 
13th July, 199(). It, was however, not satisfied with the comments fumi~hcd 
by the Ministry 10 respect of Rule 12 and decided to hear the Commerce 
Secretary to seck further clarifications in the matter. 
5.4 The Secretary accordingly appeared before the Commiucc on the 
11th Fcbruury. 1992, and submiued that Rule 12 was generally in line with 
such a provision in almost all the rules in the Government .. He at~ 
submitted that to w~it till the prob3tion period was over or the extcnd~d 
period of probation was over for terminating the service of an officer 
whose performance was not satisfactory would give undue benefit or 
unintended benefit to such an officer 
5.5 He, however, agreed to a suggestion of the Committee that there 
should be a small, fairly senior level Committee to see that the conduct or 
the performance of the probationer was so unsatisfactory that the 
term ~Ration of his service during the probationary period was justified and 
that all the rules had been scrupulously followed. He a~urcd the 
Committee that Rule 12 would be omended occordingly 
5.6 The information relating to the composition of the Selection 
Committees for Groups C and 0 m the Tea Board. asked or by the 
Committee during the evidence, has been received from the Ministr). 
5.7 The Commlttet'S notes the reply of th '.f.inistry In regard to tht 
\'&rlous points referred to them. It accordingly recommends that Rule 9 be 
so amtodtd as to delete the oxlstln& pro\iso to Sub-Rule (a) and (b) lbtrrof. 
5.8 The Committee feelt that utenslon of probationary period shottld no\ 

19 
of that accident, and furnish thereafter to the concerned authority a 
report relating tO the accidenL~ in instalments. if necessary, in 
Schedule 6." 
The Rule is vague inasmuch as at docs not prescribe any tame limit 
wathin which the occupier is to submat a report of major accident. It i~ felt 
that a time limit may be prescribed for the purpose. 
It is a~ not clear regarding the nature of reports to be furnished in 
instalmems . It is felt that the information readily available may be 
furnished wathin a specific period of time and provision be made tn the 
Rules to that effect . 
Similarly. a time limit may also be fixed for furnishing information under 
paragraph S of Schedule 6 appended to these rules. 
Comme111s: 
This is being taken care of an the amendments being proposed in the 
Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals. Rules. 1989. 
A time-frame of one week is being proposed for occupier to report on 
major accideiat as per Schedule-6. 
As anformauon an Schedule 6 will be available within a week. it mny not 
be necessary to prescribe a time limit in pan 5 of Schcdulc-6. 
.. 
(~) l'oittl rtf"'ml· 
Rr~le 5: Not~ficatlo" of Major Accidem . 
(2) "The concerned authority shall on receipt of report in accordance 
with Sub-Rule 1 of tbi~ rule. shall undertake a full analysis of the 
mnjor nccidcnt und sent the rc<;~uisite information to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest~ through appropriate channel." 
Under Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 5, discretion has been given to the 
concerned authority. It is felt that maxllnum time limit should be fixed for 
fully analysing the major accident and sending the requisite information 10 
the Ministry . 
Commemt: 
A time-frame of 3 month~ is being proposed in the proposed 
amendment~ to the Rules. 
.. 
( 4) l'oalll rtftrrtd : 
Rule 9: Tranmional l'ro•·istons 
"h shall be ~ufficaent complianc" with that ruk if he reports to the 
concerned authority as per the particulars in Schedule 7 within 3 
month\ after the date of coming into operation of those rules on 
within such longer tame as the concerned authori_t) may agree in 
writing.· 
••proyj~IOM ot the Rule not tdc.va.n1 

20 
The term "within such longer ume" appearing in the Rule tS not cle• 
and gives wide powers to the concerned authority. Is there any objection it 
maximum time limit is specified m the rule itself? 
Commtnts: 
A maximum time limit of 6 month is proposed in the amendments. 
(5) Poinr rtftrrtd: 
•• 
Ruk II: Updating of rtpoTIS undtr Rult 10. 
• • 
(2) "Where an occupier has made a report i.n accordance with rule 10 
and Sub-Rule (1) of this rule and that indumial activity ts 
continuing, the occupier shall within three years of the date of the 
last such report, make a further report which shall have regard in 
particular to new technical knowledge which has affected the 
particulars in the previous r'eport relating to safety and hazard 
assessment and shall within 30 days or in such longer ttme as the 
concerned authority may agree in writing. send a copy of the report 
to the concerned authority .. 
The term 'such time' appearing in the rule is not clear The Mintstry 
may explain as to what are the circumstances in which the period for 
sending the report to the concerned authority may be extended. Whether 
the Ministry have any objection to lix a maximum time in sending a report 
to the concerned authority? 
Commtnr.t: 
In the proposed amendments the words in Rule 11(2) after the words 
'"30 days" is proposed to be deleted. 
(6) Poml rtftmd . 
Rule 12 Requirements for furlhtr information to be sen/ to tht authority: 
(I) "Where, in accordance with rule lO, an occupier has sent a safety 
report relating to an industrial activity to the concerned authority, 
the concerned authority may. by a notice served on the occupier, 
requires him to provide such additional information as is specified in 
the notice and the occupier shall sent that infqrmlllion to the 
concerned authority within such time ns is specified in the notice or 
within such extended time as the authority may subsequently 
specify ... 
Rule 12 gives wide powers to the concerned authority Whether the 
Ministry have any objeetion, if a minimum and maximum time limit is 
prescribed within which the requisite information is to be sent to the 
concerncd authority? 
• ·rrovfllons or the Rule not r~lovan1 . 

21 
The figure (1) appearing m cbe rule seems co be irrelevanc and may be tlrlcted. 
Commtntt 
A new Sub-Rule co Rule 10 is being introduced providing for 45 days 
rime wichin which chc concerned authority will have co serve an 
improvement notice on the occupcer for additional information. 
A mixmum rime frame of 90 days is being proposed for rhe occupier ro give additconal informacion. 
This 1< being deleted. 
(7) Pomt rtftrrtd · 
Rttlt /8. Import of Hazardous Chtmit:o/s . 
• 
(3} "If rhc concerned nurhonry at rhc State is sarisfied iJ!ar the chemical 
bcrng imported is likely ro cause major accidenr. it mal direcr rhc 
importer ro cake such steP" including stoppage of such imports as the 
concerned auchority at the Stare may deem 11 appropriate." 
The discrelionury power vested in rhc concerned aurhomy ac rhe scare is 
coo wide and can be abused to rhc dcrriment of the importer. The Ministry may please clarify. 
The ccrm ·such seeps· nppearing in rhc Rule is not dear. h may be 
cluriricd as whot docs chis rcrm denocc'/ 
h is also fell rhac word 'ar· appearing twice in the Rule has not been 
used propetly. The Minisrry may explain whether the term ·ar' has been 
used intentionally or it as a typographical error? Whether the MioiSJry have 
any objection to $ubstitucc the same with word 'of? 
Comments: 
The term '$uch steps' is being replaced by 'such safety measures'. A new 
Sub-Rule 4 to Rule 18 is being added as under after dcleaing che words 
"including scoppagc of such importS" from Sub-Rule 3. 
In case. the concerned auchoricy of the Stare is of che view char the 
chemical should nor be imported on safety and environmental 
consideration, rhc authority may direct stoppage of such imports. 
The word 'at· ·~ being replaced by ·or. 
PUtm r~ftrrtd : 
R11/e /9 lm[>ro••tm~m notius : 
(I} "If the concerned authonty is of the op~ncon that a person has 
conrravcned the provisions or these rules, the concerned authority 
•hall <crve on him a no rice (in 1 his para referred to as -an 
improvemcnr notice) requiring rhar person 10 remedy rhe 
conrnrvcntion or, a' the case may be. rhe maners occasioning it 
wirhin such period as may be ~pecified in the norice~. 

22 
Th1< Rule g.ves w1de powers to the concerned authority as it docs ~ 
specify any lime hmit within which a person has to remedy rho 
contravention Whether the Mm1s1ry have any objection to fix • limc·limll 
in the maucr? 
Commtnts: 
The limot of 4S days 1S being prescribed for .ssuc nf an amprovement 
notice b)· the auth(>rillcs in the proposed amendment>. 
7.3 The Mini~try "ere requested on 8.9.92 to furnish the latcM p<Ntion 
in the maucr In repl). the Ministry •·idt their D.O.Icucr dated the 18th .. ~eptcmbcr. 1992. stated as under· 
"The final draft of the proposed amendments "" suggested by the 
Comnaincc on Su.bordinate Lcgi>lation alon8''ith other .1mcndmcnts 
have been sent to the Law Ministry for vcumg 
As regards the two sets of rules that arc still to be !romed, the rule> 
on Classaficarion. Labelling and Packaging of Halardous Chemicals " 
bcmg redrafted on the basis of suggestions made by cxpcns Rule< on 
Erucrgcncy Preparedness is being drafted ." 
7.4 The Committee cons•dcrcd the mnncr at 1ts meeting held on a he 2t'i 
October. 1992 and dcc1dcd to report the same to the house 
7.5 The Committee upproves amendments proposed hy the Mini<try uf 
l~nviruutllellt and Fure•ts In regard to Rules 5 (1), 5(2), 9,12, lft(JJ und 
19(1) (I( the Manufucturc, Storugc und import of Hn7.nrdous Chemicnls 
Hult•s, 1989 ond directs that these nmendments be carried out expeditiously, 
under intlmnllon to it. 
7.6 The Committee, ho~+ICVet, does not upprqve the amendment pa·oposed 
by the Ministry for Rule 11(2) regarding delet.~n ol entire po1·lion ufler the 
words "30 days". It, thercf>Ore, recommends that the Ministry should ddcl< 
the words "or In such hm~oer time as the concerned authority may agree In 
wrllinK" from the Rule. 
7.7. The Committee notes the comments of the :1-lini<try In regard lo 
framin¥ of t"o >eU cof Rules namlty (I) Rules on Clas<ification, Labellint 
und Puckaging of Hazardous ChemiC11Is; and lill Rule. on Emergenc, 
Preparedness. The Committee hopes that these Rulrs may "" fram.d 
upedltiou~ly under intimation to it. 

VITI 
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
REfORMS OFFICE MEMORANDA NO 4{5}/PENS!ON UNIT/79 
DATED TiiE 9Tll JANUARY. 1984 AND THE 4TH fEBRUARY. 
1986 REGARDING CARRY FORWARD OF LEAVE-
I\1PLEMEI'.'TATION OF 90TH REPORT OF TiiE COMMITTEE. 
8. The Comm111ee on Subordinate Legislation had considered the 
Dcpanmcm of Pcr.;onncl and Admini~trative Reform• Office 
Memorandum No. 4(5yPenslon Uru1179 dated the 9th January. 1984 and 
4th February. 1986, regarding carry forward of leave and made ccrram 
observauonv'rccommcndations, which were included on ots 79th Report 
(Prcscntca to the House on the 18th December. 1989). The obscrvauon,;, 
recommendation; of the CommJIIcc arc reproduced bclow:-
"The Commillee notes woth stmlc satisfactiOn that the Ministr~ have 
agreed and decided in principle to allow the benefit of enca>hmcnl of 
lc<Ovc by the Central Government employees on their ab<orption in the 
Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies under 1hc control of 
the State Governments. as suggested by 11. The Commillcc hopes that 
nece~~aoy orders to th1s cffcco would be issued at an early date having 
retrospective effect from the date from which this bcocfit was nlluwcd 
to the Central Government employees on their absorption in tltc Puhlic 
Sector Undcnaking~ etc, owned by the Central Government cith~r 
exclusively or jointly with the State Government;, so that case~ pending 
or already dispo,ed of could t>c decided under the rcvi~cd rules, Tioc 
Cummi11ce also hopes that it would be informed nf the revised orders 
os and when L'!.ucd." 
The Commmee 1<, however. not mclined to agree witb the stand of 1hc 
G~>vcrnmeno thnt there IS no necc~\ity of making an) formal amendments 
to the Leave Rules on the ground that orders of ~bsorption arc spccoal 
order> and not covered by ohc Leave Rules. It cannot be denied th>t the 
accural of lca,·c to the Government employees and its availing of by them 
whether during the service or on retirement/absorption etc. i.< unl~ m 
accordnnce with the provisions of Leave Rules. It is for this rca.,on that all 
such mailers should be dealt within frame work of the rules and the 
amendments ossued thereto. as and when ncces.ary a< formal amending 
rules. The Commillce is also aware that thi< is by and large the cffon of 
ohe Government Departments to run the admmistration b} is.,uing 
mstrucuons rather than framing the rules and pulling them on ohc StJtute 
Book. The Commollee feels that this JS not a happy situaoion nnd the 
2J 

24 
formnl rules should be made wherever required. rn the present ca~e the 
orders should be ls.\ucd a~ amendments to the Leave Rules." 
8.1 The Committee again considered the matter and made ~rtain 
ob~rvationslrccommcndations which arc contained in its 90th Report 
(Presented to the House on the 18th September. 1991). The observation&! 
recommendations arc reproduced below:-
"3.5 The Commillee is satisfied that its recommendations have been 
accepted by the Government. However, it is unable to agree to 
Government's contention that it may not be possible to agree to the 
suggestion given by the Commillee earl ier for retrospective application 
of the order dated the 16th October, 1989. The Committee is surprised 
to note that the Government have given two dates for the 
implementation of the revised rule, i.e .. the 16th October. 1989 on 
which date the revised order was issued and then the date of publication 
of the notification amending the Central Civil Services (Leave) Rule' t.e 
the 26th January, 1991. The Committee is of the considered view that in 
such matters where the lacunae and short -comings of the original order~ 
:.chcmc.~ etc. have been rectified, ther,e should not be any difficulty to 
give retrospective effect to the amende-d order/scheme. Such matte" 
should be taken at par with court decisions which give relief to the 
aggrieved parties retrO>pcctivcly. The Commitee h~ also been informed 
that quite often such orders ore given retrospective effect by the 
Government thcmselvc.•. 
3.6 The Committee, therefore, hope.~ that in the instant case, the 
Ministry of Pcr~onncl, Publ(c Grievances and Pensions will give 
retrospective effect to the order dated the 16th October, 1989 and the 
order will be made effective from the 9th January, 1984, i.e. the date oi 
issue of original order regarding grant of pro-rata retirement benefits on 
permanent absorption or permanent Central Govcrncment employees in 
the Public Sector Undertaking~ and Autonomous bodies under the State 
Governments and the cases already decided otherwise would be re· 
opened and justice done to them." 
8.2 The above observatronslreeommcndations of tbe Committee were 
referred to the Ministry of Pe,.onnel, Public Grievances and Pension~ on 
the 18th September. 1991 for implementat ion thereof. 
8 3 The Minostry vtd~ theor Office Memorandum dated the 13th 
Deccmbcr. 1991 intimated their vrcws in the matter which arc as folloM:-
• .. .. to say that wuh regard to the observations made by the Committee 
that the orders contained in Office Memorandum No 4/41188-P&PW 

2S 
I'D) dated the 16th October. 1989 should be given retrospective effect 
from the 9th January, 1984. The following points are relevant:-
{i) That the Government ord,ers contained in the Office Memorandum 
No. 4(5)/Pension Unit/79 dated the 9th January, 1984 entitled the 
Central Government officials who are absorbed in State Public Sector 
Undertakings and State Autonomous Bodies for the grant of pro-rata 
retirement benefit$, for the first time. The only discrimination in 
comparison to those who were absorbed in Central Autonomous 
Bodies was that they were not eligible to the benefit of "carry 
forward of leave". When tbe Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
pointed this out for tbe first time, only this discrimination was to be 
removed. While examining this suggestion, it was noticed that parity 
bad been brought about with effect from the 31st March, 1987 in the 
terms and conditions of absorption of a Central Government 
employee in a Central Autonomous Body with those who arc 
absorbed in a Central Public Sector Undertaking. With the 
restoration or this parity, disparity in the terms and conditions of 
absorption in a State Public Sector UndenakingiState Autenomous 
Body vis-a-vis a Central Autonomous Body had further widened. 
With a view to remove the disparity once for all, it was decided with 
the approval of t.he then Minister of State in this Ministry to grant the 
same tenns and conditions of absorption to a person getting absorbed 
in a State Public Sector UndenakingiState Autonomous Body as arc 
admissible on absorption in a Central Autonomous Body. 
Accordingly, orders had been issued on the 16th October, 1989 which 
takes effect from the date of its issue. 
(ii) The orders contained in the Office Memorandum No. 4 (12)185· 
P&PW dated the 31st March, 1987 relotmg to Central Government 
employees absorbed in Central Autonomus Bodies are applicable 
only prospectively tO those who arc so absorbed on and after the 31st 
March, 1987 Under the circumstances. the provisions of the Orricc 
Memorandum dated the 16th October. 1989 which is based on the 
liberalisation contained in Office Memorandum dated the 31st March. 
1987 cannot be extended to take effect from the 9th January. 1984. 
(2) HB'Ving regard to the observations made by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation. it is submitted that the terms and conditions of 
absorption in a State Public Sector Undertaking/State Autonomous Body 
cannot be more liberal compared to what is available to a Central 
' Government employee on absorption in a Central Autonomous Body . • While issuing the initial orders on the 9th January. !984, it had been 
categorically mentioned in para I of this olfice memorandum that:-
"thc permanent Central Government employees who are deputed tO the 
Public Sector Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies, wholly or 
substantially owned or wntrollcd by the va1i0u~ SHllc Govcrnmcnl:) assu.l 

26 
' are subsequently absorbed pemunently in such organisations with-uhe 
prior permission of the parent department of Central Government, may 
be allowed pro-rata retirement benefits (except the benefit of';carry 
forward or leave) as are admissible to permanent Cenrral Govcrhment 
employees absorbed permanently under the Autonomous Bodies 
controlled or financed wholly or substantially by the Central 
Government in accordance with the instructioos laid down in the 
Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum No 26(18)-E.V(B)/75 dated 
the 8th April, 1976 " 
(3) Under the circumstances mentioned above the disparity in tbe Office 
Memorandum dated the 9th Jaouary, 1984 (subsequently amended vide 
Office Memorandum dated the 16th October, 1989) regarding carry 
forward of leave is required to be removed. The Government, therefore. 
have decided to issue instructions on the following lines :-
(a) The provision relating to carry forward of leave applicable to the 
Central Government employees on absorption in Central 
Autonomous Bodies in the public interest may be made applicable to 
the Central Government employees wbo were absorbed in State 
Public Sector Undcnakings/Autonomous Bodies during the period 
from 9th January, 1984 to 30th March. 1987. This would remove the 
discrimination originally pointed out by the Commiuce on 
Subordinate Legislation. 
(b) The instruction of Office Memorandum dated the 16th October, 1989 
mny be applicable to Centra l Government officoals who were 
absorbed in State Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous bodies on 
or urtcr 31st March. 1987 instead from 16th October, 1989. This 
would ensure that there is no discrimination between those who were 
absorbed in Central Autonomou.~ Bodies and State Pubhc Sector 
Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies right from the date on which the 
liberalised terms and conditions were introduectl. 
(4) As regards question of this Department's Office Memorandum dated 
the 22nd October. 1990 being published in the Gazette of January. 1991 it 
may be stated that m all such cases a time gap of shon durauon is 
unavoidable as the Press tokes some time to publish the rqotification. In 
any case the executive instructions take care of the cases during the 
intervening gap and hence n<>tificauon need not be given retrospccti•e 
effect." 
8.4 On beong asked, the Ministry vidt their Office Memorandum dated 
the ISth September, 1992, informed that the above instru<:tions have 
already been issued by them on the 22nd April. 1992 (Anncxure-111). The 
Ministry have also stated that consequential amendments to the Central 
Civil Services (Leave) Rules, 1972 arc also being carried out in 
consultation wuh the Ministry of Law and Justice. 

27 
8.5 The Commiltee considered the maner at its meeting held on the 
23rd September , 1992 and decided to report the same to the House. 
8.6 The Committee directs that aU neressary steps should M taken by 
Government to make amendments 10 lbe leave rules wherever required Ia 
alven situation Instead or lssuln& admlnlstraJlve Instructions so that the 
slgniDcanee or scrullalllna powtrs or Parliament may not M araded doWD. 
8. 7 The Commlltee notes with satlsfutlon lbat tbt Mlalstry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions bne lssued instructions to give 
retrospective etTect from the 91b January, 1984 (lbe date of Issue or orlglaal 
order ), to the order dated lhe 16111 Octobe.r, 1989 wilh regard to uant or 
pro-rat~~ retirement beneDIS to the Ctrunl Gove.-nmeot eropiO}e<S wbo were 
p.rmaneotly abJOrbtd In State Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous 
Bodies durin& the period from the 9th January, 1984 to 30lb March, 1987 
and those who were abJOrbtd on or aner Jist March, 1987 will be treated 
prospecUvtly for the purpose or above benents. Hence, the Committee 
decides not to pursue tbt matter further. 
' 

lX 
CENTRAL SILK BOARD EMPLOYEES PENSION FUND 
RULES 1966-IMPl.EMENTATION OF 86TH REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE. 
9. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation had earlier considered the 
Central Silk Board Employees Pension Fund Rules. 1966 and made certain 
observations/recommendations, which were included in the 86th Repon 
(Presented to the House on the 7th August, 1991). 
9.1 The observations/recommendations of the Committee are 
reproduced below:-
·s. 7 The Committee notes with a liulc surprise the explanation given by 
the Ministry of Textiles for repealing the Central Silk Board Employees 
Pension Fund Rules, 1966 In 1010. The Committee fails to understand as 
to what was the need to make rules if they were to be repealed without 
being implemented." 
9.2 The above obslorvations of the Committee were referred to the 
Ministry of Textiles on the 8th Augu.\t, 1991 for information_ AJ)d 
comments. After a couple of reminders, the Minsitry vi~Jhetroffiee 
Memorandum dated the 2nd January. 1992 furnished their comments as 
under :-
"The Central Silk Board Employees Pension Fund was required to be 
established in terms of Central Silk Board Employees Pension Fund 
Rules. 1966 published by the Govenment of India, Ministry of 
Commerce, vide Notification No. F. 22(13)64-TEX(G) dated the 31st 
December, 1966 for payment of pension to the employees of the Board 
with effect from the 1st April, 1966 as per provisions of Rule 28·A of 
Central Pension-cum-Gratuity benefitS to the employees of the Board 
was introduced during 1966-67/1967·68, the Board's Secretariat hod 
initiated action for constitution of the Fund in consultation with the 
Ministry. The then Administrative Ministry had informed the Board that 
there was no need for creation of a separate ~or1~~pose and 
that the amount required for payment of~nsion and other pensionary 
bencfit.s..J;.Q~Jid-·bc merout -of the Grant·in·aid made twailable to the 
Board and for which necessary provisions could be included in the yearly 
Budget proposals. In view of this, Pension Fund was not created and the 
Board is mailing suitable provisions every year in the Budget Estimates 
and the expenditure on account of payment of pension and Death-cum· 
Retirement Gratuity is debited to Grant-in-aid. This practice/procedure 
i~ being followed since the commencement of the Pension Scheme fM 
28 

29 
the Board's employee&. Apar1 from tbis, Rule 28·A of Central Silk 
Board Rules, 1955, as amended from time to time, also stipulates that 
the liberalised pension rules of the Central Government will be 
applicable to the employees of the Board with ·regard to the grant of 
pension and gratuily. Accordingly, the Central Silk Board employees are 
allowed all the benefits which are apJ>Iieable to Central Government 
employees at the corresponding rates. 
It is requested that the Rajya Sabba Committee on Subordinate 
legislation may kindly be apprised of the above position." 
9.3 The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 
22nd September , 1992 and decided to report the same . 
9.4 TM Committee notes the explanation &fvto by the Ministry ot Textiles 
ror tcJ>CBUna the Central Silk Board Employ- Pms!on Fund Rules, 1966 
and decidu not to pursue the matter rurt her. 
NEW DELHI; 
12th March, 199.3, 
BHUBAJI.'ESWAR KALITA , 
Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinatt LeglslatitJn. 
I 

ANNEXURE·! 
(Vidt para 2.3 of the Report) 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMEI'T OF EcoNOMIC AFFALRS) 
NOTlFICA TION 
New Delhi, the 20th December. 1990 
G.S.R. 9S8(E)-In exercise of the powers conferred by section 15 of the 
Government Savings Bank Act, 1873 (S of 1873), the Central Government 
hereby makes the following rules further to amend the National Savings 
Scheme Rules. 1987. namely:-
! (1) These rules may be called the NatioJlal Savings Scheme (Second 
Amendment) Rules, 1990. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the 
Official Gatcttc. 
2. In ruleS of the NatioMI Savings S<:heme Rules, 19&7 for sub-rule (3), 
the following sub·rule shall be substituted. namely:-
"(3) The total deposits in a year shall not exceed forty thousand rupees." 
(F. No. z.s.90-NS. TI} 
N. RADHAKRISHNAN . 
Director (Budget). 

ANI"EXURE-11 
{Vide para S.J of the Repon) 
February I, 1989 
Discussion with tire Represenraliv-s of tire Tea Board 
3. The Commiuce assembled at the Board Room of the Tea Board at 
10.30 A.M. on Wednesday. the 1st February, 1989. and held discussions 
with the representatives of the Tea Board on the Tea Board (Reauitment 
and Conditions of Service of Directors of tbe Tea Promotion Appointed by 
Government) Rules, 1988, in the light ot the Questionnaire prepared on the subject. 
3.1 The following were present:­
Chowdhary Rom Sewak -Chamnan 
Shri La! K. Advnnr 
M£MOEIIS 
Shri Shankarrao Narayanrao Ocshmukh 
Shri Thomas Kuthiruvauom 
Shri Chnndrlka Prasad Tripnthi 
Shri Kapil Verma 
Shri Ish 0 u11 Yadnv 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.P. Mahnjan, Depmy Secrelary 
Shri S.K. Sen Gupta, Under Secwary 
REPRE.>£NTAnv£s or• Trt£ T£1\. BOARo 
Shri S.S. AhuJa, Deputy Cha1rm:tn 
Shri S. Som, Secretary 
Shri D. Mukherjee, F. A & C. A. 0. 
Shri A.N. Roy. Director of Tc• Development 
Shn T.C. Choudhury, Director (Research) 
Shri K.P. Roy Choudhur;·. La" Officer. 
REPRESU."TAnvt OF n~t Mt~<rsmv OF COMMERCE 
Shri A.N. Das, Section Officer 
3.2 At the outset, the Chairman and Members of the Committee 
expressed their displeasure about the absence of the Chairman of the Tea 
Board from the mectrng of the Parliamentary Commiuec for which advance intimation had been grvcn 
31 

32 
3.3 '1bereafter, Shri S.S. Ahuja. Deputy Chairman, Tea Bo~rd 
welcomed the Chairman and other members of the Committee and 
introduced the OHiecrs of the Tea Board to the Committee . 
3.4 The Chairman, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, welcomed 
the Deputy Chairman and other officers of the Tea Board and introduced 
the Members and Officers. 
3.5 The resume of the discussions is as under: 
Point: Proviso to Rulu 9(a) and (b): 
The order of seniority should only be changed in cases where the 
probation period has been extended beyond the normal period. The 
proviso, as it is. gives arbitrary power to the Administration , whicjl_is_J}Ot 
demable. 
Rtply: In terms of the new rule on confirmation and seniority, every 
person appointed on probation shall be deemed to have been confirmed 
with effect from the date on which he is declared to have satisfacton1y 
completed the probationary period. In the case of direct recruits. seniority 
shall follow the order of confirmation and not the original order of merit, 
but in the ease of promotees, seniority will have to be determined on the 
basis of confirmation in the entry grade which means that whatever be the 
date of satisfactory completion of the probation period tn case of 
promotees, their seniority will follow the order of confirmation tn the 
grade in which they enlered. Because under the new rules, confirmation 
will be made only once in the service of an official which will be in the 
entry grade and confirmation is delinkcd from the availability of 
permanent vacancies in the grade. 
In the above circumstances, seniority o£ direct recruits will follow the 
order of confirmation. but in the case of promotees their seniority wiU be 
independent of the order of confirmation m the promotion post. It is. 
therefore, felt thnt Rule 9 is required to be reviewed in the light of 
Government of India's revised pro-cedure on confirmation, seniority, etc. 
as circulated under O.M. No. 18011M6·Estt. (D) dated 28.3.1988 issued 
by the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department 
of Personnel and Training). The Committee felt that while reviewing Rule 
9. its opinion that the seniority of the direct recruits who completed their 
probation in the stipulated period, should not be changed 
Pomr: Rule·li-Ptriod of Probation 
The Rule inrer·alia states ... "Provided that the appointing authority may 
for reasons to be recorded in writing. extend the period of probation by 
such period or periods as it deems fit " 
It is felt that some time limit should be prescribed in the Rule upto 

33 
which the period of probation can be extended. NormaUy, the maximum 
period of probation after extension should nor be more than double the peroid of normal probation. 
It is also felt that when the probation period is to be extended the 
concerned officer should be informed of such extension within a reasonable 
period ro be included in the Rules. 
R~ply: Generally. the period upro which probation period can be 
extended is nor prescribed in the recruitment rules. The intention is, 
perhaps, to leave the matrer to the direction of the appointing authority . 
The suggestion of the Committee that such period should be fixed is 
accepted and the extension of rbe probation may be upro a maximum period of two years. 
Regardina communication of such extension of probation period to the 
concerned officer, the Committee's suggestion that a time limit of three 
months may be prescribed within which the concerned officer should be 
informed of such extension, ill accepted. 
Point: Rult·/2- Termination of Str>ict on Pr()baJion 
The ap~inring authority may terminate the services of any officer 
appointed ro a posr by direct recruitment or revert without assigning any 
officer appointed .ro a post by promotion to the post held by him before 
such promotion during or at the end of the period of probation or the 
extended period of probation if his work or conduct in that post found to be unsatisfactory . 
It is felt that when a direct recruit wirll degree in Business-Marketing 
Management and with at least liY.l years experience at the executive level, 
is appointed as Director Grade I or 11, the question of termination should 
arise only if not found suitable even after the completion oi the extended period of probation. · -
Rtply: It would be better to retain the position as it is. It is better if rule is 
made applicable to a person who is found not suitable during the probation period. .M, 
The Commirree did nor agree wirb this view. It was of rhe opinion that 
the services of a direct recruit should be terminated only if he was not 
found suitable even after the completion of the extended period of 
probation. On an inquiry, the reprcsenJative of the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the Ministry did not have the opportunity to go through 
these rules and that the Government was in tbe process of amending these 
rules. While so doing, the Committee's suggestion would be kept in view 
Point: Sclrtdule- Column 8 • 
It is nor clear from the expression "experience in expon and sales 
oromorion" as to ar what level and how many years· or experience in 

.. . 
expons and sales promotion is necemry to be considered for t~ 
appointment as a Director (Grade 1). This should be specified. 
Reply: Such experience may be at an equivalent executive level and the 
period of such experience may be 10 years. the Schedule would be 
amended accordingly. 
Point: Schedule- Column 11 
Under eloumn 11 of the Schedule. there is no mention of any percentaae 
of vacancies to be filled up by various methods. Such percentage should be 
provided in the Schedule. 
Reply: It is not necess8l)' to fix the percentage of vacancies to be filled 
up by various methods. The appointina authority. who is also ln·charae 
of administration of an organisation. should have some discretion in 
determining whether a particular vacancy should be filled up by promotion 
or transfer of eligible officials within the Tea· Board or by transfer on 
deputation or short term contract through direct recruitment. There may 
be situation when no eligible officer in the feeder cadre is available for 
promotion or the eligible officials within the Board may not be willing for 
transfer to posts outlidc India. The Government of India have not fU<cd 
any formula for deciding the perccntaJie. Such percentage may be 
determined by subjective element sqch u requisite experience and 
exposure in these worp etc. 
A view was expressed that cent percent posts be filled by promotion. In 
case, however, none was found suitable. then by direct recruitment. This 
should be taken note of while reviewln& these rules. 
Point: Schedule- Column 11 
By promotion or transfer of eligible officials within the Tea Board. 
failina which by transfer on deputulon or shon·term contract throuah 
direct recruitments. The methoQ.1>rocedure to be adopted for direct 
recruitment hu not been specified. 
Reply: For direct recruitment, the procedure followed is exactly the 
same as dono by other Government Depaztmcnts. Advertisements on All· 
India basis givlna all essential and other qualifications as specified in 
column 8 of the Schedule arc made. The initial screening of applications 
and papers received in reply to open advertisement is done by the 
administrative machinery. Thereafter, a final list is prepared for interview . 
Point: What is the composition of the Selection Comminee7 
Rtply: The composition of the Selection Comminee has been &ivcn 
under column 13 of the Schedule which reads as under: 
(a) Secretary'Additional Secretary, Ministry of Commerce 
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce. 

lJ.O'I .9J 
35 
(c) Chairman, Tea Board . 
(d) A member of the Executive Commiuee of Tea Board. 
Poim: Whether a member of, the Executive Comminee is selected by 
seniority? 
Reply: The Executive Committee is looking after all the administrative 
mauers or the Board . Seniority is not taken into account for the selection 
or a member or the Executive Comminee to the Selection Comminee and 
there is no fuced norm in the maner as availability of a particular member 
on a panicular date sometimes poses problem . 
Point: The composition of the Selection Committee should be specified, 
wherever it has not been specified. 
Rtply: There will be difficulty in specifying the composition of the 
Selection Comminee . The interests of tbc Tea Industry arid Trade are 
looked after by persons who are also Board Members and who otherwise 
rcmian so busy that it is not possible to find a particular member for 
inclusion in the Selection Comminee. 
The Comminee was not satisfied with the explanation and suggested 
that, as far as possible, the composition of the Selection Comminee should 
be made specific. II also suggested that the levels, where selections were to 
be made by interview alone, test and interview collectively and a wrinen 
test also, should be specified in these rules. 
3.6 The Chairman of the Committee thanked the representatives of the 
Tea Board on the lively discussion. 
3. 7 The discussion thereafter concluded at 12.45 P.M • 
• 

ANNEX:URE-lll 
(vide para 8.4 of the Report) 
No.414519l·P&PW(D) 
GoVEIU'IMEI'T OF INolA 
Ministry of Personnel & . ~.G. & Pensions 
(D~pottment of- PtJUion & Pensioners' Welfare) 
New Delhi, tht 22nd April, 92. 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
SuoJEcr:- Absorption of permanent Central Govt. employees in the. 
publi~ secto.L undertakings/autonomous bodies/joint sector 
under· takings under the control of State Govts.·revicw of the 
terms and conditions of absorption. 
The terms and conditions of absorption of a permanent Central Govt. 
employee in a PSU/autonomous body under the control of a State Govt< 
or a Joint Sector Undertaking under the control of a Central and State 
Govt. or two or more State Govts. were spelt out under DP&AR's O.M. 
No. 4(5yPU179 dated 9th January, 19&4. Those were superseded with the' 
Issue of this Deptt.'s O.M. No. 4143188-P&PW(D) dated 16th October, 
1989. Accordingly, the Government servants absorbed in a State PSU/ 
autonomous body/joint sector undertaking during the period from 9th 
January, 1984 to 15th October, 1989 were eligible to the retirement 
benefits stipulated in the O.M . dated 9th January, 19&4, whereas the 
employees who have been absorbed on and after 16th October. 1989 are 
governed by the terms and conditions laid down in the O.M. dated ~th 
October. 1989 ibid;. 
The President is now pleased to decide that the DP&AR's O.M. dated 
9th January, 19&4 and this Deptt.'s O.M. dated 16th October. 1989 will 
stand modified to the extent indicated below:-
(a) Para 1 of the DP&AR's O.M. dated 9th January, 19&4 which 
does not provide for carry forward of leave will stand modified 
to the extent tbat where the permanent absorption of a Central 
Govt. employee in a State PSU/ autonomous body/joint see1or 
undertaking has taken place during the period from 9th January, 
19&4 to 30th Marcb, 1987, carry forward of earned leave will be 
allowed to the extent due and admissible on the date or 
absorption of the employee subject to the condition that the 
permanent absorption was in the public interest. 
36 
• 

37 
(b) The first line of paragraph 4 of the O.M. dated 16th October, 
1989 which provides that 'these orders shall take effect from the 
date of issue' shall stand modified as under:-• "these orders shall take e((ect from 31-3-87." 
3. Ministry of Agriculture etc. are requested to issue necessary 
instructions to the anaehecllsubordinatc offices so that cases are regulated 
as per the clarifications given in the preceding paragraph. Closed cases 
may also be reopened u and wben reference& are received by the 
respective MinistriesiDeptt .'siOfficcs and dealt with on the basis of these 
instructions. 
4 In so far u persons serving in the Indian Audit & Ae<:ounts Depn . 
arc concerned, these ordcn have been issued after consultation with the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India. 
S. Hindi version of this O.M. is enclosed. 
To 
Sdl· 
(SWARN DASS) 
Deputy Secretary to tht Govt. of India 
(i) All Ministries/Dcpns 
Offices of the Oovt. of India 
(as per standard list). 
(ii) Office of C & AG with 200 spare copies. 

MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF TiiE COMMITrEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
xxvm 
TWENTY·EIGHTH MEETING 
• 
The Comminee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 13th July, 1990, in 
C -,juee Room 'A', Growfd Floor. Parliament House AMexe. New 
o~l ni. 
• • • • • • • • • • • 
MEMBERS PRESEI'IT 
Chowdhary Ram Sewak - Chairman 
Shri Tridib Chaudhuri 
Sh ri Subramanian Swamy 
Shri Ashok Nath Verma 
Shri Kapil Verma 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. P. Singh. Jomt Secretary 
Shrimoti Vandana Garg, - Committee Officer 
Shri S. K. Ganguli, - Commiltee Ojfictr 
• • • • 
3· • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
4. M•morandunr No. 42189 
The Tea Board (Recruitment and Condit lens of S~rvice of Directors of 
Tea Promotion appoinltd by Govt.) Rules, 1988. 
The Commiuee considered the above Memorandum . It however. was 
not satisfied with the comments furnished by rhe Ministry of Commerce in 
respect of Rule 12 and decided to hear the Secretary 6f the Ministry to 
seek funher clarifications in the mauer . 
5· • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
6. The Commiuce then adjourned at 3.35 P.M . 
•Rclttc·s 10 maucr not tncludcd in the Repon. 
41 

I 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Commmee met at 3.00 r.M. on Thursday. the 12th De~mbcr, 1991 
in Con1mittcc Room 63. First Floor, Parliament House, Kew Delhi 
MEMBERS PRES£>.T 
Shn Jage$b Desai - Chairman 
Shn Gaj Smgh 
Shri Mentay Padmanabham 
Shri M. Palantyandi 
Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
Shn G.G. Swell 
Shrt Kapil Verma 
Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
SECRETI\Rt"-T 
Shn S K. Sen G upta, - Deputy Secretary 
Shrl R. C Sopcrna, - Under Secretary 
Shri A K. Smgh. - Commillu Officer 
2 The Committee took up the draft 93rd Repon for consideration and 
adopted the 'arne It decided to present the Report to the Ilou,c at its 
SJIIing to be held on Thursday, the 19th December. 1991, and authorised 
the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Kapil Verma or Shri S. Vtduthalai 
Virumbt to present the Report While considering the item rclaung to the 
Calcutta Metro Railway included in the Report, the Committee decided to 
'·i.>it the Metro Railway and seek certain clarifications in the matter. during 
tiS ensuring visit to Calcutta next month. 
4 . The Commlltcc , thereafter. adjourned at 3.25 P.M. 

XXUI 
TWE,..,'TY-THIRD MEETING 
The Commiuee mer ar 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd S<:prember, 1992 
m Commiuee Room A, Parliamenr House Annexe New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Shri Jagcsh Dcsa1 ChmrmiUI 
Miss Saroj li:haparde 
Shri Mcnray Padmanabham 
Shri G. G. Swell 
Shri S. V•durhnlaJ Y1rumbi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Sopcrno, - D~p,.ty s~crttary 
Shrl Om Parkosh. - Under Suretary 
Shri A K. Smgh. Comt~uttte Officu 
2.Memorandum No 45191 
Crntru/ Silk Board Employus Pension Fund 
1 966-Jmplemtlltlllion of 86th Reporr of the Commillee. Rules, 
The Commruec cons.dercd !he memorandum and aflcr some 
discussions decided 10 rcporr !he same ro !he House 
J Mrmnrandum No 46191 
Natipnal Scmngs Scheme Rul<r, 19!17-lmp/ementation of 89th Reptlf/ 
of tht Com11uttu 
The Commurcc coru;idcrcd !he memorandum and alrcr some d•scuss•ons 
deCided ro report !he same ro rhe House. 
• • 
~ The meering rhen adJourned ar 3.25 P.M. ro mccr again ar 
11 00 A.M on Wednesday, !he 23rd Seprembcr. 1992 
'"Re!.J1u M m3ner noc 1ndudcd 1n che RC'poM 
43 

XXIV 
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING 
The Comm•ttee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday. the 23rd September. 
1992 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Anncxe. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESV."T 
Shri J agesh Desai --Chatrman 
Miss Saroj Khaparde 
Shri Md. Salim 
Shri G. G. Swell 
Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi 
S£CR.£TARIAT 
Shri R. C. Sopema, Dtpuiy Stcretary 
Shri Om Parkash, Undtr Stcrttary 
Shri A. K. Singh, Commlllte Offic"r 
2. Memorandum No. 48191 
Burea11 of Indian Standards Rules, J987- 1mplementation of 85th 
Report of tilt Committee. 
The Committee considered the memorandum and after some discussions 
decided to rcpon the same to the l-fousc with suitable recommendations. 
3. Memorandum No. 49191 
Dtpartmtnt of Personnel and A.dminisrraJive Reforms O.M. 
No. 4(5)/Pensian Unir/79 Dated the 9th January, 1984 and the 4th 
FtbruJJry, 1986 Rtgardrng Carry Forward of Leove-lmplementaJion 
of 90th Rtport of the Commiuu. 
The Committee considered the memorandum and after some 
discussions decided to report the same to the House. 
4. Memorandum No . 50/91 
Jawaharlal Nehru Parr Trust Employees (Welfare Fund) RegulaJions. 
1990-Examination by the CommitTee. 
The Committee considered the memoraodum and after some discussions 
decided to report the same to the House llfith suitable recommendations. 
s· . . . 
6. The Meeung then adjourned at 11.25 A.M. 
•Relates to maner noc lnduckd Ln the Rcpon. 
44 

XXVI 
TWENTY-SIXTH MEETING 
The Commiuee mel a1 11.00 i'.M on Wednesday, lhe 2ls1 October, 
1992 in Commiuee Room 'A', Parliamenl House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
MEMBER$ PRES£.~ 
Shri Jagesh Oesao - Churrman 
Miss Saroj Khoparde 
Shri Md Salim 
Shri Menlay Padmonabham 
Shri Prava1 Kumar Samanlaray 
Shri G. G. Swell 
SECRETARIAT 
Sbri R. C. Soperno, Depury Secr.rary 
Shri Om Parkash, Undtr Secrtrary 
Shri A. K. Singh, Commfrrce Officer 
2. Memorandum No . 54191 
Manufacture, Storage and Import of Ha111rdous Chemicals Rrtles, 
1989. 
The Commiuee considered 1he above memorandum and after some 
di~cussions decided 10 repon the same 10 lhe House . 
3. • • • 
4. • • 
5. The Commiuee lhco adjourned al 11.30 A.M. 
\ 
•Ret.uu lO metter nO( included Ln the Rc-pon 
45 

XX\'0 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETI~G 
The Commmee met at 'll.llO "'·"· oo Tl)ursday. the L?.th No,·embcr, 
1992 on Commiltec Room 'A', Parliameol House Anncxe. New Delho. 
2. 
3. 
4 
MEMBERS PIU.SE.'<T 
Shri Jagesh D~ai - Cha~rman 
Shri Md. Salim 
Shri Mentay Padmanabham 
Shri Pruvat Kum3r Samantaray 
Shri G G.' Swell 
S"CRETARIAT 
Shn R. C. Sopcrmo, Oeputy Secretary 
Shri Om Purk.o~h. Under Sccrttury 
Shri A. K. Singh, Committe< Offiur 
• 
• 
S. Mmwrw11/um No. 58191 
• • 
the Calcu11a Metro Rtllbvay (TtmJJorar.l· ProviJiom) General Rules, 
1984· lmplemeltlatU)IJ nf 9Jrd R<•port of the Commiuee. 
The C'ommoucc considered the above memorandum and alter some 
discussouns dc.odcd lu report the same to the House . 
6. .. 
7. The Cumm111cc then djourned at 11 SO A M 
•H.ebrct U't maucr not UKiudtd In rhc kcpon ,. 
I.IQIPjPLU)MRN0-2301RS'-10 8 199:) 
• 