PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH REPORT 
(Presented on 16th December, 2005) 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
December, 2005/ Pausa 2, 1927 (Saka) 
CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. REPORT : 
  I. Model Formula for Laying of Statutory Rules before 
both Houses of Parliament 
  II. The Mormugao Port Employees, (Medical Attendance) 
Regulations, 1969  
  III. The Mormugao Port Employees, (Recruitment, 
Seniority & Promotion) Regulations, 1964  
  IV. The Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and 
Refund of Fare) Rules, 1998  
  V. The Scheme for Bulk Filing of Returns by Salaried 
Employees, 2002 
  VI. Summary of Recommendations  
  VII. Minutes  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 6TH AUGUST, 2005) 
     1.   Shri A. Vijayaraghavan   ------   Chairman 

     2.   Shri Nabam Rebia 
     3.   Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
     4.   Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
     5.   Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy 
     6.   Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
     7.   Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
     8.   Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
     9.   Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
   10.   Shri N. Jothi 
   11.   Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
   12.   Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
   13.   Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
   14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
   15.   Ms R.S. Gavai 
         
SECRETARIAT 
     1.   Shri N. C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
     2.   Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
     3.   Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 
     4.   Ms S. Pankajavalli, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
1.      I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
its behalf, present this Hundred and Sixtieth Report of the 
Committee. 
1.2    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its 
meeting held on the 13th December, 2005. 
1.3    The matters  examined by the Committee arise out of the 
scrutiny of various Rules/Regualtions and related issues along with 
the comments received from the Government. The observations and 
recommendations of the Committee are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
NEW DELHI  
13th December, 2005 
A.     VIJAYARAGHAVAN 
Chairman, COMMITTEE on 
Subordinate Legislation, 

Rajya Sabha 
                                                            
                                                                                                 
REPORT 
I 
MODEL FORMULA FOR LAYING OF STATUTORY RULES 
BEFORE 
BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT 
        The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha in 
paras 57-58 of its 10th Report presented to the House on the 24th 
May, 1971 had suggested a revised formula for laying of Statutory 
Rules before both Houses of Parliament. Relevant extracts from the 
Report are as under:- 
“Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid; as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
        The Committee recommends that the  revised formula 
should be incorporated not only in new legislation but also in the 
existing Acts as and when Bills to amend them are brought 
before Parliament. The Ministry should also incorporate the 
new formula in the Bills pending before Parliament. This will, in 
the opinion of the Committee, bring about uniformity in the 
matter expeditiously.” 
2.     In pursuance to the above recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) enacted 
two legislations, namely, the  Delegated Legislation Provisions 
(Amendment) Act, 1983 and the Delegated Legislation Provisions 

(Amendment) Act, 1986 incorporating the revised formula for laying 
in fifty and ninety-two Central Acts, respectively. In this context the 
Committee was inform ed on the 26th August, 1997 that the Third 
Delegated Legislation (Amendment) Bill, proposing incorporation of 
revised formula for laying in thirteen Central Acts was in the process 
of being introduced in Parliament in the forthcoming winter session. 
3.     The Committee, on the 15th May, 2000 requested the Ministry 
of Law to furnish the latest status in the matter, particularly with 
regard to the introduction of the Third Delegated Legislation 
(Amendment) Bill in Parliament. The Ministry was requested to 
furnish a list of the Acts in which the revised formula for laying was 
yet to be incorporated. 
4.     In response, thereto, the Ministry vide their OM dated the 5th 
July, 2000 informed the Committee that the Legislative Department 
was taking necessary action  to introduce the Third Delegated 
Legislation (Amendment) Bill, 2000 in the ensuing session of 
Parliament after obtaining necessary approval of the Cabinet. The 
Ministry also furnished a list of twenty -eight Acts in which the 
revised laying formula was proposed to be incorporated. Thereafter, 
references on behalf of the Committee were sent to the Ministry on 
the 8th September, 2000, 18th January, and 24th April, 2001 
requesting them to furnish the latest position with regard to the 
introduction of the Third  Delegated Legislation (Amendment) Bill. 
The Ministry vide their OM dated the 16th May, 2001 informed the 
Committee as under:- 
“the note for the Cabinet is being prepared and in due course 
the same will be submitted to the Cabinet for its approval. After 
approval of the Cabinet, further action will be taken to 
introduce the Bill in Parliament”. 
5.     The Committee, while pursuing the matter, sent further 
references to the Ministry on the 25th September, 2001 and 2nd 
January, 2002. The Ministry vide their O .M. of March, 2002 
informed the Committee as under:- 
“the concerned administrative Ministries/Departments are 
being consulted and a note for the Cabinet is being prepared. In 
due course of time the same will be submitted to the Cabinet for 

its approval. Af ter approval of the Cabinet, further action will 
be taken to introduce the Bill in Parliament”. 
6.     There was further correspondence with the Ministry on the 25th 
June and the 17th December, 2002. The Ministry however, on the 
24th December, 2002 reiterated their earlier reply. 
7.     As no concrete information was forthcoming from the Ministry 
in the matter, the Committee decided to hear the representatives of 
the Ministry of Law and Justice. Accordingly, the representatives of 
the Ministry of Law and Justice, Legislative Department, were heard 
by the Committee, on the 25th September, 2003. During the course 
of the oral evidence, the Additional Secretary, Legislative 
Department, informed the Committee as under: - 
“….. in 1997, a Bill was prepared and the briefs were sent to the 
Rajya Sabha for incorporating laying formula in thirteen 
enactments but because of dissolution of the House, it could not 
be prepared. Further action was taken for incorporating laying 
formula in twenty -eight Acts. Now, after examin ation, we find 
that three Acts have already been repealed. Now, we have 
circulated a note for the Cabinet and once we receive comments 
from the administrative Ministries, we will take the matter to 
the Cabinet and we expect that the Bill is introduced in t he 
coming session.” 
        On being asked to state the exact number of Acts requiring 
laying formula, the Additional Secretary categorically stated that 
there were fifty -nine more Acts for which they were in 
correspondence with the concerned Ministries. T he representatives 
further informed the Committee that they did not want to hold up 
the above twenty -five Acts and with regard to other Acts they will 
process separately as and when they receive clearance from the 
administrative Ministries. The Committee taking an exception to the 
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry, expressed a desire to 
speed up amendment of the remaining Central Acts within a definite 
time-frame and keep the Committee informed of the progress. 
8.     The Ministry vide their OM d ated the 16th October, 2003, 
informed the Committee that the follow up action was being taken 
up in the matter as promised during the course of the oral evidence. 

The Ministry on the 14th January, 2004 further informed the 
Committee that the Delegated Legi slation Provisions (Amendment) 
Bill, 2003 had been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd 
December, 2003. After a couple of reminders, the Ministry on the 
15th April, 2004 informed the Committee that they had finalized a 
list of thirty-two Central Acts wherein the revised formula for laying 
of Subordinate Legislation is yet to be incorporated. They further 
informed that their department proposes to introduce a Bill in 
Parliament for incorporating the laying formula in these thirty- two 
Central Acts during 2004 itself. They also enclosed a list of thirty-two 
Central Acts in which revised formula for laying was yet to be 
incorporated. 
9.     The Ministry on the 18th August, 2004 again informed the 
Committee as under: - 
“It has been decided to withdraw the D elegated Legislation 
Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 2003 pending in the Rajya Sabha 
and to introduce a new Bill titled the Delegated Legislation 
Provisions (Amendment) Bill, 2004, incorporating therein the 
provisions relating to laying formula in all the ena ctments in 
which the same is required to be inserted as per the directions of 
the Committee. The said new Bill (after approval of the Cabinet) 
is proposed to be introduced in the current session of 
Parliament.” 
10.   Thereafter, the Ministry of Law and Jus tice (Legislative 
Department) vide their communication dated the 17th January, 2005 
informed the Committee as follows:- 
“that the Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 
2004 (Act No. 4 of 2005) has been enacted and notified in the 
Gazette of India on the 12th January, 2005. 
        In the Meeting of the Committee of Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha held on 25 th September, 2003, it was clarified by this 
Department that 59 more Acts require incorporation of the standard 
provisions for laying. Now through the above mentioned enactment 
the laying provisions in 54 Acts have been incorporated and 5 Acts 
have been repealed. So with the enactment of Act 4 of 2005, the 
process of incorporation of the standard provision for laying of rules, 

regulations and other delegated legislation have been completed and 
the recommendations of the Committee of Parliament on 
Subordinate Legislation have been implemented in full”. 
11.   The Committee notes that the Ministry  of Law and Justice has 
finally enacted and notified the Delegated Legislation Provisions 
(Amendment) Act, 2004 whereby laying provisions have been 
implemented in fifty four Acts pursuant to its recommendations as 
contained in the 10th Report of the Commit tee presented to the 
House on the 24th May, 1971. 
II 
THE MORMUGAO PORT EMPLOYEES’ 
(MEDICAL  ATTENDANCE) 
REGULATIONS, 1969 
        The Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical Attendance) 
Regulations, 1969 framed under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, 
were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to 
the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways 
(Department of Shipping) on the 11th June, 2002 for furnishing their 
Comments. The Ministry vide their communication dated the 14th 
June, 2002 furnished their comments. 
2.     The Committee discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of the Mormugao Port Trust and the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways on the 19 th June, 2002 
during its study visit to Panaji. The relevant extracts from the study 
note on the above discussion were forwarded to the Ministry on the 
21st August, 2002 
3.     The matter was regularly pursued with the Ministry. Extension 
of time was sought by the Ministry from time to time and finally, the 
Ministry vide their communication dated the 2 nd August, 2005 
forwarded a copy of the Gazette Notification G.S.R. 708 (E) dated 
the 28 th October, 2004 (Annexure) carrying out amendments as 
suggested by the Committee. The points raised, the Ministry’s reply, 
the Committee’s further observations and the action taken by the 
Ministry are as under :- 
1.     Point raised 

        Whether the Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical 
Attendance) Regulations, 1969 have been laid on the Table o f 
both Houses of Parliament, if so, the details thereof? 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        When the Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical 
Attendance) Regulations, 1969 were framed, there was no 
provision to lay the regulations on the Table of Parliament. The 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 was amended in 1982, providing 
for laying of the regulations before each House of Parliament. 
All regulations, including amendments thereof made after 1982, 
are being laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the reply furnished 
by the Ministry regarding the details of laying of the regulations. 
It desired the Ministry to furnish the specific date on which the 
regulations were laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. 
Ministry’s further comments (09.09.03) 
        Prior to the 31st May, 1982, there was no provision in the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 for laying the regulations on the 
Table of the Houses of Parliament. These regulations were 
framed in 1964 and hence, were not laid on the Table of both 
Houses of Parliament. 
2.     Point raised 
        The Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical Attendance) 
Regulations, 1969 do not contain the preamble, which states the 
authority under which thes e regulations have been framed; 
whether the Ministry has any objection in adding a preamble to 
the regulations?. 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        The preamble to the regulations can be included as an 
amendment in the consolidated amendments forwarded  to the 
Central Government for approval. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 

        The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to add a 
preamble to the regulations which was presently missing. 
Action taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
3.     Point raised 
        Regulation 3 (c) contains the definition of the term 
‘employees’. As per clause (vii) of regulation 3 (c), the term 
employee includes “daily rated and casu al labour, other than 
labour employed through contractor when injured on duty”. 
        The language of regulation 3 (c) (vii) does not seem to be 
very clear. Whether it is the intention of the Board not to cover 
the labour employed through a contractor for the purpose of the 
regulations except when they are injured on duty, if so, the 
language of regulation 3 ( c) (vii) need to be modified suitably so 
as to convey the position clearly. 
        Secondly, the format of regulation 3 does not seem to be 
proper in as much as retired Board employees are to be excluded 
from within the meaning of the term ‘employee’; this should 
have been stated by way of a proviso and not ill continuation 
after the items which fall within the meaning of the term 
“employee”. 
        Thirdly, what is the justification for excluding retired 
Board employees from within the meaning of the term 
‘employee’? 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        It is the intention of the Board not to cover the labour 
employed through a Contractor for the  purpose of the 
regulations, except when they are injured on duty for which 
necessary charges are levied as per the Medical services 
provided. As such, Regulation 3 (c) (vii) will now be modified 
suitably to delete the same. 
        As regards retired Boar d employees, we have framed 
separate regulation namely the Mormugao Port Employees’ 

(Contributory Medical Benefits After Retirement) Regulations, 
1989 to cover all the retired employees for availing the medical 
facilities from the Port Trust Hospital. Thus , regulation 3 (c) 
(vii) will be deleted, accordingly. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to 
modify  
regulation 3 (c) (vii), so as to remove ambiguity in the matter of 
coverage of labour employed th rough a contractor for the 
purpose of the regulations. The Committee also noted that the 
Ministry had agreed to delete regulation 3 (c) (vii) as there was 
a separate set of regulations for regulating medical benefits after 
retirement. 
Action taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
4.     Point raised 
        In the definition of the word ‘family’ appearing in 
regulation 3 ( d), it has been stated that the term family does not 
include family of daily rated and casual labour or of the labour 
employed through a contractor. 
        When the labour employed through a contractor is not 
considered as an ‘employee’ , should there be a need to 
specifically exclude the family of such labour from the definition 
of the term ‘family’? 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        It is confirmed that the words “but does NOT include the 
family of daily rated and casual labour or of the labour 
employed through a Contractor” in the above regulation can be 
deleted. Ne cessary amendments to the regulations will be 
carried out accordingly. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 

        The Committee noted that the Ministry has agreed to 
amend  
regulation 3 (d) as pointed out in the questionnaire. 
Action take by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
5.     Point raised:-Note 4 below regulation 3 
        “Sons and unmarried daughters of an employee, who are 
gainfully employed and are not wholly dependant on him/her 
are not eligible for medical concession under these Regulations.” 
        The words ‘gainfully employed’ appearing in the above 
note do not appear to be specific; whether the Government have 
any objection in specifying some income so as to ensure uniform 
and proper application of the regulation? . 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        The limit of dependency for the above purpose has been 
prescribed as Rs. 500/- per month, which is being followed by an 
administrative order since 1991. This limit has now been 
proposed to be enhanced to Rs. 1500/- per month in accordance 
with the amendments carried out by the Central Government to 
the CCS (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        While the Committee noted that the Por t Trust observed 
conditions prescribed by the Central Government from time to 
time for the purpose of determining dependency in the case of 
Government employees, but, the Committee desired that the 
Port Trust should carry out specific amendment in their ow n 
regulations also rather than regulating the matter through 
administrative instructions on the basis of the Government of 
India instructions. The Committee further pointed out that the 
words “wholly dependent” and gainfully employed” were not 
specific and, therefore, the provisions of regulation 3 need to be 
suitably modified. 
Action taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 

        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
6.     Point raised 
        As per regulation 2l (c), families of the  employees are not 
entitled to concession contained in this regulation in any 
circumstances. Regulation 21 relates to eyesight testing; what is 
the justification for depriving the families of the employees for 
benefits under this regulation? 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        The Port Regulations have been framed on the basis of the 
C.C.S (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944. Since no such 
provision exists in the Government’s rules, this concession has 
also not been provided in our regulations. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply. 
7.     Point raised: Regulation 22 
“Expenditure incurred by an employee or member of his 
family on treatment for “Veneral Diseases” and “delirium 
tremens” shall not be reimbursed in any circumstances.” 
        What is the justification for not reimbursing the 
expenditure incurred on the treatment of the diseases referred 
to above? . 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        This regulation has been amended, inter-alia, to provide for 
reimbursement in all cases and forwarded to the Central 
Government for approval. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry had already taken 
action to provide for reimbursement in case of treatment for 
veneral diseases and delirium tremens. 
Action taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 

        The Ministry had issued an amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
8.     Point raised 
        Regulation 31 deals with patient suffering from 
tuberculosis. As per the note below this regulation, the cost of 
medicines is fully reimbursable if otherwise admissible under 
these regulations. But, the cost of the medicines does not include 
“professional fees for administering injections”; what is the 
justification for excluding this professi onal fee for the purpose 
of reimbursement? . 
Ministry’s comments (14.06.02) 
        Necessary amendment will be carried out to fall in line with 
the corresponding rules of the Central Government. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways has agreed to carry 
out necessary amendments in the regulations based upon the 
suggestions of the Committee. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had i ssued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 
9.     Point Raised 
        Regulation 46 relates to reimbursement of fare in case a 
journey is performed by rail for obtaining appropriate medical 
attendance treatment. As per the note below this regulation, the 
facility of journey by air -conditioned accommodation at the 
Board’s expense is not admissible for journeys performed for 
receiving medical attendance and treatment. 
        What is the justification for the above provision? 
Ministry’s Comments (14.06.02) 

        The “Note” below this regulation will be deleted whilst 
amending the regulations since such a provision does not exist in 
the Central Government rules. 
Committee’s Observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have agreed to carry 
out necessary amendments in the regulations based on the 
suggestions of the Committee. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by th e 
Committee. 
10.   Point Raised 
        As per regulation 46(ii) (b ), in case of members of family, 
what is admissible is the actual fare paid for the journey by bus 
or other public conveyance or mileage allowance at half the rate 
of road mileage whicheve r is less; what is the justification for 
allowing half the rate of road mileage? 
Ministry’s Comments (14.06.02) 
        The regulations were initially framed on the pattern of the 
CCS (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 and this clause was 
incorporated accordingly. However in view of amendments to 
the CCS (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 necessary 
amendment will be carried out to the provision to provide for 
actual fare paid for the journey as per the entitlement. 
Committee’s Observations (19.06.02) 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have agreed to carry 
out necessary amendments in the regulations based on the 
suggestions of the Committee. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (02.08.05) 
        The Ministry had issued amendment as suggested by the 
Committee. 

        The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of 
Shipping) have accepted its suggestions and notified the 
following amendments in the Mormugao Port Employees’ 
(Medical Attendance) Regulations, 1969:- 
(i)    Adding preamble to the regulations- 
(ii)   In regulation 3 (c) (vii) by substituting the words “daily 
rated and casual labour, other than labour employed 
through contractor when injured on duty” by the words 
“daily rated and casual labour employed by the Port 
when injured on duty, shall be entitled to medical 
attendance/treatment to the extent the facilities and 
medicines are available in Trust’s Hospital/Dispensary. 
Labour, other than employed by the Board, such as 
those employed by contractors are not entitled to such 
benefits”, thereby making the provisions clear and 
understandable. 
(iii)  ln regulation 3 ( d ) by amending definition of the term 
“family” as, “ — Family means an employee’s wife or 
husband, as the case may be, and parents, sisters, 
widowed sisters, widowed daughters, brothers, 
children, step -children, divorced/sep arated daughters 
and step-mother wholly dependent upon the Employee” 
thus resolving the discrepancy as pointed out by the 
Committee. 
(iv)  By substituting the Note 4 below regulation 3(d) as 
under:- 
       “Note: A member of the family is treated as depend ent 
only if his/her income from all sources including 
pension and pension equivalent of DCRG benefit and 
exclusive of the relief on pension sanctioned after 
December, 1995 is less than Rs.1500/ - p.m. The 
condition of dependency both in the case of husband or 
the wife of the employee has been dispensed with”. The 
Committee had pointed out that the Note 4 below 
regulation 3(d) was not specific. 

(v)   In regulation 22, by deleting the words “not” and “in 
any circumstances” thereby allowing reimbursement in 
case of treatment of veneral diseases and delirium 
tremens also. 
(vi)  In regulation 31, by amending the “Note” below 
regulation 31 as under and allowing reimbursement. of 
professional fees:- 
       “Note: The cost of medicines shall be reimbursed in full, 
if otherwise admissible under this regulation. The cost 
of medicines will include the cost of drugs injected and 
the professional fees for administering the injections.” 
(vii) In regulation 46(i)(b), by amending the “Note” 
appearing below it as under so that  Port employees 
could travel by entitled class even for medical 
attendance and treatment:- 
       “Note: The facility of travel by air -conditioned 
accommodations at the Board’s expense is admissible as 
per entitlement for journeys performed for receiving 
medical attendance and treatment.” 
(viii)   In regulation 46 (ii) (b), by amending the provisions 
as under so as to allow payment of actual fare as per the 
admissibility:- 
       “(b) For the members of his family: Actual fare paid for 
the journey by bus or  other public conveyances or 
mileage allowance at the rate of road mileage admissible 
to the employee, whichever is less.” 
ANNEXURE SCHEDULE 
        In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 28 read with 
Section 124 of Major Port Trust. Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) the Board of 
Trustees of the Port of Mormugao hereby makes the following 
regulations further to amend Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical 
Attendance) Regulations, 1969, Namely:- 

(1)   i)      These Regulations may be called the Mormugao Port 
Employees’ (Medical attendance) (Amendment) 
Regulation, 2004. 
        ii)     They shall come into force with effect from the date from 
which the approval of the Central Government is published 
in the Gazette of India. 
(2)   Add the following at the beginn ing of the Regulation as a 
preamble to Mormugao Port Employees’ (Medical Attendance) 
Regulations, 1969. 
“PREAMBLE”: In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 
126 read with Section 28 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 
of 1963), the Central Governm ent hereby makes the following 
regulations, namely 
(3 )  In Regulation 3 
(i)    In clause (c) delete the sub clauses (ii), (iii) and (viii), 
(ii)    Sub Clause (vii) of clause (c) shall be substituted by the 
following, namely; “daily rated and casual labour employed 
by the Port when injured on duty, shall be entitled to 
medical attendance/treatment to the extent that facilities 
and medicines are available in Trust’s Hospital/Dispensary. 
Labour, other than employed by the Board, such as those 
employed by contractors are not entitled to such benefits.” 
(iii)   Delete the EXCEPTION, Note I below clause (c). 
(iv)   Delete the existing clause 3 (d) and replace with the 
following:- 
        “Family means an employee’s wife or husband, as the case 
may be, and parent s, sisters, widowed sisters, widowed 
daughters, brothers, children, step -children, 
divorced/separated daughter and step -mother wholly 
dependent upon the Employee.” 
(v)   Delete the existing Note 4 below clause 3 (d) and replace 
with the following: - 

        “NOTE:- A member of the family is treated as dependent 
only if his/her income from all sources including pension 
and pension equivalent of DCRG benefit and exclusive of 
the relief on pension sanctioned after December, 1995 is less 
than Rs. 1500/-p.m. The condition of dependency both in the 
case of husband or the wife of the employee has been 
dispensed with”. 
(vi)   Add the following as Sub -clause (I) after sub -clause (k) 
(vii). 
(i)     “Entitled class” for the purpose of this Regulations 
means the class as provided under T A Rules in force. 
(4)   In Regulation 22: 
(i)    Delete the words “not” and “in any circumstances” 
appearing in the same regulation. 
(5)   In Regulation 31: 
(i)    Delete the “NOTE” appearing below Sub -clause (iii) of the 
proviso and replace the same with the following. 
“NOTE: The cost of medicines shall be reimbursed in full, 
if otherwise admissible under this regulation. The cost of 
medicines will include the cost of drugs injected and the 
professional fees for administering the injections.” 
(6)   In Regulation 46: 
(i)    In Clause (1), delete the “NOTE” appearing below Sub -
Clause (b) and replace the same with the following: 
“NOTE :  The facility of travel by air -conditioned 
accommodation at the Board’s expense is admissible as per 
entitlement for journeys performed for receiving medical 
attendance and treatment.” 
(ii)    In clause (ii), delete the Sub-clause (b) and replace the same 
with a the following: 
“(b)  For the members of his Family:  Actual fare paid for 
the j ourney by bus or other public conveyance or 

mileage allowance at the rate of road mileage 
admissible to the employee, whichever is less”. 
(7)   In Regulation 48 
(i)    Delete the existing clause (b) and replace the same with the 
following: 
(b)   for the me mbers of his family: Actual conveyance 
charges limited to the mileage allowance at tour rates 
(without daily allowance) admissible to the employee 
himself under the rules in force. 
FOOT NOTE: 
AMENDEMENTS: 
i)      Central Government’s sanction No. PW/PEG -39/79 dated. 
6/6/1980 
ii)     Central Government’s sanction No. PW/PEG -18/85 dated. 
28/11/1986 
iii)    GSR No. 70(E) dated 11/10/2002. 
III 
THE MORMUGAO PORT EMPLOYEES’ (RECRUITMENT, 
SENIORITY & PROMOTION) REGULATIONS, 1964 
        The Mormugao Port Employees’ (Recruitment, Seniority and 
Promotion) Regulations, 1964 framed under the Major Port Trusts 
Act, 1963 were examined and a questionnaire on the subject was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and 
Highways, on the 11 th June, 2002. The Ministry furnished their 
comments on the various points raised in the questionnaire on the 
19th June, 2002. The Committee discussed the subject matter with the 
representatives of the Mormugao Port Trust and the Ministry of 
Shipping Road Transport and Highways, at Panaji on the 19th June, 
2002. Relevant extracts from the study note on the above discussions 
were forwarded to the Ministry on the 21st August, 2002. 
2.     After some correspondence in the matter and extensions sought 
by the. Ministry from time to time, they furnished the action taken 
note vide their communication dated the 1 st April, 2003 Thereafter, 

the Ministry vide their communication dated the 20 th April, 2004 
forwarded a copy of the notification GSR.173 (E) da ted the 4th 
March, 2004 carrying out the amendments as suggested by the 
Committee. The points raised by the Committee, comments of the 
Ministry, further observations of the Committee and the action 
taken by the Ministry thereon are as under:- 
1.     Point referred 
“Whether the Mormugao Port Employees (Recruitment, 
Seniority and Promotion) Regulations, 1964 have been laid on 
the Table of both houses of Parliament, if so, the details in this 
regard?” 
Minister’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        The Mormugao Port Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & 
Promotion) Regulations, 1964 when initially framed by the Board, 
there was no provision to lay the regulations on the Table of 
Parliament, The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 was amended in 1982, 
providing for laying of the regulations before each House of 
Parliament. All regulations, including amendments thereof made 
after 1982, are being laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply furni shed by the 
Ministry regarding the details of laying of the regulations It desired 
the Ministry to furnish the specific date on which the regulations 
were laid on the Table of the Houses of Parliament 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        Prior to the 31st May, 1982 there was no provision in the Major 
Port Trusts Act., 1963 for laying the regulations on the Table of the 
Houses of Parliament This Regulation was framed in 1964 and hence, 
this was not laid on the Table of the Houses of Parliament 
2.     Point referred –– Regulation 2 
“Application: -They shall apply to Class I, Class II, Class III and 
Class IV posts under the Board; but shall not apply to those 
posts the incumbents of which are Heads of Departments.” 

        As per regulation 2, the r egulations are not applicable to those 
posts the incumbents of which are Heads of Departments; what is the 
justification thereof? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        The regulations are not applicable to the Heads of Departments 
since the appointing a uthority is the Central Government and their 
appointments are governed by a separate set of rules called the 
Mormugao Port Trust (Recruitment of Heads of Departments) 
Regulations, 1991 framed by the Central Government. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply. 
3.     Points referred –– Regulation 7 
“FILLING UP OF VACANCIES: The manner of filling up of 
vacancies be direct recruitment and departmental promotion 
and the age limit, educational qualifications and exp erience for 
direct recruits in respect of the various grade or posts shall be 
laid down by the authority competent to create such posts. 
Provided that the upper age limit may be relaxed in the case of 
a candidate belonging to any Scheduled Caste. Scheduled Tribe 
or any other special category in accordance with the general 
orders issued from time to time by the Central Government for 
appointment to services under it”. 
        Regulation 7 authorizes the authority competent to create a post 
to lay down the ma nner of filling up vacancies through direct 
recruitment together with the age limit, educational qualifications 
and experience thereof as well as through departmental promotion. 
        Normally, the conditions referred to in regulation 7 form part 
of the rules/regulations; what is the justification for not specifying 
these parameters in the regulations but instead authorizing the 
competent authority to regulate through administrative 
instructions/orders? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 

        These parameters were not specified in the regulations in order 
to allow flexibility to the Chairman/Board of Trustees to amend the 
Recruitment Rules, wherever necessary taking into account local 
factors since the State of Goa entered into the Nati onal mainstream 
only in 1961 when opportunities for Education and Higher 
Education were inadequate/unavailable. However, taking into 
consideration the powers delegated to the Port Trust Board by the 
Government for creation of Class II, III & IV posts, we are proposing 
to amend the relevant provisions of the regulations suitably, vesting 
the powers to the Board for creation of Class II, III & IV posts, 
whereas the powers to create Class I posts is to rest with the Central 
Government. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the comments of the 
Ministry and reiterated that the parameters like age limit, 
educational qualifications and experience should preferably be 
prescribed in the regulations only, rather than author izing the 
competent authority to exercise discretion in this matter. The 
Committee desired the Ministry to review the position. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        The Ministry accepts the recommendations of the Committee. 
The matter is being further examined in consultation with the Port 
Trust. 
4.     Point referred -Regulation 8 
“PROBATION: 1) Every person appointed to a grade or post by 
direct recruitment, promotion or transfer shall be on probation 
for a period of two years from the date of his appointment. 
2) The period of probation may, if the appointing authority 
deems fit, be extended or curtailed in any case, but the total 
period of such extension or curtailment shall not, save where any 
extension is necessary by reason of any departmen tal or legal 
proceedings pending against the officer, exceed one year. 
3) During the period of probation, any employee may be 
required to undergo such training and to pass such tests as the 
Board may, .from time to time, prescribe”. 

        Rule 8 refers to probation in the case of appointments by way of 
“transfer”. Normally, the employees are kept on probation in case of 
direct recruitment and promotion; what are the specific areas where 
the Board employees appointed on transfer basis are required to 
remain on probation and what is the justification thereof? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        The term “transfer” will have to be construed as transfer on 
promotion, where probation period is necessary like on any other 
promotion. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the explanation furnished 
by the Ministry regarding prescribing of probation in cases where a 
person has been appointed on transfer basis. The Committee desired 
the Ministry to review the position because normally, posts that were 
filled up by transfer, even by promotion, did not carry any condition 
regarding probation. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        The Ministry has examined the matter in the light of the 
provisions contained in the CCS Rules. Similar provisions, as in the 
CCS Rules, are being made in the Regulations. The Port is being 
asked to make provisions as per the CCS Rules. 
5.     Point referred -Regulation 10 (1) & (2) 
        “DISCHARGE OR REVERSION OF EMPLOYEES ON 
PROBATI0N:- 
(1)   An Employee on probation who has no lien on any post 
under the Board or Government shall be liable to be 
discharged .from service at any time without notice if; 
(a)   on the basis of his performance or conduct during the 
period of probation, he  is considered unfit for further 
retention in service; or 
(b)   if on the receipt of any information relating to his 
nationality, age, health or antecedent the appointing 

authority is satisfied that he is ineligible or otherwise 
unfit for being continued in service. 
(2)   An employee on probation who holds a lien on a post under 
the Board or Government may be reverted to such post at 
any time in any of the circumstances specified in sub -
regulation (1)”. 
        Sub-regulation (2) of regulation 10 refers to reversion in the 
circumstances specified in sub -regulation (1). The circumstances 
mentioned in clause (b) of sub-regulation (1) of regulation 10 do not 
perhaps warrant reversion but ou tright discharge from service as 
has been stated in sub-regulation (1); whether the Government have 
any objection in amending regulation 10(2) by substituting the words 
“sub-regulation (1)” with sub-regulation (1) (a)? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        There is no objection to amend regulation 10(2) by substituting 
the words “Sub-regulation (1)” with “Sub-regulation (1) (a)”. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
6.     Point referred -Regulation 13 
        “(a) RESERVATION TO SPECIFIED SECTIONS OF THE 
PEOPLE:  
        Orders issued by the Central Government from time to time 
for the reservation of appointments or posts under the Central 
Government in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes shall apply mutatis mutandis to all appointments covered 
by these regulations–– 
(b) Instructions contained in the draft directive sent by the 
Additional Secretary and the Director General, Ministry of 
Finance, Bureau of Public Enterprises, New Delhi vide d.o. letter 
No. 5(5)/71 -BPE(IC) dated the 25th January, 1972 to the 
Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi will apply to all appointment in the Mormugao Port 

Trust covered under the said directive and to which direct 
recruitment is made and that concession in regard to maximum 
age, educational qualifications and medical standards et c. to 
disabled ex -servicemen will be extended, keeping in view the 
guidelines laid down in the Ministry of Home Affairs O.M 
No.14/42/65 Estt. (D) of the 24th August, 1966". 
        Regulation 13 which deals with reservation for specified sections 
of the people refers to reservation in favour of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. There is, however, no mention about OBCs. 
        Whether the Port Trust is following reservation in case of OBCs 
also, if. so, can the provisions of regulation 13 not be suitably revised? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        At the time when these regulations were framed, no concessions 
in appointments were provided to candidates belonging to OBCs. 
This reservation to OBCs has come into force w.e.f the 8th September, 
1993. In view of this, the provision of regulation 13 will be suitably 
revised to provide for inclusion of OBCs in reservation for direct 
recruitment. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        The Committee was informed that regulation 13 will be suitably 
revised to provide for inclusion of OBCs in the reservation for direct 
recruitment. The proposed amendment by the Port Trust is under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
7.     Point referred - Regulation 14(b) 
        “14(b) DIRECT RECRUITMENT 
        In order to be eligible for direct recruitment to any grade 
or post, a candidate shall be: - 
(a)   a citizen of India; or 

(b)   a subject of Sikkim; or 
(c)   a subject of Nepal; or 
(d)   a subject of Bhutan; or 
(e)   a Tibetan refugee who came over to India before the 1 st 
January, 1962 with the intention of permanently settling in 
India,” 
(f)    a person of Indian origin who has migrated from Pakistan, 
Burma, Ceylon and the East African countries of Kenya, 
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania (formerly 
Tanganiyka and Zanzibar) with the intention of 
permanently settling in India” 
        Provided that a candidate belonging to categories (c) (d) (e) 
and (f) shall be a person in whose favour a certificate of 
eligibility has been given by the Government of India and if 
he belongs to category (f), the certificate or eligibility will be 
issued for a period of one year, after which such candidate 
will be retained in service subject to his having acquired 
Indian citizenship”. 
        Sikkim now forms part of India. Does the entire regulation 14(b) 
not call for a review, what are the Ministry’s comments in this 
regard? 
        Secondly, the numbering of resulation 14 calls for a review in as 
much as there is no sub -regulation while there is a mention of sub 
regulation 2. Similarly, clause (b) presumed to be under sub -
regulation 1 contains sub clauses as (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f); should 
these sub clauses not be numbered as (i), (ii), etc. 
Ministry's comments (10.06.2002) 
        Under the changed scenario, we may con sider to amend the 
regulation suitably. As regard the numbering of regulation 14, the 
same will be reviewed as suggested. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 

        The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        The Ministry agrees with the suggestion. The proposed 
amendment by the Port Trust is under consideration in the Ministry. 
8.     Point referred -Regulation 14(h) 
“14(h) A candidate shall, at the time of making the application, 
pay such fees as the’ Board may from time to time prescribe. 
(i)    Medical and Engineering Graduates appointed to any post 
under the  Board after these Regulations have come into 
force shall, if so, required, be liable to serve in any Defence 
Service or post connected with the Defence of India, for a 
period of not less than four years including the period spent 
on training, if any;  
        Provided that such graduates: 
(a)   shall not be required to serve as aforesaid after the 
expiry of ten years from the date of appointment and 
(b)   shall not ordinarily be required to serve, as aforesaid, 
after attaining the age of forty years in the case of 
engineering graduates and 45 years in the case of 
medical graduates”. 
        Regulation 14(h) mentions about eligibility of Medical and 
Engineering Graduates to serve in any defence service or post 
connected with the Defence of India for a specified period under the 
given circumstances, if required. 
        Normally, such provisions are not seen in the various civilian 
appointments under the Central Government, What is the 
justification for such provisions and to what extent these provisions 
have been/are being resorted to in actual practice? 
Ministry's comments (19.06.2002) 

        To fall in line with the provisions of the Central Civil Service 
Rules we may delete the provision. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted  that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        The Ministry agrees with the suggestion. The proposed 
amendment by the Port Trust is under consideration in the Ministry. 
9.     Points raised -Regulations 15 & 16 
        “15. CONSTITUTlON OF STAFF SELECTION 
COMMITTEES: 
A Staff Selection Committee shall be constituted for each grade 
as indicated below: 
               Class I and Class II posts. 
               Chairman: 
               Chairman of the Board. 
               Members: 
        (1)   Head of the Department where the vacancy exists. 
(2)   Another Head of Department nominated by the Chairman 
of the Board. 
               Class III posts: 
               Chairman: 
               Head of Department nominated by the Chairman of the 
Board. 
               Members: (1) Secretary of the Board. 
        (2)   Another officer nominated by the Chairman of the Board  
               Class IV posts: 

               Chairman: 
        Head of a Department nominated by the Chairman of the Board 
Members: 
        (1)   Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Board. 
        (2) Another officer nominated by the Chairman of the Board. 
16.   DEPARTMENTAL PROMOTION COMMITTEE: A 
departmental promotion committee shall be constituted for each 
grade or post as indicated below : 
        Class I and Class II posts. 
        Chairman: 
        Chairman of the Board 
Members:          (1)      Head of the Department where the vacancy 
exists. 
                 (2)   Another Head of Department nominated by the 
Chairman of  
                        the Board. 
               Class III and Class IV posts. 
               Chairman: 
               Head of a Department nominated by the Chairman of the 
Board 
Members:   (1) Secretary of the Board 
                 (2)   Another officer nominated by the Chairman of the 
Board. 
        The Departmental Promotion Committee shall meet once 
twice a year as may be necessary and prepare a “Select list” of 
employees fit for appointment against the promotion quota of 
vacancies in the various grades or posts. Where promotion is 
made on the basis of meri t, normally the field of selection shall 
not be more than five times the number of vacancies subject to 
employees with necessary qualifications or experience being 
available. The Departmental Promotion Committee may at its 

discretion after these limits to suit exceptional circumstances. 
Employees shall be arranged according to the order or merit 
adjudged by the committee and the select list so prepared shall 
be utilized for filling up vacancies likely to arise during the 
course of the year. While adjudging merit of an employee, due 
regard shall be given to his seniority also”. 
        Regulations 15 and 16 refer to the constitution of the Staff 
Selection and Departmental Promotion Committees. There is, 
however, nothing to suggest representation of SCs/STs, etc., in line 
with Government guidelines. 
        Whether the Government. have any objection in amending the 
provisions of these regulations so as to provide representations to 
these categories? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        The representatives of SCs/STs are members in Staff Selection 
and Departmental Promotion Committees. Further, the composition 
of the Staff Selection Committee and the Department Promotion 
Committees have been indicated in a separate column of the revised 
Recruitment Rules in respect of all the categories of posts, the 
proposal for which is being submitted to the Board for approval. 
However, necessary amendments will be carried out to the relevant 
provisions of these regulations also so as to provide representation to 
SCs/STs. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        It was mentioned that necessary amendments will be carried out 
to the relevant provisions of these regulations also so as to provide 
for representation of SCs/ST s. The Port has been asked to propose 
for amendment on line of the provisions in the CCS Rules. 
10.   Points referred -Regulation 16 

“16. DEPARTMENTAL PROMOTION COMMITTEE: A 
departmental promotion committee shall be constituted for each 
grade or post as indicated below : 
               Class I and Class II posts. 
               Chairman: 
        Chairman of the Board 
        Members:       (1) Head of the Department where the vacancy 
exists. 
                        (2)  Another Head of Department nominated by the 
Chairman 
                              of the Board. 
               Class III and Class IV posts. 
        Chairman: 
               Head of a Department nominated by the Chairman of the 
Board. 
        Members:       (1) Secretary of the Board 
                        (2)  Another officer nominated by the Chairman of the 
Board. 
        The Departmental Promotion Committee shall meet once 
twice a year as may be necessary and prepare a “Select list” of 
employees fit for appointment against the promotion quota of 
vacancies in the various . grades or posts. Where promotion is 
made on the basis of merit, normally the field of selection shall 
not be more than five times the number of vacancies subject to 
employees with necessary qualifications o r experience being 
available. The Departmental Promotion Committee may at its 
discretion alter these limits to suit exceptional circumstances. 
Employees shall be arranged according to the order or merit 
adjudged by the committee and the select list so prep ared shall 
be utilized for filling up vacancies likely to arise during the 
course of the year. While adjudging merit of an employee, due 
regard shall be given to his seniority also”. 

        The words “once twice a year” do not convey the true intention 
of the provisions, i.e. whether the meeting is to be held once in two 
years or twice a year .Would the Ministry clarify the provisions of 
the regulations? 
Ministry’s comments (19.06.2002) 
        We intend to amend this provision to reflect that DPC will meet 
as and when required. 
Committee’s observations (19.06.2002) 
        The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways have agreed to make necessary corrections 
in the regulations based upon the points raised in the questionnaire. 
Ministry’s further comments (01.04.2003) 
        It was assured to amend the provision to reflect that DPC will 
meet as and when required. The Port has been asked to propose for 
amendment on line of the provisions in the CCS Rules. 
3.     During the course of discussion that the Committee had with the 
representatives of the Mormugao Port Trust and the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, the Committee had 
observed as follows: –– 
“The Committee feels that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport and Highways should have suo-motu undertaken 
review of the regulations from time to time, so as to keep them 
updated as well as in order. The Committee expresses the hope 
that the Ministry would carry out necessary changes in the 
regulations expeditiously.” 
4.     The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 1 st April, 2003, besides 
furnishing their Action Taken Note on each of the points raised, 
replied to the above observation of the Committee as under: –– 
“This Ministry feels that the Port Trusts should  be advised to 
review regulations once in five years with a view to effect such 
changes as are necessary to bring them in conformity with the 
changed position, including additions to or reduction in the 
strength of the lower and higher level posts. 

        The Ports are being advised accordingly.” 
5.     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have carried out 
amendments in the regulations, based upon its suggestions as 
under:–– 
(i)    In regulation 7  by prescribing age limit, educational 
qualifications, experience, etc. in the schedule annexed to 
the regulations containing the details of the posts and the 
mode of their filling up. 
(ii)    In regulation 8 by amending sub-regulation (1) on the lines 
of similar provisions in the CCS Rules with regard to 
probation period. 
(iii)   In regulations 10(1) and (2) by substituting the words “Sub- 
regulation (1)” with “Sub -regulation (1) (a)”, thereby 
removing the discrepancy, as pointed out by the Committee. 
(iv)   In regulation 13 by inserting therein a provision for 
reservation in favour of OBCs. 
(v)   In regulation 14(b) by substituting the entire regulation 14 
and thereby removing the discrepancies as pointed out by 
the Committee. 
(vi)   In regulation 14(h) by  deleting the provisions, the same 
being obsolete. 
(vii)  In regulation 15 by providing representation to SCs/STs in 
the Staff Selection Committees. 
(viii) In regulation 16 by providing therein representation to 
SCs/STs in Departmental Promotion Committee and 
further providing therein that the DPC may meet “as and 
when required” instead of “once twice a year”. 
6.     The Committee hopes that the Ministry have since advised the 
Ports to review the  regulations once in five years with a view to 
effecting such changes as were necessary to bring them in conformity 
with the changed position including addition to or reduction in the 
strength of the lower and higher level posts. 

IV 
THE RAILWAY PASSENGERS (CANCELLATION OF TICKET 
AND 
REFUND OF FARE) RULES, 1998 
        The Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and Refund of 
Fare) Rules, 1998 framed under the Railways Act, 1989 were 
examined and a questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Railways ( Railway Board) on the 27th January, 1999 for their 
comments on the points raised therein. The Committee discussed the 
matter with the representatives of the Central and the Western 
Railways at Mumbai and with the South Central Railways at 
Hyderabad along with the representatives of the Railway Board on 
the 4th February, 1999 and the 7th January, 2000 respectively. The 
points raised, the Ministry’s comments, the Committee’s further 
queries and observations that emerged during the course of its 
deliberations with the representatives of Central, Western and South 
Central Railways are as under: - 
1.     Point raised 
        Whether the Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and 
Refund of Fare) Rules, 1998 have been laid on the Table of the House, 
if so, the details in this regard?  
Ministry’s comments 
        The above mentioned rules were laid on the Tables of Lok Sabha 
on the 3 rd December, 1998 and Rajya Sabha on the 4 th December, 
1998. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee noted with satisfaction the reply of the 
representatives of the Ministry regarding laying of rules on the Table 
of both the Houses of Parliament. 
2.     Point raised 
        The Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and Refund of 
Fare) Rules, 1998 are in supersession of the earlier rules framed on 
the subject in 1990. What are the reasons that these rules were 
required to be replaced so early? 

Ministry’s comments 
        In 1976, these rules were notified for the first time in the 
Government of India Gazette through issue of the Gazette 
notification as required in the old Indian Railway Act. After a large 
number of changes were made in the 1976 rules, the entire set of rules 
were revised in 1986. Again, after a number of changes made in the 
rules of 1986, and as required in the revised Railway Act, 1989, these 
rules were revised in 1990. After 1990, a number of amendments 
were made in these rules and, therefore, they had become a little 
confusing. Besides, some more basic amendments were required to 
be made in these rules. It was, therefore, decided to revise the entire 
set of rules of 1990. It is worth mentioning here that, as on previous 
occasions, the previous rules of 1990 have been retained with 
amendments. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the Railway 
Board regarding the necessity for preferring a new set of rules in the 
year 1998 in supersession of the earlier rules by the Government. 
3.     Point raised: Rule 3(1) & (2) Station Master to refund Fares 
        The words “after  verifying the genuineness of the ticket” 
appearing in sub- rules (1) and (2) of rule 3 give wide powers to the 
Station Master and a claim for refund might be delayed. What 
procedure is adopted in verifying the genuineness and whether 
Ministry have any objection in modifying the above provisions so as 
to emphasise urgency on the part of the authority making the 
refund? . 
Ministry’s comments 
        Refund is granted after verification of genuineness of ticket and 
its particulars from the record available at  the station. The 
verification is done from the computer, if it is working or from the 
reservation chart or from the message for reservation, etc. The 
verification does not take much time. If refund is granted without 
verification of genuineness of ticket and its particulars, there can be 
large scale misuse resulting is loss of revenue to Railways, which is 
not desirable. 

Committee’s observations 
        The Committee noted that the South Central Railways have 
taken several initiatives for facilitating timely refund against unused 
tickets and that they have extended the facility of refund at 39 
railway stations. The Committee, however, felt the need for 
modifications in rules 3(1) & (2) as they did not cast an urgency upon 
the Railway Authorities for processing/handling of refund cases. 
4.     Point raised: Rule 6(1) Unused Tickets on which reservation has 
        been made 
        Under these rules refund of fare is made even to the agent of the 
passenger. Whether in such cases any written authorisation is 
required from the passenger, if not, whether any enquiry is made to 
verify that the agent presenting the ticket is the authorised person? 
Is there any objection in incorporating a provision wherei n refund 
of fare shall be given to an agent only on production of written 
authorisation? 
Ministry’s comments 
        Comments shall be furnished after examination of the issue. 
Ministry’s further comments dated 24.8.1999 
        Rules provide for purchase of tickets through the agent or 
representative without any written authority .This procedure, which 
was in vogue in respect of cancellation and refund of tickets also, was 
incorporated in refund rules by the Ministry of Law and Justice who 
finalize the rules framed through Gazette Notification. 
        Rules provide that refund shall be granted after verification of 
all the particulars of the ticket irrespective of whether the refund is 
being given to the passenger or his representative. Therefore, if the 
passenger or his representative surrenders the genuine ticket and 
correctly declares all details regarding names of passengers, refund 
is granted after verification of the particulars from the station record 
without making any enquiry. Declaration of correc t name of 
passenger and surrender of genuine concerned ticket itself means 
that the representative is the genuine representative of the passenger 
and there is no scope of any enquiry. 

        As per the existing practice, there are many cases where 
passengers send their tickets for cancellation and refund through 
representatives. Besides, in the case of tickets for family or party, the 
ticket is surrendered for cancellation and refund by one person who 
acts as representative for other. If the written authorization is made 
compulsory and incorporated in the rules, it will create a lot of 
problems to the passengers because the staff will neither cancel the 
ticket nor grant refund without the authorization letter. Besides, the 
Railways has no machinery to check the authenticity of authorization 
letter. It will therefore, not be desirable to incorporate this provision 
in the rules. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee noted the explanation furnished by the 
representatives on requirement of written authorization. 
5.     Point raised: Rule 6(1) (b) (c) 
        Under clauses (b) and (c) of Rules 6 (1), the cancellation charges 
are on higher side. Keeping in view that a cancelled reservation is 
always given to a waitlisted ticket holder (there is always some  
waiting list in almost all the trains), there does not appear to be any 
loss to Railways. What is the justification for keeping the cancellation 
charges at such a high rate? 
Ministry’s comments 
        It is to mention that only during peak periods, waiti ng list 
passenger is available to avail the cancelled reservation. However, 
during non-peak days, the cancelled reservation often goes vacant, 
thus the Railways lose revenue. There had been cases where 
undesirable elements used to corner reserved accommoda tion and 
sell them to needy passengers at a premium. In case of unsold tickets, 
they used to get refund losing only 30 per cent under the 1976 rules. 
Therefore, the maximum cancellation charges were raised to 50 per 
cent which continued till the introducti on of refund rules of 1990. 
Under the refund rules of 1990, 50 per cent cancellation was leviable 
on reserved tickets surrendered within two days in advance. The 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had examined 
these rules between 1987 and 19 93 and on the basis of their 
recommendations, provision was made in the refund rules of 1990 

that 50 per cent cancellation shall be levied on tickets surrendered 
within 6 hours before scheduled departure of the train (this time 
limit of six hours was later  on reduced to four hours). In the new 
rules for 1998, for tickets surrendered one day in advance and upto 
four hours before scheduled departure of train, the cancellation 
charges were reduced to 25 per cent. This reduction in the time-limit 
and introducti on of 25 per cent cancellation slab provided 
considerable relief to passengers who were losing 50 per cent for 
cancellation of their tickets upto two days in advance. 
Committee’s further query 
        What is the justification of levying double cancellatio n charges 
under the rule specially when fresh reservation fee is charged for 
every advancing and postponement of journey? Whether the 
Ministry of Railways have any objection in rectifying the position? 
        Ministry’s further comments dated 24.8.1999  If the passenger 
has purchased a ticket for a particular date and he does not want to 
travel but wants to postpone or prepone his journey, he is supposed 
to cancel his already reserved ticket and purchase fresh ticket for the 
proposed journey date. While can celling the ticket the passenger 
loses cancellation charges which are upto 50 per cent of the total fare. 
However, as a passenger friendly measure, Railway issues him the 
ticket for fresh journey without levying any cancellation charge but 
collecting only the nominal reservation fee which he has to pay in any 
case for obtaining reservation. Thus, the passenger saves a lot of 
money which he would have otherwise lost by way of cancellation 
charges. Therefore, when the Railways has helped the passenger, he 
must ensure that he undertakes the journey on the revised day. If he 
does not do so, double cancellation charges are levied so that he is 
denied the financial benefit given by the Railways at the time of 
postponement/preponement of the ticket. If only single cancellation 
is levied, instead of double cancellation, there will be innumerable 
cases where the undesirable elements (like touts) will take undue 
advantage. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee during its discussions with the representatives 
of South Central Railway could not get a clear picture with regard 

to the fact whether a passenger is obliged to pay 25 per cent of the 
fare as cancellation charges for cancellation of a reserved ticket in 
two days or one day in advance. The comments of the Railway Board 
clearly stated that under the new rules of 1998 “tickets surrendered 
one day in advance and upto 4 hours before the scheduled departure 
of train, the cancellation charges were reduced to 25 per cent” but, 
the provision of rule 6(1) (b) still provide for cancellation charge at 
the rate of 25 per cent of the fare if the ticket is presented for 
cancellation within one day in advance “excluding the day of journey 
and upto 4 hours before the scheduled departure of train”. The 
Committee felt that there was some contradiction between the actual 
provisions of the rule and the comments of the Railway Board. 
6.     Point raised: Proviso to Rule 6(1) and 7(1)  
        Under the proviso to rules 6 (1) and 7 (1) for night trains, refund 
is admissible at the station within the time limit specified in the sub-
rule or within first two hours after the opening of the reservation 
office whichever is later, meaning thereby if a person could not catch 
a train during night, he has to come again the morning after the 
opening of the reservation office to collect his refund. In such 
circumstances, is it possible to arrange for a 24 hour refund counter 
atleast in major cities so that the passenger can receive his refund 
then and there and does not have to come again for refund. 
Ministry’s comments 
        On the basis of the recommendations made by the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, this provision was made 
from 1.2.1993 in Refund Rules of 1990. The intention behind this rule 
is that if the passenger is booked by a night train and he does not 
want to travel, he should not come to the station at odd hours but 
collect his refund next day in the morning. Under the present system 
the Passenger Reservation System remain under shutdown betwe en 
20hrs. and 8 hrs. for on line reservation work for processing of other 
off line activities before starting the reservation work for the next 
day. 
Committee’s observation 
        The Committee, while noting the explanation furnished by the 
representatives of the Railway Board felt the necessity for increasing 

the time period from first two hours to at least first four hours in 
rules 6(1) and 7(1) for the convenience of the public. The Committee 
felt that ideally, Railway should have arrangement for 24 hou rs 
refund at least at railway stations in big and metropolitan cities. 
7.     (i)    Point raised: Rule 12 Cancellation of tickets where Railway 
               Administration is unable to provide accommodation 
        Under what circumstances the Railway A dministration 
expresses inability to provide accommodation to passengers holding 
reserved tickets? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The circumstances under which the Railway Administration can 
express inability to provide accommodation to passengers holding 
reserved tickets are:  
        The coach by which the reservation is made is marked sick due 
to mechanical reasons. 
        The train by which reservation was made is cancelled. 
        The air -conditioning equipment in the coach by which 
reservation was made  was not working and the passenger is not 
willing to travel by that coach. 
Committee’s observation 
        The Committee noted the position. 
7.     (ii)   Point raised 
        Whether any clerkage is levied on cancellation of tickets under 
rule 12? 
Ministry’ comments 
        Total charges collected on ticket are refunded without levying 
any cancellation charge or clerkage. 
Committee’s observation 
        The Committee noted the position. 
7.     (iii)  Point raised 

        Whether Ministry of Railways have ever come across any claim 
for damages/compensation where a passenger holding a valid 
reserved ticket is required either to travel by a lower class or is 
unable to be provided with the accommodation in the train and 
whether any modification in the rule is contemplated? 
Ministry’s comments 
The information is being collected. 
8.     Point raised: Rule 16 When passengers are made to travel in 
lower  
        class for want of accommodation. 
        Under what circumstances a ticket holder of a higher class is 
made to travel in a lower class? Whether the Ministry have received 
any complaint in regard to issue of certificate in such cases and if so, 
whether there is any proposal to streamline the procedure in this 
regard? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The circumstances under which the ticket holder of a higher 
class is made to travel in a lower class are: 
        Accommodation is not available in the class for which the ticket 
was issued and it is available in some lower class. 
        The coach by which the reservation is made is marked sick due 
to mechanical reasons and the passengers are booked in lower class. 
        The air -conditioning equipment in the coach by which 
reservation was made is not working and the passenger is 
accommodated in lower class. 
        The procedure in this regard is already quite simple. In such 
cases the Conductor/TTE issues a certificate regarding lower class 
travel and the refund is granted at the destination station within 20 
hours of arrival of the train. There is no proposal to further 
streamline this. 
Committee’s further query 

        In rule 16 para 3, the word ‘provided’ needs to be reconsidered. 
In the above rule, should the condition of 12 hours not be removed? 
Ministry’s further comments dated 24.8.1999 
        As provided in the Railways Act, refund rules are framed 
through Gazette Notifications which are printed in the Gazette of 
India. In the case of such Notifications, the language of rules is 
framed by the Ministry of Law and Justice as per their legal  
requirements. It is therefore not possible to make any change in this 
regard. 
        The condition of “12 hours” has not been mentioned anywhere 
in Rule 16. It has been stipulated in this rule that, in cases of lower 
class travel, refund shall be admissi ble at the destination station, on 
the strength of the certificate issued by conductor/guard, within 20 
hours of arrival of the train. This time limit of 20 hours has been 
prescribed so that the passenger may not have to wait at the station 
during odd hours but can go to his home and again come back at his 
convenience within this time limit to obtain refund. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the reply given by the 
Railway Authorities. The Committee cited many examples of 
complaint due to this rule. 
9.     Point raised: Rule 17 Lost, misplaced, torn or mutilated tickets 
        The charges collected for issue of duplicate ticket appears to be 
very much on the higher side particularly when the system of 
reservation is computerized and not much efforts are involved in this 
process. Whether the Ministry have any objection in rationalizing 
these charges so that they commensurate with the work involved, no 
doubt, ensuring that such cases need to be kept at the minimum? 
Ministry’s comments 
        Earlier, duplicate tickets were issued on payment of 25 per cent 
of fare irrespective of distance. Based on the recommendations of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha the charges for 
issue of duplicate tickets for distan ces beyond 500 Kms. (except for 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains) were reduced to 10 per cent (subject to 

payment of 25 per cent of total charges for 500 Kms.). This has 
provided considerable relief to passengers holding tickets for long 
distances. 
Committee’s observations 
        The Committee was informed that the present rule has been 
framed after considering the recommendations of the same 
Committee and the same has provided considerable relief to the 
passengers. 
10.   Point raised: Rule 21 Application for refu nd in other 
circumstances 
        The Rule does not lay down any procedure that will be followed 
by the Railway Administration after an application has been made 
to CCM (Refunds). Is there any time limit by which a decision is 
taken on the application. Whe ther there is any objection in 
prescribing the procedure in the rule itself? 
Ministry’s comments 
(i)    The rules provide that refund is granted on unused ticket 
after verification of genuineness of ticket and its particular 
.The railway administration the refore grants refund after 
due verification from the concerned zonal railways and 
after verification that the ticket was unused. There appears 
to be no need for prescribing any specific procedure. 
(ii)    Railway administration makes full efforts to grant refund 
to the passengers at the earliest. However, instructions were 
issued to all zonal railways to ensure that all refund cases 
are finally settled within three months from the date of 
receipt of the application from the passengers. 
Committee’s further queries 
(i)    when passengers approach ticket checking staff for asking 
refund, they are looked upon with suspicion; 
(ii)    Refund should be arranged expeditiously on an application 
without much documentation; 
(iii)   The amount of profit made by Railways on refund. 

Ministry’s further comments dated 24.8.1999 
(i)    As per .rules, refund is granted at stations across the 
counter. Ticket checking staff is not authorized to grant 
refunds. 
(ii)    When the passenger approaches, refund is granted at the 
station immediately within the time limits prescribed in the 
rules provided that verification of genuineness of ticket and 
its particulars is possible at that station. In cases where the 
verification is not possible or the refund is sought after the 
normal time limits, a Ticket Deposit Receipt is issued to the 
passenger and refund is granted from the office to the Chief 
Commercial Manager (Refunds). In such cases, verification 
of ticket and its particulars, verification of usage of ticket 
from the deposited reservation charts, etc. takes some time. 
However, every effort is made to grant refund to the 
passenger at the earliest; 
(iii)   The passengers purchase tickets only when they have to 
travel. However, there are many compelling circumstances 
when the passengers  have to cancel their tickets. Besides, 
under certain compelling circumstances, the Railway is 
unable to carry the passengers. In cases where the 
passengers do not want to travel for some reason or the 
other, or where the Railway is unable to carry the 
passengers holding tickets, refund is granted to the 
passengers. For cancellation of such tickets (except those 
where Railway fails to carry them) cancellation charges are 
levied depending upon the time of surrendering of ticket. 
        Whenever it is possib le to verify the ticket and its 
particulars from station records, refund is granted at the 
station across the counter provided that the ticket is 
surrendered within the normal time limits prescribed in the 
rules. In other cases, a Ticket Deposit Receipt is issued and 
the cases for refund are processed in refund offices and 
refund is sent to the passengers. For granting refund at the 
stations, extra staff is provided at stations on all Indian 
Railways. Besides, Railways have to keep number of 
persons in refund and FA& CAO offices for processing the 

cases of refund. In many cases, the staff have to be deputed 
to verify the ticket and its usage from the deposited 
reservation charts. The Railways have to spend huge 
amount in maintaining staff for granting refund . The 
expenditure involved in refunds may be much more than 
the amount earned as cancellation charges. It would, 
therefore, be appreciated that the amount received on 
account of cancellation charges should not be considered as 
Railway’s earning profits. 
Committee’s observation 
        The Committee was not satisfied with the reply given by the 
Railway Authorities. The Committee, however, noted that South 
Central Railway had issued instructions to settle applications for 
refund within three months. The Commi ttee desired that Rule 21 
should be modified so as to prescribe a time limit for processing of 
applications for refund. 
2.     The Committee, while further pursuing the matter, requested 
the Ministry on the 13th March, 2000 for further clarifications on 
some specific issues/observations. The Ministry on the 22 nd May, 
2000 furnished their clarifications/comments which are as under:- 
Committee’s observation: Rule 3(1) & (2) 
        These rules show no sign of urgency on the part of the Railway 
Authorities for processing of Refund cases. 
Ministry’s Comments 
        For the purpose of issue of tickets, and refund of fares, there can 
be four types of stations i.e., (1) ticket issuing -cum-journey 
commencing station, in cases where ticket has been issued for 
journey from the same station; (2) ticket issuing station, in cases 
where ticket has been issued for travel from some other station; (3) 
journey commencing station, in cases where ticket has been issued 
from some other station and (4) any station, other than the  three 
mentioned above, on Indian Railways. Rule 3 stipulates the time 
periods within which refund is granted across the counter at these 
stations. Obviously, this rule is basically for refund at those stations 
which are linked to PRS’ or where the message s for reservation are 

sent. Therefore, the question of ‘urgency upon the Railway 
Authorities for processing/handling refund cases’ does not arise as 
refund is granted immediately at the station across the counter. 
Committee’s observation: Proviso to Rules 6 (1) & 7 (1) 
        In proviso at the end of Rules 6(1) & 7(1), the time limit of 2 
hours for claiming refund on the following day may be increased to 
at least 4 hours. 
Ministry’s Comments 
        The suggestion of the Committee is being examined. 
Committee’s observation: Rule 6 (1) (b) 
        Rule 6 (1) (b) is not clear. The committee wanted a clarification 
as to whether the passenger is obliged to pay 25 per cent of the fare 
(as cancellation charge of a reserved ticket) two days or one day in 
advance. 
Ministry’s Comments 
        Rule 6 is quite clear .25 per cent cancellation is charged when 
the ticket is surrendered within one day in advance (excluding the 
day of departure of train) and upto four hrs before scheduled 
departure of the train. For example, if the journey is for 10th June at 
16.00 hrs, 25 per cent is charged if the ticket is surrendered on 9th 
June or upto 12.00 hrs. on 10th June. 
Committee’s observation: Rule 16 
        It is difficult for the passenger to obtain a certificate from the 
conductor or the guard or the TTE and that the time limit of 24 hrs 
for presenting the certificate should be extended to 2 -3 days for the 
convenience of the passengers. 
Ministry’s Comments 
        The Conductors/Guards/TTEs are provided with the necessary 
certificate. They issue certificates to those passengers who hold the 
higher class ticket but travel in lower class for want of 
accommodation in higher class. In such case, refund is granted 
within 24 hrs. of arrival of the train at the destination station of  the 

passenger. This time limit of 24 hrs. is quite sufficient and there 
appears to be no justification to increase this. 
Committee’s observation: Rules 21 
        This rule should be modified so as to prescribe a time limit for 
refund. 
Ministry’s Comments 
        In most of the situations, refund is granted at the station across 
the counter within certain time limits. However, if the passenger 
approaches the station after the time limit and in cases where refund 
is not admissible or could not be granted at the station for any reason, 
Rule 21 states that the Station Master shall issue a Ticket Deposit 
Receipt (TDR) to the passenger and the case for refund shall be 
processed in Refund office of the Zonal Railway under whose 
jurisdiction the TDR issuing station comes. Although Zonal Railways 
have been instructed to finalize such cases early and grant refund 
within three months, it is not always possible to stick to this time limit 
in many cases because process of verification of ticket and its 
particulars, verification of usage of tickets from Reservation Charts, 
etc. takes a long time in some cases. It will therefore, be appreciated 
that it is not possible to stipulate any time limit for granting refund 
from Refund Offices. 
3.     The Committee considered the subject matter in its meeting held 
on the 29 th June, 2000. The Committee felt that there was ample 
scope for seeking further clarifications/elucidations on the said rules 
and decided to invite the representatives of the Ministry of Railways 
before the Committee for oral evidence. The Committee also desired 
that the Ministry, in the meanwhile, may study as to whether similar 
rules are in operation in other countries and the extent to which such 
rules have been utilized in India. Accordingly, an oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways was taken on the 29th 
August, 2000. During the course of the oral evidence, the 
representatives of the Ministry informed the Committee that they 
were already working towards liberalization and simplificati on of 
the refund rules and procedures. The Committee not agreeing with 
the Ministry’s contention regarding levy of cancellation charge @ of 
25 per cent observed that “the people who have seen the operation of 

consumer protection laws in the western world a re of the view that 
you are not required to pay for a service which was never enjoyed by 
you, for a variety of reasons. Charging of any sum as cancellation 
charge is anathema, as far as the western consumer is concerned. In 
an environment where there is a long waiting list, the Railways, 
empirically, are not able to establish how actually they are put to any 
disadvantage or loss.”  In this environment, it would not only be 
improper but also unacceptable that we have very heavy cancellation 
charges in the name of preventing misuse of this facility by touts or 
by such interested elements that might become a source of nuisance. 
The Committee felt that a whole lot of consumers or public cannot 
be put to such a serious harassment in the name of preventing misuse 
by touts or cornering of accommodation by unscrupulous people. 
The Committee further observed that even the Airlines were not 
charging that heavy a sum from the passengers for cancellation of 
tickets even though the air tickets are far more expensive and th ere 
is no waiting list. The Committee felt that charging of heavy sum as 
cancellation charge amounts to confiscating somebody’s money 
without providing the service. In the opinion of the Committee the 
whole regime of cancellation charges should be brought down to a 
minimal fee covering only the cost involved in issuing fresh tickets. 
In this background, the Committee desired the Ministry of Railway 
to have a relook and reconsider the imposition of cancellation 
charges @ of 25 per cent and reduce the same to the minimal in order 
to make it truly consumer friendly. The Committee, then, as a 
followup to the oral evidence requested the Ministry to furnish their 
comments/claritications on the following points vide an O.M. dated 
the 4 December, 2000 : 
(i)    feasibility of bringing down cancellation charges to minimal 
fee level. 
(ii)    study made by the Railway Board regarding cost benefit 
analysis relating to cancellation process 
(iii)   issue of certificate by the TTE in the train itself in respect 
of the passengers who could not join on a party ticket 
(iv)   non-issue of First class/ AC class tickets to the passengers 
at booking office and instead being told to purchase 
ordinary tickets even for higher class journey 

(v)   charging or double penalty from the pass engers for 
traveling in a class higher than the one for which the ticket 
is purchased. 
4.     In the meantime, the Ministry vide their communication dated 
the  
7th February, 2001 informed the Committee on point (iii) regarding 
the issue of certificates by the TTE that instructions already exist 
that, if some person of a group/family does not turn up at the station 
and the persons travelling cannot claim refund before 
commencement of the journey, the person travelling should obtain 
the requisite certificate from the Gurad/Condutor/TTE of the coach 
and claim refund from the CCM (refunds) 
5.     Thereafter, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 
24th August, 2001 furnished their comments on point (i) feasibility 
of bringing down cancellation charges to a minimal fee stage and (ii) 
study made by the Railway Board regarding cost benefit analysis 
relating to cancellation process. The Ministry informed that the 
refund rules were considerably liberalized and cancellation charges 
have been substantially reduc ed after the recommendations of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha in the year 
1980. The Ministry further stated that they have not only reduced 
the time period for cancellation but also the cancellation slab up to 
25 per cent. However, on the issue of feasibility to liberalize these 
rules further, the Ministry clarified that the refund rules of Indian 
Railways were very liberal as compared to the similar rules 
applicable in some foreign countries like Bangladesh and Japan. 
6.     The Ministry of Railways vide another communication dated 
the  
21st January, 2002 lastly furnished their comments on two 
outstanding points (iv) and (v). With regard to point (iv) relating to 
the non -issue of first class/AC class tickets to the passengers at 
booking office and instead being told to purchase ordinary tickets 
even for higher class journey, the Ministry stated that the unreserved 
tickets for AC classes are generally not issued. However, after 
obtaining confirmation of availability of accommodation, s ome 
railways are issuing unreserved tickets for AC class from booking 
counters. In the case of first class there is a practice of issuing 

unreserved tickets for the day journey only. The passengers, who 
want to travel in reserved classes from those station s where there is 
no information in regard to availability of accommodation, are 
advised to purchase second class un -reserved tickets. In such cases, 
the second class ticket is changed to higher class in train on payment 
of difference of fare paid for secon d class and the fare payable for 
the concerned higher class. For this facility, the availability of 
accommodation in the concerned higher class and prior permission 
from an authorized railway official to board the train are the pre -
requisites. This provisi on is not applicable in Rajdhani/Shatabdi 
groups of trains. On point (v) regarding charging of double penalty 
form the passengers for traveling in a class higher than the one for 
which the ticket is purchased the Ministry stated that the passengers 
holding waitlisted tickets for other than Rajdhani/Shatabdi group of 
trains are not permitted to board the trains. However, no penalty is 
realized from such waitlisted passengers if they board these trains 
with the permission of an authorized railway official. Su ch 
passengers are accommodated if accommodation is available, 
otherwise they are advised to detrain at the next stoppage as 
stringent penalties have been provided to prevent the entry of 
unauthorized passengers in Rajdhani/Shatabdi group of trains 
which are fully reserved trains. If some passenger boards the train 
without a proper ticket and without permission of an authorized 
railway official, he is charged double the fare upto the destination of 
the train. 
7.     The Ministry’s comments on (i) feasibility  of bringing down 
cancellation charges to minimal fees stage and (ii) study made by the 
Railway Board regarding cost benefit analysis of cancellation 
process, were found to be not satisfactory. The Committee had 
suggested the Ministry in very clear terms t hat the cancellation 
charges should be brought down to a minimal level. In this regard, 
the Committee has been informed that the refund rules of Indian 
Railways were very liberal as compared to similar rules applicable 
in some other countries like Banglade sh and Japan. Rather than 
liberalizing rules there was justification for making them more 
stringent. 
8.     In the meantime a communication dated the 13th January, 2003, 
from Dr. A. R. Kidwai, Member of the Committee, addressed to the 

Chairman of the Commi ttee, was received. The Hon’ble Member 
desired the matter to be expedited and the Chairman, Railway Board 
be invited for a discussion before the Committee. 
9.     In the meanwhile, the Committee considered the subject matter 
again in its meeting held on, the 31st march, 2003. While deliberating 
upon the subject, the Committee felt that there was still a fairly good 
scope for bringing down the cancellation charges to lower stages and 
to further liberalize the rules to make them more consumer friendly. 
Consequently, a detailed reference was sent to the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) for further clarifications, particularly 
with regard to levy of cancellation charges, and cost benefit analysis 
in the cancellation process in other countries, justification for levying 
of 25 per cent cancellation charges, justification for charging of 
double penalty from the passengers travelling in a higher class and 
the levy of double cancellation charges on cancellation of ticket on 
which journey has been postponed or preponed. 
10.   The Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) furnished their 
comments on each of the points vide their communication dated the 
22nd December, 2003 which are as under:–– 
Committee’s Observation 
        The Ministry, while stating the cost benefit analysis in the 
cancellation process, have shown a comparison with countries like 
Bangladesh and Japan. What is the position with regard to levy of 
cancellation charges and cost benefit analysis in the cancellation 
process in countries like USA, UK and other European countries? 
Ministry’s Comments 
        Study of refund rules prevalent in different foreign railways has 
also been done in Railway Board. In most of these countries, reserved 
accommodation is never fully utilized and thus, there are no chances 
of cornering of accommodation by anyone. In India, the demand for 
berths/seats is much more than their availability. Therefore, it is 
necessary to have a deterrent factor in the form of cancellation 
charges to discourage cornering of accommodation.  Since the 
position in these countries is very different, it may not be appropriate 
to compare, their refund rules with those applicable over Indian 
Railways. In fact in some countries, refund is not admissible on 

certain type of tickets and change of date  of journey is also not 
permitted. 
Committee’s observation 
        The 25 per cent cancellation charges in case where confirmed 
ticket is cancelled one day before the day of journey and up to 4 hours 
before the schedule departure time of the train seems to  be on the 
higher side. One day or even half a day’s notice for cancellation of a 
confirmed ticket seems to be fairly reasonable and there is little 
justification for levying a cancellation charge of 25 per cent. Any 
cancellation charge is not justified un less a confirmed ticket is got 
cancelled at the last moment or say a couple of hours before the 
schedule departure time of the train. What is the view of the Ministry 
on this observation of the Committee? 
Ministry’s comments 
        Till 1990, there were o nly two slabs of cancellation charges 
leviable on confirmed tickets. For tickets surrendered more than two 
days in advance (excluding the day of journey), the nominal flat 
cancellation charges were applicable. For tickets surrendered within 
two days before  scheduled departure and upto certain time limits 
after departure of the train, 50 per cent cancellation was levied. 
        Based on the recommendations of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha, which had studied Refund 
Rules in 1980 also, not only the time limits of ‘more than two days in 
advance’ and ‘within two days in advance’ were substantially 
reduced but also a new slab of 25 per cent cancellation was 
introduced. Accordingly, as per the revised rules introduced in 1990, 
and continued thereafter, cancellation charges are as under: 
        For tickets surrendered more than one day in advance 
(excluding the day of journey), the nominal flat cancellation charge 
(ranging from Rs.10 to  
Rs.50 depending on the class) is levied. 
        For tickets surrendered within one day in advance and upto four 
hours before scheduled departure of the train, 25 per cent 
cancellation charge is levied; and 

        For tickets surrendered within four hour before scheduled 
departure and upto certain time lim its after actual departure of the 
train, 50 per cent cancellation charge is levied. 
        Under the present situation where availability of seats berths is 
less than demand, if cancellation charges for confirmed seats/berths 
are eliminated or reduced, th ere might be many cases of cornering 
of accommodation and the result will be that the passengers seeking 
reservation will not get confirmed accommodation. Deterrence is 
thus created by levying cancellation charge for such persons and the 
general passengers  benefit from the increased availability of 
confirmed accommodation. It is, therefore, not desirable to abolish 
this slab of 25 per cent cancellation charge. 
Committee’s observation 
        What is the justification for charging double penalty from 
passengers travelling in a class higher than one for which the ticket 
has been purchased by them? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The passenger is required to purchase ticket only for that class 
in which he wants to travel and must travel in the class for which he 
has the ticket. Therefore, when a passenger is detected travelling in 
a class higher than the one for which he has purchased the ticket, 
difference of fares of two classes upto the point of detection (subject 
to the fare for minimum distance applicable for travel by that train) 
and penalty equivalent to difference of fares, subject to minimum Rs. 
50, is collected. For the rest of journey, if accommodation is 
available, only the difference of fare between the two classes, without 
any penalty, is collected. If accommodation is not available, he is 
advised to detrain at the next stoppage. Thus, double penalty is not 
imposed. 
Committee’s observation 
        The justification put forth by the Ministry that the non -levy of 
double cancellation charge would encourage undesirable elements 
like touts is not fair because this indirectly amount to penalizing 
genuine public unreasonably simply to keep a check on the illegal 
activities of the middlemen/touts. In view of this will it not be 

desirable that the illegal activiti es of the middlemen/touts are 
checked through stringent penal laws rather then overburdening the 
honest and genuine passengers? 
Ministry’s comments 
        A passenger purchases ticket for a particular train and date as 
per his own requirement/choice and, therefore, he must travel by 
that particular train. If he does not want to travel by that particular 
train and wants to change the date of his journey, in the normal 
course he is required to cancel his ticket and purchase a fresh ticket 
for the revised date. In doing so, he will not only lose the cancellation 
charges applicable at the time of cancellation but will also have to 
stand in the queue twice–once for cancellation of ticket and again for 
purchasing afresh ticket. However, as a customer -friendly measure 
and to avoid financial loss and inconvenience to the passenger, 
Railways allows the passenger to prepone/postpone his journey only 
once. In such cases, only fresh reservation fee is realized for the 
facility provided to passenger and to recover the co st involved in 
modifying the ticket. After availing the facility of change of date of 
journey, if the passenger still does not want to travel on the revised 
date of his choice, he is charged double cancellation charge i. e. the 
cancellation charge he would  have paid when the change of date of 
journey was allowed and the cancellation charge payable at the time 
of actual cancellation of ticket. The double cancellation charge in 
such cases is levied to avoid misuse of the facility. If double 
cancellation is not levied, the passenger will be able to avoid loss of 
upto 25 per cent cancellation charge by first postponing his journey 
and then cancelling the ticket more than one day in advance by 
paying only the nominal flat cancellation charge. Levy of double 
cancellation charge works as a deterrent against misuse of this 
facility. It should not be construed that double cancellation is levied 
only to curb the activities of touts/middlemen and is intended to 
penalize the genuine passengers. It may be appreciated that  it is not 
possible for the Railways to distinguish between genuine passengers 
and touts/middlemen standing in the queue for purchasing/canceling 
tickets. It is, therefore, not desirable to abolish the double 
cancellation charges. 
Committee’s observation 

        What is the amount of unpaid refund money lying with the 
Railways over the past three years? Please supply information year-
wise? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The Railways do not keep a separate account of the unpaid 
refund money. Therefore, no such data in this regard is maintained. 
When the passengers cancel their tickets within the time limits 
specified in the rules, the amount due to them is refunded. When they 
cancel their tickets after the prescribe d time limits, their cases are 
processed in refund offices on receipt of their claim letters and the 
refundable amount, if due, is refunded to them. 
Committee’s observation 
        The various types of harassment of railway passengers which 
are already in the knowledge of the Ministry of Railways, what 
efforts are being contemplated to make the rules more consumer 
friendly? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The rules for cancellation of tickets and refund of fares have 
been considerably liberalized during the past 15-20 years. Refund in 
most of the cases is admissible at stations across the counter provided 
that the tickets are surrendered within the time limits prescribed in 
the rules. 
        There are general complaints of inconvenience caused to 
passengers, in  cases when the tickets are surrendered after the 
prescribed time limits, arising out of delays in granting refund to 
passengers. 
        It is worth mentioning that as a customer friendly measure, 
Railways have allowed the refund of 10 per cent or 25 per cent fare 
collected for issuing duplicate tickets against the lost/misplaced 
reserved / RAC tickets issued before preparation of reservation 
charts. Such refund is admissible from PRS terminals at destination 
station, subject to verification and deduction of nominal clerkage of 
Rs. 10, during working hours upto three days of arrival of the train. 

11.   The matter was again placed before the Committee in its 
meeting held on the 25th February, 2004. The Committee was not 
convinced with the Ministry’s view poi nt that the existing slabs of 
cancellation charges are reasonable and consumer friendly and any 
further liberalization in the rules would lead to cornering of 
accommodation in the trains. The Committee opined that there is 
still a fairly good scope for rea lignment of cancellation charges in 
favour of the passengers. In the light of these observations the 
Committee sought further clarifications from the Ministry. The 
Ministry vide their communication dated the 5th July, 2004 furnished 
their comments on each of the issues referred to them (Annexure). 
12.   The Committee then considered the matter in its meeting held 
on the 19th October, 2004. Its observations/recommendations are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs: 
13.   Rule 6(1)(b)(c) regarding refun d on unused tickets on which  
        reservation has been made 
        The Committee has had a prolonged correspondence with the 
Ministry of Railways with regard to the levy of cancellation charges 
at a rate as high as 25 per cent. The Committee is not convinced with 
the various arguments put forth by the Ministry that there is no 
scope for further reduction in the cancellation charges. As the 
position stands at present, cancellation charge @ 25 per cent of the 
cost of ticket is levied in case a ticket is got cancelled “within a day 
in advance (excluding the day of journey) and upto 4 hours before 
the scheduled departure of train”. The rule states that if a ticket is 
presented for cancellation “within one day in advance (excluding the 
day of journey) and upto 4 hours before the scheduled departure of 
the train”, then cancellation charge @ 25 per cent of the fare will be 
applicable. On a specific query to the Ministry, it was clarified 
through an example that, if the journey is for the 10 th June at 1600 
hours, cancellation charges @ 25 per cent would be applicable if the 
ticket is surrendered, on the 9th of June or upto 1200 hours on the 
10th of June. In this connection, the Committee has two observations 
to make. In the first place, the language of Rule 6(1)( b) is not easily 
understandable and it is difficult to comprehend the provisions of the 
rule. The Committee feels that the words “one day in advance” or 
“excluding the day of journey” are quite confusing. Not only this, the 

rule as it stands at present, allows different time period to people for 
being covered  within the bracket of 25 per cent cancellation charge. 
As can be seen from the example, the time period available with the 
ticket holder depends upon the scheduled time of departure of the 
train. The later the scheduled departure time during the course of 
the day, the more disadvantageous a ticket holder is because, as per 
the rule, “the day of journey” has to be excluded. 
        Accordingly, in the first place, the Committee recommends that 
provisions of Rules 6(1 )(b ) may be recast so as to clearly indicate 
the rate of cancellation charges applicable if a ticket is surrendered 
within a given number of hours before the scheduled departure time 
of the train. The Committee feels that this would not onl y make the 
provisions easily understable but would also remove the discrepancy 
as pointed out above whereby varying time period is available to 
ticket holders (depending upon the scheduled departure time of the 
train) for getting their tickets cancelled. S econdly, as the provisions 
of Rule 6(1)(a) stand at present, in order to avoid paying cancellation 
charges @25 per cent, a ticket has to be got cancelled “a day in 
advance of the scheduled departure day of the train”. In 
Committee’s opinion, this period is  too long and there is scope for 
reduction in this period. In this era of computerization of 
reservation/cancellation process, a ticket can be got cancelled or 
issued/re-issued at the click of a button without any loss of time. With 
the given level of efficiency and speed due to automation there is no 
reason why the Railways should require its customer to surrender 
tickets so much in advance, in case they are unable to perform the 
journey, or pay cancellation charges at a high rate of 25 per cent. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends that the contents of Rule 
6(1)(b) be reviewed and the 25 per cent cancellation charges should 
be levied only when the passenger gets his ticket cancelled within a 
few hours of the scheduled time of departure of the train. The 
Committee hopes that the Ministry of Railways would be able to give 
some relief to passengers in this regard. 
14.   Provisos to Rules 6(1) & 7(1) regarding limitation of timing for  
        claiming refund for cancelled tickets 
        The Committee is not satisfied with the existing provisions 
whereby for night trains running between 2100 and 0600 hours, 

refund shall be admissible at the station either within specified time 
limit i.e., 2100-0600 hours, or within first two hours of the opening of 
the reservation office the next day. While the Committee appreciates 
the good intentions behind the exiting provisions, it feels that the 
limitations of “first two hours of the opening of the reservation office 
the next day” is too harsh. In big cities, there can be many reasons 
beyond the control of an individual, like traffic jam, long queues, etc. 
due to which a person may arrive late at the reservation office or his 
turn at the counter may be delayed. In such circumstances, what 
shall be the remedy?. The Committee  sees no justification for 
restricting all such cases to just first two hours of the opening of 
reservation office the following day. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should review these provisions 
keeping in view the convenience of persons seeking refund. 
15.   Rule 16 regarding refund when passengers are made to travel 
in a  
        lower class for want of accommodation 
        The Committee is not satisfied with the existing provisions of 
Rule 16 whereby the refund of excess fare ca n be reimbursed to the 
passenger only if the ticket is presented “within 20 hours of the 
arrival of the train at the destination station”. The Committee is not 
able to understand why this time limit of 20 hours has been 
prescribed when the passenger is in possession of a certificate from 
the conductor or the guard or the travelling ticket examiner of the 
train to the effect that the holder of the ticket had to travel in a lower 
class for want of accommodation in the class for which the ticket was 
issued. Wh en such a certificate is there with the passenger, the 
refund of the excess fare paid remains only a procedural matter and 
in the Committee’s opinion the passenger should have the liberty of 
claiming the refund at his convenience. The Committee hopes that 
the Ministry of Railways will look into this aspect and the time 
allowed for claiming refund would be suitably increased. 
16.   Rule 17 regarding lost, misplaced, torn or mutilated tickets 
        The Committee had earlier raised the issue of rationalizing  the 
levy of charges in case a ticket was lost, misplaced, torn or mutilated. 
While the Committee is happy to note that the Railway Board had 
given some relaxation in this matter on the basis of the earlier 

recommendations of this very Committee. The Committee, however, 
feels that the existing levy @ 25 per cent of the total fare in case of 
journey upto 500 kms and 10 per cent of the total fare in case of 
journey of more than 500 kms subject to a minimum recovery of 25 
per cent of total charges for reserved  or RAC ticket of 500 kms are 
still on the higher side. Not only this, the procedure for calculating 
the levy in case of tickets with journey beyond 500 kms is again quite 
complicated. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the 
Railway Board may have a re-look at the provisions of Rule 17 and 
bring in place simple and clear provisions levying a nominal penalty 
in case a passenger having “reserved or RAC” status approaches for 
issue of a duplicate ticket for the journey. In Committee’s view, when 
a person’s identity matches with the records of the Railways and he 
is actually allowed to perform the journey, there is no point in 
making him pay 25 per cent additional fare for issue of a duplicate 
ticket. The Committee is further of the opinion that in such 
circumstances, the levy of cancellation charges should be nominal, 
that might meet the administrative and other expenses and the 
passenger need not be unduly taxed. 
17.   Rule 21 regarding application for refund in other circumstances 
        While examining the rules the Committee had objected to non - 
prescription of any procedure under Rule 21 for processing 
applications received for refund after the expiry of the prescribed 
time limit. The Committee had also raised the issue of prescribing an 
upper time limit within which such applications should be disposed 
of. The Committee is not satisfied with the explanation furnished by 
the Ministry justifying the non -prescription of the detailed 
procedure or any upper time limit for disposal of applications under 
Rule 21. The Committee wonders that when the Railway Board have 
issued strict instructions for final settlement of such applications 
within 3 months, why should there be an objection in prescribing the 
same period or a little larger span of say 4-6 months in the rules itself. 
The Committee hopes that the Railway Board will have a re-look into 
the matter and consider prescribing an outer time limit for disposal 
of applications under Rule 2l, which would, in its opinion, enhance 
the efficiency and transparency  in the functioning of the Railway 
Board. 

18.   The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Railways 
are still putting forth the same logic on which they had been relying 
earlier when this Committee had taken up for examination the rules 
of the y ear 1986. The Ministry of Railways had maintained at that 
time that the cancellation charges had been kept on the higher side 
in order to discourage touts from cornering the tickets. The 
Committee had never agreed to this view of the Ministry. In the 
Committee’s view, steep rise in the cancellation charges was not the 
remedy. The Committee in its 83rd Report presented to the Rajya 
Sahha on the 7th September, 1990 while examining the set of rules of 
1986 on the subject had observed that “what the Ministry fe lt was 
the remedy, was worse than the disease”. The Committee is unhappy 
to note that the Ministry of Railways have again come forward with 
the same logic after a lapse of about 15 years even though the 
Railways have, in the meantime, computerized the whol e process of 
reservation and cancellation of tickets. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Railways should take steps to find 
out other ways and means of checking the menace of middlemen and 
touts instead of resorting to levy of heavy cancellation charges. The 
Committee further recommends the Ministry of Railways to 
consider if they can prescribe a maximum ceiling for the cancellation 
charges for different classes of journeys/distance slabs along with the 
existing basis so as to mitigat e the hardship caused to the ticket 
holders on account of cancellation of tickets. 
ANNEXURE 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
Rail Bhavan, New Delhi, l10001, dated  5.7.2004 
No. TCII/2003/99/Parl. Committee.                                                      
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
Subject: Railway Passengers (Cancellation of Ticket and Refund 
             of Fare) Rules, 1998 -consideration by the Committee 
             on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha. 

        The undersigned is directed to refer to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat’s O.M. No. RS. 5(27)/99-Com.1 dated 21st April, 2004 on 
the above subject and furnish point-wise information as under :- 
Point (i)  Grounds/justifications, besides those already furnish, for 
levying a  
               cancellation charge @ 25% . 
Comments:  If the cancellation slab of 25% is abolished, there might 
be cases where the undesirable elements will resort to cornering of 
reserved accommodation  and sell them to needy passengers at a 
premium. In case they fail to sell the tickets, they will get refund by 
losing only nominal flat cancellation. The result will be that the 
genuine passengers seeking reservation will not get confirmed 
accommodation. Deterrence is thus created by levying cancellation 
charge for such persons and the general passengers benefit from the 
increased availability of confirmed accommodation. 
Point (ii)  The amount of safety cess being collected by the Railways 
from passengers. 
Comments:  A statement showing the amount of safety surcharge 
levied on tickets is enclosed as Appendix – I. 
Point (iii)         The manner in which the amount of safety cess being 
collected by  
               the Railways from passengers is being utilized. 
Comments:  The safety Cess being collected from the passenger fares 
is credited to the Special Railway Safety Fund. This fund is being 
utilized for undertaking various works of replacement and renewal 
of assets which were overaged as on 1.4.2001 and iden tified by a 
Select Committee for replacement so as to improve the overall safety 
standards of the Railways. All these works identified by the Select 
Committee, on which the expenditure out of SRSF is being made, are 
listed in a Budget document “Works, . Machinery and Rolling Stock 
Part III” (Green Book). 
Item (iv)        The rate of increase in passenger fare in various classes 
from  
                      time to time since independence. 

Comments:   A statement showing increase/revision of passenger 
fares f or  
                      the last 18 years from 1986 to 2003 is enclosed as 
Appendix -II. 
                      The information for earlier increase/revision is not 
readily  
                      available. 
Item (v)         The criteria applied for increa sing the fare from time 
to time  
                      since independence. 
Comments:   The information is enclosed at Appendix-III 
DA: as above 
APPENDIX-I 
Safety surcharge 
Safety surcharge was levied on tickets with effect from 1.10.2001, as 
under: 
Class Amount per 
passenger (in 
rupees) 
  
  Tickets for 
distances 
Tickets for 
distances 
  upto 500 kms beyond 500 kms: 
Single Journey tickets (Rs.) (Rs.) 
Second (Ordy) 1 1 
Second M/E) 2 2 
Sleeper 10 20 
AC Chair Car 20 40 
First 20 40 
AC 3-tier Sleeper 30 60 
AC 2-tier Sleeper 40 80 
AC First/Executive 50 100 
Monthly Season     

Tickets     
First class 20 Not applicable 
Second class 10 Not applicable 
Quarterly Season     
Tickets     
First class 60 Not applicable 
Second class 30 Not applicable 
  
APPENDIX - II 
NOTE SHOWING REVISION OF PASSENGER FARES FROM 
1986 
1.     With effect from 1.4.1986, passenger fares were increased as 
under: 
II (Ordy) Nil. 
II (M/E) (a) 1-250 Kms. 7.5%. 
  (b) 251 Kms. & above 5% 
  subject to minimum increase of Re. 1 
  per ticket. 
AC Chair Car, First/AC 
2-tier, 
12.5% 
AC First   
  
2.     With effect from 1.11.1987 a surcharge (to help drought) was 
levied as under: 
Ac Class & First Class including 10% 
Rajdhani Express trains   
AC Sleeper, AC Chair Car, Second Nil. 
Class (M/E) & Second Class (Ordy)   
  

3.     With effect from 1.4.88, the Increased made from 1.11.87 was 
regularized and fares were increased as under :- 
Class Distance Slab Increase per ticket(in 
  in Kms.) Rs.) 
Second (Ordy.) 1-10 0.50 
  11-50 1.00 
  51-150 2.00 
  151 and above 3.00 
Second (M/E) 1-50 2.00 
  51-100 3.00 
  101-150 4.00 
  151-200 5.00 
  201-250 6.00 
  251-300 7.00 
  301-350 8.00 
  351-400 9.00 
  401-500 10.00 
  501-600 11.00 
  601-700 12.00 
  701-750 14.00 
  751 and above 15.00 
AC Chair Car 1-100 5.00 
  101-200 10.00 
  201-400 15.00 
  401-1000 20.00 
  1001 and above 25.00 
AC Sleeper 1-50 10.00 
  51-100 15.00 
  101-150 20.00 
  151-200 25.00 
  201-250 30.00 
AC sleeper (contd.) 251-300 35.00 

  301-350 40.00 
  351-400 45.00 
  401-500 50.00 
  501-600 55.00 
  601-700 60.00 
  701-800 70 00 
  801-900 75.00 
  901-1000 80.00 
  1001-1100 85.00 
  1151-1300 95.60 
  1301 and above 95.00 
First Class Nill.   
AC First Class 10%   
  
4.     With effect from 1.5.90, Passenger fares were increased as under 
;- 
Second (Ordy.) 1-25 Kms No increase 
  26-100 Kms. Rs. 1 per passenger. 
  101-200 Kms. Rs. 2 per passenger. 
  201-300 Kms. Rs. 3 per passenger. 
  above 300 Kms. Rs. 4 per passenger. 
Second (M/E) 1-25 Kms No increase. 
  26 – 50 Rs. 1 per passenger. 
  51-100 Rs. 2 per passenger. 
  101-150 Rs. 3 per passenger. 
  151-200 Rs. 4 per passenger. 
  201-250 Rs. 5 per passenger. 
  251-300 Rs. 6 per passenger. 
  301-350 Rs. 7 per passenger. 
  351-400 Rs. 8 per passenger. 
  401-450 Rs. 9 per passenger. 
  451-500 Rs.10 per passenger. 
  501-600 Rs.11 per passenger. 
  601-700 Rs.12 per passenger. 

  701-800 Rs.13 per passenger. 
  801-900 Rs.14 per passenger. 
  Above 900 Rs.15 per passenger. 
AC Chair Car, 
I, 
1-25 Kms. No increase  
AC Sleeper & 
,A,C 
Above 25 Kms. 17% 
First.     
  
5.     With effect from 16.8.91, passenger fares were increased as 
under:- 
Second (Ordy.) (increase per ticket) 
1-10 Kms. Nil 51- 60 Nil 
11-15 Rs.1 61-100 Rs. 1 
16-25 Nil 101-200 Rs. 2 
26-33 Rs. 1 201-300 Rs. 3 
34-40 Nil 301-400 Rs. 4 
41-50 Rs. 2 401 &beyond Rs. 5 
Second Class 
(M/E) 
Rs. 1 to Rs. 20 for 
various  
  
    distances   
AC Chair Car, I, 
AC Sleeper 
      
& AC First   1-800 20% 
    801 & above 15% 
  
6.     With effect from 1.492, passenger fares were increased as under 
: 
II (Ordy.) :          1-10 Kms.     -                 nil. 
                           11-15            -                 Rs.0.50 
                           16-25            -                 Rs.1 
                           26-65            -                 Rs.2 
                           66-100          -                 Rs.3 

                           101-250        -                 Rs.4 
                           251 & above  -                 Rs.5 
II (M/E)              Rs. 1 to Rs. 25 per ticket depending upon 
distance. 
AC Chair Car, First, AC Sleeper                 -  15% 
AC First             -                    -                 20% 
7.     With effect from 1.4.93, passenger fares were increased as 
under: 
II (O)           1-10 Kms. & 11-15 Kms.        -      raised by 50 paise. 
                    Other distances                 -      no change. 
II (M/E)                                                -      10% 
Sleeper Class :- Fare fixed at 25% Higher than Second 
(Newly            Class -No separate charge for berth 
introduced) 
ACCC, 1st, AC 2- T & AC-1              -      10% 
AC 3- Tier introduced, with fare at 25% higher than AC Chair 
Car, in  
non Rajdhani/Shatabdi. 
8.     With effect from 1.4.94, passenger fares were increased as 
under: 
        II Class (Ordy.)  upto 100 Kms.             -   nil 
                                  beyond 1 00 Kms.       -   Rs. 1 to Rs. 5 per ticket 
                                                                          on various distances. 
        II Class (M/E)            51 to 65 
        (fares rationalised)                                   101 to 
110                      reduced 
                                          116 to 125 
                                          151 to 155 
                        and             1-15, 66-70, 111-115, 
                                          126-130, 156-165   
                                          & 201-205 Kms. -   no change 
                                                                          for other distance 
                                                                          increase will range  

                                                                          from Rs 1 to 20 per 
                                                                          ticket 
        Sleeper Class                                               Contd, 25% higher 
than 
                                                                          II Class fare. 
  
        AC Chair Car 
        First Class                  6% 
        AC Sleeper 
        AC First Class 
        AC 3-tier                   Fares fixed at 25% 
        (Newly introduced)     higher than AC Chair Car 
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi:                                  revised 
9.     With effect from 1.4.95, passenger fares were increased as 
under:- 
        II, SL & 1st (Ordy)                                 -   Nil 
        II & SL (M/E)                                        -   Nil 
        1st class (Mail/Express), AC Chair Car, 
        AC 2-tier and AC 1st Class                    -   10% 
        AC 3 -tier sleeper                                     -continued to be 25% 
higher than 
                                                      AC Chair Car fares. 
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi                   -              Separate Km. fare 
structure made . 
        (Km. Fare structure)                inclusive of charges fo r high 
speed, 
        (introduced)                            reservation, bed-roll and mineral 
                                                      water, excluding catering charges. 
10.   With effect from 1.8.1996, passenger fares were increased as 
under: 
        II Class Ordinary & Mail/Express fares   - No increase. 
        Sleeper Class (Ordy & Mail/Express) : 
                                  upto 200 Kms.             - No increase. 
                                  above 200 Kms.          - 5% . 

        I class (Ordinary & Mail/Express), 
        AC Chair Car, AC-III tier Sleeper,         10% 
        AC-II tier Sleeper & AC I Class 
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi                                       - 10% 
11.   With effect from 1.4.1997, Passenger fares we re increased as 
under :- 
        Second (Mail/Express/Ordy.)                 -   No increase . 
        Sleeper (Mail/Express/Ordy.)                 -   5 % 
        First (M/E/Ordy.), AC Chair Car, 
        AC 2-tier, AC 3-tier & AC First            -   10% 
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi: Also increased as per the table supplied. 
12.   With effect from 20.06.1998 passenger fares were increased as 
under:- 
        II Class Ordinary:                                   1-50 Kms.          Re.1 per 
passenger. 
                                          51-100 Kms.       Rs.2 - do - 
                                          101-300Kms.      Rs.3 - do - 
                                          301 Kms & above    Rs. 5 - do - 
        SL Class (Ordy):        1-750 Kms.         Re. 5 per passenger. 
        & 1st Class (Ordy)                                  751-1500 Kms.  Rs.10 - do 
- 
                                          1501 & above      Rs. 20 - do - 
        Other Classes:  Increase per passenger in other classes was 
under: 
  1-500 
Kms. 
501-
1000 
1001-
1600 
1601-
2500 
2501 
Kms. 
  (in Rs.) Kms. 
(in 
Kms. 
(in 
Kms. 
(in 
& above 
Class   Rs.) Rs.) Rs.) in Rs.) 
II M/E 5 8 12 18 25 
SL M/E 10 15 25 35 45 
I M/E 20 30 40 50 60 

AC CC 20 30 40 50 60 
AC 3-T SL 40 60 80 100 120 
AC 2-T SL 60 90 120 150 180 
AC – I 180 270 360 450 540 
  
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi: Fares increased by 20% for all distances. 
13.   With effect from 1.4.1999, passenger fares were increased as 
under: 
               II Class Ordinary:      No increase. 
               II Class (M/E):          No increase 
        Other classes:        Fares for other classes revised on the basis of 
the 
        relativity as under: 
        (a)   Ordinary Class                   Index 
               Second Class (O)                 100 Base Class 
               Sleeper (O)                          155 
               First (O)                               525 
               Mail/Express 
               Second (M/E)                       100 Base Class 
               SL (M/E)                              155 
               AC CC                                300 
               AC 3- T                               450 
               First (M/E)                           525 
               AC 2- T                               720 
               AC 1                                    1440 
               (If revised fares comes to less than the 
               existing fares, existing fares shall be retained) 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi fares: FARE TABLE for Rajdhani/Shatabdi 
trains introduced and the fares are revised accordingly. 
14.   With effect from 1.4.2000, passenger fares were not increases. 
15.   With effect from 1.4.2001, passenger fares were not increases. 

16.   With effect from 1.4.2002, the fares were rationalised as under: 
. 
        Mail/Express Fares for different classes:  The second class 
(Mail/Express) fare structure rationalised. Keeping this structure as 
index 100, the Mail/Express fares of other classes shall be revised on 
the basis of relativity among the fares of different classes as given 
below : –– 
Second Class 
(M/E)      
            - 100 (base class) 
Sleeper Class 
(M/E)      
            - 160 
AC Chair Car                - 350 
AC 3 Tier             - 450 
First Class 
(M/E)           
            - 525 
AC 2 Tier             - 720 
AC First Class               - 1400 
  
        Ordinary Fares for different classes:  The Second Class 
(Ordinary) fare structure also rationalised. These fares have been 
fixed at 55 per cent of Second Class (Mail/Express) fares beyond 100 
Kms. Keeping this structure as index 100, the ordinary fares of other 
classes shall be revised on the b asis of relativity among the fares of 
different classes as given below: –– 
Second Class 
(Ordy)     
-             100 (base class) 
Sleeper Class 
(Ordy)     
-             160 
First Class 
(Ordy)          
-             525 
  
        Rajdhani/Shatabdi Express trains:  No change. 

17.   With effect from 14.4.2002:                      Fare structure of 
Second class and  
                                                            AC Chair Car of Jan Shatabdi  
                                                            Express trains introduced. 
18.   With effect from 1.4.2003. the fares were rationalised as under: 
        1.     No revision in passenger fares. 
2.     Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Jan Shatabdi Express fares:  The fare 
structure of Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Jan Shatabdi trains 
rationalized by linking them to corresponding class of 
Superfast Mail/Express trains and fixed at 15% higher for 
Rajdhani/Shatabdi and 5% higher for Jan Shatabdi trains. 
APPENDIX - III 
The criteria applied for increasing the fare from 
time to time since independence 
        After attaining independence, Passenger tariff has been 
examined from-time to time by the High Powered Committees such 
as the Rail Tariff Enquiry Committee (1977 -80) and The Railway 
Fare and Freight Committee (1991 -93). The basic principles which 
govern the fare structure are: –– 
        (1)   The cost of service and 
        (2)   The value of service 
        (3)   What the traffic can bear. 
Tariff Fixation Methodology 
        For the purpose of charging, trains are divided into two main 
categories i.e. (a) Ordinary trains and (b) Mail Express trains. 
Ordinary trains have three different classes as under: –– 
        (i)    Second Class Ordinary. 
        (ii)    Sleeper Class Ordinary. 
        (iii)   First Class Ordinary 
Mail/Express trains have seven classes as under: –– 
        (i)    Second Class Mail/Express 
        (ii)    Sleeper Class Mail/Express  

        (iii)   Air conditioned Chair Car 
        (iv)   Air conditioned 3 Tier Sleeper 
        (v)   First Class Mail/Express 
        (vi)   Air conditioned 2 Tier Sleeper 
        (vii)  Air conditioned First class 
Relativity and base class 
        Second class (ordinary) w as the base class as recommended by 
the Rail Tariff Enquiry Committee (RTEC), 1980. The relativity 
between the fares for other classes and the fares of the base class was 
expressed as a percentage taking the base class fares as 100. The 
relativity indices recommended by RTEC and adopted by the 
Ministry of Railways in 1983 alongwith the relativity indices 
adjusted in the Railway Budget 1999-2000, are given below: –– 
  Recommended Adopted in Adopted 
Ordinary Services by RTEC 1983 w.e.f 
  in1983   01.4.1999 
Second Class 100 100$ 100* 
Sleeper Class - 144 155 
First class - 808 525 
Mail Express Services 
(i) Second Class 140 187 100 * 
(ii) Sleeper Class - 269 155 
(iii) Air conditioned Chair 
car 
300 592 300 
(iv) Air conditioned 3 Tier - 777 450 
(v) First Class 550 926 525 
(vi) Air conditioned 2 Tier - 1392 720 
$ Average relativity at a distance of 400 kms. 
* Base Class. 
Passenger Fares (2002-03) 

        The fare structures of Mail/Express and Ordinary passenger 
services were rationalised in 2002-03. 
        The minimum fare for Second Class (Mail/Express) was 
increased from Rs.15.00 to Rs. 16.00 upto a distance of 15 kilometers. 
The minimum fare for the Second Class - (Ordinary) was increased 
from Rs. 3.00 to Rs. 4.00 up to a distance of 10 kilometers. 
        Indexing the rationalised fares of Second Class (Mail/Express) 
at 100, the fares of other six classes of Mail/Express services were 
also rationalised as per the relativity index given below: –– 
Class of Travel                        Relativity Index of fares 
Second Class (Mail/Express)     100 (One hundred) 
Sleeper Class                             160 (One hundred and sixty) 
AC Chair Car                            350 (Three hundred and fifty) 
AC 3-Tier                                 450 (Four hundred and fifty) 
First Class                                 525 (Five hundred and twenty 
five) 
AC 2- Tier                                720 (Seven hundred and twenty) 
AC First Class                           1400 (Fourteen hundred) 
        Similarly, for ordinary passenger services, indexing the fares of 
Second Class (Ordinary) at 100, the fares of other two classes were 
rationalised as per the relativity index given below: –– 
Class of Travel                        Relativity Index of fares 
Second Class(Ordinary)             100 (One hundred) 
Sleeper Class (Ordinary)            160 (One hundred and sixty) 
First Class (Ordinary)                525 (Five hundred and twenty 
five) 
        Earlier there was no fixed relationship between the fares of 
Mail/Express and Ordinary Passenger trains. In the rationalised fare 
structure, the fares for Second Class (Ordinary) for distances beyond 
100 kilometers were fixed at 55 per cent of Seco nd Class 
(Mail/Express) fares. 
        The fare structure for Monthly Season Tickets (MST) was also 
rationalised. The Second Class Monthly Season Ticket fares were 

fixed equivalent to the fares for 15 single journeys by Second Class 
(Ordinary), uniformly f or all distances. First Class Season Tickets 
continued to be charged at 4 times the Second Class Season Ticket 
fares. The quarterly Season Tickets also continued to be charged, at 
2.7 times the Monthly Season Ticket fares. 
        The fare structures for R ajdhani Express trains and Shatabdi 
Express trains were rationalised in 2003-04. The basic fares for each 
class of these trains were fixed uniformly 15% higher than the fares 
for the corresponding class of Mail/Express (Super Fast) trains. The 
charges for catering services, as per the requirement of the journey, 
will be added to the basic fares. 
        The basic fares for Jan Shatabdi Express trains were reduced 
from the existing mark -up of 10% to 5% over the fares of 
corresponding class of Mail/Express (S uper Fast) trains. The 
Catering services were made optional on these trains. 
        Concept of reduced rail fares during non -peak periods was 
introduced. As an experimental measure, the basic fares of AC First 
Class and AC 2- Tier in all Rajdhani Express trains were reduced by 
10% (Ten per cent) for the journeys performed during the period 
from 15th July to 15th September 2003. 
        The recommendations of the Committee that the fares may be 
increased in a equitable manner taking into account all relevan t 
consideration including the costs, standard of comfort and capacity 
of Passenger travelling in a particular class to bear the increase in 
fares have been noted and are kept in view at the time of revision of 
fares. 
V 
THE SCHEME FOR BULK FILING OF RETURNS BY 
SALARIED 
EMPLOYEES, 2002 
        The Scheme for Bulk Filing of Returns by Salaried Employees, 
2002 framed under the Income Tax Act, 1961 was examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) fo r their comments/clarifications 

on the 15th January, 2003. The points referred to the Ministry and 
the comments/clarifications received thereon are reproduced below:- 
1.     Point raised 
        The date of publication of the notification as appearing in t he 
Gazette notification is the 24th June, 2002. The notification was laid 
on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2002. The date of 
enforcement of the Scheme as mentioned in the notification is the 1st 
July, 2002. What are the reasons for delay in  laying the Scheme 
before Parliament? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The Notification S.O. No.661 (E) was issued on the 24th June, 
2002, that is, between the Budget Session and Monsoon Session. As 
per statutory time-limit provided in section 296 of the Income - Tax 
Act, the notification is to be laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament within 30 days, which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions. 
        The Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha were in session from 15th 
July to 12th August, 2002 (that is for 27 days). Accordingly, laying 
the Notification on the Table of the House within first few days of the 
Winter Session would not lead to statutory delay. 
        In this connection, it may also be mentioned that this 
notification, along with six other notifications, were issued in the 
month of June, 2002 by the Tax Policy and Legislation (TPL) 
Division of the Department of Revenue, which is involved in the 
Budget making exercise relating to the Direct Taxes. It may be 
recalled that the Minister of Finance had made a number of 
announcements relating to changes in Direct Taxes on the 31st July, 
2002 in the Lok Sabha. Prior to these announcements, a number of 
post budget representations were examined and processed by the 
TPL Divisi on during the month of July, 2002. Further, the TPL 
Division was also processing the Prevention of Money Laundering 
Bill. The Bill was considered and passed by the Rajya Sabha on the 
24th -25th July, 2002. Thereafter, a notice was also given to Secretary 
General, Lok Sabha, on the 30th July, 2002 for consideration of the 
amendments carried out by the Rajya Sabha. In attending to these 

matters, this notification inadvertently remained to be laid before 
Parliament during the monsoon session. 
        The above  facts have been brought to the notice of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation. The delay in laying the 
notification within the time limit has inadvertently occurred due to 
the above-mentioned reasons and it is requested to kindly condone 
the same. 
2.     Point raised: Clause 1(3) 
        “It shall be applicable to all eligible employers and their eligible 
employees assessed to tax at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Baroda, 
Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Gandhinagar, Hyderabad, 
Jaipur, Jabalpur, Kolkata, Mumbai, Nagpur, Pune and Thane.” 
        What is the criteria for selecting the given cities for the scheme; 
what are the reasons for not including cities like Kanpur, Lucknow, 
Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram, etc., for this purpose? 
Ministry’s comments 
        Initially, metropolitan towns and state capitals having large 
concentration of salaried employees which were also on the income 
tax network, were included in the scheme for bulk filing of returns. 
Certain satellite towns of these cities such as Gandhinagar , Thane 
which are on the Income- Tax network were also included for wider 
availability of the facility. It was proposed to include the remaining 
cities at a subsequent stage. 
3.     Point raised: Clause 2 (b): Designated Assessing Officer 
        “Designated Assessing Officer” means an Assessing Officer as 
authorised by a Chief Commissioner or a Commissioner under this 
scheme.” 
        The minimum level of officer to be designated as Assessing 
Officer has not been prescribed in the Scheme; whether Government 
have any objection in prescribing the minimum level of officer who 
could be appointed as Designated Assessing Officer? 
Ministry’s comments 

        The term “Assessing Officer” is already defined in section 2(7 
A) of the Income -tax Act. The minimum level of such officer is the 
Income-tax officer.” It was not considered necessary to give any 
different definition of the term in the Scheme. 
4.     Point raised 
        As per clause 3, the Scheme is optional and “provides an 
additional mode of furnishing of re turns of income by persons 
deriving income from salaries.” But as per clause 4(1), the Scheme 
“shall be applicable” to employees whose total income does not 
include any income chargeable to income tax under the head “Profits 
and gains of business or profession.” 
        Is there not a contradiction between clause 3 and clause 4(1) of 
the scheme so far as its applicability is concerned; secondly, what is 
the meaning of the phrase “additional mode” in clause 3; is the 
scheme not providing an “alternate mode” of filing the income tax 
return? 
Ministry’s comments 
        No, there is no contradiction between clauses 3 & 4(1), in so far 
as the scheme provides an additional mode for filing of returns but 
is applicable only to those salaried taxpayers whose income does not 
include income chargeable under the head profits and gains of 
business or profession. 
        Under the Scheme, the employee continues to file a paper return 
in the prescribed form. The employer transcribes the data in the 
return on to a computer - readable medium, and files such medium 
along with the paper return, to the designated Assessing Officer. The 
Scheme, thus, provides an “additional” mode of furnishing returns. 
5.     Point raised 
        Clause 4(2) lays down a number of conditions subject  to which 
a person can file a return under the Scheme. 
        What is the objective for which the scheme has been devised and 
to what extent the same has been achieved, particularly, in view of 
the conditions/restrictions subject to which the scheme has b een 
made applicable? 

        What has been the response of the Central Government, the 
State Governments as well as of the public sector companies which 
fall within the definition of “eligible employer” towards the Scheme? 
Ministry’s comments 
(i)    The main objectives of the Scheme are to provide a fast 
track for hassle free filing of returns for salaried employees 
through their employers so that they do not have to visit 
Income Tax Offices for filing returns, and to ensure faster 
processing of returns and issue of refund, if any, through 
verified data capture by the eligible employers. Clause 4(2) 
only lists out certain specific types of returns, which would 
be very few in number, and which would be incompatible 
with the Scheme and the computer software designated for 
the purpose. 
(ii)    The response has been limited. Very few Central or State 
Government employers have taken advantage of the 
Scheme. 
6.     Point raised: Clause 6(1) 
        “An ‘eligible employee’ will receive the duly signed and verified 
returns of income from his ‘eligible employees’ assessed to tax at any 
of the specified cities. The employer will transcribe correctly and 
completely and data contained in these retu rns of income using the 
Bulk Return Preparation Software (BRPS) to generate ‘Bulk return’ 
on a specified computer readable media. In case eligible employees 
of an eligible employee are assessed at more than one specified city, 
separate ‘Bulk returns’ will have to be generate in respect of each 
specified city. The employer will furnish Bulk Return on a specified 
computer readable medium along with the corresponding returns of 
income in Form No. 2D or Form No.3 before the designated Assessing 
Officer of the respective specified city.” 
(i)    The word ‘eligible employee’ as appearing in the above Rule 
should be ‘eligible employer’. 
(ii)    As per the above provisions, the employer is supposed to 
file returns of income in Form 2D and 3 also besides bulk 
returns on computer readable medium. Does it not enhance 

the work for the employee/employer as well as Government; 
should the Scheme not provide any mention for the 
employer who is required to undertake an additional 
responsibility under this Scheme? 
Ministry’s comments 
(i)    The typographical error is regretted and shall be rectified. 
(ii)    The term “bulk return” only refers to the data pertaining 
to individual returns captured in the data format 
prescribed under the Scheme. Data capture of returns of the 
employees filed under the scheme is the responsibility of the 
employer which is expected to be borne by the employer as 
a measure for employee welfare. For the employee, 
however, the Scheme provides a facility for easier filing and 
faster processing of returns.  The work of the Government, 
in fact, gets reduced due to simultaneous processing of a 
large number of individual returns comprised in the bulk 
return. 
7.     Point raised: Rule 6(2) (xiii) steps for the ‘eligible employer’ 
        “Furnish the ‘Bulk return’ on the prescribed computer readable 
medium, along with the returns of income in Form 2D or Form 3 of 
the concerned employees, before the concerned designated Assessing 
Officer in the respective specified city by the due date for furnishing 
of return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139 of the Act. It 
is for the ‘eligible employee’ and ‘eligible employer’ to ensure that 
the Bulk return on virus -free and uncorrupted computer readable 
medium is furnished before the designated Assessing Officer on or 
before the due date as prescribed under the sub-section.” 
        What will happen in case the eligible employer furnishes the 
Bulk return to the Assessing Officer on the last date and the 
computer readable medium gets corrupted thereafter, so that by the 
time the employer furnishes another copy of the same, the last date 
has already gone. Whether the fresh copy sent to the Assessing 
Officer will be considered to have been received after the due date or 
relaxation will be granted as it is not the fault of the employer? 
Ministry’s comments 

        Under the scheme, the Bulk return on the specified computer 
readable medium and the paper returns are to be filed together by 
the employer. Section 7(2) provides that the receiving official will 
upload the data on the computer readable medium to ensure that the 
data can be retrieved, and only thereafter issue a receipt. The date of 
issue of signed receipt is the date of filing of the returns. In case the 
computer readable medium becomes corrupted after the date of  
filing of returns, this will not affect the validity of returns or the date 
of filing as paper returns would have already been filed. 
8.     Point raised 
        How far has this new scheme proved effective, whether the 
eligible employers are facing any d ifficulty in this regard; whether 
people have been adequately educated/informed about the new 
scheme? 
Ministry’s comments 
        The response to the scheme has been limited. The Department 
is therefore introducing electronic filing of returns through 
intermediaries and also through internet under digital signatures. 
2.     The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the  
15th June, 2004. The Committee noted that the Ministry’s 
explanation on point No.1 regarding delay in laying of the Rules was 
not based upon a correct interpretation of laying provisions of the 
Act. The Committee desired that the Ministry be apprised of the 
correct position so that it gets a reply in the proper perspective. The 
Committee also took note of the fact that the Sc heme evinced only a 
limited response and hence the Government were working on 
alternatives. 
3.     Accordingly, vide this Secretariat communication dated the 3rd 
September, 2004 a reference was made to the Ministry of Finance 
seeking their comments in the matter. The Ministry furnished their 
comments on the 10th  November, 2004. The point referred to the 
Ministry and the comments received there on are as follows:- 
Point raised 
        The Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha, 
before whom the c omments, as received on the questionnaire, were 

placed, has not found the comments of the Ministry on Point No.1 in 
the right perspective. The fact of the matter is that the mention of 30 
days period in section 296 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, has nothing 
to do with the timely laying of the subordinate legislation. Section 
296, in fact, casts a responsibility on the Administrative Ministry to 
lay every rule made by the Central Government under an Act “as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament” and 
the period of 30 days mentioned therein refers to the period during 
which House may agree to modify/annul the said rules. As regards 
the timely laying of subordinate legislation, the Ministry’s attention 
is drawn towards the following recom mendation of the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha as contained in its 131st  
Report which was presented to the House on the 15th December, 
2000:- 
“The Committee now recommends that Orders required to be 
laid before the House should be lai d (i) if the House is not in 
Session, during the Session immediately following the date of 
publication of the Order in the Official Gazette, and (ii) if the 
House is in Session, on the date of the publication of the Order, 
during its continuance and in cas e of time lag between the date 
of publication and the date of the closing of the Session is less 
than 15 clear days, before the expiry of the Session immediately 
following the said Session.” 
        The Ministry of Finance may like to review their 
reply/comments on Point No.1 in the questionnaire in the light of the 
above position. 
Ministry’s comments 
        The reasons for delay in laying the Notification before the Rajya 
Sabha have already been explained vide letter dated the 19th 
February, 2004. This reply is supplemented with the following 
comments: 
(i)    Irrespective of the interpretation of provisions of section 
296 of the Income Tax Act, it is an admitted fact that the 
subject notification was published p rior to the Monsoon 
Session of Parliament in 2002, but was laid only in the 
Winter Session. This was beyond the time stipulated by the 

Committee on Subordinate Legislation of the Rajya Sabha, 
in their 131st  Report. As submitted in our earlier reply, this 
inadvertent delay was due to pre-occupation with a number 
of other legislative matter during the Monsoon Session and 
is sincerely regretted. 
(ii)    It may be mentioned that the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation of Rajya Sabha, had in its 145th report n oted 
that there had been a persistent delay in the laying of 
statutory orders on the Table of the Houses. The list of the 
orders specifically mentioned by the Committee, where 
such delay had taken place, included the notification under 
consideration. During the course of the oral evidence before 
the Committee, the Revenue Secretary had assured that the 
process for laying of the notifications shall be streamlined 
and it shall be ensured that the notifications are laid on the 
Table of both the Houses without any delay. In accordance 
with the same, a nodal officer has been entrusted with the 
task of laying the notifications issued by CBDT in both the 
Houses of Parliament. The procedure for laying of statutory 
orders has been streamlined and necessary measures h ave 
been taken to ensure that no such delay in laying of 
notifications takes place in future. 
4.     The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Finance have streamlined the procedure for laying of statutory 
orders and necessary measures hav e been taken by them to ensure 
that no such delay in laying of the notifications takes place in future. 
The Committee further hopes that the Ministry shall rectify the 
typographical error in clause 6(1) by substituting the words “eligible 
employee” with the words “eligible employer” under intimation to it. 
5.     As regards the overall scheme, the Committee is not satisfied to 
find that the scheme has evinced a limited response and very few 
State or Central Government employees have taken advantage of the 
scheme. In this regard, the Committee notes that the Ministry 
proposes to introduce electronic filing system of returns through 
intermediaries and also through internet under digital signatures as 
an alternative in view of the limited response to the scheme . It is a 
matter of regret that the scheme brought about by the Ministry failed 

to get a positive response and as a result thereof it had to set out to 
work on alternatives in such a short period. The Committee expects 
the Ministry to come out with the new  schemes only after deeper 
thoughts. 
VI 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Law and Justice have 
finally enacted and notified the Delegated Legislation Provisions 
(Amendment) Act, 2004 whereby laying provisions have been 
implemented in fifty four Acts pursuant to its recommendations as 
contained in the 10 Tenth Report of the Committee presented to the 
House on the 24th May, 1971. 
II 
        The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Shipping 
Road Transport and High ways (Department of Shipping) have 
accepted its suggestions and notified the following amendments in 
the Mormugao port Employees’ (Medical Attendance) Regulations, 
1969:–– 
(i)    Adding preamble to the regulations. 
(ii)   In regulation 3 (c) (vii) by substituting the words “daily 
rated and casual labour, other than labour employed 
through contractor when injured on duty” by the words 
“daily rated and casual labour employed by the Port 
when injured on duty, shall be entitled to medical 
attendance/treatment t o the extent the facilities and 
medicines are available in Trust’s Hospital/Dispensary. 
Labour, other than employed by the Board, such as 
those employed by contractors are not entitled to such 
benefits”, thereby making the provisions clear and 
understandable. 
(iii)  ln regulation 3 (d) by amending definition of the term 
“family” as “Family means an employee’s wife or 
husband, as the case may be, and parents, sisters, 

widowed sisters, widowed daughters, brothers, 
children, step -children, divorced/separated d aughters 
and step-mother wholly dependent upon the Employee” 
on the basic of the discrepancy as pointed out by the 
Committee. 
(iv)  By substituting the Note 4 below regulation 3(d) as 
under:– 
       “Note: A member of the family is treated as dependent 
only if his/her income from all sources including 
pension and pension equivalent of DCRG benefit and 
exclusive of the relief on pension sanctioned after 
December, 1995 is less than Rs.1500/ - p.m. The 
condition of dependency both in the case of husband or 
the wife of the employee has been dispensed with”. 
       The Committee had pointed out that the Note 4 below 
regulation 3(d) was not specific. 
(v)   In regulation 22, by deleting the words “not” and “in 
any circumstances” thereby allowing reimbursement in 
case of treatment of veneral diseases and delirium 
tremens also. 
(vi)  In regulation 31, by amending the “Note” below 
regulation 31 as under and allowing reimbursement of 
professional fees:– 
       “Note: The cost of medicines shall be reimbursed in full, 
if otherwise admissible under this regulation. The cost 
of medicines will include the cost of drugs injected and 
the professional fees for administering the injections.” 
(vii) In regulation 46(i)(b),  by amending the “Note” 
appearing below it as under so that Port employees 
could travel by entitled class even for medical 
attendance and treatment:– 
       “Note: The facility of travel by air -conditioned 
accommodations at the Board’s expense is admissible as 
per entitlement for journeys performed for receiving 
medical attendance and treatment.” 

(viii)   In regulation 46 (ii) (b), by amending the provisions 
as under so as to allow payment of actual fare as per the 
admissibility:– 
       “(b) For the members of his family: Actual fare paid for 
the journey by bus or other public conveyances or 
mileage allowance at the rate of road mileage admissible 
to the employee, whichever is less.” 
III 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways have carried out 
amendments in the regulations, based upon its suggestions as 
under:– 
i)      In regulation 7 by prescribing age limit, educational 
qualifications, experience, etc. in the schedule annexed to 
the regulations containing the details of the posts and the 
mode of their filling up. 
ii)     In regulation 8 by amending sub-regulation (1) on the lines 
of similar provisions in the CCS Rules with regard to 
probation period. 
iii)    In regulations 10(1) and (2) by substituting the words “Sub- 
regulation (1)” with “Sub -regulation (1) (a)”, thereby 
removing the discrepancy, as pointed out by the Committee. 
iv)    In regulation 13 by inserting therein a provision for 
reservation in favour of OBCs. 
v)     In regulation 14(b) by substituting the entire regulation 14 
and thereby removing the discrepancies as pointed out by 
the Committee. 
vi)    In regulation 14(h) by deleting the provisions, the same 
being obsolete. 
vii)   In regulation 15 by providing representation to SCs/STs in 
the Staff Selection Committees. 
viii)  In regulation 16 by providing therein representation to 
SCs/STs in Departmental Promotion Committee and 

further providing therein that the DPC may meet “as and 
when required” instead of “once twice a year”. 
        The Committee hopes that the Ministry have since advised the 
Ports to review the regulations once in five years with a view to effect 
such changes as were necessary to bring them in conformity with the 
changed position including addition to or reductio n in the strength 
of the lower and higher level posts. 
IV 
        The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Railways 
are still putting forth the same logic on which they had been relying 
earlier when this Committee had taken up for examination the rules 
of the year 1986. The Ministry of Railways had maintained at that 
time that the cancellation charges had been kept on the higher side 
in order to discourage touts from cornerin g the tickets. The 
Committee had never agreed to this view of the Ministry. In the 
Committee’s view, steep rise in the cancellation charges was not the 
remedy. The Committee in its 83rd Report presented to the Rajya 
Sahha on the 7th September, 1990 while examining the set of rules of 
1986 on the subject had observed that “what the Ministry felt was 
the remedy, was worse than the disease”. The Committee is unhappy 
to note that the Ministry of Railways have again come forward with 
the same logic after a lapse  of about 15 years even though the 
Railways have, in the meantime, computerized the whole process of 
reservation and cancellation of tickets. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Railways should take steps to find 
out other ways and means of checking the menace of middlemen and 
touts instead of resorting to levy of heavy cancellation charges. 
        The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Railways 
to consider if they can prescribe a maximum ceiling for the 
cancellation charges for different classes of journeys/distance slabs 
along with the existing basis so as to mitigate the hardship caused to 
tt1e ticket holders on account of cancellation of tickets. 
V 
        The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Finance have streamlined the procedure for laying of statutory 
orders and necessary measures have been taken by them to ensure 

that no such delay in laying of the notifications takes place in future. 
The Committee further hopes that the Ministry shall rectify the  
typographical error in clause 6(1) by substituting the words “eligible 
employee” with the words “eligible employer” under intimation to it. 
        As regards the overall scheme, the Committee is not satisfied to 
find that the scheme has evinced a limited  response and very few 
State or Central Government employees have taken advantage of the 
scheme. In this regard, the Committee notes that the Ministry 
proposes to introduce electronic filing system of returns through 
intermediaries and also through internet under digital signatures as 
an alternative in view of the limited response to the scheme. It is a 
matter of regret that the scheme brought about by the Ministry failed 
to get a positive response and as a result thereof it had to set out to 
work on alternatives in such a short period. The Committee expects 
the Ministry to come out with the new schemes only after deeper 
thoughts. 
VII 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday the 13th December, 
2005 in Room No. 126 -C (Chairman’s Room), Third Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
   1.  Shri A. Vijayaraghavan     –––      Chairman 
   2.  Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
   3.  Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
   4.  Shri Rudra Narayan Pany 
   5.  Shri N. Jothi 
   6.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
   1.  Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary 
   2.  Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary 

   3.  Ms. S. Pankajavalli, Committee Officer 
2.     The Committee took up for consideration its draft 160th and 
161st Reports on certain rules/regulations examined by it and the 
notifications laid during the 205 th session, respectively and adopted 
the same with minor changes. 
3.     During the course  of discussion on its 161 st Report, a view 
emerged that the Committee should monitor the framing of 
rules/regulations under various Acts passed by Parliament by the 
concerned Ministries/Departments within the stipulated time period. 
The Committee was infor med that the Secretariat was already 
calling for information periodically from all Ministries/Departments 
about the status of Subordinate Legislation under the various 
Central Acts under their administative control. The Committee 
desired that Ministry-wise status in this regard may be placed before 
it for its consideration. 
4.     The Committee decided to present both its reports to the House 
on the 16th December, 2005 and authorized its Chairman and in his 
absence,  
Shri Rudra Narayan Pany and Dr. Radhakan t Nayak, Members, to 
present the same to the House. 
5.     The Committee decided to hold its next meeting on the 13 th 
January, 2006. 
6.     The meeting then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 