Com. 1·118 
·PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND FOURTH REPORT 
(Presented on the 15th March , 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIA T 
NEW DELH I 
March. 199S!Phu/guna. 1916 (Soka} 

CONTENT 
I. COMPOSmO" orTlt£ COMMI11U ................................... (i) 
2. Tue REPORT... .. ... . ...... .. .... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . ... .. .. 1 
I. IntroductiOn....... ................ .. ..................... . 1-7 
n. Life Insurance Corporation Rules, 1956 
3. A!<l<EXUtES ....... . .. . .. • .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . • .. .. .. . . . . . 8-13 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1994-95) 
I. Shri H. Hanumanthappa-Chatrman 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3 Shri Misa R. Gaocsan 
4. Dr. lshwar Chandra Guptd 
5. Shn Ram Jethmalam 
6. Shri Chtmanbhai Mehta 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Shn Ahmed Patel 
9. Shri Ramachandran Ptllai 
10 Shri V Rajeshwar R<to 
11. Shri K N Singh 
12. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
13. Shu Gopal~tnh G Solanki 
14. Shn Som Pal 
15. Shri !'yodel;. Yonggam 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. VanaJa N Sarna, 
Shri Om Parkash, 
Shri I r. C. Sethi, 
Director 
Under Secrewry 
Committet Officer 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODl:CTION 
I. the Chaarman of the Commiuec on Subordinate Lcgts!auon , ha•tng 
been authomcd by the Commmcc to present the Rcpon on its behalf , do 
hereby present th" Hundr<!d ond Eighth Rcpon of the Commiuce . 
I I The Commtuec con$idcrcd and adopted the Report ot ns mecnng 
held on the 9th Ma!(h. 1995. 
1.2 The mane" exammcd by the Cummillcc ansing out ot the !'<:rulln~ 
or various Rul¢s' Rcgulatwns ami the is.\ucs, related thcrcwuh. alongwilh 
the comment> of the Government received thereon, 30d the ob<>ervation• 
ond recommcnd3110n' whtch m the opinion of the ContmillCC, should be 
brought 10 the notice of the llou,c. arc cont:uncd in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
II 
LIFE !NSURAI"CE CORPORATION RULES: l~Sii 
2. The Life ln>urJncc Cor poration Rules. 1956 were examined and 
ccnnin point> were referred to the Ministry of Frnancc (Dcparuncnt oi 
Economic Aff:urs) on the 10th October. 1990 tor their comments. The 
Ministry vide theor Office Mcmonmdum dated the 23rd October l WO 
furni<hcd their comment<. 
2.1 Mcanwlttle. the Committee vi,ilcd Buntbay on the 26th Octol>cr. 
1990 and discu>'cd the matter with the representatives ol the L•fc 
ln~uranee Corporutton of India and the Ministry of Finance. The relevant 
extract~ from the ~tud)' note arc pl•ced a• Annexure-! 
2.2 The extracts from the "udy note were forwarded to the Mimstry ol 
Finance on the 14th Fcbruar~. 1991 for further comments on the pnint\ 
raised thcrcm The MimM<) of Finance •ide thcll' Office Memorandum 
dated the 9th July. 19'11 furnished the~r Comments_ 
2.3 The potnt' referred and the comment' furnt<hcd by the Mimstr) ,.,,t., 
their Office Memorandum dated the ~3rd Oclobcr. 1990 3nd th" 'lth Jul) . 
1991 arc as under:-
(!) Pumt re[rrrrd· 
Whether all the rul" rc@ulauons ha•c sutcc been iramcd unJcr the Ltic 
Insurance Corpnrauon Act. 1956. anJ if not. what arc the matter> tn 
respect of 11.h1ch rules regulation' >rc )cl t<> be !ramcJ and h•>"' the 
matters arc betng de all w1th m the absence of the rules' 

2 
Comments: 
The Rules and Regulations under the Ltfe Insurance Corporation Act, 
1956, are made under Section 48 and Section 49 of the Act respectively . 
These rules are made as and when the need arises. All Rules have been 
made wherever the necessity has been ielL 
Further commems. 
A list of Rules and RegulatiOns framed under the life Insurance 
Corporation Act, !956 has already been furnished vide this Department's 
Office Memorandum No. 4(3)/lns.lll/90 dated the 13th November, 1990. 
Under Section 48 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 the 
Central Government may make rules as nod when the need arises. Since 
all the oontingenctes under which Rule.~ may be made cannot be antici· 
pated, it will not be possible to intimate the Rules and Regulations which 
are yet to be framed/made . 
(2) Pomt r~ferred · 
Whether the Life ln<uranec Corporation Rules. 1956 were latd on tile 
Table of the Rajya Sabha, if so, "hen? If not. what arc the rca.<on~ 
therefor? 
Comm~nts. 
Under Sub-section 8 of the Sect•on 48 of the Act every Rule made by 
the Central Government under the Act is required to be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made. before each House of the Parliament. Since this 
pcnains to the year 1956, in the absence of records which arc not 
traceable, we are unable to indicate the date when these Rules were laid 
on the Table of the House . 
Further Comments: 
The Life Insurance Corporatton Rules. 1956 were laid on the Table of 
the Rajya Sabha on the 22nd November, 1956 The Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (Re-appotntmcnt of Terminated Development Offic· 
ers) Rules, 1990 framed under Section 48 of the Life Insurance Corpora· 
tion Act were published on the 19th January. 1990 and -.ere laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the 23rd March, 1990. As there is no delay tn 
laying the rules on the Table of Rajya Sabha. it was not considered 
necessary to append a delay statement 
(3) Point r<[trred. 
Rule 3(2) 
"A non-official member shall hold office for a period of two year~ 
unless a shorter period is spcctficd in the order of appointment.'' 
What arc the ground~ on which a non-official member is appoi111ed for 
a shorter period? It tS felt. that some criteria should be laid down for 
appointment for a 'hurter p<:liod The rul"" arc also 'ilcnt as tO what 

3 
arc the conditions for appointing non-official members of Life Insur­
ance Corporation. 
The present composition of the official and non-official members and 
total number of members of Life Insurance Corporation may also be 
furnished. 
Comments: 
The Life Insurance Corporation Rules. 1956 provide for a non­
official member to bold office for a period of two years. So far "'e 
have not made any appotntment of non-official member for a period 
shoner than two years. No special conditions have been laid down for 
appotntment as non-official members. However, ordinarily persons 
who are associated with various walks of socio-economiC life such as 
trade unions, business management, educational instituuons, etc. and 
who are below the age of 60 years are selected for appotntment as 
non-offic1al Directors There can be 7 official mentbers and 9 non­
official members on the Board. At present all the 9 non-offic1al 
members' posts are vacant. The present Board of Directors coMists 
of-
1. Shri M.G. Oiwan. Chairman. LIC of India; 
2. Shri G Chidambar, MD. UC of India 
3. Shti K.P. Narasimhan, MD. UC of India. 
4. Shri N.R. Ranganathan. Special Secretary {Ins.}. Ministry of 
Finance; 
S. Shri Ashok Gocnka, Chairman. GIC of !ndia; 
6. Shrl S.S. Nadkarni, C&MD. !OBI: 
7. Dr. S.A. Dave. Chairman, UTI. 
Furllttr Comments: 
All attempts are being made to fill up the vacanc1cs of the Life 
Insurance Corporation Board as early as possible and it does not appear 
possible to fix a time limit for this purpose. 
(4) Potnt Rtftrrtd: 
What IS the quorum rtxcd for the meeting of the Life Insurance 
Corporation a.nd who conducts the meeting in the absence of the 
Chairman. 
Commtnts: 
The quorum fixed for the meeting is 5 members pcrsonallr pre>.cnt In 
the absence of the Cha1rman, the members may cficct one of thcm>elvcs 
to pres1de over the meeting. 
Funhu Comments 
RegulatiOn 7 of the Life Insurance Corporation Regulation,. 1959 
prescribe< that S members personally present shall be a quorum for a 
mcctmg of the Corporation. Since the conduct of the mccung of 

4 
the Corporation is governed by the Life Insurance Corporation Regulation. 
1959 it is not considered appropriate to specify this. in the Rules. 
(S) Point Refemd: 
Rult 7 
''In the events of the occuranee of any vacancy in the office of a member 
by reasons of his death. resignation or removal or otherwise, the Central 
Government may appoint another person to ae1 in his place." 
The Rule is silent about the time-limit within which the casual vacancies 
wiU be filled up. Whether Government have objection to prescribe a time 
limit Cor filling up the casual vacancies? 
It is also not clear as to what will be the term of office of members 
appointed to fill up the casual vacancies. This may please be clanfied. 
Comments. 
The rule is silent about the time limit wnhin which the casual vacancies 
shall be filled. The Government feel that there ts no need to prescribe the 
time llmir for filhng up the casual vacancies. 
The term of o(fiee of Members appointed to fill up the casual vacancies 
will normally be co-terminus with the term of the membership of the 
person whose death, resignation, or removal has occasioned these appoint­
ments. 
6 Poim Rt{frred: 
Whether the fees paid to the members of Life Insurance Corporation 
under Rule 8 and the daily allowance paid to the non-official member of 
Life Insurance Corporation, for hahs on duty under Rule 9(b) have since 
been revised? if so, the details may please be furnished. 
Comments: 
The fees and dnily allowance paid to the non-official member have since 
been revised by the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment Rules, 1938.) 
Futthtr Comments. 
The dctatls. of the [ees and daily allownace paid to the non-official 
members are as undcr:-
Fus: A member not betng a whole-time officer of the Corporation or an 
officer of the Central Government shall be paid fees by the 
Corporatoon a..• follows: 
(a) For auending meetings of the Corporallon- Rs.2001- for eacb 
mcctong 
(b) for auend~ng meetongs of any Commillce constituted by the 
Corporatron- Rs.IOOr- for each meeting as well as for visit to 
other places on connection with the affairs of the Corporation. 

s 
association. etc .. of the erstwhile Banks are still in force: and if so, the 
reasons for keeping them olive instead of replacing them by regulations 
tontcmplntcd untler sub-~ection {1). 
Commcnlli: 
The ar11clcs of Association of the erstwhile acquisitioned Banks rem•in 
in force till such time they arc rcpl•ccd b)' the Regulations. In cases where 
specific provisions in the Regulation nrc not made, the existing provisions 
of the Articles of Association rcmam in force. However. to take c3re of 
any such eventuality, a specific pro,ision is made in Officers· Scf\·itc 
Regulation regarding revocation of earlier rules etc. To that extent the 
provtsion referred to by the Committee stand replaced by the provision in 
O!ficcrs' Service Regulations. Regulation 53, reads as follows:-
"S3 Any rule>, regulation, order, agreement, resolution or other 
inwumcnt, or any usage, custom. convention or practice, goveming any 
matter dealt within any of these regulations including allowances. pre­
requisites and facilities. shall on the date when such regulation comes into 
force and unless the contrary is provided in these regulations. shall cease 
to have effctt in regard to such matter 
Provided th3t th~sc shall not affect the.. 'olidity of anything done or any 
claim ori~ing prior ttl that date in pursuance of sud1 agreement, rule, 
rcgul~tion. resolution. other provision or usage, custom. convention or 
practice.·· 
(4) l'uilll refrrwt· 
Cl~uscs (c). (i} and UJ of sub-section 2 of Section 19 of the Act read as 
follows:-
"(2) ... The Regulations mJy prnvidc for all (If any of the followinJ; 
mutters. nnmcly:-
(c) The delegation of powers uud functions of the Board of Directors 
of a corresponding new Bank to the scncrol mannger. director. 
officer or other cmpl11yccs of that bank: 
• 
(i) the form and manner in which contracts binJing on the 
corrc~ponding new bank may be executed: 
(j) the conduions and the requirements •ubjcct to ...,h,<h loans or 
advances may be made or bills may be discounted or purchased by 
the corresponding new bank. 
It appc3rS that regulations envi,lgcd unJcr the abnvc provis1ons of the 
Act have not yet been made. The committee would like to 

6 
know the reasons for not making regulations under the above provisions 
during the la.st several years. 
Commtnls: 
Statutory Regulations relating to the delegation of powers have not been 
framed as a workable solution could not be found to reconcile the 
paramount need Cor operational flexibility in regard to delegation or 
powers-panicularly credit sanctioning powers which are revised frequently 
and s~spended or withheld at shon·notice to meet the resource/credit 
situation facing the bank and the stability implicit in the statutory 
regulations. 
Besides. since the nationalised banks vary in terms of size, internal 
structure, pace of expansion, quality of manpower etc. the extent of 
delegation also varies from bank to bank. What can be considered 
adequate delegation of powers in a small bank like say Corporation Bank, 
would grind all operations to a halt if applied to banks like say Central 
Bank or India, Bank of India etc. 
Keeping these (actors m view, it is felt by Reserve Bank of India and by 
Government that incorporating delegation of powers in statutory 
regulations under the provisions of Nat ionalisation Acts would result in 
loss of operational flexibility for the banks. Any rigidity in the mallcr of 
dclegotion of powers will pose operation•l bottlenecks which may not be 
conducive in efficient functioning of the nationalised banks. 
Committee's Observations: 
The commiuee was not satisfied with the explanation and felt that there 
should not be any diffieully in making suitable rc.gulations to cover nil 
contingencies. 
(5) Point refurtd· 
Regulation 2{2) says that the regulations shall not apply to an officer 
during his tenure of service outside India or to employees engaged in any 
country outside India and serving there. 
What arc the reasons that the regulations shall not· apply to officer 
aerving outside India? 
Comments: 
The terms and conditions of Officers posted to serve outside India arc 
regulated by separate contract of service specific to the duration of the 
assignment. This is having regard to the laws governing contract of service 
applicable in the respective country of posting, taxation laws. labour 
legislation and cost of living. However these tcnns and conditions are 
subject to rules/guidelines issued by Government of India/Reserve Bank 
of India as the case may be, from time to time. 

7 
(6} Por111 referred: 
Regulation 4 (2) gives power to the Banks not to have at all time the 
officers serving in all the grade> made m terms of Regulation 4(1}. Then, 
what is the usc of creating all these four grades? 
Comment<: 
The follo"ing four grades arc laid d(>wn under Regulation 4{1}:­
''4(1) There shall be the followmg four grades for officers with the 
scale of pay 'pccified against each of tbe GrJdes:-
{a) Top Executrve Grade . 
Scale VII Rs 4100-125·-lli<'lO 
Scale VI R< 3850-1:!5·4350 
(b) Senior \1;onagement Grade. 
Scale V Rs 3575·110-3685-115-3roo 
Scale IV Rs. 2925·105·3450 
(c) Midc.lle Management Grade: 
Scale Ill Rs 2650-100-3250 
Scale II Rs 1825·100-2925 
(d) Juntor Management Grade; 
Scale I Rs 1176-60-1475-70-1895-EB-95· 
2275·100·2675. 
For abundant prccmni(ln Regulation ~(2) proviues tbat !lank rs not 
rcquored to have at all times. ofr.cers 'erving 111 :~II grades given above. Of 
course. the possibrlity of any Bank not hoving any officer 111 any one or 
more gradcYis very very remote Nevertheless its inclusion in the body of 
Regulations hu~ not created ony problems. and at b~st be retained as 
·Saving clause ' 
(7) P11i111 rrfcrr<d: 
Rcgulauon 5 supuiJtcs th;ot the increments shall. subjcc1 to the sanction 
of the competent authonty, accrue on an annual basis and shall be granted 
on the first day I)( the mon1h 111 which it f"lb due. The l'xprc~'i<'" "Subject 
to the sanctrtlll of the competent aulhority" may lead one to conclude that 
the Compctcm Authonty may al«> W>thhold •anction Whether there is 
any objccuon rn m"ktng the provrsion clear and specific to the extent that 
sancuon will be accorded 10 all ca!>CS except when there arc sufficrent 
ground.~ for "'ithholding it along "-ilb 1hc dct~1ls of the ground< for 
wuhholding the <amc? 
Comments: 
The import of the Regulation 1S that the Competent Authonty is 
empowered to po"ponc sanctron of the rncrcment and not necessarily 

8 
withhold the increment as such. Sanction of annual increment may 
sometime be postponed by the Competent Authority on account of one or 
all of the following reasons: 
(i) Unauthorised absence on loss of pay 
(ii) Extra-ordinary leave on loss of pay. granted subject to a 
condition that incrementls would be deferred, and 
(iii) during the Suspension period, the annual incrementS are not 
released. 
In ccnain cases, under the fitment fonnula applicable on promohon 
from one grade 10 another, the next increment is to be sanctioned on the 
date of increment in the previous grade or on the anmvcrsary date of 
promotion. It may therefore not be desirable to make any specific 
provision in this regard. 
Commllttt'l Ob5<rvatloos: 
The Committee did not agree with this view. During the discussions it 
transpired that nonnally the increments were being sanctioned by the 
banks on due dares. Accordingly, it was by and large agreed that nonnal 
increments should accrue as a mauer of course in Government service 
unless withheld under specific orders passed before the date of accrual of 
the incrementS and subject to other condition etc. such as qualifying 
service for tho purpose, which should also be provided for in the 
Regulations. 
(8) Puint refemd. 
According to Regulation 6(2), every branch of the bank shall be 
classiricd by the Bank In accordance with criteria to be approved by the 
Government. Whether any criteria have been approved by the 
Government in this rcgnrd? 
CommentS: 
The following guidelines have been given by the Government regarding 
classification of branches for the purpose of categorisation of Managers. 
The earlitr limits of business criteria ha•·e bun revised. downwards. 
Category of Branch Business criteria 
averages aggregate 
deposits and advances 
during the last 2 years 
2 
(a) Small Branches Below Rs. 1.5. crorcs 
(b) Medium/Main Rs. 1.5 crores and 
Branches at State/ above but below Rs. 
District Capitals 7.5 crores. 
(c) Large Branches Rs. 7.5 crores and 
above but below Rs. 
15 crores. 
Incumbency 
3 
Scale I 
Scale II 
Scale JU 

(d) Very Large Branches 
(e) Exceptionally Large 
Branches 
9 
2 
Rs. 15 crores and 
above but below Rs. 
100 crores. 
Rs. 100 crores and 
above. 
3 
Scale IV 
Scale V 
Non I . There will be no staff linkage to the above norms. 
2. Each year, in the month of February. the bank may 
undenake an exercise in the maner of classification of 
branches on the basis of the above criteria and upgrade or 
downgrade br!Uiches taking into account two years of 
average business. 
(9) Point r~ftrud: 
Regulation 15(3) says that an officer appointed to any other grade shall 
be on probation for such period as may be decided by the Bank. 
Whether there is any objection in specifying a definite period of probation 
for other grades of officers too? 
Comments: 
The Normnl period of probation in the case of promotec officers and 
direct recruil officers in Junior Management Grade is laid down under the 
Regulation viz. One year and two years respectively. The grounds on 
which the probation could be reduced or dispensed with. will depend up~'" 
the merits of each ense. lt may not be desirable to lay down uniform 
guidelines in the maner. Further it may not be desirable for specifying a 
definite period of probation for other grades of offitel'li. The same is best 
left to the discretion of the Banks, each case to be decided on merit, 
having due regnrd to the experience and expertise of the new entrant. This 
is all the more relevant because in higher scales/grades, Specialist Officers 
with requisite technical background are inducted. 
Commlttte's Oburvntlons: 
The Committ~ did not accept this position as unfettered discretion leads 
to arbitrariness. There are sound guidelines in such matters namely the 
probation period fixed for a post should not be extended beyond tl"icc the 
normal period. lt is only in rare circuMStances that the normal period of 
probation is eunailed and in case there is a need to that effect some sound 
guidelines should be laid. During the course of the discussion it was 
pointed out that at higher levels persons having spedaliscd knowledge in 
various fields were inducted and in their case it may not be appropriate to 
have any probation period. The Comminee agreed that in such cases 
specific provisions could be made. But the entire field could not be left to 
discretion. 

tO 
( 10) f'oint refe"ed' 
The Table of Regulation 24(1) has laid down certain monetary limits in 
respect or medical reimbursements. It appears that these limits have not 
been reviewed and rCYI'.ed since 1979. It is felt th>t these limns may be 
rcvtscd and a provision should be made for the revtcw and rcviStoo of 
these hmits at regular intervals. Similar provision IS also called for in 
rcgulauon 24(1) (b) (ii) (I) whtch restricts bed charges to a certain limit 
in case of hospitalisauon. 
CommenL\: 
Annual limtts upto which an oflicer may claim reimbursement on 
certificate basis or amount or medical expenses incurred by him (for 
himself and/or family) arc revised at the time of wage rcvi.<ion. The 
annual limits last revised w.e.f. 1st January, 1985 arc given hereunder: 
Pay Range 
R\ 117S!. tO R..~.I82S'· p.m. 
Rs.l8261. p.m. and above 
Reimbursement limit of p.a. 
Rs.600'­
Rs.801Y-
Self and family 
The limns arc in fact revised at the time of wage negotiation taking 
Into account the overall 'cost burden' to the Banks. The same holds good 
for provision 24(1 )(b)(ii) which resrnm bed charges to a ccrtatn limit in 
case of hospllnlisation. The bed charges were last revised from 1st 
Junuury, 1985. In case of Bank of India in terms of Regulation 24(2), the 
Bonrd has decided that the medical aid rules in force a~ on 30th June. 
1979 in a unaltered form shall continue to be in force as laid down in the 
new regulation. There is no lllOtlctary limits for SELF. 90% of medical 
expenses above Rs.IO<Y- arc reimbursed to the officer employees 
Commlllee's Oh1crvatlons: 
During the course of the discussions, it was agreed that instead of 
having two slabs of R.\.60CY·and Rs.S()()!. addmi,;ihk during a year, the 
urpcr slab may be made applicable to ull categories of officers 
(II) f'u1111 rcfrrutl: 
Regulation 33(5) reads as under:-
.. An orriccr dc•iring to avail of privilege lea,·e shall ordinarily give 
not lc" than one months' nouce of his intention to avail of such 
leave:· 
What wtll be the consequence if. due to some reasons, it IS nol possible 
to &1\'C one month's notice? 
Curnmtnts: 
Ordinarily. one month'• notice is required to be given by an officer for 
the purpose of availing Privilege Leave. In emergent ctrcumstances. 

11 
however, the Competent Authority may sanction Privilege Leave at a 
shorter notice also, depending upon the facts and merits of the case. 
The Provision of one month's notice enables tbe bank to arrange 
leave programme smoothly without disrupting the banking business. 
Committee's Ohstrvatlons: 
The Committee was of the view that 15 days' notice should be • 
sufficient to make necessary arrangement. 
(12) Pomt r~fur~d : 
Proviso to Regulation 37 reads as undcr:-
"Provided thM in very special circumstances the Board may grant 
extra-ordinary leave on loss of pay to an of!ieer upto a total 
period of 120 days." 
Whether there are any guidelines for exercising this power by the 
Board? 
Comments: 
Each case is decided on merits. 
Commltlce's Observollons: 
The Committee was of the view that the maximum limit of 720 days 
upto which nn officer could be granted extra-ordinary leave on loss of 
pay during the service career of an officer was on the low side and 
required revision. The Commiuee also felt that guidelines should be 
laid down to indicate the purposes for which such leave could be 
granted. 
(13) Poi111 referred: 
The Table 10 Regulntion 41(4) lays down certain amounts as ~oiling 
allowance based on pay ranges. Whether these amounts have since 
been revised and whether there is any objeCiion in providing for their 
revision at regular intervals? 
Comments: 
The rates of halting allowance are generally revised at the lime of 
salary revision They were last revised w.e.f. lst January, 1987 at the 
time or settlement of residual issues. 
The rates of halting allowance presently prevailing are given 
hereunder: 
"41(4) On and from 1st January. 1987 an officer in the 
grades/=les set out in Column 1 of the Table 
below shall be entitled to Halting Allowance at 
the corresponding rates set out in Column 2 
thereof. 

Grades/St-ales 
of Officers 
Scale VI & vn 
Scale IV & V 
&ale II & ITI 
Scale 
12 
Major 'A' class 
cities 
100.00 
100.00 
70.00 
70.00 
Daily Allowance (Rs.) 
Area I Other places 
80.00 60.00 
80.00 6000 
60.00 50.00 
60.00 50.00 
Also limils of hotel expenses ure revised from time to time whenever 
Indian Tourism Development Corporation Hotels revise their rntcs. 
(14) Point rtftrred: 
Regulation 42(3) has fixed certain limils on charges to be paid in c:u<: of 
travel on transfer. Whether these amounts have since been revised, if so. 
what are the details thNeof and if not. what are the reasons therefor? 
Whether there is any objection in providing for its revision at regular 
intervals? 
Comments: 
Regulation 42(3) provides for payment of lumpsum amount to officers to 
tukc care of incidental expenses on transfer. such as packing, insurance, 
local transponation etc. Prior to 1st January, 1987, a limit of Rs. l.OOO'­
was laid down for claiming such Incidental expenses on production of 
vo~chers · alternatively, tho Officer could c laim on lumpsum basis a.~ 
indicated below: 
Pay Range Amount Payable 
Rs.700 io Rs.l200 p.m. 
Rs.1201 and above 
Rs.400 
Rs.SOO 
On and from lst January. 1987 the rates of lumpsum amount have been 
revised and the alternate provision of claiming on production of vouchers 
has been deleted. The provisions prevailing w.e.f. lst January. 1987 nrc 
given hereunder:-
''42(3) An Officer on transfer will be eligible to draw n 
lumpsum amount as indicated below for expense.\ 
connected with packing, local transportation, insuring 
the baggage, etc. 

13 
Grade 
Top Management and Senior Management 
Middle M~nagement and Junior Management 
Lumpsum 
Rs .1500'­
Rs.lOOO'-
These rates arc generally revised at the time of salary revision. 
(15) Point rt{tfftd : 
Regulation S4 says that in case of any question as to the application or 
interpretation of regulations, it shall be referred to the Board for its 
decision. Whether the decision of the Board sball be final? Whether an 
officer will have a right to ptefer aft appeal against the decision of the 
Board? 
Comments: 
The deCJsion oi the Board is final. The officer has no right to prefer an 
appeal 
Committee's Observations: 
The Committee, however, felt that final dccisi6n in this regard should 
not be left to the Board alone, There should be a provision to file an 
appeal with the Government 
2.2 Thereafter, the nbove regulations were further examined and some 
additionnl points were referred to the Ministry of Finance on the 6th 
September, 1989, for comments . The Committee dL~cussed these points 
with the officers of the Ministry of Finance and Canara Bank at B'mga.lorc 
on the 21st September, 1989. 
2.3 The additional points referred and the commeots of the Canara 
Dank officers during the discu.sion arc reproduced below: 
(I) Point rairtd. 
Regulation 2( I) inter-alia states "to such other employees of the Dank to 
whom they may be made applicable by the competent authorit)· to the 
extent •nd subject to such conditions as such authority may decide . • 
It is not understood as to how these regulations which are only for 
officers can be made applicable to other employees. These words also 
occur in the definition clause 3(j). 
Commcnu: 
This is an enabling provision to cover the employees recruited on 
contract basis . 

Committee's Obscr.alfuns: 
This maucr should be clnritied in the Regulation itself t(l make it clear 
to whom it i~ made applicable 
(2) Point rarwl· 
Regulation 24(1) prescribes reimbursement limit for medical cKpenscs in 
rwo slabs. Whether there is any objection an the reimbunemcnt of actual 
medical expeno;es incurred b~ an officer for self and for hrs iamil} mcmbc"' 
without any limit' 
Comments: 
The annual limit' upto which an officer ma) claim reimbur\Cmcnt on 
certificate basis for medical expenses incurred for self and/or family 
members arc fi~cd at the industry level and arc reviewed at the time of 
salary revision and are con"dercd as a package keeping in ,jew the overall cost factor . 
(3) Point rtJrud. 
The ~ystem of 2 slabs of medical aid under Regulation 24(1) should be 
removed and snmc slab may be stipulated for all officer>. 
Comments: 
ThL1 issue is to be tnkcn up at industry level and if if is deddcd at apex 
leve l to have u uniform slab, the Bank has no object ion. 
( 4) Po/111 rai.red: 
In accordance wuh Resulation 33(1) an officer shall be cligtblc for 
privilege Leave after completing J 1 month$ of service. It is felt that there 
sho uld not be any time restric tion for availing of Pnvilcgc Leave nt the 
credit of the officer. 
Comments: 
This restrictton os applicable only 10 case of newly recruited officers. As, 
such officers have 10 undergo training in the initial period to acquire 
knov.ledge in the bankong field and S}stems, it IS felt desirable to place 
.umc restriction on their ab:<cnting them<eh·cs on leave dunng the initial 
period of their service. To meet the immediate exigencies, an ofiicer has 
proviSIOn to avail casual leave of 12 days in a year in addition to 2 days 
sick leave per month . 
However. if the Commutee feel\ that dunn£ the probation period also 
Pri\'ilegc Leave can be granted on pro-rata ba.,is, the same can be 
incorporated in the report . 

15 
(5} Pmm raist•d 
According 10 Rc&ulation 49(2) durmg the joining time an officer shall be 
elil)ible 10 c.lraw the emoluments at the place of the old or new post1ng, 
whichever ore Je.- . 
h i' fell thai the provision i~ unreasonable. The officer should not be put 
to a disadvantageous position financially and should be allowed to draw 
the emolument< cithct wnh reference to the place where he is entitled to 
higher rates or on the ba.1s of the place where he actually stayed during 
the pcri<l<l 
Cummtnt': 
AI the tunc of uva1hng the joming time. the officers are in transit and 
arc normally clisihlc for other allowances like halting allowance as per 
Rcgulauon 41 oi the Canara Dank (Officers') Service Regulations or out of 
pocl.ct c•pcn!><'s incurred f<ll lodgmg/boarding etc Hence lower of the 1"'0 
namely emoluments at the tran,fer of transferee place whichever is lower is 
p.tiJ to the officer. 
Committee's Ob.ser,alio.u: 
The C11mmincc felt that 11 was 1n the fitness of things that during the 
jomm~ lime allowances should be allowed with reference to the place of 
actual !\h•Y· 
(6) f'o1111 r/ll~ttl 
Re~tul~t•on 49(5) pruvidcs th<tt no JOIDifig time will be admissible to an 
officer when hi\ p<l'ting is of a temporary nature. The provi~ion appears 10 
be nrbitrnry and unrcn~onablc It is felt that joining rime shoulli be 
admissible to <tn ,1fficcr on transfer. whcrhcr temporary or regular 
Commrnl\: 
Temporary tran$(crs t•rc generally «msidcrcd at the request of the officer 
on grounds of extreme compassion ttnd the period of such tran~fer.< is 
restricted normally to ,ix month' The officer is not eligible normally for 
any ather transfer bench! like rcimbur~cmcnl of fare. frcighr etc. and since 
the 1ransfcr rs of a purely 1cmporary nature pcrmiu ing joining time is not 
considered ncccs;ary. Tempo• ary po,ring of an ofriccr to ano1hcr place of 
work c.luc to ;~dmini>trativ~ cxigcnd~s entails the officer for hahm!\ 
allnwaocc It' meet t>oardmg. lodging and !neal conveyance expenses subject 
to the Jim•t' f1rcscnbcd. Joining time i' not l'ermiucd normally n< shifting 
of family and belongings i> ll(lt involved during this temporary period. 
(7) l't1111/ rar.<td: 
Under Rcgulatl(ln 4b, no benefit ol gratuity is admi,~ibk for the <crvicc 
extending IS ycaf\ and upto 30 years This position appears to be har<h on 
those who d1e or ret lTC after complcllon of a service between IS years and 
rcurc aitcr complcllon of a "'rnce between L5 years and 30 years. It ~~ fell 
that in such cases gr:nult) at the rate of half month's pay should be 
admisSible for ever~ completed year oi service as in the case of those who 
have put tn comf1)Ctcd years ot scr-·icc beyond 30 years. 
Comm•nts: 
As per StCilon 4(2) of payment of Gratully Act, 1971. 15 days pay for 
each completed year of Sen· Lee ts paid as Gratmty. Ho,.ever, when 1 

lb 
OWccr' Scrvocc Rcgulatoon,, l'J79 were formulated it wns observed that 
>Orne of the Banks were pnyinj! one month's pay for every completed year 
of Service subJCCI to a maximum of 15 months pay upto the scnice of 30 
years and half of a munth's pay fm each cumpktcd year of service beyond 
30 years. As such it was fell that this provision may be contonucd. Further. 
the Gratuity Act provides for l5 months pay for .m }Car:. of ""rvice. As 
such our provisions nrc much more beneficial than provided under the Act 
In fact officers whn retirc/Liic .. oftcr IS years get as much a< Gratuoty 
equivalent 10 30 year• oi 'ICI'\ o.:c. Thcrciorc. the above rule os not harsh 
Jnd on the rorttrar) it " benefiCial to such oificers. 
Commlltee's Ob<en atiun<: 
The Commrnce felt that this maner should be rc·cxcm incd m depth. 
The Ct>mmonee was mformed that such a dcdsinn could b~ taken at apex 
lc\·CI. 
2.4 The Mrn"tf)'. who were earlier a< ked to respond to the (lb'ICrvatiun' 
made by the Commillee during the discu~ions 'AHh Canara Bank Officers, 
rniormed •·id~ their O.M dated the 17th Octnbcr 1990. "' under: 
" .. to s~y that the observations made by the Commrucc have been 
exammcd in consultation with the concerned OrganisationS/Sections 
and it hu< been decided 10 ucccpt the observauon/rccommcndatron 
relating to probatron pcnod for scnror office" and to suitahly 
nmcnd Regultion 15(J) or the Officers' Service Regulations, 1979/ 
82. In other cases. no change has been considered necessary ... 
2.5 On the 9th November, 1990. the Minist ry of Finance were requc.rcd 
lo store the spec ific reasons, in each case, for not accepting rhc 
Cornminces' Obscrvauons. The Ministry vide their Office Memorandum 
dated the 21st December. 1990 furnished their comments :1< under :-
( 1) Point rui1ed 
Suitable RegulatiOn> to cover ull the contingencies referred ro ut Clau.'"' 
(c) (i) nnd Ul or sub-scc11on (2) of the Sccllon !9 of Bankrng Companic' 
(Acquisition and Tr;tnsfer of Undertaking_') r\ct. 19i0/80 nla) he made. 
Comments: 
The general superintendence, direction Jnd management of the affaors 
and bustnC$' of the Bunk arc •cstcd io the Board or Directors. and the 
Board dclcgmcs authority to the General Manager and other cxccuuves 
and officel" according to its requirement by Resolutron.~/powers of 
Attorney The extent of dclcgauon 'aries from Bank to Bank depending 
on rts organisauonal structure, man-power. business deals etc. There 
cannot be anr uniformity in the>e aspects amongst all the l'ationali,cd 
Banks and hence any standardisation of delcgarcd power is not practicable 
and would not be conducive in cffccuvc management. 

17 
(2) Puml fdl~ed 
Rcgulatlc>n 5: The Commillcc felt that nonnal increment ;hould nut l>c 
suhJCCteu to sanc11on of competent Authonty but it should accrue as a 
mancr of """'" a' on Government scrvrce unl""' wnh held under spccifk 
orders pa"cd before the date oi accrual of the incremcn~ and subject to 
Other condrll<>n' etc. <uch "' quahf~rug. service for tlle purpose. wluch 
<huuld al<o be pruvrucd for 111 the Rc~ulations 
Cnmmenb: 
The mcrcmcru can be \tnpped nnl~ h~ way or pun~bmcm. Rcgula1ion 5 
rs only the cnal>hng pwvr,ion to ensure that oflkcrs who arc not entitled 
for increment\ arc not gw~n the mcr.:mcnts Vihith ~m: not due to them. No 
chnn~c is. thcrcrorc. C<tnMUcrcd necessary. 
(J) f'ourt TOHtd" 
Rc~:n l aliun 2~ \1) ln,tcad of having two slabs ior reimbursement of 
n1cdical cxpcn'e'. the upper slob may be mndc applicable to all cutcgoncs 
of ufficcr> 
Cc>mmcnb: 
T he Committee\ rccommcndatu>n to app ly a uniform slab for medic al 
reimbursement to all categories of officer.< " not aae pwblc bccau~c the 
same would have overall cost unplicatrons nnt.l other category of crnployec' 
may t\lro dcmund p~Hity in mcl.hca1 f:.lc1Htics. Morc.·ovcr, such limits arlo! 
decided durinl! the course of lliscu" rons wrth Officers" Associa tion nt the 
umc ,,[ ~al~ry rc'''ion> 
(~) Portrt ru11rd. 
Re~ulation ~~ t5): 15 day• uoticc may he f>rC<crit>cd for the pu:po~e oi 
availin~ Privrlcgc Leave a' .•garmt nne month"s nvticc prom!cd tn the 
Rcgulosll<lO 
Conuntnl\: 
Su"c the Rcgul.rtu>n pro,·rdcs th<· "~rd ·ordinarily" in actual practice 
the ban~ c.tn<itlers the !r.I'C C\'Cil 1i the <honer notice is given depending 
upon the lac" :1nd mcfll' <•f the ca'~ If IS da)S period i< pro,illcu, then. 
if used wtth the term "Onhn.rnl) • th, provisron will St:uld further diluted. 
t<o:n ch.uagc. ''• chcrcfur&:. con~idcrcd nccc!-.Sar~. 

18 
(5) Point raiStd. 
Re~ulation 37: The maximum period of 720 days for Extraordmury 
Leave IS on the lov. side and reqmrcd rcviston. The purpose• for 
whteh such leave could l>c granted should also be specified. 
Commenl\: 
It i~ not constdered necessary to lay down spcCJiic reasons for grant 
of Extraordinar! Lea,·.:, as tt "ill rc,trict the privikgc Ho,.e•cr. for 
pursutng higher stu die• and for jouung spouse. the officer m·•! be 
granted not more than three !"'" Exu:.ordinary lc.o'c. 
(6) Potnt ruutd 
Regulalion S~: Deci•ion of the Board uctth regard to Applicatt<>n or 
lntcrpretauon of Regulation should not be final. There should be • 
prnviston to ftle the appeal "ith the Government 
Comment': 
Nationahscd Bank' arc autonomous bodte' and the rcgubttm" arc 
frumed in 'on,ullation with the Reserve Bank of lndi.1 uno Wtth the 
prcviou> sanction of the Ouvcmmcnt The quc,uon t>l appltcabk or 
intcrprewuon of the rcgulnuon <lwuld 1,., tciencd to Board lor tt~ 
decision. The nggril!vcd p;n ty is nLH p1·cvc-n1cd twm huvmg legal 
recourse. Any further amendment to the Rcgul.uoon " um cnllcd for 
PUNJAB NATIONAL llAI'K (OFFICERS') 
REGULATIONS. 1979 
SJ:RVICE 
2.6 The Punjab National Bunk (Officers') Service Regulations. 1979 
were uiS(\ examined and certain additional point> were referred to the 
Ministry of Finance on the 14th Au~ust, 1989. f<'r comment~. The 
comments were, however, (u:-m,.hcd b~ Punjah NatHm<tl Dank on th~ 
8th December, 1989 which were later endorsed by Moni,try of Finance 
on the 7th Fchruary, 1990. 
2. 7 The Commtnec vis ned the Head Office uf PuntJb t'\.>ll<lllal Bank 
at Kc" Delhi on the lith December, 1%'1 .ual J"cus~d the 
Regulation' wtth the Ofhccr< of the Punjab Kall<>nal Ban~ and 
Mintstr) of Ftoancc 
2.8 The point' referred and the comments lurnoshcd by the Punjab 
Sational Bank are reproduced below:-
(!) Po1111 rt/tfftti-
Whcther all Rcgul>tion• required to t>c made under Sccu<>n 19 of 
the Banktng Compamcs (Acqui,ition .tnd Tran,fcr ol Undcrtakm~<) 
Act. 1970 have been made and laul <•n the Table t>i Ra•\a Sabha. il 
so. the detJil,. thereof. :mJ af om. the rca.(o(lll' th~·Jdor'' 

rdmary 
cs for 
r grdnt 
cr. fl.lr 
la' be 
honor 
! be • 
ns nr~ 
11h the 
able or 
(<)T it~ 
g lognl 
:d for. 
RVICE 
~· 1979 
11 10 1ho 
. The 
on the 
Fimmce 
•' !lank 
d the 
"" and 
Punjab 
o !9 of 
·takings) 
sbha. if 
• 
• 
• 
19 
So far 1he following rcgulalion' have been framed under Sccuon 19 of 
1hc Bankmg Companies (Acqui~u".m and Transfer of Undenaking,s) Act. 
1970:-
(i) Punjab Nauonal Bani. Officers. Employees· (Conducl) 
Regulauon,, 1977. 
(it) Punjab Nalional Bank OfficNs Employees· (DIScipline and 
Appeal) Rcgulalions. 1971 
(iii) PunJab Ka1ional Banl Officers' Service Rcgulalions. 1979 
(tv) PunJab Nauonal Bank Ofliccr Employees' (Acceplanco of jobs in 
Privalc ScciOr Concerns after Rc1iremcn1) Regulalions, 1980 
Sewon 19 of 1he abo'c mentioned Acl. no doubt. empowers the Bank's 
Board to frame rcgulaln>ns in rcspcc1 oi any-one or all of the variou• 
subJeCts cnumcra1cd !herein. no rcgulalions have so for been framed to 
•pcct!ically anclude 1he >ubjccls other than those covered under 1hc above 
mcnuoncd four regulmion• Thh is the posilion in rcspcci of all 1he 
nauonalised banks. Apparcnl ly need for framing any o1her regulations has 
ttot been felt in "ew of the Section 19(3) of !he Bankmg companies 
(Acqu~Siuon and Tronsfcr of Undertakings) Act, 1970 which infer-alia 
provides. 1hat the Antclcs of Association and every regulations, rules. 
bye-laws or mdcr m.1de by !he bank and in force at the commencement of 
!he Act 1b1d be deemed 10 be the regulations made under ~ub-scc l ion (i) 
(2) f'oilll referred 
Whcthc.r Govcrnmcn1 have laid down any criteria for appointmCnl of 
pcr~ons on the Contmincc mcn11oned in proviso 10 Regulations 6(i) & 77 
Cumm1.•nh: 
Government have i\Sucd gUJdclines regarding calcgorisnuon of post~ m 
existence on 1hc ;•ppointcd date . The Bank has made the ca1egonsalion 
kecp111g in VIC"- 1hesc guidelines. 
(3) PoiTJt r~/trrtd 
According lo Rcgul.tllon 4'1(2) during the joining tunc an officer shall be 
clig1blc 10 dra"' the cmoluntcnl> a1 the place of the old or new posting. 
"'hichc\Cr arc lc~s 
Jt IS fch th31 ihC p!O\iMOll b unrca<onablc. n1c officer should not be pul 
to ~ di,ad\Otnt.t&COu• positi<tn financtally •nd sh,,uld be allowed to dra" 
!he cnwlumcn!S c1ther "'"h rc!crcncc 10 the place \\here he is cnlillcd to 
h1ghcr ralc> <'r on !he ba"' of 1he place where he actually sta)cd during 
!he pcrwd 

20 
Comments: 
Joining period is only a transitory period meant for enabling the officer 
employee to shift his family from his previous pia~ of posting to his next 
station of posting. The officer does not perform duties at any place. 
2.9 After prolonged correspondence the ministry on the ZOth February 
1991 informed as under:-
" .... The recommendations made during the visit of the Com mince to 
the concerned banks have been examined in the Banking Division in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law. The views of the Government 
on the recommendations are as follow:-
"Amtndmtnt to Rtgulation 49(2) 
The recommendations of the Comminee is agreed to in principle. 
Necessary steps will be token to modify the regulation after taking 
the approval of Finance Minister/Law Ministry, etc .. 
2.10 The Comminee at its meetmg held on the 4th October, 1991, 
considered the maner and decided to report 'the same to the House. 
The observatlons/n:commendatlons of the Committee In respect or 
Canara Bank Officers Service Regulations, 1979 are given to succeeding paragraphs: 
2.11 The Committee recommends that Regulation 2(2) ol the Canara 
Bank (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979 should be amended to make lt 
speclnc lo whom the Regulullons shnll apply and to wllom not. 
2.12 The Commlltee feels Ibn! normal Increment should not be subjected 
to sanction ot competenl Authority and It should accrue os a malter of 
course as In Government Service unless withheld under specific orders 
passed before the dote of accrual or lbe lncrrments and recommends that 
Regulallon S 5hould be amended accordingly. 
2.13 The Comtnlltee notes that the Ministry or Flnanc<o bud accepted Its 
suggestion Jo describe a dermlle period or probation for officers and also 
that the probation period fixed for 1 post should not be extended beyond 
twice tbe normal period and recommends that Regulation 15(3) should be amended. 
2.14 The CommiUee is not convinced witll the reply of the Ministry thai 
statutory regulation relating to delegation of powers, as required under 
dauses (c), (I) and ij) or Section 19(2) of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Underlakin~:s) Act, 1970180, have not been 
framed as a workable solution ond could not be found to n>eonci!e the 
permanent need or operallonal nexlbiUty. The Committee feels that In the 
present scenario II bas become aU the more important to han proper 
- delegation of powers In the form of subordinate Legislation. 

21 
2.15 The Committee, therefor<, recommends that statutory regulations 
relnling 10 Dcle~:allon of Po\\cr' should be franted expeditiously as required 
under daust (c)(l) an~ (j) of \ttllon 19(2) of lht Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Trnn,rer uf Undertakings) A~t. 1970!1980. The regulations 
so fumed onay 1ar} from bank 10 bank keeping !11 •iew its organlsational 
structure, man·PU"'er, bu\inn~ deed) ttc. 
2.16 1 he CommiiiL'l' ftth th~t during the Probation Period lhe Pri,.ilt~te 
Lean should be ,ranted to on om<er and recommends lbat Regulation 
33(1) should bt amended •ultably. 
1 .11 Th• Commlltct feels th•t IS da~s notice may be prescribed for 
••ailing or Prl•lll'\:< ua1t agalmt 30 days ootlc• and recommends lbat 
Regulotlon 33(5) •hould b• amended according!). 
2.\S The Committee fcol> that during the joining lime of on o!licer, in 
transit, u!lowance> <hould be auo .. ed according to the pluce of his actual 
sta~ and recommend' that Regulation 49(21 should be ammended 
accordin~l)· . 
2.19 The Committee feel\ th"t the dedslon of the Board with rt~tard to 
Application or lnttr]Jrctatlon ur Regulations, should not be final and lbere 
should be u JlrUiision tu file un oppc.U with the Covernmtnt. The 
Committee rccommeottl• that Re~ulullon 54 should be amended accordingly. 
2.20 The Lonunlttce directs thut the above amendments may be carried 
out In the identic~! rcgulutions of all the nationalised banks also. 

Ill 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC COI'.'DmONS OF ISLANDERS OF 
LAKSHADWEEP RULES FOR SELECTION TO MBBS AND OTHER 
::OURSES--IMPLEMENTATION OF 82ND REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
3. The Committee in its 82nd Report, which Wl!S presented to the House 
on the 1st June. 1990, had dcah with the Socio-Economic Condition.~ of 
Islanders of Lakshadwecp Rules for selection to llffiBS and other courses. 
3. J The Comminee made the following observations and 
recommendations:-
"3. 14 The Comminec i~ of the rirm view that the reservation for 
admission to MBBS and other post matric professional 
courses in the Union Territory should not, in any case, 
exceed 50 percent of the total scats available for allotment 
to these courses, so as to ensure that the concern for the 
backward sections of the population does not lead to a 
situa tion of social tensions and conflicts. There is already a 
judgement of the Supreme Court that reservations 
exceeding 50 per cent arc not const itutiona lly valid. The 
Committee feels that tho Ministry of Home Affnirs, has 
been unnecessarily dragging on the matter for years. The 
Committee further feels that when the Supreme Court 
observed. "II will be open to the Gove rnment of India to 
issue fresh Rules despite the tendency of this appea l in the 
Court", it was enough indication to the Government oi the 
mind of tile Court that it was desirable to frame fresh 
Rules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of llome Affairs should frame fresh Rules in this 
regard a• suggested above. This would help the Ministry to 
get the Special leave Petuion in the Supreme Court 
disposed oL 
3.15 The Committee also recommends that Government should 
consider rescheduling of the population in the Union 
Territory keeping in view the overall development in the 
Islands ." 
3.2 The above observations I recommendations of the Commiuee were 
forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs on the 14th June. 1990, for 
implementation 
22 

23 
3.3 ln reply, the Ministry vide their O!fice Memorandum dated the 1st 
October. 1990, stated as follows:- " 
" ....... The rccommcndatioM of the Committee have been considered .n 
consultation with the AdministratOr. Lakshadwcep and the Ministry of 
Welfare. 
As regards recommendation contained in poragraph 3.14 of the ' 
report. it may be mentioned that it may not be appropriate to 
overlook the composition of the Population of Lakshadwcep and also 
the extent or availability of infrastructure facilities for socio-economic 
development of the area as ... ell as the inhabitants of the said area, 
while providin& opportunities for employment and education for such 
areas. As had been submitted before the Committee also. it is again 
mentioned that in the absence of medical and other professional 
colleges in the Islands. the Administration hos no altcmath•e but to 
look up to either, the Ministry or Human Resource Development or 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for allotment of scats in 
various technical and medical colleges outside Lakshadwccp, for the 
students of Lakshadwecp and to ensure that the interest of local 
students Is duly protected to such a situation giving over·riding 
priority to such students in nomination against the allotted !;e:ILS. 
appenrs to be the only feasible and equitable solution. This is also in 
keeping with the normal policy of the Government ror ensuring u fair 
representation to the members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes :•nd other candidates belonging to Scheduled areas. 
This Ministry is also of the view that with all their limitations. the 
children of the Islanders arc not yet equipped to compete with the 
mninlnndcrs because of their socio·cconomic background. These scats 
allocated to Lakshlldwcep in medical and other professional colleges, 
which arc obviously outside Laks)ladwccp. arc the only source for the 
Islanders to get higher education whereas for the mainlanders. scats 
to be filled on the basis of all India compeution arc also available. 
Thus. the policy of reserving 93% of the scats for MBBS and other 
Post Matrtc professional coursc.s reserved for STs and 7% for others 
on open-merit-basis is intended to help the people of Lakshadwccp to 
avail themselves of the facilities of higher education and become a 
source of inspiration for others in the Islands. If such reservation ts 
not provided to them. the basic objectives will be defeated . 
Moreover, seats in outstdc institutions arc alloncd to Lakshadv.ecp 
primarily because Lakshadweep is a schcdul<:d area. The t.:nion 
Territory Administration has been of the view that scats alloncd to 

24 
Lakshadwcep should be funher alloucd to Lakshadweep for htgh~r 
studies, only 7% scats were provided for open merit and tbe 
remaining 93% were reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, that ts, the 
bonafide Scheduled Tribes residents of Lakshadweep. 
In odduion, reducing the number of seats for reservation for the 
Scheduled Tribes in Lakshadwccp will be retrograde in view of the 
declared policy of the Government of India to provode mott 
facilities/ opportunities for the :socio·cconomic development of tlle weaker sections of society 
As regards the recommendations contained in paragraph 3 15 of 
the Rcpon, the people in Laksh ad weep still continue to be sociaDv 
and educationally back-.ard, and it would not be an appropriate or 
opportune time tO delete the people of Laksbadweep from the l1st 0: 
Scheduled Tribes Any change at this juncture will be reacted t~ 
sharply by the inhabit3nts o( Lakshadwecp and is likely to give rue to 
social tension. 
In view of posuion explained above, this Ministry finds JU<,f 
unable to accept the recommendations of the Commiltee 0"1 
Subordinate Legislation." 
3.4 The CommiHcc Dl its meeting held on the 22nd November, 1990, 
considered the maHer and decided to visit the Union Territory of 
Lakshadweep to make an on-the-spot-study of the problem. 
3.5 Keeping in view the need for maintaining austerity In Government 
expenditure following the Gulf Crisis, lhc Committee at its meeting held 
on the 18th January, 1991, decided no1 to undertake any study-visit outside Delhi. 
3.6 Thereafter, the Commiuec during its visit to Lakshadweep discussed 
the molter on the Sth Oc1obcr, 1993, at Kavaratti with the represcntallves 
of the Lakshadweep Administration and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
3.7 Outing the course of discussion the Administrator, Lalcshadwcep 
informed that the children of Lakshadweep Islanders are not yet a.s 
equipped so as to compete with the mainlanders because of their socio­economic background 
3.8 The Administrator, strongly defended the Government policy of 
reserving 93% of seats for MBBS and other post matric professional 
courses for Scheduled Tribes and 7% for others on open merit basis as this 
is intended tO help the people of Lakshadwcep to avail themselves of 
facilities of higher education and become a source of inspiration ior o1bcrs in Islands. 
3. 9 As regards the recommendations contained in para 3.15 the 
Commiuee was mfonned that the people in Lakshadwcep still continue to 
be a socially and educationally backward and it would not be an 
appropriate or opportune time to delete the people of Lakshadweep from 
the list of Scheduled Tribes. It was also contended that any change at this 

25 
juncture will be reacted sharply by the inhabalilnls of Lakshadwccp and is 
likely 10 give rise 10 social !Cn>iun 
3.10 The Administrator strc,,cd the need for maimaming status-quo. 
3.11 Aftor detailed di~russlun lhr Commll!c" drddcd no! 10 plli"Su< Its 
rerommend~Uons conlalncd in par~s J.l-1 and 3.15 or Eighty-second Report. 

IV 
REPRESENTATION RECEIVED FROM THE PRESIDENT. AIR 
INDIA HOSTESSES ASSOCIATION, BOMBAY REGARDING 
rnEIR AGE OF RETIREMENT AI\L> OTHER SERVICE 
CONDITIONS 
4. A representation dated the 7th December. 1990, (Annexure I) was 
received by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, R3jya Sabha from 
the President, Air India Hostesses Association. Bombay . 
4.1 A copy of the rcprcscmation was forwarded on the 30th January. 
1991, to the Ministry of Civil Aviation for eommeniS. 
4.2 In reply, the Mmistry vidt their Office Memorandum dated the 8th 
February, 1991, stated as follows:· 
" ..... to say that the Prc>Jd<llt. Air India Hostesses Assocoation had 
made a somewhat similnr representation to the Chairman, Commince 
on Public Undertakings, Parli~ment House, New Delhi on 5th 
December, 1990 and a note was scm to the Lok. Sabha Secretariat on 
the subject on the 28th January. 1991. A copy of this note which 
explains the posnion of the case is sent herewith." (Annexure II) 
4.3 Thereafter the Ministry on the 28th February. 1991 were requested 
as follows:-
" ..... to request that Ministry to let this Secretariat know the position 
in regard to the recruitment and terms and conditions of service of 
the Air Hostesses in various International Airlines such as British 
Airways, Pan·Am, Japan Airlines, Pakistan International Airlines, 
K.L.M. etc. for consideration of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha ." 
4.4 After a couple of· remondcr:s. the Ministry vide their Office 
Memorandum dated the 13th August, 1991. responded as follows:-
" ..... to enclose a statement containing the available information in 
regard to conditions of recruitment I retirement I marriage etc. of 
airhostcsses in foreign airlines." (Annexures ill & IV) 
4.S The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 
lith September, 1991. and was not satisfied with the comments furnished 
by the Ministry. It decided to discuss the matter with the representatives of 
the Ministry and Air India during its visit to Bombay. 
4.6 Accordingly, the Committee during its visit to Bombay discussed the 
matter with the representatives of Air India and the Ministry of Civil 
26 

4.7 During the course of discussion the Committee was informed thai 
Management h3S raised the retirement age of Air Hostesses to 58 years 
they can fly upto 1he age of 45 years subject to their fitness after 
Medical Examinations. 
t8 The Committee was also informed that Air Hostesses get a higher 
in pay compared to their Male Colleagues i. e. Flight Pursers and that 
the last three years approximately 200 Air llostesscs were recruited 
110 male cabin erew was recruited . The sex discriminotion as alleged by 
Air Hostesses Association is not correct. In Indian Airlines the Air 
are allowed to Oy upto the age of 58 years. 
4.9 The Committee was also informed that the ban on marriage by Air 
·lbtess. es within three years of joining service has been removed. 
UO The Committee notes th2t the Air India Hostesses Association has 
• complaint under the equal Remuneration Act 1976 before the 
i••t>ttt nt authority ror relief and the mauer is sub-judice. 
4.11 The Commillte also notes that the National Industrial Tribunal has 
appointed to review the terms and concUUons of services of the 
flllllioyees including Air llostesses of the Indian Airlines and Air India. An 
&lvtn hy the Tribunal shall be binding on both the parties. 
;Aawdingly the Comrnlllee decides not to purs11e the maller further. 

v 
RULES AND REGULATIOt'\S RELATJKG TO TERMS AND 
CONDITIONS OF TilE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF AIR 1:-.-r>JA 
AND INDIAN AIRLJKES fRAMED UI\TIER TilE AIR 
CORPORAl!O/'\S ACT. 1953 
5. The Mtni>tl') of Civil A lill!On "·ere addressed on the 28th 
February. 1991. as fol!o1-s:-
.•..... to supply to this Secretariat t\\0 copies each (in English and 
Hindi) of rules and regulations rcl,ting to the terms and conditions 
of the members of the Board of Directors of Air India and Indian 
Airline$ framed under the Air Corporations Act. 1953 for scrutiny 
by the Commillec on Subordinotc Legislation Rajya S"bha. In case 
no rules I regulations on the ~ubjcct have bocn framed. how their 
~election I appointment is made and s'lary. allowances etc, payable 
to them arc dcddccJ• Coprcs of the orders I instructions etc . 
issued rn this b'ehalf may he 'em," 
5.1 In reply, the Mini\tf)' <•ide their Office Memorandum dntcd the 
19th March. 1991. 'tated as under:-
....... the guidelines for appointment of Drrecrors on the Board of 
Air-India and Indian Airlines have been indicated in Secti<>ns 4 & 
5 of the Air Corporn rlons Act, 19:53. The guidelines applicable to 
other Public Sector Undertaki ngs also apply to the Air Corporation. 
2. In regard tt> salury I ~llowanccs or the Board of Direclms. no 
specific rules 11nder Section 5(2) or the Air Corporations Act ba•·c 
been fr~mcd. Dire<tors on the Board "lw urc officials of rhc 
Government I Public Sector Undcrrn~ings get their salary and 
allowances as per the rules of Organisation' concerned. In the case 
of the Non-official Directors no salary is paid For aucnding Board 
meetings I Committees appointed by the Board, they are paid 
sitting fcc a.. per the guidelines contained in Bureau of Public 
Enterprises O.M No. !(31)87-BPE(WC) dated the 15th June. 1988 (Annexure · v') ," 
5.2 Thereafter on the 27th May, !991. the Ministry's anention "'"' dra" n to the followrng:-
" .... that the provrsions of Sections -1 & 5 oi the -"'ir Corporations 
Act, 1953 with re~ard to the 3ppointmcm or Dir<!Ciors on the 
Boards of Arr lndi" and Indian Airline• arc general in nature. 

29 
They are required to be elaborated and clarified by making rules in 
terms of Section 44(1) of the said Act. 
The Government may, therefore, make specific rules with regard to the 
terms and conditions including payment of Snlarics nnd Allowances etc. for 
the Directors of the two Corporalions. The rules should also indicate as to 
the areas and interests which would be represented on the Board of the 
two Corporottons. The specific reply of the Ministry as to whether they are 
agreeable to make the rules as suggested ab<>ve, if so. by when they arc 
bxcly to be made? In c:asc, the Ministry is not agreeable to the making of 
Rules, as suggested above the reasons therefor may be stnted." 
5.3 In reply, the Ministry Yidc their Ortice Memorandum dated the 25th 
June, 1991, stated as under:-
" .... that the Board(s) of Dtrectors for Air·lndia and Indian Airlines 
are appointed with the opprovol of the Appointments Commiucc of 
the Cabinet. Apart from the Managmg Director of the Corporation, 
the other Directors are part·timc and only participate in the meetings 
of the Board. These part·timc Directo.-. arc drawn from the 
GovcrnmcniiPSUs' under the Ministry and eminent personalities of 
proven ability in public life. The guidelines issued by the Bureau of 
Public Enterprises from time to time arc al!\0 kept in view while 
framing proposals for appointment of Board of Directors. In the past, 
the I!oard(s) of Directors were normally being appointed for a period 
of only one year However. last year, they have been appointed for a 
period of three year.. 
2. The Managing Director of a Public Sector Undertakings is 
normally app<>intcd by the Appomtmcms Commillcc of the Cabinet 
on the recommendations of the Public Enterprises Selection Board. 
3. Under the above circumstances, the Ministry is of the view that 
there is no need for framing any rules regarding terms and 
conditions. and salaries & allowances, of Directors of the Boards of 
Air India and Indian Airlines." 
5.4 The Commmcc considered the ma11cr at its meeting hcJd on the 11th 
September, 1991, and was not satisfied "'ith the comments furnished by the 
Ministry. It decided to discuss the mallcr with tbe representatives of the 
Ministry and authority of the Organisations of the Air India and Indian 
Airlines during its visit to Bombay. 
5.5 Accordingly, the Committee during its visilto Bombay, discussed the 
ma11cr with the representatives Of the Air India and the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and Tourism on the 25th May. 1993. 

JO 
5.6 During the course of discussion the Committee was informed that 
guidelines for appointment of Directors on the Board of Air India and 
Indian Airlines are contained in Sectoons 4 and 5 of the Air Corporations 
Act, 1953. Cr W.!$ also informed thar the Bureau of Public Emerprises had also issued guidelines in this regard 
5. 7 Th~ Commluce exprused Its unbnpp!ness over non-specific provision 
r~gardine the fixed tenure of the Directors In the Air Corporations Act, 
1953, in reply to IObich the Commiuee was Informed that the rtpea) or th~ 
Air CorporaUons Act, 1953 Is on the an•U and once the Act Is repealed the 
terms and condiUons or the Board or Directors of Air India and Indian Airiinos ,.ould be dt'<'ided thereatcer. 
5.8 In •lew of the r•ct the Air Corporations Act, 1953 under IObicb the 
Board or directors or Air India and Indian Airlines are appointed has since 
b«o repealed by the Air Corporations (Transfer of Underrakin~ and 
Repe•ll Act, 1994, the Commlue.. decides not to pur.ue the maller further. 

\I 
TilE ATR CORPORATIONS R\.'iLES. l'J5-1-fMPLEJI.fENTATIO~ OF 
81ST REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
6. The Comminee on Sull<>nhnJIC Lcp,IJI inn in liS 81SI Rcpnrl. which 
,.as prc,enlcd 10 1he Jlou'~ un 1hc '" June, 1'190. had dc3h wilh 1hc Air 
Corporauon• Rule<. 1'1)4 
b.l The Comnunec made I he folio" ang ob<crvalions and 
rtcommcnJauuns. 
-:..9 The Comnuncc " c•~rcmcl} unhapp~ on lh<: manner in whiCh 1hc 
Mllli\11} or Cl>~l ,\\1311011 ha~ been laking lhC maHer casually 
and -cmhng lhc rcplac' 1o 1hc rdcrcnccs made by 1hc Sccrcl~ra31 
110 II' tach31f only on bcang remanded lame and ar.ain. 
5.10 The C'omm1uec " 1101 con"ncc<..l b~ the s1and 1:\kcn b) 1hc 
M1ni,1rv of C'1>1l ''"a""" w11h rcg.~rd 1<> rule 47lil of 1hc Au 
CClrpnr;aiH>II' Rules. 1'154 Ko dl>ul>L '" poull«l ou1 by 1hc 
Mini(,trv. nov ... nc''- \tr Tr::msporl Coundl lwi- b<:~.:n constituted 
for 1hc Ia<~ 21 ycnrs or >0 as holh 1hc Airlines have been 
IIHhviOU:tlly aiiU ;!ISO 10 S(1111e CXII.Onl COIICclivdy, performing lhC 
funclions n' loid down in ahc Air Co r po r uhon~ An. 1'1~3. e'en 
1hcn 1hc Com1nlllcc lcch 1ha1 '" long a• the provi,iCln rcl•lllll~ 10 
1hc con>IIIUIIOn of Air T• un>pon Counti l eXIsts 111 <;cclillll 30 of 
the Act. J provi~iou fo1 grunt of ~l rc~~O i lablc op·ptHtunit}' of 
defence t>d.uc bcang remove<.! fr0 111 1hc Counc>l 111 11' Ch;11r111an 
and member> ' '"'uld ''' made ua ahe CXI'Iing rule .;7(i) vf 1hc 
Rule< 
:..ll The Cunumttcc dbu •.11\,apc.::o \\Jth the vtcw of tlu: Mim~u~ 1hJl 
no ouncndm\:'rl1 1~ n~~....:,~M) 111 rule 5'> which 1~ gc1h:ral an n,,nuc 
<J~ no !<>pt:l,:lo\1 ptr:Uithic::o. .uc fC4UHCd Hl be lffi[X1~1.-J nnJ. i.il"'v fur 
1hc lac! !hill Ill' pcn;alt) ""' hllhcno l>ccn impo>cd untlcr 11 lhc 
Com!lullcC recommend' 1ho1 Rule 59 should he ,uuahh 
amended • .o lvn~ "' 11 c"s'' 111 1hc Stalulc Boo!. f><nahy 
prov1dcd 1hcrc1n 'huuld be hn>.cu c11hcr w>lh ahc put'ha"ng 
po"-cr ol 1hc rupee 01 wnh 1l1< co'l uf Ll\111!\ !111.k,.-
6.2 The ahovC Ob,crvall00' n:comnlcncJiaUOIIS ui the C'•nlmiu.;c \.\C'f~ 
forwarded 10 ahc MIOI'Il) of Ci"l .-\VIalion on the ~Urh Jun.:. llJ'Hl k•r 
implcmcniJIIOn 

32 
6.3 Arter couple of reminder~ the Ministry vide their D.O. leuer dated 
the 24th Junu~ry. 1991, intimated as under:-
"Thc recommendations of the Commiucc have been carefully 
cx~mincd. In regard to the amendment of Rule 59 of the Air 
Corporations Rule~. 1954, it may be noted that the maximum fine of 
Rs. 1,000/. i.s prescribed in Section 44(2) (m) of the pnncipal Act. In 
order to give effect to the recommendation of the Commiuee, the 
Act would need amendment In consideration of the fact that similar 
provisions for fine exist in other Acts too, the Government do not 
propo'l: to amend the Air Corporations Act at present. 
The other recommendation of the Commiucc relates to Rule 47(i) 10 
regard to the removal of Chairman and Members or the Air 
Transpon Council. You arc aware that no Air Tmnsporr Council has 
been con~titutcd for a considerable period of time and that the 
Government docs not contemplate constitution of the Council at 
present. The Government feels that if the reconstitution of the 
Council is contemplated in future, it may be necessary to re-examine 
the powers of the Council and the manner of appointment of its 
Ch~irman/Membcrs. At that point of time, the Government would 
also consider nmcndmg the rules in regard to the removal of 
Chairman/Members. The delay in reply is deeply regretted." 
6.4 The Committee con~idcr~d the mouer at its meeting held on the 3rd 
July, 1991 and was not sat1sfied wuh the comments furnished by the 
Ministry and directed that clarifications be sought from the Ministry for 
not constituting the Air Transport Council when there is a provi~ion in the 
Act. Accordingly, the Ministry were requested to furnish the reasons for 
not constituting the Air Transport Counc iL 
6.5 The Ministry ••ttl< their Office Memorandum dated the 25th 
February, 1992, informed as under:-
........ to say that ~ccord1ng to Section 30 of the Air Corporations 
Act, "The Ccnltal Government may from time to time by the 
notifica tion in the offic1al G~zcttc constitute an Air Transpcm 
Council. .... " The Constitution of this Council is not mandatory . 
However, it has been mentioned in the Act that the Air Transport 
Council will consider any matter of importance referred to the 
Committee by the DITcctOr·General Ci>·il Aviation or Director 
General Post and Telegraphs or matters relating to operation of 
scheduled air services, routes on which it should be operated, 
frequency, passenger fares, freight rares etc Since both the Air 
Corporations have been in exi•tencc for more tbon 30 years and all 
rnuial problems have been sorted out, there has been no need for 
constitution of an Air Transport Council. in recent times. 

33 
II is requested that this information may kindly be conveyed to the 
Commillcc on Subordinate Legislation for their information." 
6.6 The Commiuee at liS mccung held on the 30th June, 1994, 
considered the maucr and decided to repcm the same to the House. 
6.7 The Committe.. notes that the Air Corporations Act, 1953 bas since 
btm repeal~><~ by the A lr Corporulions (Trunsfer of Uoderukings and 
Repeal) Act, 1994, consequent upon whlcb lh< Air Corporations Ru1es, 19~ 
stand reptalcd aulomallcaUy. Hence, the Commillce decides not to pursue 
lhr m~llcr further and drop• lls recommendations contained In the 8Ist 
Rrport. 
NEWDELill; 
November 9th, 1994 
H. HANUMAl\'THAPPA 
Otoirman, 
C()mmittet on Subord~nate Ltgisk11ion 

ANNEXURE-I 
[Vid~ Para 4) 
AIR INDIA HOSTESSES ASSOCIATION 
Clo Air Corporations Employees' Union 
To 
The Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
(Rajya Sabha). 
Parliament Ilouse, 
New Delht. 
Dear Sir, 
'Viman Bh3van' 
Old Aupo11, 
Bombay-100029. 
Dated: 7th December. 1990 
We understand that the Parliamcntarv Commillcc on Subordinate 
Legislation (Rajya Sabha) had visited Bo~bay recently. However. we 
could 1101 take the opportunity of meeting them to present our view 
point~ as the management of Air India did not give us any indication 
of your visit. However, we further understand that a delegation of Air 
Corporations Employees' Union with whom we have a coordination 
appeared before the Committee along with other Unions and made a 
reference to the discrimination being meted out by Air India 
Management towards airhoste>sc• with regard to the age of retirement 
and other service matters We submit this memorandum highlighting 
cer1ain points for the kind consideration of the Committee. We submit 
as follows:-
! A petition pertaining to the discrimination in the rcurcmcnt age 
between airhostcS> and male cabin crew of Air India and Indian 
Airlines was submitted to the Committee on Petitions (Lok Sabha) in 
May, 1988. The Committee was of the opin1on that the "in-built bias 
against the female .mployec~· should be remedied. 
2. A mcmorundum was submiucd to the then Prime Minister Shn 
Rajtv G~ndhi by approximately 100 Members of Parliament belonging 
to both the Houses and also 8 National Trade Uoi<ln Centres urging 
the Government of India to end the discrimination against the female 
employees. 

35 
3. Observations and reeommcndallons of 1he Commillce on Petition~ 
(81h Lok Sabha) is annexed hcrclo. (Appendix 'A') 
4. Following the above representations and the recommendations of 1he 
Petitions Commiuec (Lok Sabha) the Government of India decided 10 
remove the discrimination and issued a directive dated 16th October, 1989 
(Appendix B) through the Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Managing 
Directo~ of Atr India and Indian Airlines requesting 'Immediate' 
implementation of the Government decision under intimation to the 
Ministry with a compliance rcpon of the action taken . The Indian Airlines 
Management with in three days of rC(;cipl of the abo•·c said directive, 
implemented 1he decision on removing the d.iKriminalion by bringing the 
age of retirement of the airhostes.<es at par with the male cabin crew 
members. 
S. Air India however took the steps to seunlc the decision of the 
Government of India and after non-implemenlalion of the directive for 
over two months sought certain clarifications from the Joint Secretory of 
1he Civil Aviation Ministry. Mr Ravindra Gupta, Joint Secretary, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation, vide D.O . No. Av.18022123183-AIIA dated the 29th 
December, 1989 informed Mr Jctley tho! the maner had been reviewed 
and the increase in the age of retirement did not specify job functions. 
6. Upon receipt of this D.O. Lcllcr, Air India had issued Circular 
No.IR/231632 dated March 23, 1990 and Circular No.HQ/65/615319 
dD!cd November 2, 1990 offering clerical posi:ion on ground . 
7. Air lndin had thus scuttled the decision of the Government of India 
and it is perpetuating the discriminatory auitudc towards 1he female 
employees. In fact they urc trying 10 expose AirhostesSC$ as sex objects on 
board the aircraft in the name or iolern•tional competition etc No. Other 
airlines in the world has such discriminatory procticc. As a result of the 
Government of India's decision as originally conveyed to Air India 
management, they allowed a Tokyo based airhostcss of Air India 10 ny 
beyond 45 years of age bul upon receipt of 1he D.O. leucr of Mr 
Ravindra Gupta, the said airhostess was grounded with the result thai the 
said Japanese airhosless Ms. Mochi Zukki had 10 file a coun case in the 
Tokyo Dis1ric1 Coun where the ma11cr is at present pending. It has been 
reponed thai Air India had pleaded that as a result of the inm.llalion of 
the new Government (meaning Shri V.P. Singh Government). there has 
been a change in the decision and that is why 1bey are trying 10 extend the 
grounding of the Airhoslcss (Tokyo based). 
8. In the absence of any ccntficd standing order, the model stonding 
order applies 10 Atr India. The Hon . Delhi High Court held recently that 

36 
the Industrial Employment Standing Order Act applies to Air India. The 
process of Certification of a standing order by the appropriate authority 
has been taken up and the same is in the appeal stage of hearing. The 
circulars of Air India referred to in item No. 6 above is in connict with the 
original decision conveyed by the Govemmcnt of India to the managing 
Directors of Air India and Indian Airlines. Grounding of the airhostesses 
at the age of 45 contemplated in the circular letter would in fact lead to 
reduction in income and emoluments of the air hostesses not only in 
comparison with their previous income but also m comparison with the 
emoluments of the male cabin crew. Hence contents of the circular is in 
violation of the various provisions of Equal Remuneration Act as 
amended. As stated, the model standing order applies to Air India and the 
S3id model standing order does not differentiate between male and female 
employees with regard to the age of superannuation. The airbostesses are 
part of the cadre of Oying crew and the female airhostesses and male Oight 
pursers put together fall under the cadre of cabin crew. The job functions 
of the cabin crew arc defined. Assignment of a clerical job to them on 
ground is in conOiet with the job functions laid down for the cadre of cabin 
crew. 
9. As stated above the said circulars of.Air India prescribing ground job 
upon attaining the age of 45 years is in conflict with various provisions of 
the following Acts:-
1. Equal Remuneration Act; 
2. Tho Industrial Employment Standing Order AcVRulcs Model 
Standing Orders; 
3. Violative of Clauses 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India; 
4. InduStrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
As such we make this appeal to you to set aside the said two circulars of 
AIR INDIA referred to in item No. 6 of this memorandum and be pleased 
to extend the age of retirement of airhostcsscs upto 58 years at par with 
male cabin crew as decided and communicated by the Government of 
India vide their circular dated 16th October. 1989 referred to in para 4 of 
this memorandum and further the airhostcsses have a fundamental right to 
Oy till the age of 58 years as long as they remain as airhostesscs in Air 
India. 
Hope this humble petition will receive your favourable consideration. 
Thanking you on behalf of all Airhostesses. 
Yours faithfully. 
Sdl· 
(Ruheen Khambatta) 
J>ruident, AIHA 

(APPENDIX-A) 
EXTRAcrS FROM THE OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMEN 
DA TIONS OF THE COMM11TEE ON PETITIONS (8TH LOK 
SADllA) 
1.23 It was further stated that the job functions and duties of female and 
male cabin crew as well as other terms and conditions of service were 
determined by the Awards!AgreemcntSISeulements with the Cabin Crew 
Association. Air India Cabin Crew Association was representing 
approximately about 1800 female and mule members of the Cabin Crew. It 
was a recognised union to represent these categories. Out of 1000 air· 
hostesses as many as 800 airhostcsscs were its members. In the past Cabin 
Crew Association have resisted interchangeability in the job functions and 
given direction to members to adhere to the job functions and duties 
prescribed for them. Tt was also relevant to note that the airbostesses. who 
were members of Cabin Crew Association, were not party to the petition 
in question . 720 Air Hostesses signed the petition: 
1.24 A petition from the whostcsscs working in Air India and Indian 
Airlines alleging discrimination based on sex against the female cabin crew 
was presented to Lok Sabha by Smt. Dibha Ghosh Goswami . M.P. on 2nd 
May, 1988. Two main grievance~ or the petitioners nrc: 
(i) Age of retirement of all employees including the male members of 
cabin crew of the two corporations was 58 years. However, the 
age of retirement or airltostcsses working as cabin crew was 35 
years. which was extenda ble upto 45 years subject to medical 
fitness. This difference according to the petitioners, was purely on 
grounds of sex and should. therefore, be done away with. 
(ii) In Air India, the airhostesscs were not allowed to function as 
supervisors in the flight as the Cabin Crew Maonual provided 
that only a Aight Purser. who was a male. could be inchargc or 
the Cabin ... . 
1.2.5 The Committee find that the grievances or the airhostesses are not 
new and the same have been agitated many times in the past either before 
the Tribunals specially set up or before various courts . The Supreme Court 
while considering some writ petitions filed on behalf of the petitioners, 
dealt with the very issues now raised in a very exhaustive manner. In its 
judgement given in August, 1981, the Supreme Court in very unambiguous 
language pronounced that having regard to various circumstances service 
conditions, promotional avenues etc. the male crew member and the air 
37 

38 
hos!csscs cons111u1ed 1wo diffcrcnl calcgories and as such the ques1ion of 
discriminalins agamM Air 1Jos1escs did no1 arise. According 10 lhe 
Supreme Cour!, whnl arlicle 14 of lhc Cons1ilu1ion prohibi1cd was hos1ile 
discrimina1ion and no1 reasonable cla"-<ificalion and lhereforc 1he treatmenl 
of lhe airho.~lesses in I he mallcr of retirement age or service conditions in 
a different manner vis-a-••IS male crew members was not discriminatory so 
a.~ to amount to an infraclion of Anicle 14 of the Cons!ituuon. The 
Supreme Court also held that lhc Service Regulauons. under which age of 
rc1ircment of auhostc~":~ had been fued at 35 years. extendable upto 45 
years subject to medical fitness, agamsl the retirement age of 58 years for 
other employees. "'ere nol discriminatory and did not suffer from any 
constiuuional infirmily. 
1.26 The Commtncc note !hat lhts has also been the stand of the 
managements of the 1wo Corporauons. Therefore. whenever the 
petitioners have represented or filed ""t pclitions in Bombay High Court 
or Supreme Court. they were !Old I hat the Supreme Co uri in its judgement 
of AuguSI. 1981 had upheld the validity of the Employees Service 
Regula! ions of the two Airlines and therefore, there was no juStificnlion in 
the demands by lhc female cabin crew. The Commiucc ftcl !hat !his 
tcntamounts to laking too lcgalislic a view of lh~< whole issue. In e~scncc 
wh111 the pctilioncrs have been agitating for through representations and 
writ pc1i1ion t~ not merely a dcclaralion thai lhe provisions of the Service 
regulnlions arc di~criminalory but a positive ~ction on the pari of 1hc 
management 10 bring parily in the age of rclircmcnt of two categories of 
employees. 
1.27 The Commince find that although 1he Supreme Court has held 1ha1 
fixation of different age of retirement for different categories of employees 
was perfectly constilulional. 11 has not said that the age of rctiremenl of 
air-hos1e.~sc~ cnnno1 be more than 35 years or 45 years as provided in 1he 
rclevunl scrvtce regulalaons. As a matter of fac1 the Court has in its 
judgcmen! observed that ··The qucslion of fixation of retirement age of an 
Air hos1ess has to be decided by rho authorities concerned afler taking into 
consideration various factors such as 1hc nature of the work. the prevailing 
condi!ions. 1he prac1ice prevalenl in other eslablishmcnts and the 
like"" ...... The Coun bas further observed lhat "'there cannot be any cui 
and dried formula for de1cm1ining the age of retirement which is 10 be 
linked with various circumstances and a varicly oi factors ... It i' 1hus 
alway~ open 10 the manageme.nls of lhe 1wo Corpora1ions 10 decide whal 
~hall be the age of re1iremen1 for a particular category of employees. In 
the past also, lhe age of rcliremcnt of air hostesses bas been enhanced 
from 30 yea!l 10 35 years and agaan to 45 years subjccr ro ccrtaan 
conditions The Commillcc are. therefore of 1he view that the demand of 
1hc atr hoSics.'IC~ for raising lhe age or retirement needs to be considered 
afresh in 1hc light of the presenl day socio-economic cnvironmem and rhe 
arguments advanced by the Pcllhoners. The Comrmttee would like to 

39 
emphasise rhna a fresh appraisnl of rhe demands of the air hostesses cannot 
and should nor be shunt our raking sheller under rhc Supreme Court 
judgement. which as pointed our above, does not ban a reconsideration of the issue. 
1.28 The Commiuee note with satisfaction the understanding and 
sympathy displayed by the Secretary. Civil Aviation. when be said during 
evidence before them thar keeping in view the practice obtaining in 
European Airlines it would be worthwhile if the Boards for the two 
Corporations reconsidered the whole mauer. It is relevant to reaill the 
observations of rhe Secretary in his evidence before the Committee tbat 
simply because Supreme Court has given the legal and eonsititutional 
position. it doe• not prevent the Boards of the Airlines from giving certain 
conces~ions tu the employees. 
1.29 The Commiucc feel that a stage has now come for a fresh look at 
the service regul3tions. remedy the in·built bias against female employees 
and rake necessary corrective measures wirh fuU confidence in the 
eapabilirics of our women folk. 
1.30 Considering the general improvement in life expectancy as well as 
the position obtaining in several inrernarional airlines. the Committee arc 
of the view that the retirement age of the Air Hostesses may be rnised to 
SS years. This can be subject to the condition that after completing SO 
years of service, the Air Hostesses may be required to undergo a medical 
fitness test annually. The Committee nrc also of the view that the 
restriction of four years' service before an air hostess could gcr married is 
nor warranted and should be done away with. The only reasonable 
restriction which the Commillce feel could be imposed in keeping with the 
small family norms. is that the services of an Air Hostess may be 
terminated In case of third pregnancy after two thing children. The 
Commiuee also feel that there is merit in the Air Hostesses' plea thnt it 
was very difficult fur an Air Ho~tess !o prove that she was nor married. 
The management should not insist on such a condition and an affidavit to 
rhc effect that on Air Hostess \IdS not married at the time of her 
appointment was good enough and should be accepted by the Corporatoons 
1 31 The Co111mottcc arc further of the view thao just as the senior most 
cabin crew member on board an Indian Airlines flight is allowed to 
supervise the functions of all orber cabin crew, whether male or femsle. 
the A1r Hostesses working in Air India should also be permitted to 
function as supervisors on board. The cabin crew manual or Air India 
which provides that only a !-light Purser could be incharge of each zone of 
flight may be amended so as ro provide that a Deputy Chief Air Hostess 
oould be entrusted with supervisory functions on board. In Ibis case also, 
although the Supreme Court has up held the constitutional validity of the 

40 
provisions of cabin crew manual. the management of Air India can olways 
modify these provisions by issue of an administrative ins!nlctions and bring 
them at par with those obtaining in Indian Airlines . 
1.32 The Committee desire that a thorough review of the service 
regulations of employees both in Air India and Indian Airlines should be 
carried out with a view to removing the in·built bias against female 
employees and to provide them all necessary facilities and avenues of 
advancement as arc generally made available by other international lines to 
their female emp loyees. The Committee would like the boards of both the 
Airlines to complete such a review wilhio three months and repon back to 
them the changes effected. 

To 
(APPENDIX-B) 
NO.IV. 18022/23188-ACIA 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
Mll\'ISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION AND TOURISM 
N~w Ddlu, dat~d the 16/h Oct, 1989 
The Managina Director. 
Air India, 
Air India Building. 
Nariman Point. 
Bombay. 
SubJ~CI: Discrimination agamst Air Hostesses in Air India and Indian 
Airlines---<lecisions regarding. 
Sir, 
I am directed to sny that the question of removmg discrimmation in 
service conditions against Air llostcsscs m Air India and Indian Airlines 
has been engaging the at1cnt1on of the Government for quite some time 
After careful consideration. 11 has been decided as under:-
(i) That like the mole cabin crew, Air Hostesses in Air India and 
Indian Airlines should also be allowed to serve till the age of 58 
years; 
(ii) that the Air Hostesses should be subjected to medical 
examination once a year after the age of 35 years, but such 
medical examination shall not be called superannuation medical 
examination. In addition Air Hostesses sh:ill be subjected to 
weight restriaion regime which shall be very strictly observed and 
for which suitable executive instructions and gwdelines may be 
drawn; and 
(iii) that ban on marriage by Air Hostesses within three years of 
jointng service shall be removed. 
2. You are requested to implement the above decistons of the 
Government with immediate effect under intimation to this Ministry. 
41 

42 
I 
3. A compliance report of lhc acrion lakcn may please be $ubmiucd co 
lhi$ Minisrry wirhin a week. 
4. Please acknowledge rcccipl of chis lcucr. 
Yours failhfully, 
Sdi-
(J. R. Nagpal) 
Undtr Stcretary to the Government of India 

AN'<EXURE-ll 
[Vrd~ Para 4.2) 
ALLEGED DISCRIMINATION AGAINST AIR HOSTESSES IN AIR 
INDIA 
B•ckground: 
The 15sues rao$Cd by the Air India Ho~tesses Assocaauoo have been 
rai$Cd earlier ai<O. The llon'ble Supreme Court of India. an the case of 
Air-India V/s. Nergc<h Mecra had held that: 
"Having regard to the various carcumstances. incidence. service 
conditions, promouonal avenues etc of the Asstt Aoght Pursers and 
Air llostC"-<C< of Air-India (Aoght Stewards and Air Hostesses on the 
case of Indian Aorlanes Corporation) the inference was arrcsistiblc that 
Air llostcsscs. though members of the Cabin Crew were an emircl) 
<eparate class governed by different set of rules. regulation> and 
condllllln> of service. Therefore. though pecu liar conditions dod form 
part of the regulations governing Air I !ostcsses that ~ouk! not 
nmount to d r s~rinunation so as to VIOlate Artic le H of the 
Constituuon. · 
Further, the I !on'blc Supreme Court in Covil Writ Pct1110n No. 231 of 
1987 (Ms. lena Khnn VI>. Unit1n of India & Ors) reJected the request ior 
rc·CilllSideration or the decision in Air 1ntlia v;,_ Nargesh Mccrt.il """~ and 
held a> follow"-
"ldcntical quc.:stiun!- were r::t1scd before 1h1 ~ court 111 a few wnl 
pc t umn~ corhtr by ~omc other empl oyee~ of Air Ir1dia and they were 
considered at length hv n Bench of 3 Judges an A1r India V/s 
Nerge~h Mccrza and wcr~ considered in favour of Aar India We arc 
bound by this deci"on The learned CoUIISCJ i11r the Pctauoncr 
submit• thot tho< dcc1<ion needs rc-co n <~dcroti{m and made a fcrvunt 
appeal to u~ to refer 1he matter for thai purpose We do 1101 feel 
rcr<uJdcd to accept th1s reque!ot. .. 
From thi~ t1 will be evident that the Hon'blc Supreme Court oi 
lndta D)' it' Jud&emcnt of 1987 not only rejected the otlcnticol "'ucs 
rao<ed by Alf Ho,tc"" but also re-confirmed the corrcctne" of the 
dcci•ion tn the )car 1981. 
Therefore, these "'"« h.-·c already been settled b) the 
Judgement~ of th: H1gh"t Court 1n the courn11. 
The Commlltec on Peutions (8th lok Sablta) m then lOth Report 
submitted on 9th May. 1989 had recommended that a legahst1c vtew 
43 

44 
should not be taken and a fresh look should be given tu the Service 
Regulations. The Commiltcc had suggested the following:-
(i) Retirement age of the Air l lo<tcsse< mav he rai<ed to 55 
(ii) Re~trictton of four yea" se"'icc before an Air Ho<tcs. could get 
married $hould be done a"ay with. 
(tii) Although the Supreme Court h.1s upheld the ConSluuuonal 
validity of the provNon~ of the Cilbin crew manual. A1r India can 
modify the proVtsron~ l<> permit Atr Ho,tcsscs to function as 
Supcrvt~rs on board 
The Air India Hostesses A•,;o<tation i> a non-rccogm<ed Association . 
The Air India Cabm Crew •s the rc<ogn•sed associauun whtch has been 
entering into ~lllcmenrs'agrecment\ wuh Air India in regard to terms and conduions o( $Crvtccs etc. 
The Government and the A1r lnd•a management have gtven a fresh look 
10 the Service Regulations m regard to the female eabm ere .. and have decided·· 
(1) that the female cabm ere"' "''II retire at 58 year.< of age. wuh the 
q•pula11on that an "" hostc'·'es would be allowed to fly only upto 
the age of ~5 years subject to the medical fitness for flyml' duties. 
For this purpo~cs. Atr Hostesses arc required to undergo medical 
examination at the age of 37 years. and every two years 
thcrcaftt..:r upto 1hc age of 45 ycurx. as agamsr annual medical 
cx.unina tion earlier After the age of .:5 years, the Air llosrcsscs 
Wtll be os.<igned ground dul ics upto the age of 58 years. During 
the period of ground ussignmcnt from the age of 45 year. upto 
the ngc of 58 years, her pay will be protected; subjccl to the 
condition that she will not be cn litled to allowances relating exclusively to flying dulles. 
(ii) Air India's order dared 2.lJ 911 regarding asstgnrncnr oi air 
hostesses on ground j(•bs after 45 years of age is bcmg reviewed. 
(iii) the ban on marn;~gc b,v Atr Ho.rc>ses wnlun three yea" of 
JOinmg servtcc ha' hcen removed The period had earlier hccn 
reduced from four to three years. 
It is lruc that lndtan Alflinc' ha1 c amended thc1r regulatiOns to allow 
Air Hostesses 10 fly 1111 58 yc<~rs nf oi);C Smox the nature of opcralle>n' oi 
the two atrhnes IS different Alf India has ta~cn a consciou.' dcc1'i"n to 
restrict the flymg duttcs by II< Air Hostesses upto the age of ~5 ~ca.-. 
The JOb of the cabm crew " a strenuous and non·stop flytng hou" on 
rnost of Air lndta flights arc four to it'c time• that of the longcsr domestic flight 
Alf Hostesses provide pcrsonah;cd scrvtce to rhe passengers. whtlc the 
Assn . Flight Pursers -.ork 10 the gallics. The dulles and responsibilities of 

the male and female cabin etC\\ rue quue distinct and separate In (act the 
All India C~bin Crew Associauon h;od objcctcd to inter-changeability in 
lhc duties and rc•ponsibiliaics of ahc male c~bm crew ws-a-•·u aho female 
cabin crew. h was >ubjeea mauer of an award or Naaional lndusarial 
Tribunal, wherein it was held ahat lhcrc caunoa b~ any mterchangeabiliay 
lx:a,.·ecn the duties and rcsponsibiliaics of male crew vs. female cabin crew. 
A number of Air Hoste»es upto retire from the service of the Corporation 
oo reaching the age of 35 years. The Corporation allows ahem tn do so with all po~t-retircment benefits 
Every five years the Corporation negotiates with rccogntsed Unions the 
aerms and conditions of service and cnrc" 11110 an agreement. The lnst 
sctllemena was entered into with the Cnbin Crew Association for the 
period 1.10.85 10 31.8.90 which i• binding on both parties. 
The Air India Hostesses Association have n!so filed a complain! before 
lhe competent authority under the Equol Remuneration Act of 1976 seeking the following relief:-
(!) have totnl parity between the IIosaesses and the male Cabin Crew 
members in their conditions of service and lhaa the Hostesses be 
permilled Oying duties till ahc age of rclircmena. i.t. 58 years. 
(2) abolish the medical examinations for lhc Irosacsses wiah immediate 
effccl. or in the ultcrnaae. make the medical examinaaion, with its 
allendant lintilntions, npplical>lc 10 the mnlc members of the Cabin Crew. 
(J) (a) abolish all form~ of di>pnriay in the promotional avenues for 
male and fcmolc Cabin Crew. 
(b) from a common line of promolion for female and male 
calcgories of Cabin Crew, based on a common line of scniroty, 
depending on the numl>cr of years or service. 
OR 
(c) make available an equal numl>cr of promorional avenues and 
posas as offorded to ahe male category. 
(d) give lhe female category of Cabin Crew equality of srarus on 
booed lhc aircrafa, based on either grade or on years of service 
t•ls-u-l'is the male crew. 
Since lhe proceedings before the Autlwriay under the Equal 
Rcmuncraaion Act, is of n quasi-judicial narurc, rhe maucr is sub-judice. 
Vide Notification dated December 7, 1990, lhc Govcrnmenl have 
nppoinacd a Naaional lndusariol Tribunal to go into various issues regarding 

46 
terms and conditions of service of Indian Airlines and Air·lndia . As such, 
the iS$UCS raised by the Air India Hostesses Association may abo be raoscd 
before the National !ndustnal Tribunal. so that it can go into these aspccu 
in its entirely An •ward can be ghcn in this regard whoch shall be bindin~ 
on both parties. 

Al'iNiiXllltE-III 
f\'tdt• Para 4 4 J 
C0~1MRATIVE STATEMI.:NT IN NEIGIIUOURfNG FOREIGN 
AfRUKES GOVERNIN(i 1'111 SUBJECT MATffiR OF 
RECRUITMENT /RET IREM ENT/MARRIAGE AND PREGNANCY 
Airline Age of Age uf ~u ndiuon Condition 
Rccruicmcn1 JlcllrCI1lCIII reg. reg. 
Mafl'insc Pregnancy 
--- --Singapore 18-25 year> 35 years (Ta- M~1rringc Service tcr-
Airlines ken on COil· pcml illcd. mina!Cd on 
tral'l for <I firs! pre· 
JlCl'il>d of s gnancy. 
ycnrs ~I n 
1ime) 
ThlJ 20-25 YC<Ifs 4U IC3JS N111 lliiO\\~tl Scr•icc ter· Airway$ en HI. III y chu - mwatctl on 
lltg prot>~- first 
tinn. pt(·g_nancy. 
Royal JS-25 1~ ~·cars. Not ~1llowct1 Ku condition Nepal lo lll.l H) for rt!g. pre!· 
Auiinc~ 1hc firM 5 gnaney. 
year.. of 
\~1 \·h.: I:. 
Bang- 11\-22 years 35 years (!'(- r\'ul ,111\m.:d 1\o condition 
btksh lendable 1(1 to marry ior reg. pre-Biman 40 )'C~IT\ ~and the fir'' 3 gnancy, 
upt<> ol5 yc:n< yea,-.. of 
111 C~\C the ~f\'h"c. 
Alii SCI\ 
J1rt11ll(ll~d It> 
high~r ..... -.. ~~: 
<>f pay 
Pakistan 18-lo year• 35 years ex· Kot ;lllnwcd Nu1 •pplic· Inter- lendable 1n marry, able in view national uph> 4(1 year, or marriage. 
A1rlines if lhc 'crvicc 
IC~I\rd i~ 
gll<>d. 
17 

Airline Age of Age of Comhlion 
Rccruicmcnc Rctircmcnl reg. 
Marriage 
Air Lanka 18-21 years 50 yc:::trs No Not 
restriCtiOn on co 
marriage children 
during 
service. 
A If 18-25 6() years No No Mnunciu' restriction on reg. 
marriage pregnancy. 

A.'<\;f.\lRF.-1\' 
II'"'' r, .. , .1 ~1 
COMP,\RAliVE ST,\TEl\1El\T 1-: OTHER FOREIG'\ ,\IRLII\ES 
GOVER!'<II'Ci TfiF Sl'BJECT MA"ITER or: RETIREMENT. 
MARRIA\.E Al\1) rR£GNANCY 
Name 
"' 
the A~:c c>i Cnn<hllon f("f! Cundllnl!1 reg. Atrlinc Rc 1 ~rcmcnr Mo.an1.1~c Prcgnollll'~ 
-- ------ -- -- -- -- --I. luflh;m;n 55 }'C'il r~ !\ 1 aruag,c i\o t:tlll<.fttU)II 
pClJlllltcd r<.'J! prt:gn .tlh;y 
2. Pnn Am liO yc:u~ Maning<' N<.* cont.lit i(m 
pc lrUlllCd fl.!£. prcgnan<.'~ 
3. Trans 60 VCOII'\ Militia!!~.: 1'\u c·ond11 ion Wodd pt.:rm•th:ll I'C!! prcgn<.~ n cv 
Airhm·s 
"" 
Franfc 55 \'(' .1(, Mlllri:I£C t\u C(' IH.lifi<)H 
I'''IUlll lcd reg prcgunncy 
i Swi:;.:-. Air 57 \'Clll \ \t~~rri.tgt' N~' i.:tlll<..li,ion 
J">l'lllllltt.;d ft.'~ prt:gnaucy 
6 Alitnha 5) )'C:tr~ ~I. If ll;tgc.: KH l.'l'ndirton 
A1rlinc~ Pl..'riHith'<.. r..:~ pn:~n:w.:>· 
7 Dri!"h 55 \~Oir' ,\brru~c l'\'u i.:ondition Ai:lin.;:, permuted u:g rrc!!n:tnt:~ 
5 Ouanr.1' 5' ~-~..·ar' \L.•rrt.l,t: :\"~\ "·unduu,,u Airnu:s ('c:lll\llh .. ·c.! rq.~- prcg.n~'"'' . 
511 \Ci.U~ M.,tn;•.t!.: ,.....,. t.:ont.hlwn 
J"CftlU1h.·tl r~; p u: _;n ;111~ y 
"' I 

Al'-'NEXl'RE-V 
[\'ide Para 5.1J 
1'\0 2(]1}'117-BP£ (WC) 
GOVERI'\:>.IEI'T OF l~DIA 
1\lii'ISTRY OF II'DUSTRY 
(Uurcau of Pul>hc Entcrl""cs ) 
PuMlic Enh .. rpri~ Rh.l\ ·an t 
C(;O Complex. Bloc!- :-;u 14, 
Lod• R~>au. !'~" Ddln 1 Ult11l1 
Dated the l :irh Juu ~ . I'ISS 
OFFICE 1\lEMORANDl'M 
Sull/<'tl: Pa1 men I I)[ !>ttling Fcc IH IIOIH>rlid:tl Member~ nf lhc Bnanl of 
IJucctnr~ of the Puhlk E:t~rerp1i$CS 
lludcl the cxiMin~ :u r<m£C11Wtlt. ,, nUIJ-oHici:-~1 Member of the Buo.uU of 
Uir¢ctOIS nf llu.: l'ublh.' Entcrpri.\t! i~ pait1 siuing r~~ ror attCIHli · '~ cadi 
11\t'Ciill~ <>f the• !lo,~nl. 
2. Rq'>IC~Cili:IIH\n::> have hccn J cccivl~ d h)' the Gov~.:rnmcnt that the 
ah<,vc rut..:~ of ~o, inin g fcc~ were dctcnninttJ by !hL: (iovctnmcnc Sl)IUC lime 
in llJ60'~ ;;u1d arc. thcrcr~_,rc. cuu~Jlkl'c<.l inadcquau· undc-1 the present 
dccum~tnncc~. It ha~ Occn MJ ~g .. ·Mcd tv the GovcuHncnl th.l1 th~ .~;;uing fee 
for i!IICII<.hng the 11\CCiill!!' or I he Bo;l(d of Direc-tor. a.~ well ~' n>cc l in~< or 
the Committee or SIJb·CommHll~<.:s hy 1hc Hoanlmay he su1tahh lm:n.:a~cd 
Thc!-C and olhcr rchstc..J '~'uc~ h.1vc been cxamiJH.·d 111 the Govcnllllflll. Jt 
hn• been dccrdcd thai the <illlll~ [cc pay~blc on unlly [>~,;, to the """' 
official Members of 1hc B<lartls of Publtc Entcrp11SCS, tkpcn,hug "1'''11 lh~ 
Schedule to whJCh 1hc l'uhlK T:nt~:rpu5-C bdon~!-. \\PIIId ', ·'' l••lh,\\'1:-
Sd1cdulc to which 
rhc I'F. l>donp 
ror aucndmg 
nn:-.:l•ng~ of the llu~ai 
P"' d.•y 
hH >lH~Ih.hll !! Jlh \ t Ut,:.\ 
of 1h~ Com lHtt .. '\: '1 \ 
Cnmmmcc •'i'i'4.'1 u ,r 
bythc Bua1d pc .1.11 
----
" n 
c 
D 
R' 
~50 
:tMl 
I <;t) 
I(Ml 
J . ThC\c orders i<Jkc cHccl irum I 1.1:\il. 
so 
R• 
l~ll 
liM I 
l ' 
'II 

4. The Mmistry of Petroleum ond Natural G:.<. Minisuy of lndus<ry. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Coopcrouon etc . may kutdl) bring the 
foregoing to the notice of the Puhlic Entcrpri.\CS under thcor odministrnti"c control. 
SJI. 
( KRISI!l\A CIIAI'\DRA) 
Ruutw of Pubhc Em~rprius 
All Adm ini'lr:uivc ~hn~>lri.-~ Dcplillll<'lll of I he Govcrnmcn r oi 
India 