COM. 1-115 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABRA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
RS247J 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT 
(Presidented on the 20th May, 1995 
....... 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DEUfi 
MtJy, 1995/lytJistluJ, 1917 (Salul) 

• 
CONTENTS 
PAGES 
J. CoMPOSITION Of' THE COMMITJ'E.E •. ...• ... . . ...•• ... ... .... .. (i) 
2. TtiE RJ:PORT 
1. introduction............................................ ...... 1 
11. Press Council Act 1978-Jmplemcntation of 57th 
Report of the Committee............................... 2--4 
111. Bureau of Indian Standards Rules. 
1987-Implementation of 99th Report of the 
Committee ............................................. . 
JV. Grant of Ownersh.ip Rights in respect of 
Commercial Shops/Flats in Delhi-
Implementation of 95th Report of the 7-8 
Committee .................... ....... ...................... . 
V. The Dadra and Nagar HaveH (Administration) 
Regulations, 1988-Implementation of 97th 
Report of the Committee................................ 9-11 
VI. Oil and Natural Gas Commission (Terms and 
Conditions of Appointmen t and Service) 
Regulations, 1975-lmpleme ntation of 88th 
Report of the Committee . ...... .. . ... .. .. .. . . . ....... .. 12-15 
3. ANNEXURE$. 16-30 

COMPOSITION O.F THE COMMITTEE 
(1994-95) 
1. Shri Hanumanthappa -- Chairman 
2. Sbri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Misa R. Ganesan 
4. Dr. Ishwar Chandra Gupta 
S. Shri Ram Jetbmalani 
6. Shrl Cbimanbbai Mehta 
7. Shri Rajendra Prasad Mody 
8. Sbri Ahmed Patel 
9. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
10. Shri V. Rajeshwar Rao 
11. Shri K. N. Singh 
12. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
13. Sbri Gopalsinh G. Solanki 
14. Shri Som Pal 
15. Sbn Nyodak Yonggam 
ScCRhoARIAT 
Shri H.K. Cbanana, Depury Secretary 
Shri Om Prakash, Untkr Secretary 
(i) 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, lh~ Cbairman of lhe Conuniuee on Subordinate Legislation, haVIIII 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred and Ninth Report of the Committee. 
1.1 The Committee considered and adopted tbe Report at its meeting 
held on the 23rd May, 1995. 
1.2 The Maners examined by 1he Committee arising out of the scrutiny 
of various RuleVRegulations and the issues related there with, alongwitb 
lhe commeou of the Government received !hereon, and the observations 
and recommendations which, in the opinion of the Committee. should be 
brought to the ooticc of the House, arc contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
-
I 

II 
PRESS COUNCIL ACT 197S-IMPLEMENTATION OF 57TH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. Tbe Comminee in its 57th Report which was presented to the House 
on the 22nd "December, 1983, bad examined the Press Council Act, 1978 
and made foUowina recommendations/observations: 
"20. Tbe Committee recommends that in ease where multiple 
agencies are involved m the matter of linalisation of rules, the 
practice should be to call the representatives of all the concerned 
Mmistrics, Departments etc., simultaneously, round the table, for 
discussion instead of writing to one authority or the other . Such a 
meeung may be repeated if necessary for speedy decisions and 
expeditious finalisalion of the rules and regulations. 
21 The Comminee finds 11 difficult to agree with the Government's 
plea that in the absence of regulations duly framed by the Press 
Council, and approved by Govemmem, there was no vaeuun\' in .so 
far as conditions of services of the Council's employees were 
concerned and that until the regulations are so made and notified the 
eondition.s of service governing 1 he Central Government employees 
were being applied to the Council's employees. The Committee feels 
that the Press Council bas a sped fie and autonomous role to perform 
and conditions of service of its employees have to be drawn up 
independently in consonance with the nature of its functions. The 
Comminee, therefore, strongly recommends that the rules and 
regulations for the Press Council's. employees be fmalised with utmost 
expeditiousness, climmating all delay." 
2.1 The extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting on tbe llth January, 1984, for 
implementation . 
2.2 lnspne or prolonged correspondence upto the 18th December , 1995, 
the recommendations of the Committee were not imlemented. The Joint 
Secretary of ibe Mmistry was, therefore, asked to appear before the 
Chairman, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, on the 20th February, 
1986 for explllDing the reasons or undue delay in implementing the 
recommendations of the Committee . The Joint Secretary appeared and 
explained the reasons for not fmali.smg the recommendations contained in 
the 57tb Repon of the Committee 
2.3 Thereafter. the Ministry kept oo sending interim replies in the 
maner till the 23rd August, 1990.JCeeping in view the d~l•y on th~ p;>n of 

3 
the Minil.try, the Chairman, Commiuee on Subordinate Legislation, 
directed that a reprcscntative of the Minostry not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary be asked to appear before hom on the 19th December, 1990, to 
clanfy the position on the mauer . The Joint Secretary of the Ministry 
appeared before him and explained the reasons for not finalising the 
mauer. Thereafter. the Ministry sou~t extension of tome which was 
granted upto 30th April, 1991 and the Ministry was asked to finalise the 
matter within the date but the Ministry failed to do so. Once again, the 
Ministry sought further extension of time upto 31st December. 1991 for 
implementation of the recommendations of the Commtttee. 
2.4 The third request of the Ministry for extensoon of time upto 31st 
March, 1992 was not accepted by the Chairman because be was not 
satisfied with the pace of action being taken by the Minostry for 
implementing the recommendations of the Committee Therefore, he 
directed that the representll!ive of the Ministry be asked to appear before 
him on the 17th June, 1992 but the meeting could not be held. The 
Chairman further directed that the representative of the Ministry be called 
on the 2nd July, 1992. The Joint Secretary appeared before born and 
assured that the matter would be finalised in consulation with the Mmistry 
of Finance "ithin a period of one month 
2.5 After prolonged correspondence, the Ministry on the 3rd March, 
1993 sought another extension of time which was granted upto 30th June, 
1993. Again, on 7th January, 1994, the Ministry sought further extension 
of time which was granted upto 31st March, 1994 for implementation of 
the recommendations of the Committee 
2.6 Once again on the 3rd October, 1994 the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting requested for extension of time upto 31st December, 
1994 which was placed before the Cbaarman, Committee on Subordinate 
Legoslation but he was not satisfied with the pace of action being taken by 
them and felt that the Ministry was not serious in implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee. He. therefore. directed thst a 
representative of the Ministry be called to appear before him oo the 27th 
January, 1995. 
2.7 Accordmgly. the Joint Secretary of the Ministry appeared before the 
Chairman and explaoncd the position, He also assured to send a note 
containing the reasons for the extra·ordinary delay in the matter, 
2.8 Thereafter, the Ministry, on the 6th February, 1995, sent a note 
(Annexure I) alongwoth the request for extension of time upto 30th June, 
1995, for finalising the matter. The request of the Ministry was placed 
before the Chairman, who directed that the matter may be pia..., before the 
l:omminee for taking a decision regarding time to be allowed in such cases, 

4 
2.9 The Committee at its meeting held on the 9th May, 1995 considered 
the maner and decided to rcpon the same to the House. 
1 2.10 The Committee express its deep sense of anguish over the situation 
that the Government have taken unduly long time of nearly ten yean 1n 
making the Regulations under the Press Council Act, 1978 relating to 
condit1ons of service of the employees of tbe Council. Tbe Comminee also 
takes a Jerious note of the extremely slow pace with which the Ministry 
moved in the matter and went on seeking extensions of time, once after 
the another . 
2 .11 The Commutcc takes this opponunity to impress upon the Ministry 
to react to the recommendations of the Commiuce in a positive manner 
rather than tr)'ing to evade the issue and thereby delaying the matter. 
2.12 Tbe Committee, therefore, reiterates and strongly recommends that 
tho Rtgulatlons under the Press Council Act, 1978 be llnaUsed e x~itlously 
tlllder intimation to it and expects that such inordinate delays do aot recur 
in furture. 

Ill 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STA!\'DARDS RULES, 1987-
fMPLEMENTATION OF 99TH REPORT OF THE COMMllTEE 
3. The Committee oo Subordinate Legislation bad dealt with the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Rules, 1987 and made certain observauoosl 
recommendations in us 99th Repon, wbicb was presented to the House oo the 22nd Man:h, 1993. 
3.1 The extracts from the repon were forwarded to the Mirustry of 
Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Disuibution on the 8tb 
April. 1993 for implementation. 
3.2 The Commmee's observationslreoommendations as contained in the Report are reproduced below:-
"3.4 The Committee notes with sacisfaetion that the Ministry of 
Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution have 
accepted its recommendation to reduce the time limit from sill 
months to three months for filling up of vacancies in the Executive 
Committee of the Bureau under Rule 6(5) of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Rules, 1987. As regards reduction of lime limit form 6 
months to 3 months for filling up v.acancies in the Bureau under 
Rule 4(3), the Committee accepts the contention of the Ministry, 
and decides nor tO press irs earlier recommendation for amendment of Rule 4(3). 
3.5 The Committee also notes with satisfaction that the Ministry 
have proposed to amend Rule 6(2) to provide guidelines for 
nominatmg the Members of the Executive Committee of the Bureau 
as recommended by it earlier. The Committee however, 
recommends that in proposed sub-clause (f) of Rule 6(2) there 
should be 2 persons representing recognised consumer organisation 
instead of I person and in sub-clau.5e (i) the number be reduced 
from 3 to 2 
3.6 The Committee funher notes with satisfaction rbat, as per i&s 
recommendation. the MinJStry have proposed to amend Rule 12(4) 
to provtde guidelines for levying fee for inspection of articles of processes. 
3.7 The Commutee recommends that Rules 6(2). 6(5) and 12(4) of 
the Bureau of Indian Standards Rules, 1987 be amended, as agreed 
to be the ,._{inisary, expeditiously and under intimatJOn to it " 
3.3 After couple of remtnders, the Ministry vide their office 
5 

6 
Memorandum dated the 28th March, 1994 forwarded a oopy of the Gaz.ette 
Notificatioo GSR No. SS1 (E) dated lhe 17th August, 1993 incorporatina 
therein the recommendation of the Committee. (Anaexure U) 
3.4 Tbe Committee at iiS meeting held on the 17th November, 1994 
x cided to report the matter to the House. 
~ .s Tbt c-mlllte nota wttb ~atls(adloa that the Mln1stry laan 
amuded Rules 6(l), 6(5) alld 11(4) u per Ill AlQCJtioa a~~d clotdcla llot lo 
punue the matter tunber. 

IV 
GRANT OF OWNERSHIP RIGHTS rN RESPECf OF COMMERCIAL 
SHOPSIFLATS IN DELHI- IMPLEMENTATI ON OF 9ffii REPORT 
OF THE COMMmEE 
4. The Committee on subordinate Legtslarion in us 84th Rcpon, which 
was presented to the House on the 27th December, 1990 had dealt with 
the Grant of ownership rights in respect of Commercial shopslflaiS in 
Delhi and made the following observations and rccommcndations:-
"3.6 The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken by the 
Ministry of Urban Development in dealing with the matter 
through administrative instructions. This is not the first time that 
a question has arisen with reg.ard to the transfer of ownership 
rights in respect of commercial shopslflats in various areas of 
DelhVNew Delhi, to the allonees. It appears that the 
Government has aU through been dealing wiih the mauer by way 
of ad·hoc decisions. As ad-hocism leads to arbitrariness, the 
Committee recommends ihat proper rules for the purpose should 
be framed expeditiously so as to avoid chances of corruption and 
malpractices." 
4.1 Thereafter the Committee in its 95th Report which was presented to 
the House on the 14th May, 1992, funher considered the matter and made 
the following observations and recommendation:-
"2.4 The Committee is not ~atisfied with the views expressed by the 
Minsnry of Urban Development that there is no need to frame 
rules for conferment of ownership nghts of shops etc. and 
reiterates its earlier recommendation made m the 84th R.epon 
that proper rules for the purpose should be framed expediliously 
so as to avoid chances of corruption and malpractices. 
The Committee is also of the opnion ihat the current process of 
conferment of ownership rights of shop etc may be aUowed to 
continue untnterrupted." 
4.2 The above observation/recommendation of the Committee was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi, on the 27th 
May, 1992, for implementation 
4.3 On the 8th September, 1992, the Ministry vide their communicallon 
informed as under:-
.. 0000 and to say that the proposal for eonfcrnng ownership ngbts to 
the ten markets was approved by the Cabinet in October, 1989. The 
detailed guidelines have been incorprated in tbe Cabinet decision 
7 

8 
dated 20th October, 1989 and action to implement the decision il 
being taken accordangly. In this connection it is stated tbat the 
Committee bas already opined that the current process of conlet'Dieot 
of ownership rights of shop etc. may be allowed to continue 
uninterrupted 
2. For the grant of ownership rights of re.maining 17 Markets under 
the control of Directorate of Estates, the maner is under 
examination . 
3. In vtcw of the foregoing, the Ministry submits that it is DOl 
oe~ary to frame rules separately for grant of ownership rights to 
these seventeen markets till a decision is taken by the Government." 
4.4 The Committee considered the matter at its meeting beld on the 6th 
May, 1994 and decided to drop its recommendations contained in its 95tb 
Report as it ceased to be within the purview of the Committee, consequent 
upon the creation of Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi. 
4.5 Hence, the Committee decides not to pursue the mattu tllrtber. 

v 
TI!E DADRA AND NAGAR HAVEL! (ADMTNISTRATION) 
REGULATIONS. 1988-JMPLEMENTATTON" OF 97TH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
5. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation in its 97th Report, which 
was presented to the House on the 19th August, 1992, bad dealt with the 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli {Administration) Regulations, 1988, and made 
the following observations and recommendations:-
"3.4 The Committee feels that even two women representatives io 
the Pradesh Council arc. inadequate and recommends that Regulation 
3(1)(c} be amended, so as to increase the number of women 
representatives tO 113rd of its total strength. 
3.5 The Committee does not agree with the pleas of the Ministry for 
nOI fi>ing lhe time·limit for filling up the casual vacancy in the 
Pradesh Council and recommends that a time limit of 3 months be 
fi>ed ~nd Regula11on 6(2) be amended accordingly." 
5.1 The above observalions/recommendations of lhe Committee were 
referred to the Minislry of I lome Affairs, Government of India, New 
Delhi, on the 25th August, 1992, for implementation. 
5.2 In reply, the Mmislry vide their office Memorandum dated lbe 21st 
December, 1992, informed as under:-
" ... . and 10 say thai matter has been considered in consultation with 
lhe Ministry of Law, Jus1ice and Company Affairs and the position is as under:-
(!) that the Presidcnl promulgate-d the Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
(Administration) Regulation, 1988 under article 140 of the 
Conslitulion In respect of constitution and functions of Pradesh 
Council. The Commiuee on Subordinate Legislation (Rajya 
Sabha) C>amined the said regulation and made cer111in 
recommendations for amendment thereof. 
(2) that the clause (I) of article 24() of 1be Constilution empowers 
the President to make regulalions for the peace, progress and 
good Government of cer1ain U01on Terrilories-Clause (2} of 
tbis article Stipulales that a regulation so made by the 
President could repeal or amend any Act made by Parliament 
or any other law "'hieh is for the time being applieable 10 the 
Union 1crri1ory. It further says thai any such regulation 
promulgaled by 1he Presidcm shall have the same force and 
effec1 a< •n Act or Porliamenl wbicb applies to that territory. 
9 

10 
II becomes clear from this that a regulation promulgated by 
the Pre~ident under article 240 stands on !he same Cooling as 
an Act of Parliament. Supreme Court in tbe case of T.M. 
Kanniyan Vs ITO, Pondicberry (AIR 1968 SC 637) bas also 
held the same view It bas also laid down as follows (at P. 
642):-
"Wbcn promulgated by the President the regulation bas 
the same Coree and effect as an Act oi Parliament 
applicable to tbat territory." 
The Court also observed that the "President can ... make 
regulattons under article 240 with respect to a Union 
terntory occupying the same field on wbicb Parliament can 
also make laws • 
(~) that Rule 204 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct oC 
B~tneM m !he Council of States (Rajya Sabha) relating to 
Commtttee on Subordinate Legislanon reads as under:-
"Tbere shall be a Committee on Subordinate Legislauon to 
scruunise and report to the Council whether the powers to 
make rules, regulations. bye-laws, schcmc;s or other 
statutory in~truments conferred by the Consitution or 
delegated by Parliament had been properly c~cercised 
within such conferment or delegation. as the case may be.· 
(4) thot according to Section 8(51) of the General Clauses Act, the 
express1on 'rule' means rule made in exeercise of a power 
conferred by any enactment and includes a regulation made as 
a rule under any enactment. It appears from the context that 
the cxpress1on 'reg,ulaLion' used in Rule Z04 referred to abovt 
would be 10 the nature of a rule as dcfened in !he General 
Clauses Act and not regulations made by the President under 
article 240 of tbc Constitution . 
(5) that the Commence on Subordinate Legislation or RIJ)'I 
Sabha had on an earlier occasion examined the scope of 11! 
.crutiny of (i) rules Framed under the regulations promulgated 
under article 240 of the Corstitution and (ii) the regulatiOIIS 
promulgated under :!40 The Committee in its Forry·fint 
Reporl made the following obscrvatioos:-
"The Comnuuee. lherefore, decides that the rules framed 
under the regulations made by the President under article 
240 will henceforth be subject to its scrutiny." 
As a regu lauon promulgated by the President uaw 
article 240 as treated par "'ith an A<t of Parlio.ment, such • 
regulation cannot come under the catagory of Subordinate 
Lcgi,lation." 

11 
5.3 The committee considered the maner at its meetin& held oa the 17th 
October, 1994. 
5.4 Tbe Committee cleddes oot to punue 1M matter fllrther u the Dad,. 
ud Napr H .. tU {Admlnlstralloo) ReJIU!alloos, 1988, have beeo 
promulcated b)' the I'H$ldent, undtr Artlde Z40 of the cooslitullno Ill 
rupect of coasUtullno aad fll~M:Uoas ol Pradesh Coundl, Ill •hich case, the 
RqulaUou canDO! come Wider the purview ol the Committee oa 
SubordiDalc Lqlslatloo. 

VI 
OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION (TERMS AND 
CONDITIONS OF APPOINTMENT AND SERVICE) REGULATIONS. 
197s-IMPLEMENT A TJON OF 88TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
6. The Commlltce on Subordinate Legislation, in tts 88th Repon 
presented to the Hou~ on the 16th September , 1991. bad dealt with the 
Oil and Natural G:u Commtssion (Terms and Conditions of Appointment 
and Servtec) Regulauoos. 1975. The observationslre.commeodations of the 
Comm111ee are as follows:-
2.9 The Commiuee hopes and trusts that the proposed 
amendments would be pushed through without any further 
delay. under intimation to the Commiuee. 
2.10 The Commiuee, however. expresses its unhappmess over lhc 
serious delay on the part of the Ministry of Petroleu~ llJid 
Natural Gas in responding to the communications sent to them 
by tbe Secretariat on its behalf. The Commiuee expects lhat 
such delay will not recur. 
2.11 The Commiuce also expressed its unhappiness during its study 
vi~it to Bombay in October, 1988 as on officer of the Ministry 
was present during the discussions. This aspect was brought to 
thctr notice in the study note. Strangely. the Ministry, chose to 
ignore it The Commincc is also greatly concerned over delays 
on the part of Mini&~rie~ and Department.< of the Govcrnmertt 
in responding to the communications sent on its behalf. Quttc 
often when the delay aspect is inqu1red into at the level or 
Joint Secretary/Secretary. it transpires that the matter was not 
placed befor<; then. Th~ Committee has also been informed 
tbat qutte often eommcnt.Sirequests are sent by junior offia:n 
such as Section Officer/Desk Officer and sometimes unsigned 
endorsements are sent. 
2.12 The Commmee, therefore, takes this opportunity to lay down 
spec:tfic directionslguadclines in these matters so as to ensure 
prompt disposal of the cases. On receipt of a reference from 
the Committee, ao acknowledgement should be sent within a 
week and be brought to the notice of Joint Secretary 
concerned, who should mom tor the same to ensure that ao 
undue delay IS caused in sending comments etc. The Joint 
Secretary shall be personally responsible for any undue delay 
12 

!3 
in responding to the Committee . The comments should be sent 
prcfer~bly within a month. In case it is not possible to send 
comment~ within three moruhs of the receipt of the reference 
rn the Ministry, rhe Committee may be informed of the 
reason~ for delay and spcctfie request be made to the 
Committee for grant of extension of time. The comments and 
the rcqucM for cxtcMion oi time etc. should be sent by an 
officer not below the rani.. of Under Secretary. During the 
Comnunec's study vi,lls, an officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Seuetary convc..,an t with the subject maLter of the 
di>oeu"ton should be present to assist the Committee. 
2.13 The above guidelines may be brought to the notice of all the 
Mtnrstrtes etc . or the G<.wernmcnt. lower formations and 
autonomou< bodic.< under 1hcir control. for information and 
compliance . 
6.1 The above observations/recommendations of the Committee were 
forwarded to the Mrnimy of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the 16th 
Scptcmhcr, 11191, for implementation. 
6.2 The Ministry, nde their office memorandum dated the 22nd 
Oclllbcr, 1991 lllfOtnted as under:-
"tu ' tate thnt as recommended by the Commince on Subordinate 
Legislation. lll>lructtnns hnve been issued to comply wtth the 
prc;crihcd procedure regardi ng submission of information asked for 
by 1hc Comrnrllcc, rtllcnduncc by officers of app ropriate level during 
the VISit> nf the Committee to 1he public secto r undertakings in 
cvnn~clion wilh the examination of rulcs/rcgulat ionfi made under 
subordutatc lc~t,lutton and monitonng of the Committee's reports for 
follow up nctton. As regard~ the examination of ONGC (Terms and 
Condtttuns of Appuintmem and Service) Regulations, 1975, since the 
Committee has not made any funhcr recommendations, it is 
pre~umcd that no funhcr action is required ," 
6,3 A cornmumcatton was addressed to the Mimstry on 8th November, 
1991 clurifytng the posttton regarding a mendment m the oil and Natural 
Ga~ Commts.,ion (Terms and condttions of Appomtment and Service) 
Rcgulattons, 1975 as under:-
"to rcquc~t that Mini>try 10 imimat~ "hcthcr all the amendments to 
the 0&1 and 1\'atural Gas Commission (Term< and Conditions of 
Service) Regulations, 1975 "hich "'ere stated to be under process by 
the /111111\tr)· •·Ide their orrice Memorandum ot even number dated the 

14 
13th August. 1990 have been published m the official Gazette; if so, 
two cop1c$ (each in English and Hmdi) thereof may be furnished tor 
information of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. Rajya 
Sabha" 
6.4 Thereafter, after a prolonget! corrcspon~encc the M1nistry on 201b 
O.:tober, 1993, informet! as under:-
•to say that consequent upon acceptance of one or the 
recommendations of P.K. Kaul Committee. the Govcrnmeru had 
decided to conven ONGC into a Public Limited Company Tilt 
President had promulgated an ordinance oo 2.7.1993 for providing for 
the transfer and vesting of the assetS. liabilities. obligations and 
employees of ONGC to the company formed and registered undu 
the Companies Act. 1956. and for mailers connected therewith or 
Incidental thereto and also to repeal the ONGC Act. 1959. To 
replace this Ordinance. the Oil and 1'\atural Gas Comm=n 
(Transfer of Under·tuking and Repeal) Bill, 1993 was passed by the 
Lok Sabha on 23.8.93 and by the Rajya Sabha on 27.8.93. The Bill 
has received the assent of the President on 4.9.93 and the 
corresponding Act is be1ng published in the Gazette of lod13, 
Extraordinary as Act No. 6S of !993 by tbc Ministry o[ Law and 
Justice The Act empowe..s the Central Government to issue 1 
notification appointing the date from which the undertaking of the 
Commission shall stand transferred to and vest in the Corporation 
This notification will be issued after receipt of the consent from the 
lenders of vnrious loans tO ONGC. 
With the conversion of ONGC into a Public Limited Company, tht 
ONGC Act, 1959 will be repealed and ONGC Rules, 1960 and 
various Regulations framed under these Rules will also not remain 1n 
force New Rules for the ONGC Limited are bciug framed by lb< 
Corporation itself as per its Anicles of Association. Hence. there 
docs not seem any nccessit~ to amend ONGC (Terms and Conditions 
of Appointment and Service) Regulations. 1975 ot tllis stage. Tb 
mny kindly be confirmed." 
6.5 The ONGC (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 1993 
(Annexure Ill) wa.' passed by Parliament and assented to by the Presidtlll 
on the 4th September, 1993, By tbe said Act. Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission Act, 1950 ha$ been repealed, consequent on tbe repeal of lhc 
said Act. the rule!Vregulations framed thereunder stand repealed 
automatically. 
6.6 The matter was placed before the Commillee at its mcettng beld oe 
the 28th November. 1994. The Committee directed that it may be reponed 
to the House. in view of the fact that the recommendations of 
Committee have become infructuou.. consequent upon the repeal of 
011 and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959. 

15 
6.7 The Commiuec note• that the Oil and Natural Gas Commission 
Act. 1959. has since been repealed and deetdcs not to pursue the maucr 
further. 
NLw Dtuu. 
May 23, 1995. H. IIAI'.'t:MANTIIAPPA 
Chatrmtzn, 
Cnmmwee on Subordmatt Legulullun 

ANNEXURE-I 
£Vid• Para 2.8) 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCt\STII'G 
SubJecl: Note regnrdmg formulation of Regulation s noufying service 
condotions of the cmpl~lyces <1f the PC!. 
The Press Council of India (PCI) is an au t onomou~ sta tutory body and 
was set·up in March. 1979, under the Press Council Act. 1978. "'ith the 
twin objectives of prc:scrvins ihc freedom of the Press and of maintaining 
and improving the standards of newspapers and ne" s ago:,ncoc~ on India 
The Council consists of 28 members bc;odes the Chaorman 
2. Under Section 26(b} of the Press Council Act , 1978, the PC!, with the 
prior approval of the Centra l Government, is to make Regulatoons not 
inconsistent with the Act and the Rules made there under specifying the 
terms and conditions of •ervicc of the employees appointed by the Count~ 
under sub-se.:tion (I) and (2) of scctoon II of the Press Councol Act. Sub­
section (I) &. (2) of SectJOD 11 provide for appointment of a Secretary to 
the Council and that the terms and condi tions of service of the employees 
io the Council shall be determined by rcgulatioM. Rul e 8 of the Press 
Council Rules, 1979, provides that until the Council makes these 
Regwations. the term• and conditions of serv ice governing the emp loyees 
of tbe Central Government and the right~ and previlcge• enJoyed by them 
shall, so far as may be, apply to the employees of the Councol. 
3. In pursuance thereof. the Prc>.S Councol sent a set of draft Regulations 
to the Ministry in 1982 seeking the prior approval of the Government. The 
Government approved the Regulations woth certain amcndmcn~ and sent 
the same to PCI in Octobe r '84" for notifying. Instead of doing that, the 
Cou ncil referred the matter back to the Ministry scck in& reconsidcrnt ion 
on tbe ground that the proposed Rcgultllions infringe on the autonomy of 
the Council. In brier. the Council wanted unfettered po"'cr~ on the matter 
of creation of posts and prescribmg the pay scales which the Government 
was not inclined to accept. 
4. In order to settle this issue. Minostry of I & B con,ened an inter 
departmental meet10g on November '88". Thereafter. a statement 
incorporating the stand taken by the Gover nment on the various 
Regulations were circula ted to all the conce rned department s m February 
'89 seeking their clearance to the Rc~:ularions. In the meantime tn June · 
Jwy '89 a reference was received from the Chairman. PCI Shn Justice R. 
S. Sarltaria. forwarding therewith a rcvoscd set of Regulations. Tbcrcafter 
16 

17 
concerted effons were made by this Ministry by having a meeting with the 
Chairman, PCI, to reach an understanding. Keeping in view the public 
interest at large. the Mmistry of I & B was inclined to agree to the 
Regulations proposed by the Pet. though there were minor differences of 
opinton. However, the following were the three issues which the Ministry 
of Finance was not inclined to agree to : 
./ (i) Prescnbmg a scale of pay of R.s. 5~700 for the post of 
Secretary , PC I. 
"" (ii) Prescribmg a scale of pay of R.s. 1~2900 for Lbe post of 
C.ssistants, Research Assistants and Stenographers Grade C, and 
./ (iii) RelaxattOn from seekmg prior approval of Lbe Government to 
amend the schedule of posts. 
5. On reJection of the above proposals by the Ministry of Finance, the 
file was again sent to former Finance Minister in January 91' for 
acceptance of the above three proposals of the PCI. While Lbe Ministry of 
Finance accepted the proposal of PC! for prescribing Lbe scale of pay of 
Rs. 5900--6700 for the post of Secretary, PCI, for the remaining two 
ro osals the Mints r of Finance observed that in view of the Jar cr im i­
cations and repurcussions on other organisations. these proposals be 
muomme3To ThC"l>nme 'Mmtster. 
6. However, instead of resubmitting the file to the former Prime 
Minister il was considered desircablc to seek the views of the Chairman. 
PCI. Accordingly, the matter was taken up with the chairman, PCI, who in 
his D.O . dated 13.3.9!, agreed to notify the Regulations as the major 
point of difference i.e. pay scale of Secretary, Per. had been accepted and 
also for the reason that the Committee on Subordinate ugislation, Rajya 
Sabha, was pres.~ing hard to finalise the Regulations He also slated in his 
leiter that PCI would continue 10 pursue the remaining rwo points with the 
Finance Mimmy and when rhese are accepted an amendment can be 
issued 10 !he Regulations Bl the proper time. Accordingly, draft 
Regulations were then forwarded 10 Per in June 9!' duly veued by the 
Ministry of law for taking action to nohfy the Regulations and also to 
oonslder the observation of Ministry of Law which they had made while 
veuing the Regulauons . 
7. Instead of notifying the Regulations and coosulering Lbe observations 
of the Ministry of Law. Press Council raised the issue of revision of scale 
of pay attached to the posts of Assistants, Research Assistants and 
Stenographcl'$ Grade C working tn the Secretariat of the press Council. In 
view of the endless delay on Lbe pan of the Pet. Secretary. r&B, appealed 
to the Chairman, PCI on 18.9.91 to dehnk other issues and take immediate 
action for notification of the Reautauotu. He aloo """ured that thiS 

18 
Ministry would continue ttJ efforts to raise tbe issues re,arding upward 
revision of scale of pay of Assistants, Research Auistants and 
Stenographers Grade C wttb the Mmistry of Fmaoce . The Chairman, PCI, 
in his letter dated 9th October, 1991. responded that the Press Council bad 
decided that the notification containing the RegulalioM be issued, 
however, no provision of the Regulations should be inconsistent with the 
Press Council Act, 1978, and the Rules made there under. Keepillj in view 
the decision of the Council, the Chairman, PC!, made certain suggestions 
in bis letter for modifying some of the provisio~¥ of the Regulations and 
particularly Regulations 3(2) whioh rcla!ed to the authority having the 
power for amending the Schedule (which specifies the strength of the posts 
etc.) attached to the Regulations. But, before settlement of this issue the 
Press Council of their own gave the scale of pay of Rs. 1646--2900 to the 
categories of Assistance, Research Assistants and Stenographers Grade C. 
However, the actual monetary benefits has been allowed to be given to 
them w.e.f. June 92' and no arrears of pay and allowance for the p&$l 
period paid to them. Thus, the Press Council extended the higher scale of 
J!;IY to Assistants ete~ ~atnst the aavice of the Government. FuTilier' tJie 
Press Council alsO merged the posts of Research Assistants with that of the 
AssistantS. 
8. In July 92' the modified draft Rc.,ulalions were sent to the Ministry of 
Finance for their concurrence. Minist ry of Finance, however, raised certain 
objections in respect of Regulations No. 3, 11 and 21. While 
communicating the comments of the Ministry of Finance to PC! it was felt 
necessary to convene an inter Ministerial meeting to son out the issues. 
The meeting was held in April '93 in which representatives of Department 
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and Department of Pensions were 
present but no one from PC! attended the meeting . The decisions reached 
in the meeting were conveyed to the PC! with the reqo~t to notify the 
Regulations before 30th June 1993. It was also mentioned that in case of 
_clelay the Press Council wg.uld direcJ!.l' be responsible anoaccoUiiiable 
before the Comminee on Subordinate Legislation. Again, instead of 
making effons tO notify the Regulations the Press Council proposed a DeW 
set of RegulatiQ.JlLID J'!!.Y 93~ror BJ!Proviil. The new Regulations again. 
after consideration in the Mitilstry. were sent to the Ministry of Finance 
for their concurrence in January 94' The Ministry of Finance while giving 
comments in November '94 on regulations Nos. 3, 11 and 21 have 
Categorically mentioned thot seaLe of pay of Assistants and Stenographers 
Grade C cannot be revised to Rs. 164(}--2900 as the seale has not been 
extended to the employees in the autonomous bodies . The merger of the 
posts of Research Assistants with Assistants bas not been agreed to and 
the seale of post or Research Officer has been down graded. In respect of 
Regulations 3(2) it bas been mentioned that the strength of Cou..!!£il and 
The creauon of=pons- mayoc regul~atcd tn accordance with their O.M. 1 
dated 6.U.85 read with O.M. dated 15~ relating to the creation of ~ 
3.... ,, , ,.. ' 

19 
~~~ in the autonomous bodies. In respect of Regulations 11 and 21, it has 
been mentioned that the Press council may inco~ate in tbeir by'lawsl 
Re~ulations that _proposal relating 10 emolument structure would need 
prior apj)roval of the Govemmcnt_!l!_eonsul~ !}th the ~istry - of 
Finance. The above comments of the Ministry of Finance have beeo 
oonveyed to the Press Council for modifying the Regulations. In response 
theiito the Press Council has informed that the maller will be placed 
before the Council and the Government will be informed accordingly. The 
Council bas been reconstiluted vide this MiniStry's notification dated 
25.1.1995. The Council is being reminded 10 have the matter considered 
and send its recommendations to the Ministry at an early date. 

ANNEXURE II 
( Vidt Para 33) 
TO BE PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, 
EXTRAORD!NAR Y 
[Part 11-Scction 3-Sub·section(i)) 
Government of India 
Ministry of Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution 
Krisbi Bhavao, New Delhi . 
Dated 17.8.1993 
NOTIFICATION 
G.S.R. 557 (E) In exercise of the powers conferred by section 37 of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, .986 (63 of 1986), the Central 
Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Rules, 1987. namely:-
!. (1) These rules may be called the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(Amendment) Rules. 1993 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publicauon in the 
Official Gazelle. 
2. In the Bureau of Indian standards Rules, 1987.­
(1) in rule 6,-
(a) for sub·rule (2), the following sub-rule sbaU be substituted, 
namcly :-
"(2) The Executive Comntillee shall consist of the Director General u 
ex-officio Chajrman and sixteen other members, reprC$enting the following 
categories. to be appointed by the Bureau of Indian Standards, with the 
prior approval of the Central Government, namely:-
(i) Additonal Secretary and Financial Adviser and Joint Secretary 
having administrative control of the Bureau of Indian 'Standards; 
(ii) 2 persons representing Ministries or Department of Central 
Government; 
(iii) 2 persons representing recognized consumer organization; 
(iv) 2 persons representing Industry, trade and their associations; 
(v) 2 persons representing public sector enterprises; 
(vi) 1 per$0D rcpresenlln& small soole seotor: 
20 

21 
(vii) 2 person represenhng scientific and research institulioM; 
(viii) I person representing teehnjcaJ, educational or professional organizations; and 
(ill) 2 member from tbe Bureau of Indian Standards. • 
(b) in sub-rule (e) for tbe words "six months" the words "three monlbs" shall be substituted. 
(2) ln rule 12, for sub-rule (4), !he following sub-rule shall be &ubstituted, namely:-
"(3) Tbe Bureau of Indian Standards sbaU be paid fees in advance for 
JUch iMpection and e.tpenses of travelling allowances. daily allowances and !he lilce as may be mutually agreed." 
Sd/. 
(PRADIP BADAL) 
Joinr ~cretary to the Govt. of India. 
Non!: Tbe principal rules were published vide No. G .S.R. 361 (E), dated 
31 March 1987 and subsequently amended vide G.S.R. No. 7(£) 
dated 6 January 1989, G.S.R. No. 48(£} dated 2 February, 1990, 
G.S.R. No. S43(E) dated S June 1990 and G.S.R. No. 638(£) dated IOtb July 1990. 

ANNEXURE ID 
[Vide Para 6.5) 
Bill No. 7l F of 1993 
THE OIL AND NATURAL GAS COMMISSION 
(TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL) 
BILL, 1993 
(As PASSED Bv T1111 Hoosll5 OF PAilUAM.,.,­
LoK SABHA 01'1 Tl'r; l3RD AUGIBT, 1993 
RAJYA SAB.HA Off 't1IE 27111 AUGUST 1993) 
Assroted to oo 4 ~p. 1993 
A(t No. 85 ot 1993 
22 

I of 19~ 
(J of 19$9 
BUJ No. 7l·F of 1993 
TirE Oil. AND NATURAL GAS 
COMMISSION (TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL) Bll.l, 1993 
(As PASSED BY ntE HousEs OP p AIWAMENT) 
A 
Bll.L 
to provide for tht "ansftr and vesting of tht 
undertaking of tht Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission to and in the Oil and N<UuriJ/ 
Gas Corporation Umued, a company 
incorporated urrder th< Companies Act, 
19$6, IUtd for ma11us connected therewith or 
incidentol thereto and also to repeal the Oil 
and Naturol Gas Commis•ion Act, 19$9. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty· 
fourth year of the Republic of India as 
follows:-
1. (/) This Act may be .called the Oil 
Natural Gas Commissio.n (Transfer and Short dtk 
Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 1993. 
of and 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into 
force on the 2nd day of July, 1993. 
r:ommrnC't• 
m~nt 
z. In this Act, unless the eonte~t otherwise fl<flnitions. 
requirer-
(•) "appointed day" means such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazene appoint under section 3; 
(b) "Corporation" means the Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation Umired, a company registered 
under the Companies Act. 1956: 
(c) "Commission" means the Oil and Natural 
Gu Commission established under sub-settion 
(1) of section 3 of the Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission Act, 1959; 
(d) "Ptc.ICribed" means pructibcd by rulc.s 
made under th.is Act. 
23 

U•dm-*"'l 
•I 
Comrnwton 
U) 't'Ui '" 
CDrptJT8/i()fl 
c. .. ro~ 
"'"' of """"I •I 
wukn.k~nt 
.. 
WfJ>OIOI-
24 
3. On such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette. 
appotnt. the undertaking of. the Commission 
shall stand transferred to, and vest in the 
Corporation. 
4. (l) On and from the appointed day, the 
enure eapital of the Commission shall, by vit1ue 
of thiS Act. stand vested in the Corporation. 
(Z) The undertaking of tbc CommiSSion which 
ts transferred to and which' vests in. the 
Corporation under section 3 shall be deemed to 
include all assetS. rightS, powers, authorities and 
privileges and all properties, movable and 
immovable, real and personal, corporeal or 
incorporeal. in possession or reservation, 
present or contingent of whatever nature and 
wheresoever situate including lands, buildings, 
works, workshops. vehicles, oil rigs, oil 
platforms, cash balances, deposits, foreign 
currencies, reserves, teserve funds or any other 
investments, securities tenancies, leases and 
book debts and all other rights and interests 
arising out of SUtch properties as were 
immediately before ·the appointed day in the 
ownership, possession or power of the 
Commission in relation to its undertaking, 
whether within or outside India, all books of 
account and registers, records and documents 
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to 
include all liabilities and obligations of whatever 
kind, within or outside India, of the 
Commission in relation to its undertaking sub­
sisting immediately before the appointed day. 
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonds. guarantees, 
powers of attorney, other instrumeRts and 
working arrangements subsisting immediately 
before the appoulled day and affecting the 
Commtsston shall cease to have effect or to be 
enforceable against the Commission and shall 
be of as full force and effect against or in favour 
of the Corporation and enforceable as fully: and 
effectually as if. instead of the Commission the 
Corporot1011 hod been named th-crc:in or bad 
been aparty thereto. 

25 
( 4) Any proceeding or cause of action 
pending or existing immediately before the 
appointed day by or against the Commission, in 
relation to its undertaking may, as from the 
appointed day be continued and enforced by or 
against the Corporation as 11 might have been 
enforced by or agamst the Commission. if Ibis 
Act had not been 1n force and shall cease to be 
enforceable by or against the Commission. 
S. With effect from the appointed day, all 
licences, leases , concessions, permits. quotas. 
benefits, privileges and exemptions granted to 
the Commtssion in connection wnh the affairs 
of the Commission under any law for the time 
being in force shall be deemed to have been 
granted to the Corporation. 
6. (1) Where any exemption from or any 
IISSC5$mcm with respect to, any tax bas been 
granted or made or any benefit by way of set 
off or c~rry forward of any unabsorbed 
depreciation or investment allowance or other 
allowance or loss ha~ been extended or it 
available to the Commission under the lncome-
43 of 19fJI tax Act, 1961, such exempt ion, assessment or 
benefit shall continue to have effect in relation 
to the Corporation. 
(2) Where any payment made by the 
Commission ts excmp1 fl'Om deduction of the 
tu nt source under any provision of the 
41 o/1961 lncome·tax Act, 1961, the exemption from tax 
will continue to be available as if the provisions 
of the said Act made applicable to the 
Comm~ton were operative in relation 10 the 
Corporation 
(.3) The transfer and vesting of the 
undenaking or any pan thereof in tenus of 
sectton 3 shall not be construed as a transfer 
within the meantng of the rncome-tax Act, 
oiJ of 19fJI 1961, for the purpose of C'IJlital gains. 
ttc., "' b< 
"-<md .. 
how bN~t 
~ 10 
CorpomtJon 
u.tmpticn or 
~~ru t(l 
COnhn&« to 
Mlit effect. 
7. Any guarantee given for or in favour of tbe au..,.,,.. ., 
Commt$.$iOn with respect to any loan or base b< op<J•bw. 
finance or Other a-sistance shall continue to be 
operattve m relation to th" Corporation. 

Pt0~qiotu m 
- of •ffoanr ond 
"""' c-...,. 
"""' 
8. (J) Every officer or other employee of the 
Commission (except a member or the 
Chairman) serving in us employment 
immedtately before the appointed <by shall, in 
so far as such officer or other employee is 
employed in connection with the undertaking 
which the vested Corporation by virtue o( this 
Act, become, as from the appointed day. an 
o((icer or. os the case may be, other employee 
of the Corporation and shall hold h1s office or 
service therein by the same tenure. at the same 
remuneration, upon the same terms and 
conditions, with the same obligauons and with 
the same rights and privileges as to leave, 
passage. insurance, superannuattoo scheme, 
provident fund, other funds, retirement. 
pension. gratuity and Other benefits as he would 
have held under the Commission i( its 
undertaking had not vested m the Corporation 
and shall continue tO do so as an officer or 
other employee of the Corporation or umil the 
expiry of a period of one year from the 
appointed day if such officer or other employee 
opts not to be the officct· or other employee of 
the Corporation within such period. 
(2) Where an officer or other employee of the 
commission Opts under sub-section ( J) not to be 
m the employment or service of the 
Corporation such officer or other employee 
shall be ckemed tO have resigned. 
(J) Notwithstanding anyttung contained in the 
Indumial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other u o/1947, 
law (or the time being in force, the transfer oi 
the service of any officer or Other employee of 
the C.ommission to the Corporation shall not 
entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under this Act or under any other 
law for the time l>eong in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court. uibunal 
or other authonty . 

I o/19J6 
27 
( 4} The officers and or her employees who 
have retired before the appointed day from the 
service of the Commission and are entitled to 
any benefits, rights or privileges shall be 
entitled to receive the same benefits, rights or 
privileges from the Corporation. 
(5) The trU$15 of the provident fund, gratuiry 
fund or the superannuation scheme of the 
Commission and any other bodies created for 
the welfare of officers or other employees shall 
continue to discharge their functions in the 
Corporataon u was being done hitherto in the 
Commission and any tax exemption granted to 
the provident fund, gratuity fund and the 
superannuation scheme or any other bodies 
created for the welfare of officers of other 
employees shall continue to be applied to the 
Corporation. 
(6) Norhwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act or rn the Companies Act, 1956 or in 
any Other Law for the time being in force or in 
the regulations of the Commission, no member 
of chairman of the Commis.~ion shall be entitled 
to any compensation against the Commission or 
the Corporation for the los~ or office or for the 
premature termination of any contract of 
management entered into by him with the 
Commission. 
9. (l) For the purposes o( ascenaining the fowtr D{ 
availability of any oil or natural gas, the Central wry 
Government may, on the request being made 
by the Corporation, authorise any officer or 
employee of the Corporation, by general or 
spe,ial order,-
(al to enter and inspect any land; 
(b) h.> survey and take measurements of 
DO) such land, 
(c) 10 dtg holes or perform any other 
functions Cor the purposes of 
measuring or prospecting for the 
avatlabrhty of oil and natural ga.•; 
and 

28 
(d) 10 examine any document, book 
register or record in the possession 
or power of any person having the 
control of or connected with any 
tuch land and place marks of 
identification thereon and take 
extracts from and make copies of 
any such document. book. register 
or record. 
(2) Every person authorised by the Central 
Government under sub-section (!) shall be 
deemed to be a pablic servant within the 
meaning of sechon 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 4J of 1!6/l 
(3) The Corporation snall be liable 10 pay 
compeosauon for any loss or damage caused to 
the land cau,cd by its officers or employees in 
performing the function~ under sub-section (I) 
in such manner as nuv be prescribed to the 
occupier of the land. 
(4) The amount of compensation payable 
under sub-section (3) shall be determined by the 
competent authority appoinled by !he Central 
Government m the manner prescribed. 
- oo 10. (1) The Central Government may,by 
... u ruk> notification in the Offictal Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In parucular, and without prejudice to the 
generally of the foregoing power. such rules 
may provide for the amount and the manner of 
paying compensation for any loss or damage 
caused to the land by the officers and 
employees of tbe CIITJ>Oration under sub-section 
(3) and (4) of section 9. 

Ord. 28 of 
199J. 
Ord. 28 of 
199). 
29 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in rwo or more 
sucoessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or 
the sucx:essive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in malting any modofication in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be: so. however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudioe to the vahdity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
11. (I) On the appointed day, the Oil and ll<pto/ of Arl 
Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959 shall stand 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the 
Corporation shall, so far as may be, comply 
with the provisions of sections 22 and 23 of the 
said Act so repealed for any of 1he purposes 
related to the annual accounts of tb~ 
Commission. 
ll. (I) The Oil and Natural Gas. Commission 
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) 
Ordinance, 1993 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwllhstandong the repeal of the Oil and 
Natural Gas Commossoon (Transfer of 
Undertaking and Repeal} Ordinance, 1993 
anything done or any action taken under the 
said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been 
done or token under the corresponding 
provision of this Act. 

30 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertaking of the Oil and 
Natural Gas Commission to and in the Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited, a comp.my incorporated under the Companies 
Act, 1956, and for mailers connected therewith or incidental thereto 
and abo to repeal the Oil and Natural Gas Commission Act, 1959. 
(AI passed by the Houses of Parliamenr) 