                        
                                              
  
 
                                 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
                                            RAJYA SABHA 
 
                      COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
                                               Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                                                  May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTH REPORT 
 
The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution 
and Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 2005 
And 
The Electrical Wires, Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices and 
Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2003 
 
                                       (Presented on 3 
rd  May, 2013) 
 
   REPORT NO.     
  207 

 
C O N T E N T S 
      
                         PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
I. The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel  (Regulat ion of 
Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpracti ces) 
Order, 2005 
 
II. The Electrical Wires, Cables,    Appliances and  Protection 
Devices and Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2003 
 
 
 
 
4. MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
3. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
4. Shri P. Kannan 
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
6. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
7. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi  
11. Shri Shantaram Naik 
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
13. *Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
14. *Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
15. *Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
 
 
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.         Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director 
5.      Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
6.        Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  9 
th  May, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been authorized by 
the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, thi s Two Hundred and Seventh Report of the 
Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up    while   scrutinizing (i) The Motor Spirit 
and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 
2005 and (ii) The Electrical Wires, Cables, Applian ces and Protection Devices and Accessories 
(Quality Control) Order, 2003 and issues relating t o them along with the comments received from the 
concerned Governments. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the Report.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft R eport in its meeting held on the 2nd 
    May, 2013.  
  
 
 
 
MAYA SINGH 
                                                         
     Chairperson  
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,                                                                                                                     
Rajya Sabha  
 
N
EW DELHI  
May 2, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

I 
Report 
On 
The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and 
Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 2005 
 
 The Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation  of Supply and Distribution and 
Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 2005 (Annexure-I)  have been framed under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955.  The Order has been framed i n supersession of the Motor Spirit and High 
Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 1998. 
 
2. In view of the importance and enormity of the is sues involved, the Committee has had 
several meetings with major Oil Companies like Indo  Burma Petroleum, Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation, Indian Oil Corporation and Bharat Petr oleum Corporation.  The Committee also 
discussed about the enforcement of the Order with t he State Governments of West Bengal, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh . Views/ suggestions were also received from agencie s engaged in the 
supply, distribution and sale of these commodities as well as other associations/ bodies and the 
public in general like the Centre of Science & Envi ronment, an NGO; Federation of All India 
Petroleum Traders Association; Petrol & High Speed Diesel Dealers Association; Gramin Vikas 
Samity; Petrol Dealers Associations etc.. 
 
3. The said Order of 2005 incorporates various chan ges like (i) introduction of short delivery 
under the malpractices; (ii) “Authorized officer” having power of search and seizure under clause 7; 
(iii) introduction of restriction on marketing of M otor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (MS/HSD); (iv) 
grant of authorization to market Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel; (v) supply of Motor Spirit and 
High Speed Diesel blended with ethanol and bio-dies el, respectively; (vi) specification of time 
frame for sending test report by the laboratory and  for communication of the test results to the 
concerned; (vii) details of norms for permissible s tock variation, (viii) powers of search and seizure  
of the officers of the State Government and the Oil  Marketing Companies in the Public Sector; and, 
(ix) sampling procedure to be adopted for drawing s amples of petroleum products for testing at 
laboratories listed have been specified.  The Motor  Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of 

Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpracti ces) Order, 2005, while under consideration, 
was amended twice- first was in 2007 and again in  2009.   
 
4. The Committee in fact had earlier taken up the M otor Spirit and High Speed Diesel 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Preventi on of Malpractices) Order, 1998 for 
examination and a questionnaire on the subject matt er was forwarded to the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas for comments/ clarifications.  The Co mmittee also held discussions with the 
representatives of Oil Marketing Companies like Ind o Burma Petroleum, Hindustan Petroleum and 
Indian Oil Corporation alongwith the Ministry of Pe troleum & Natural Gas in 2000. Views/ 
suggestions were also invited from organizations, a ssociations, traders, and public in general on the 
efficacy of the Order.   In the meanwhile, the Mini stry of Petroleum & Natural Gas vide  their 
notification No. G.S.R. 729(E) dated 21 
st  December, 2005 notified the Motor Spirit and High Speed 
Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and P revention of Malpractices) Order, 2005 in 
supersession of the  Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and 
Prevention of Malpractices) Order, 1998.  
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up the discussion  on the new Order and a freash 
questionnaire on the subject was prepared and forwa rded to the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas for their comments/ clarifications on the 22 nd  May, 2007. The comments of the Ministry are 
enclosed ( Annexure II) .  The points raised by the Committee and the comme nts/ clarifications 
received from the Ministry are reproduced in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 
6. When asked about the reasons for framing the Ord er of 2005 in supersession of the earlier 
one and the major points of distinction between the Orders of 1998 and 2005, the Ministry informed 
that the earlier Order was framed in 1998 and since  then several amendments had been made to 
incorporate necessary changes for making it relevan t in the liberalized scenario.  The new Order of 
2005 incorporated all the amendments into a single Order.  There are additions/ changes in the 2005 
Order to incorporate the changing environment and t o give clarity to the provisions.  The major 
points of distinction include additions/ changes in  the definition clause to the terms ‘Adulteration’;   
‘Authorized Officer’; ‘Consumer’, ‘Malpractices’; c lause 3(ii) under Product, Supply and 

Transportation; Clause relating to Power of Search and Seizure; Clause 7(1)(d) under Power of 
Search and Seizure and Clause 8(5)&(6) under Sampling of Product.   
 
7. The Committee is happy to note that a new clause  8(5) & (6) under Sampling of 
Product which did not exist in the earlier Order ha s been incorporated in the 2005 Order so 
as to provide that the notified laboratory shall fu rnish the test report to the authorized officer 
within twenty days of the receipt of samples at the  laboratory and also the authorized officer 
shall communicate the test results to the dealer or transporter or concerned person and the oil 
company, as the case may be, within five days of re ceipt of test results from the laboratory for 
appropriate action.   The Committee feels that fixing time line for different stages will quicken 
the process which earlier used to take longer time.   
 
8. The Committee is happy to know that its suggesti ons for fixing of a time period for 
testing of samples under Clause 5(5) of the 1998 Or der was accepted by the Ministry.  The 
earlier Order did not provide the time limit within  which the samples were to be tested by the 
laboratory.  As per Clause 8(4) of the 2005 Order, the authorized officer shall forward the 
sample of the product taken within ten days to the laboratory for analyzing with a view to 
checking whether the density and other parameters o f the product conform to the 
requirements of the BIS specification number of IS- 2796 and IS-1460 for Motor Spirit and 
High Diesel respectively.   
  
9. Clause 5(2)  states that ‘After scrutiny of the application, the Central Gov ernment shall, if it 
is satisfied with the details furnished by the appl icant, after requiring the applicant to furnish ban k 
guarantee for an amount specified by the Government , issue authorization to market motor spirit 
and High Speed Diesel indicating the terms and cond itions of such authorization.’  The Committee 
inquired whether Government had any objection in sp ecifying in the Order itself the time period 
within which the Government shall scrutinize the ap plications and issue a certificate of 
authentication.  Also, what was the basis for calcu lation of the Bank Guarantee required to be 
furnished by the applicant for the purpose of the Order.  
 

10. The Ministry informed that Government did not h ave any objection in specifying the time 
period in the Order itself within which the Governm ent shall scrutinize the applications and issue a 
certificate of authentication.  Regarding requireme nt of Bank Guarantee, the Ministry informed that 
the Company proposing to make the specified level o f investment in the eligible activities or a 
Company which has already made the total minimum in vestment required in the eligible activities 
but is yet to complete the project/ projects will b e required to sign an agreement, containing 
conditions and milestones, with the Ministry of Pet roleum & Natural Gas/ Regulatory Board.  The 
agreement would inter-alia , have specific provisions for bank guarantee of a specified amount for 
the proposed investment.  The guarantee, where prop osed, would be discharged on completion of 
the specified level of investment, but the obligati on of the applicant to complete the project would 
continue till final completion of the project.  Whi le formulating the guidelines regarding grant of 
authorization to market transportation fuel, it was  considered to have specific provisions for 
performance guarantee and bank guarantee/ interest bearing deposit of 1/4 th  of the specified amount. 
 
11.   In the view of the Committee, guidelines regarding grant of authorization to market 
transportation fuel should be specific and have cla rity with regard to all technicalities 
pertaining to provisions for performance guarantee and bank guarantee so as to leave no 
scope for any kind of arbitration and discretion an d, accordingly, recommends to the 
Ministry/ Regulatory Board to take immediate/ neces sary action in this regard to ensure the 
same.   
 
12. Clause 7(1) states that  ‘Any Gazetted Officer of the Central Government or a State 
Government or any police officer not below the rank  of Deputy Superintendent of Police duly 
authorized by general or any special order of Centr al Government or a State Government, as the 
case may be, with a view to scrutinizing compliance  with the provisions of this Order, or for the 
purpose of satisfying himself that this Order or an y Order made thereunder has been complied with 
or there is reason to believe that all or any of th e provision of this Order have been and are being 
or are about to be contravened’.  The Committee was of the view that the words ‘reason to believe 
that all or any of the provisions of this Order hav e been and are being or are about to be 
contravened’  leave scope for harassment by the concerned office rs as it gives them discretionary 

power.  The Committee, accordingly, desired that th e rule may be rephrased with suitable words to 
obviate such eventuality. 
 
13. The Ministry submitted that the Control Order o f 2005 is a tool available for effective 
implementation of the Essential Commodities Act.  U nder clause 7(1), the power of search and 
seizure has been vested with reasonably senior and responsible officers of Central Government, 
State Government and Oil Companies.  Under clause 7 (2), before exercising the power of seizure 
the authorized officer shall record in writing the reasons for doing so and shall also provide a copy 
of such recording to the dealer, transporter, consumer or any other concerned person. 
 
14. The Committee pointed that the word ‘officer’ s hould come between the words ‘the’ and 
‘authorized’ in Clause 8(1) which reads as  ‘The authorized under clause 7 shall draw the sampl e 
from the tank, nozzle vehicle or receptacle, as the  case may be, in clean aluminum containers, to 
check whether density and other parameters of the p roduct conform to the requirement or BIS 
specifications number IS 2796 and IS 1460 for motor  spirit and high speed diesel respectively.  
Where samples are drawn from retail outlets, the re levant tank-truck sample retained by the dealer 
as per clause 3(b) would also be collected for labo ratory analysis’.  The Ministry accepted the 
typographical error and agreed to amend the Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation 
of Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpra ctices) Order, 2005 to remove the 
typographical error. 
 
15. The Committee was of the view that Clause 8(6) which states that  ‘The authorized officer 
shall communicate the test result to the dealer or transporter or concerned person and the oil 
company, as the case may be, within five days of re ceipt of test results from the laboratory for 
appropriate action’  provides for appropriate action on the part of the  dealer, transporter, oil 
company, etc., once the test results are communicat ed to them without specifying the same and that 
it was desirable that the action to be taken for be tter implementation of the Order should be  
specified in the Order itself. In reply the Ministr y submitted that Clause 8(6) of the 2005 Order 
provides that the authorized officer shall communic ate the test results to the dealer or transporter o r 
concerned person and the oil company, as the case m ay be, within five days of receipt of test report 
from the laboratory for appropriate action. The aut horized officer, after receipt of test report from 

the laboratory under clause 8(5), if the product passes in the laboratory test, communicates the same 
to the dealer or transporter or the concerned perso n.  In case of failure of sample in the laboratory 
test i.e. sample failure with respect to any of the  parameters specified in the BIS number IS 2796 
and IS 1460 for Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel respectively, the competent authority of the oil 
marketing companies may take further necessary acti on such as suspension of sale and supplies and 
also issue of a show cause notice alongwith a copy of test results, to the dealer giving him 
opportunity to explain his case before taking any p enal action under Dealership Agreement, 
Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) and transport er under Transport Discipline Guidelines.  
Since further action depends on the outcome of the test reports, the same cannot be specified in the 
Control Order.  Under the given situations, the Committee feels tha t the Government/ OMCs 
should ensure that specific norms and guidelines ar e in place with regard to all activities and 
operations of the retailers, traders, transporters and oil companies to curb adulteration.  
 
16. When asked about the reasons for deleting Sched ule I of the Order of 1998 pertaining to 
requirements and specifications of the products fro m the Order of 2005, which according to the 
Committee otherwise provided a ready reference in t he matter, the Ministry informed that Schedule 
I of MS/HSD Control Order, 1998 provided various pa rameters of BIS specification IS-2796:1995 
and IS-1460:1995 for Motor Spirit and High Speed Di esel respectively.  The Bureau of Indian 
Standards makes amendment to the specifications of MS and HSD which requires amendment of 
MS/HSD Control Order.  As the changes in the specif ication of the products (MS/HSD) are more 
frequent than the changes in the Control Order, and  by incorporating specifications in the MS/HSD 
Control Order the same would be required to be amen ded every time BIS specifications are 
amended.  Without incorporation the BIS specificati ons by way of a schedule, HSD and MS has 
been defined in clause 2(e) and clause 2(g) respect ively by mentioning the BIS specification 
number.   
 
17. The Committee took note of the fact that the pr oblems of adulteration and under supply were 
serious both in rural and urban area, and, accordin gly, inquired whether oil companies were also 
entrusted with the responsibility of taking penal a ction against retail outlet if found indulging in 
under supply.  Also,  whether Government would expl ore the possibility, by way of, guidelines for 
oil companies in this regard.  In response, the Min istry informed the Committee that Oil Marketing 

Companies (OMCs) undertake regular and surprise ins pections of Retail Outlets and also take 
action under Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) and Dealership Agreements against those 
indulging in adulteration and malpractices includin g short delivery found to be due to deliberate 
tempering dispensing units or unauthorized fittings  in the dispensing units.  MDG provide for 
termination of dealership in the first instance its elf for serious malpractices like adulteration, 
tampering of seals, unauthorized fittings/ gears in  dispensing units.  Checking of adulteration was a 
continuous process and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas had been reviewing steps taken to 
curb adulteration from time to time.  In the process, several technological and institutional measures 
had been taken to contain adulteration.  In order to monitor the activities at retail outlets by adopting 
the latest technological improvements, Government h as directed the Public Sector Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) to undertake automation of retail outlets selling more than 200 KL per month  
and to complete third party certification of all the retail outlets selling more than 100 KL per month.  
OMCs had already commenced the automation of these outlets in a phased manner. 
 
18. The Committee observed that Indian Oil Corporat ion, Hindustan Petroleum, Bharat 
Petroleum, HPCL have carried out automation for the ir retail outlets.  The Committee feels 
that these Oil Companies being mega scale projects on all India basis and considering that 
rolling out of automation essentially involves repl ication of the same solution at all retail 
outlets, these mega Companies should design and pro vide a system at their Retail Outlets 
(ROs), which is robust, rugged and scalable on a lo ng-term basis to accommodate all the new 
technological advancements in retail of petroleum.  The Committee recommends that all the 
OMGs should have a time bound programme to complete  the process of automation for all 
their retail outlets which would be a significant s tep in curbing the malpractices at the 
dispensing units effectively. 
 
19. The Committee was of the opinion that chemicals / solvents available in the market like 
kerosene, naphtha, etc., which are cheaper in cost and can be easily mixed with Motor Spirit and 
HSD which were the main cause of adulteration and d esired to know the views of the Government 
for considering bringing to par the prices of these  adulteratives with the sale price of MS/HSD to 
obviate the problem of adulteration.  The Committee  also expressed serious concern over the grave 
effect of adulteration on the environment and sought to know the steps taken by the Ministry to stop 

adulteration and pilferage.   The Ministry submitte d that the possibility of adulteration of petrol/ 
diesel by some unscrupulous elements could not be r uled out due to huge price difference between 
petrol/ diesel and various adulterants available in  the market and the easy miscibility of these 
products with petrol/ diesel.  To check adulteratio n in auto fuels and diversion of PDS kerosene, 
Government has asked Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs)  to take the following various steps to 
contain the menace of adulteration:- 
(i)   Government has requested the State Government s/ Union Territory Administrations to take 
steps to control adulteration under the Control Ord ers issued by the Government to prevent fuel 
adulteration, under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 wherein State Governments are 
empowered to take action against those indulging in adulteration. 
 
(ii) OMCs are required to undertake regular and sur prise inspections of retail outlets and also 
take action under Marketing Discipline Guidelines ( MDG) and Dealership Agreements against 
those indulging in adulteration and malpractices.  Infact, MDG provide for termination of dealership 
in cases of adulteration being established. 
 
(iii) Government has taken initiatives to expedite the installation  of Global Positioning System 
(GPS) to monitor the movement of tank trucks. 
 
(iv) OMCs have introduced new tamper proof tank-tru ck locking systems to prevent en-route 
adulteration by transporters. 
 
(v) Keeping in view the misuse/ diversion of Suprem e Kerosene Oil (SKO) for adulteration, the 
import of SKO by private parties has been canalized through OMCs. 
 
(vi) As advised/ required by Government, OMCs have created a separate wing to report to a 
Director other than Director (Marketing), which wil l oversee and monitor all activities and 
operations to curb adulteration and specify norms and guideline in this regard.    
 
20.  The Committee notes that the Government has taken i nitiatives in the form of 
technological and institutional measures to contain  adulteration of petrol/ diesel and 

streamlining PDS kerosene distribution.  The Commit tee, however, feels that there is  need to 
establish a monitoring regime and a system of fines  and penalties that can act as a strong 
deterrent to fuel adulteration.   
 
21. The Committee noted that the Center of Science & Environment in its study had observed 
that the regulatory framework should be treated and  developed separately from the system of self-
regulation by the Oil Companies currently in force.   In keeping with this observation, the 
Committee felt that some vertical accountability an d liability should be established along the 
entire supply chain i.e. oil companies, transporter  and retailer, for ensuring effective checks 
and balances .  
 
22.  In response, the Ministry submitted that while  the vertical accountability of PSU and OMCs 
was in-built in the system itself, these companies being public sector companies were also 
accountable to Parliament through various Parliamen tary Committees.  Further, in order to develop 
an independent regulatory framework, Government had  decided to set up a Petroleum & Natural 
Gas Regulatory Board to regulate the refining, proc essing, storage, transportation, distribution, 
marketing and sale of petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas, excluding production of crude 
oil and natural gas to protect the interests of con sumers and entities engaged in specified activities  
relating to petroleum, petroleum products and natur al gas and also to ensure uninterrupted and 
adequate supply of these products in all parts of t he country and to promote competitive markets 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental t hereto.  As far as Petroleum & Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board is concerned, Government has the p ower to issue policy directions to the Board 
under Section 42 of the PNGRB Act, 2006.  Further, the Board would also be subject to 
Parliamentary control in terms of the following provisions of the Act:- 
i. Every rule made by Central Government and every reg ulation made by the Board, as 
soon as it is made, would be laid before each House of Parliament. 
ii. The Parliament has the power to make modification t o each rules and regulations or to 
decide that such rule or regulation shall not be made. 
iii. The rules or regulations shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be. 

iv. The Annual Report and the Accounts of the Board shall be laid before each House of the 
Parliament. 
 
23. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas are aware 
of their duty and the need and importance of lying the statutory rules/ regulations/orders and 
Annual Reports before each House of Parliament. The  Committee expects that the Ministry 
would continue to adhere to the timely framing and laying of the notifications/ Annual 
Reports   in future also. 
 
24. Views/ suggestions received from concerned agen cies, organizations, associations, traders, 
individuals, etc. on the efficacy of the 1998 Order  included the following issues and were duly 
considered by the Committee while examining both th e Orders: (i) calibration of 
machines/dispensing units; (ii) sub-standard measur es/ containers used by dealers; (iii) sale of 
adulterated and spurious products by petrol pumps/ retail outlets; (iv) administrative orders 
regarding quality of oil; (v) testing of products a nd difference of density of the same products; (vi)  
non availability of testing equipment ; (vii) use o f ‘Marker system’; (viii) pricing/ taxing of 
petroleum products; (ix) quality and quantity of pe troleum products; (x) equal selling prices for (a) 
kerosene and diesel; (b) naphtha, solvents and petr ol including (c) uniform excise duty, sales tax 
and other taxes for all products and all industries ; (xi) billing of Moor Spirit & High speed Diesel; 
(xii) transportation and supply of petroleum produc ts; (xiii) inspection of retail outlets and 
involvement of voluntary organizations for inspecti ons; (xiv) sealing of tank trucks; (xv) 
maintenance of book of accounts; (xvi) issue of lic enses for retailing kerosene; (xvii) enroute 
pilferage of  Moor Spirit & High Speed Diesel; (xvi ii) sealing of dispensing units; (xix) Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDG); (xx) BIS specifications and quality control; and, (xxi) Health hazards 
and environmental impact due to unclean and adulteration..      
 
25. The Committee also discussed the matter with th e representatives of Indian Oil Corporation 
and the State Government of West Bengal alongwith t he Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas at 
Kolkata on 6 
th  June, 2007.  Study note on the said discussion is enclosed (Annexure III).   During 
the course of discussion, the Committee was informe d that States were not responding to the 

Ministry’s communication regarding end-use certific ates because there were no complaints.  As 
regards quantum of bio-diesel being mixed by oil companies, the Committee was informed that bio-
diesel was at a developing stage.  As per approval of Government, 5% ethanol was mixed in petrol. 
However, some State Governments were levying export  duty on ethanol coming from other States 
which made the cost of petroleum to go up.  On bein g informed that IOC was producing seed and 
extracting bio-diesel for mixing it in diesel, the Committee expressed that help of the Ministry of 
Agriculture may be sought in producing more bio-die sel seeds.  To this, it was informed that the 
Department of Biotechnology of the Government of We st Bengal had taken up the project for 
production of bio-diesel, though,  no concrete resu lts had been achieved so far. In addition, it was 
informed that the Anti-Adulteration Cell did not report to Director (Marketing) of the oil companies 
to ensure its independence.  The procedure followed  was that of third party checking.  Kerosene 
was the main adulterant in the petroleum products a nd consumers could not check it.  However, 
there was a mechanism where even one per cent of ad ulteration could be detected.   Marker was 
used for detection of adulteration which was rampan t even at depot level with the connivance of 
transporters.  Dealers were given option to keep sa mples of Truck-tank with them.  There was huge 
price difference between the kerosene and petrol/ d iesel.  Otherwise if distribution of kerosene was 
monitored properly, adulteration could be checked.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
26.  The Committee also took up the matter with Ind ian Oil Corporation, Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation, Bharat Petroleum Corporation, Ministry  of Petroleum & Natural Gas and the State 
Governments of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Goa at  Bangalore, Hyderabad and Goa on the 26 th  
May, 2008, 20 th  December, 2010 and 30 th  September, 2011, respectively .   The following points 
came up for discussion: (i) irregularities found du ring inspections of retail outlets by the State 
Government officials, (ii) facilities of provision of Auto LPG in the cities, (iii) installation of VT S 
and status in this regard in remote areas, (iv) dis parity in the release of new LPG connections from 
State to State, (v) diversion of kerosene meant for  Public Distribution System (PDS) by 
unscrupulous elements due to price differential bet ween PDS kerosene and diesel, (vi) existence of 
bogus and non-existent beneficiaries, (vii) steps t aken to curb adulteration including introduction of  
new locking system, (viii) use of alternate fuels t o curb adulteration, (ix) expenditure incurred in 

R&D as compared to total expenditure and how these compare in respect to other countries, and (x) 
need, if any, for revision in the Act/ Order.    
 
27. In response to the points raised, the Committee  was informed that inspections of retail 
outlets were carried out by the officials/ authoriz ed representatives of the oil companies.  In case o f 
failed samples, TTs were blacklisted, while in some  cases retail outlets were even terminated.   Oil 
Companies had taken several measures to curb black marketing of kerosene such as regular / 
surprise inspections at retail outlets, random samp le collection for testing, introduction of CFR 
engines to carryout octane rating test, blue dyeing of SKO, sealing of tanks before leaving company 
premises, installing tamper proof locking system et c.  However, when it came to expenditure spent 
on R&D as compared to the company’s total expenditu re and also in comparison with other 
countries,  the Committee observed that the total expenditure towards R&D against the total 
turnover of the oil companies was very less and was  too meager in comparison to some 
reputed MNCs.   The Committee was further informed that after the i ntroduction of Marking of 
kerosene in October 2006, the Order of 2005 was ame nded on 12th January, 2007 with the Motor 
Spirit & High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpractices) 
Amendment Order, 2007.  However, after the stoppage  of Marking of kerosene w.e.f. 1 st January, 
2009, the 2005 Order was again amended on 1 st  January, 2009 with the Motor Spirit & High Speed 
Diesel (Regulation of Supply and Distribution and P revention of Malpractices) Amendment Order, 
2008. 
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
28. The Committee observes that financial incentive s arising from differences in prices are 
generally the primary cause of fuel adulteration.  Adulteration of gasoline & diesel is indulged 
primarily due to the significant price difference b etween these products and the adulterant.  
Hence, there is need to establish a monitoring regi me and system of fines that can act as a 
strong deterrent to fuel adulteration.  
 
 29.  Adulteration of transport fuels at the point of sale and transportation has become a 
routine problem in India. There are several petrole um products available in the country, 
which are close substitute of gasoline and diesel, but are available at considerable lower 

prices.  While a number of analytical techniques ar e available to detect adulteration, it is 
important to have good sampling technique and acces s to a good petroleum analytical 
laboratory.   
 
 30. Consumer interest is the prime objective of th e quality surveillance program.  
Consumer representatives groups such as consumer fo rum, NGOs, representative from the 
local Transport Authority, Civil Supplies Departmen t, Bureau of Indian Standards and 
Pollution Control Boards/ Agencies may be involved to take up the sample collection and 
surveillance activity.  This can be achieved by a c redible monitoring system and   appropriate 
surveillance programs. 
 
31. Government/ OMCs should ensure that specific no rms and guidelines are in place with 
regard to all activities and operations of the indu stry including retailers, traders, transporters 
and oil companies to curb adulteration.  Marketing Discipline Guidelines in vogue should be 
regularly modified /revised in view of the changing scenario to make them more effective. 
 
32. In the view of the Committee, guidelines regard ing grant of authorization to market 
transportation fuel should be specific and have cla rity with regard to all technicalities 
pertaining to provisions for performance guarantee and bank guarantee so as to leave no 
scope for any kind of arbitration and discretion an d, accordingly, recommends to the 
Ministry/ Regulatory Board to take immediate/ neces sary action in this regard to ensure the 
same.   
 
33. Inspections by joint teams of Anti-Adulteration  Cell and State Pollution Control 
Boards officials should be taken up. 
 
34. Policy for imposing severe penalty and punishme nt to the adulterators needs to be 
imbibed into the legal framework to discourage adul teration. Penalty system should be severe 
and imposed upstream. In case of an abuse in fuel m arket, the penalty should be imposed on 
all concerned along the supply chain, i.e.  the company, transporters and dealers. 
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

35. A culture of “Good Business” needs to be develo ped/ re-enforced within the industry to 
eradicate adulteration via  awareness-raising by Government organizations and greater effort 
by State Governments to monitor and enforce regulations. 
 
36. There is need to prevent en-route adulteration of Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel 
by transportation /tank truck crew. In this regard feasibility of replacing the existing sealing 
system for the tanks carrying MS/HSD with other Security locking system may be explored. 
 
37. Government should expedite the installation of Global Positioning System (GPS) to 
monitor the movement of tank trucks.  The Committee  feels that installing GPS should be 
made mandatory and the same be operationalized at the earliest. 
 
38. Petrol pump owners should be motivated for good  & quality conscious business 
through a regular and routine monitoring system.   
 
39. Government should interact and coordinate with the Oil Companies and manufactures 
for upgradation  of the dispensing units to obviate the possibility of short delivery. 
 
40. Sampling system/ procedure should be such that it brings greater transparency at 
various levels in the whole process right from the filling point up to the retail outlet.  Also, 
provision for on-site testing facilities including number of Mobile Laboratories needs to be 
increased. 
 
41. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas are aware 
of their duty and the need and importance of lying the statutory rules/ regulations/orders and 
Annual Reports before each House of Parliament. The  Committee expects that the Ministry 
would continue to adhere to the timely framing and laying of the notifications/ Annual 
Reports   in future also. 
  
42. Companies should design and provide a system at  their Retail Outlets (ROs), which is 
robust, rugged and scalable on a long-term basis to  accommodate all the new technological 
advancements in retail of petroleum.  The Committee  recommends that all the OMGs should 

have a time bound programme to complete the process  of automation for all their retail 
outlets which would be a significant step in curbin g the malpractices at the dispensing units 
effectively. 

II  
Report  
on 
The Electrical Wires, Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality 
Control) Order, 2003 
 
The Government framed the Electrical Wires, Cables,  Appliances and Protection Devices 
and Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2003 (Annexure-I) under Section 14 of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 1986 rescinding  the General Service Electric Lamps (Quality 
Control)Order,1989 and the Electrical Wires, Cables , Appliances  and Accessories (Quality 
Control) Order,1993 issued by erstwhile Ministry of  Industry (Department of Industrial 
Development).The Order was notified in the Gazette of India on 17 th  February, 2003 with the 
objective to ensure the quality of the electrical w ires,  cables, appliances, protection devices and 
accessories and to fulfill this objective the appro priate authority has been entrusted with appropriate 
powers.  
 
2. During the course of examination of the Order, t he Committee held three meetings.  The 
Committee held discussions with the representatives  of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion), Mi nistry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) and B ureau of Indian Standards.  Views/ 
suggestions on the efficacy of the said Order were also received from organizations/ associations/ 
manufactures like  (i) Electrical Lamp & Component Manufacturers Association of India, (ii) Indo 
Asian Fusegear Limited, (iii) Federation of Industr ies of India, (iv) Indian Society of Lighting 
Engineers and (v) Infopower.  The Electrical Wires,  Cables, Appliances and Accessories (Quality 
Control) Order, 1993 has since been amended four ti mes on 5.2.2004, 22.8.2005, 19.2.2009 and 
7.8.2009 respectively.  
 
3. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation took up  the said Quality Control Order, 2003 for 
detailed examination and a detailed questionnaire o n the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Pol icy and Promotion) for 
comments/clarifications on 11 
th  May, 2004. The Ministry furnished their replies on  8 th  September, 

2004 (Annexure-II).  The points raised by the Committee and the replies of the Ministry thereon 
are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
4. The Committee wanted to know whether the Electri cal Wires, Cables, Appliances and 
Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2003 had been laid on the Table of the 
both Houses of Parliament, if so, the details there of. The Ministry informed that the said Order, 
2003 had been laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament vide  
OM No.6(9)/2001-LEI dated 
5th  March,2003.  
 
5. The Bureau of Indian Standards Act was enacted i n 1986 whereas the Electrical Wires, 
Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices and Acces sories (Quality Control) Order has been 
enacted in the year 2003. The Committee inquired ab out the reasons for delay in the enactment of 
the Order and in what manner the areas governed by the Order were being regulated so far.  The 
Ministry replied that BIS Act was enacted in 1986 t o strengthen the work on standard formulation 
and certification in national interest. It being a continuous process, Quality Control Orders were 
being issued by Government of India under this Act from time to time with a view to protect the 
interests of common consumer. Earlier 7 electrical products were covered in Quality Control 
(Orders) No. GSR 463(E), dated 24 
th  April, 1989 and GSR 83(E), dated 24 February, 1993  issued 
under Essential Commodities Act. Due to deletion of  these 7 items from the list of essential 
commodities, the new Electrical Wires, Cables, Appl iances and Protection Devices and Accessories 
Quality Control (Order), 2003 was issued on 17 th  February, 2003 under BIS Act.  
 
6. Clause 1(2 ) states “ In respect of items covered under serial numbers 1 to 7 of the Schedule, 
this Order shall come into force with immediate eff ect. In respect of items covered under serial 
numbers 8 to 24 of the Schedule, this Order shall c ome into force after a period of six months from 
the date of publication in the Official Gazette .”   The Committee asked about the different time 
schedules for different items and the criteria for fixing the time schedule.  The Ministry informed 
that item numbers 1 to 7 were earlier covered under  mandatory certification vide 
 Quality Control 
(Order) issued under Essential Commodity Act. Since , they were already in operation under 
mandatory certification; it was felt that no time p eriod would be required for implementation of the 
Order in respect of these items. The said Order, th erefore, came into force with immediate effect. 

However, for the remaining items at Sl Nos. 8 to 24 being brought under mandatory certification for 
the first time, time period of six months was considered necessary for implementation.  
 
7. Clause 2(f) defines “manufacturer”, in relation to electrical wires, ca bles, appliances, 
protection, devices and accessories, means a person  who, or a firm or a Hindu undivided family 
which produces, makes, assembles or manufactures an y such electrical wires, cables, appliances, 
protection devices and accessories and includes a p erson who, or a firm or Hindu undivided family 
which claims such electrical wires, cables, applian ces, protection devices and accessories to be 
produced, made, assembled or ‘manufactured’ by such person or firm or Hindu undivided family as 
the case may be.”  The Committee wanted to know the justification for  including within the 
definition of the term manufacturer such persons si mply on the basis of their ‘claim’. The Ministry 
replied that the definition of manufacturer includes any person who ‘claims’ to be the manufacturer. 
The same is also given in the Consumer Protection A ct, 1986 and the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1978.  
 
8. Clause 3(1) states “Prohibition regarding manufacture, storage, sale an d distribution, etc:  
(1) No person shall by himself or through any perso n on his behalf manufacture or stores for sale, 
sell, or distribute any electrical wires, cables, a ppliances, protection devices and accessories which  
do not conform to the Specified Standards and do no t bear Standard Mark of the Bureau on 
obtaining certification marks licence:” The Committee inquired about the standard specifica tions 
prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) in comparison with the international standards 
and the objectives sought to be achieved by prescri bing that the specifications given by the foreign 
buyers “shall not in any case be less than the spec ified standard”. The Committee was apprehensive 
that Indian standards may be inferior to standards fixed by other countries. The Committee also 
noted that though organizations like WTO specified standards seemingly to encourage competition, 
unifying the standards all over the world for maint enance of healthy market conditions, this usually 
led to arm-twisting and notching the markets of the  developing countries. The Committee, 
accordingly, wanted to know about the Quality Control measures adopted and prescribed by Central 
Government for the manufacturing sector in the area s of stiff competition.  Also, if there was a 
scope for Central Government to directly adopt inte rnational specifying standards instead of 
standards specified by Bureau of Indian Standards f or exportable goods.  India being a signatory to 

WTO accord, the Committee inquired whether the Cent ral Government adhered to international 
standards in case of importable goods.  
 
9. In response the Ministry informed that internati onal standards namely, ISO 9002, 9003 etc 
were generic standards for Quality Management Syste ms and these were not product standards. 
Corresponding Indian Standards for Quality Systems are totally identical with the international 
standards. It was further apprised that most of the Indian Standards on products were either identical 
or based on corresponding International Standards a nd they had been brought under mandatory 
certification as their quality may affect health an d safety of the consumers. The Committee noted 
the reply of the Ministry that the standard making process followed in BIS was transparent and 
equally applicable for Indian manufacturers of elec trical goods as well as foreign manufacturers 
exporting items to India.  In India certain product s have been brought under mandatory certification 
of BIS which is evenly applicable for Indian manufa cturers as well as foreign manufacturers 
exporting to India.  Moreover, these standards are in line with WTO agreement.   
 
10. Clause 3(2)  states “The sub-standard or defective electrical wires, ca bles, appliances, 
protection devices and accessories or raw–material or components, which do not conform to the 
Specified Standard shall be deformed by the manufac turer beyond use and disposed of as scrap 
within three months.”  The Committee wanted to know if there existed any s upervisory authority or 
Agency to oversee that manufacturers were complying  with the provisions of deformation and 
disposal of their goods which did not conform to th e Specified Standard. The Committee also 
inquired about the role of the Central Government i n this regard. The Ministry stated that according 
to the Quality Control Order, 2003, BIS had been co nferred the sole authority to issue license to 
manufacturers for marking their products complying with Indian Standards. As per the Order, 
appropriate authority appointed by respective State  Governments was responsible for implementing 
this Order and were authorized to take action wherever non-compliance is observed. 
 
11. Clause 4(4) states  “Consequent to the expiry of any license or cancell ation thereof by the 
Bureau for one or more of the electrical wires, cab les, appliances, protection devices and 
accessories mentioned in Column (2) of the Schedule , the Appropriate Authority shall also be 
informed of the same by the Bureau .”  The Committee, accordingly, desired to know the  objective 

behind providing information regarding expiry/cance llation of license by the Bureau to the 
Appropriate Authority and if the Appropriate Author ity was the implementing authority for the 
Order, the type of information maintained by the Ap propriate Authority alongwith the mechanism 
in place for ensuring regular updating of the same.  The Ministry informed that the implementing 
authority for this Order included various State Gov ernment Agencies. However, authority for 
issuing the license to use BIS standard mark on the  product or expiry/ cancellation of BIS license 
lies with BIS only.  Therefore, it is necessary to provide the requisite information to ensure effective 
implementation of the Order 
 
12. Clause 5(c) states  “enter and search any premises and seize  any  electrical wires, cables, 
appliances, protection devices and accessories in r espect of which it has reason to believe that a 
contravention of this Order has been committed or t he said electrical wires, cables, appliances, 
protection devices and accessories are not of the S pecified Standard ”  The Committee was of the 
view that the words “in respect of which it has reason to believe that a contravention of this 
Order has been committed”  were ambiguous in nature and that there should be some safeguards 
in place to prevent undue harassment of any dealer or manufacturer. The Ministry informed that the 
provision given in the Order is considered necessar y with a view to prosecute whenever any 
contravention is observed. However, those provision s were already there in the earlier Quality 
Control (Order) which was enacted under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
 
13. Clause 9 deals with  obligation to furnish information and states  “No manufacturer or dealer 
shall with intent to evade the provisions of this O rder, refuse to give any information lawfully 
demanded from him under Clause 5 or conceal, destroy, mutilate or deface any books or documents 
or any electrical wires, cables, appliances, protec tion devices and accessories kept by, or in the 
possession or control of, such person.”   The Committee wanted to know about the liability of  the 
manufacturer for not furnishing the information and  penal provisions for them who resort to 
concealing, destroying or mutilating books/documents/information.  The Ministry submitted that the 
penalties for violation of any provision of the Qua lity Control Order which had been notified 
under Section 14 of BIS Act shall be the same as given in Section 33 of BIS Act. 
 

14. The Committee noted that the objective of the Q uality Control Order, 2003 is to ensure the 
quality of the electrical wires  cables, appliances, protection devices and accessor ies and for which 
the appropriate authority has been entrusted with a ppropriate powers. The Committee, accordingly, 
wanted to know  the extent to which the objective of the Order has been achieved and adequacy of 
machinery both at the level of Central Government a nd the State Governments for ensuring 
compliance with the Order.  The Committee further w anted to know to what extent buyers or 
general public can be associated in the implementation of the Order.  
 
15. The Ministry informed that before the enforceme nt of the Electrical Wires, Cables, 
Appliances and Protection Devices and Accessories ( Quality Control) Order- 2003, the Ministry of 
Industry (Department of Industrial Development) iss ued the General Service Electric Lamps 
(Quality Control) Order, 1989 and the Electrical Wi res, Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices 
and Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 1993 under  the Section 3 of the Essential Commodities 
Act, 1955. Hence, sufficient experience was gathere d during the process of implementation of 
mandatory certification in the country and various stakeholders including common consumers, 
NGOs and relevant industry groups were consulted be fore the notification of the Electrical Wires, 
Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices and Acces sories (Quality Control) Order,2003  was 
issued. 
 
16. The Committee considered the matter in its meet ing on 5 
th  September, 2005 and decided to 
seek the views of leading traders/manufacturers’ as sociations connected with the subject matter, so 
as to have inputs on the efficacy of the Quality Co ntrol Order, 2003. Views/ suggestions were 
received from (i) Electrical Lamp & Component Manuf acturers Association of India, (ii) Indo 
Asian Fusegear Limited, (iii) Federation of Industr ies of India, (iv) Indian Society of Lighting 
Engineers and (v) Infopower and were duly considere d by the Committee.  Views/ suggestions so 
received have been enumerated below: 
(i) The said Quality Control Order has been issued by Government keeping in view the adverse 
impact of large-scale imports of spurious electrica l goods and to safeguard the interests of the 
Indian consumers.  As a result of expansion in powe r generation and distribution in hand, the 
demand for electrical equipment such as switches, w ires and CFL’s etc. has gone up many fold.  
Thus, quality of these electrical equipments needs to be controlled.  The Quality Control Order was 

supposed to come into force by August 2003 on all 2 4 products but unfortunately it was not fully 
implemented and in case of certain products such as  Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) the 
implementation had been deferred till February 2007.  
 
(ii) BIS specifications lay special emphasis on tou gh conditions of performance for electrical 
products with regard to India. It is appropriate th at all electrical products to be used in India shou ld 
comply with Indian standard specifications to suit the Indian conditions properly.  
 
(iii) The BIS mark gives legal authority to BIS to cancel such BIS mark of such products, which 
are found not fully complying with the BIS specific ations even if such products are picked up from 
the open market.  BIS needs to take severe punitive  actions against manufacturers, importers or 
traders of sub-standard BIS marked products.   
  
(iv) There is need for effective protection of cons umer interest through BIS mark.  Closer 
coordination needs to be established between the Mi nistry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and State Governments to co-ordinate their efforts 
to protect the interests of the consumers and ensure that the objective of BIS mandatory certification 
mark are being effectively implemented.    
 
(v) For effective monitoring of proper use of BIS m ark by genuine licensees, BIS should 
encourage public awareness campaign through adverti sement and coverage by electronic and print 
media and by making presentations for the manufactu rers, Marketing Associations, Electronic 
Contractors and the general public.  Seminars and w orkshops could be organized and interest 
groups involved for full implementation and enforce ment and use by manufacturers, sellers and 
officials of BIS.   
  
(vi) Substantial man power should be made available  within BIS organization or services of 
private agency for effective monitoring needs to be supervised/ monitored. 
  

(vii) BIS Act may be amended suitably so as to vest  sufficient powers with the BIS to enable the 
organization to implement the Act without depending  much upon the State Governments for its 
implementation. 
 
(viii) Punishment as provided in the Act/ Rules is neither enough nor deterrent.  As such BIS Act 
should be suitably amended to allow BIS to impose s tringent penalties and punishments to the 
defaulters/ misusers of BIS Standards.        
  
 (ix) Bench marks as declared in BIS Citizens’ Char ter not being met.  While BIS has set bench 
marks for its various activities in its Citizens’ C harter, regular reviewing of the achievements of 
these bench marks is not being done.   
 
(x) BIS is using, generating and disposing hazardou s materials and resulting hazardous waste in 
violation of applicable rules/ regulations.  BIS is  using DG sets without acoustic enclosures in 
violation of Noise Laws. 
 
(xi) BIS has been mandated by Parliament for harmon ious development of standardization, but 
in the last few years BIS has refused to make stand ards when approached by other organizations 
needing standards for their working.  This has resu lted in many organizations formulating standards 
by themselves or through other agencies.  This has in reality defeated the basic purpose of 
establishing BIS  
  
17. The above views/ suggestions were forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
(Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion) for t heir comments/ clarifications.  In response, the 
Ministry submitted that adequate provisions exist i n clause 3 of the Quality Control Order, 2003 
read with section 14 and 33 of the BIS Act, 1986.  The Quality Control has been issued under 
section 14 of the BIS Act, 1980, and section 33(1) of the Act provides that any person who 
contravenes the provisions of the section 14 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend upto one year or with fine, which may ex tend upto Rs. 50,000 or both.  As regards the 
punitive aspects, the same have been taken care of in section 33(1) of the BIS Act. However, BIS 
have proposed amendments to BIS Act to modify vario us provisions. Further, BIS has started to 

outsource part of the work related to product certi fication scheme and enforcement.  Manpower is 
also being augmented through recruitment of officer s.  This initiative will help BIS to provide the 
services required by the industry effectively.  Reg arding the views on CFL, the Ministry submitted 
that through Electrical Wires, Cables, appliances a nd Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality 
Control) Amendment Order, 2005, Self Ballasted Lamp s for general lighting Services, known as 
CFLs were brought under mandatory certification whi ch came into force after 18 months from date 
of notification i.e. w.e.f. 22 nd  February, 2007.      
   
18. The Committee, thereafter, heard the representa tives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consume r Affairs), Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion) and the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
on the said Rules as well as on the working of BIS on 9 
th  April, 2010.  During the course of the 
meeting, the Committee raised the following issues: (i) why Quality Control Order, 2003 was issued 
by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotio n when it had no role in the implementation of 
the Order, (ii) when the BIS and BIS Act, 1986 came  under the administrative control of the 
Department of Consumer Affairs, (iii) reasons for r emoval of some electrical items from the 
purview of the Quality Control Order, 2003 and its resultant effect on the quality of such items.  
Whether the Committee had recommended that a Scient ist should be appointed as DG-BIS and if 
so, the reasons for not implementing the recommendations.    
 
 
19. Regarding Committee’s query on removal of certa in items, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promo tion) replied that those electrical items were 
removed from the purview of the Quality Control Ord er, 2003 as they were not for direct 
consumption of the common man.  Infact, these elect rical items were internal  to the industrial use 
and really used in production of other products.   Quality Control Order, 2003 was issued bringing 
24 electrical items under mandatory BIS certificati on to protect the consumer from spurious items. 
Due to persistent request from the Industrial Assoc iations/BIS and after a series of meetings with 
them the Ministry in concurrence with the Ministry of Law took a unanimous decision to delete the 
seven items from the Order.  The Ministry had refer red the matter to the Indian Electrical and 
Electronics Manufacturer’s Association (IEEMA) on t he definition of ‘single use’ and ‘multiple 

use’.  Based on the advice tendered by IEEMA the Mi nistry confirmed that all the seven deleted 
items were of single use. The Ministry also informed that the papers of Quality Control Order, 2003 
were laid on the Table of the Lok sabha and Rajya S abha Secretariat on 13 th  March, 2003 and 21 st  
April, 2003 respectively. The deletion of 9 Household Electrical items from (Quality Control) Order 
was forwarded to Lok Sabha Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat on 9 th  July, 2004. 
 
20. The Committee further observed that for a number of  products like invertors, the 
quality standards had not been laid down and expres sed concern on certification and 
registration of such products for ensuring quality standards. The Committee was not satisfied 
with BIS’s reply in this regard.  It took note of the fact that BIS had already form ulated quality 
standard specification for soild state invertors run from storage batteries.  
 
21. The Committee also conveyed its concern regarding t he practice followed by BIS for 
issuing certification.  Earlier, ISI used to first inspect and examine the  company and its product and 
then registration was allowed. After that a new pra ctice started in which the company itself 
provided a certificate and BIS registered the produ cts. The Committee expressed concern that such 
a practice would lead to compromising of the qualit y standards of electrical goods as inspection by 
competent authorities had been dispersed with.  
 
22. The Ministry informed that the practice of carr ying out preliminary inspection and passing 
of samples in independent testing by BIS officers f or grant of license was still there.  In addition, a 
simplified procedure for grant of license has been introduced in order to reduce the time period for 
grant of licenses. Under the scheme, a visit is und ertaken either by a BIS officer or by a Charted 
Engineer to judge the competency of the applicant t o manufacture products in line with the 
requirements of the prescribed Indian Standard. In case, the Officer/ Charted Engineer gets satisfied 
that the applicant has the capacity to manufacture the product as per the specifications prescribed in  
the standards, the test report of the sample, as su bmitted by the applicant from any of the BIS 
approved laboratories, is accepted for consideratio n for grant of license. However, with the view to 
ensure that the sample meets the requirements of th e relevant Indian Standard, a sample is drawn 
during the visit and sent for independent testing a nd case is reviewed, if necessary, after receipt of  
test report of the sample. In case where  a license  has been granted based on the assessment of the 

Charted Engineer, BIS officers visit the premises o f the licensee within a month after grant of 
license and in addition to judging the capability o f the licensee, a sample is drawn for independent 
testing and follow up action is taken, if necessary  based on the test reports . This simplified 
procedure expedites the process of grant of license , but monitoring and control mechanism is still 
retained by BIS. 
 
23. The Committee then took up the Quality Control Order for discussion with the 
representatives of the Department of Policy and Pro motion, Department of Consumer Affairs, BIS 
and leading manufacturers/ traders of electrical it ems at Bangalore on 21 st  June, 2011. A study note 
(Annexure III ) was prepared.  During the course of discussion the Committee raised various  issues 
like (i) whether BIS have carried out amendments to  the BIS Act to impose stringent penalties to 
those who do not comply with the provisions of the Act; (ii)  steps taken to prevent and detect the 
manufacture or import of spurious electrical goods in the country; (iii) proposal, if any, to bring 
more electrical items under mandatory certification  and the opinion of manufacturers in this regard, 
(iv) whether BIS conducts regular inspections of fa ctories manufacturing electrical products and 
store-houses selling electrical products, and (v) the level of compliance by factories and traders with 
the quality prescribed by BIS and action taken agai nst the violators.  The Committee was informed 
that testing of electrical equipment is usually not  done in time and it takes a lot of time. The 
Committee observed the need to strengthen the staff  of BIS, to increase the number of BIS 
labs so as to reduce imbalances in the country in r espect of distribution of BIS laboratories 
and emphasized the need to strengthen the enforceme nt of rules.  The Committee noted the 
views of the Ministry for mandatory certification f or Chinese or foreign electrical goods 
imported to India along with deterrent and stringen t action to be taken for faking ISI marks. 
Some cases of outsourcing of testing also came to the notice of the Committee. 
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
24. The Committee observed that when it was inquire d to the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promo tion) whether subsequent amendments 
to the Electrical Wires, Cables, Appliances and Pro tection Devices and Accessories Quality 
Control Order, 2003 were laid before the Parliament  they could not provide a satisfactory 

reply. The Committee, therefore, reiterated that it  is mandatory for every 
rule/regulation/order issued by the Government unde r various Acts of the Parliament and 
their subsequent amendments to be laid on the Table of the House. 
25. The Committee observed that for a number of pro ducts like invertors, the quality 
standards had not been laid down and expressed conc ern on certification and registration of 
such products for ensuring quality standards. It to ok note of the fact that BIS had already 
formulated quality standard specification for solid  state invertors run from storage batteries.  
In the opinion of the Committee, BIS has been manda ted by Parliament for harmonious 
development of standardization.  However, a number of organizations were still awaiting 
standards for their working from BIS, which often r esulted in organizations formulating 
standards by themselves or through other agencies.  In the Committee’s opinion, this in 
reality, defeats the basic purpose of establishment of BIS itself.    
 
26. The Committee observes that Bureau of Indian St andards has not done much  to 
arouse mass awareness about quality standard specif ications of different electrical goods and 
devices which are either manufactured in India or i mported from foreign countries especially 
China and advises BIS to organize  public awareness  campaigns through advertisements and 
coverage  in  electronic and print media. 
 
27. The Committee observes the need to strengthen t he staff of BIS, to increase the 
number of BIS labs so as to reduce imbalances in th e country in respect of distribution of BIS 
laboratories and emphasizes the need to strengthen the enforcement of rules for mandatory 
certification of Chinese or foreign electrical good s imported to India along with deterrent and 
stringent action to be taken for faking ISI marks.  
 
28. The Committee observes that closer coordination  needs to be established between the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and the States to co-ordinate 
their efforts to protect the interests of the consu mers towards ensuring that the objective of 
BIS mandatory certification mark is being effectively implemented, and,  by greater efforts by 
the States in taking quick punitive action against those importers or traders or manufacturers 

who produce or deal in sub-standard electrical equi pment which do not comply to BIS 
specifications.  
 
29. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply o f the Ministry on the point that Quality 
Control Order was supposed to come into force by Au gust 2003 on all 24 products but 
unfortunately it was not fully implemented and in c ase of certain products such as Compact 
Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) the implementation had been deferred till February 2007.   In the 
view of the Committee, delays in the enforcement of  rules adversely affect large sections of 
society.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at the Ministry should ensure that such 
instances of inordinate delay are avoided in future.      
  
30. For regular monitoring there is need to strengt hen vigilance by BIS.  Punishment is 
neither enough nor deterrent.  As such BIS Act shou ld be suitably amended to allow BIS to 
impose stringent penalties and punishments to the defaulters/ misusers of BIS Standards.        
 
31. The Committee expressed its concern regarding t he practice followed by BIS for 
issuing certification.   BIS has started a simplified procedure for granting  licenses to industry 
which may put all checks and balances of normal pro cedure to naught. This simplified 
procedure, while it expedites the process of grant of license; it in the process violates many 
provisions of BIS Act/ Rules/ Regulations.  The Committee, recommends that necessary action 
should  be taken by BIS to correct the procedure so  that it does not put companies applying 
for license under normal procedure to disadvantage.  
 
32. While BIS has set bench marks for its various a ctivities in its Citizens’ Charter, The 
Committee recommends that regular reviewing of the achievements of these bench marks 
should be done religiously so that the basic purpose of establishing BIS is not defeated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
 XXVII  
 
Twenty Seventh Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 02.15 pm on the 02 nd  May, 2013 in Room Number 126-C, Third 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The following Members of the Committee were present in 
the meeting:- 
 
Members Present 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh    Chairperson 
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
3. Shri P. Kannan 
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
5. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
8. Shri Ahmad Saeed Mahilabadi 
9. Shri Shantaram Naik 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
11. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
12. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1.    Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
       2.    Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
       3.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director 
       4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director   
 5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2.  The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Com mittee and thereafter the 
Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration one-by-one. 
 
(i) Two Hundred and Fourth Report on the Statutory Orde rs laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha during the 227 
th  Session. 
 
(ii) Two Hundred and Fifth Report on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and 
Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010;  
 
(iii) Two Hundred and Sixth Report on the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004; and 
 

(iv) Two Hundred and Seventh Report on Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel (Regulation of 
Supply and Distribution and Prevention of Malpracti ces) Order, 2005 and the Electrical 
Wires, Cables, Appliances and Protection Devices an d Accessories (Quality Control) 
Order, 2003. 
 
3.  The Committee adopted these Reports with some a mendments suggested by the 
Members.   
 
4.  The Committee while discussing the draft Two Hu ndred and Fourth Report on the 
Statutory Orders laid on the Table of the Rajya Sab ha during the 227 
th  Session was of the 
opinion that its repeated recommendation for timely laying of the subordinate legislation framed 
under different Acts before the House, have not evo ked the desired promptness in the 
Ministries/Departments. However, the Committee has noted some improvement in this regard. 
While 33.5% notifications were delayed during 226 th  Session, it came down to 26.25% during 
227 th  Session. It was, therefore, decided to continue th e exercise of summoning the Secretaries 
of the concerned Ministries before the Committee to explain such delays.  
 
5.  While discussing the reasons of delay in laying  of notifications by 
Ministries/Departments the Committee noticed that i n most of the cases reasons 
citied/forwarded by the Ministry/Department has bee n the late receipt of printed copies of 
notifications from Government of India Press. To un derstand the problem and for its solution 
the Committee decided to summon the Secretary, Mini stry of Urban Development and 
administrative Ministry of Government of India Pres s responsible for printing Government of 
India Notifications. 
  
6.  The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in  her absence Shri Vijay Jawaharlal 
Darda and in his absence Dr. K.P. Ramalingam to pre sent the Reports to the House on 03 
rd  
December, 2013. 
 
7. The Chairperson thanked the Members present and meeting was concluded at 2.40 
pm.      
 