COM-I 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
(Presented on 22nd October, 2008) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
OCTOBER, 2008/Kartika, 1930,  (Saka) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
 
 
 I. The Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations 2003-Implementation of 
163rd Report of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha. 
 
1-5 
II. Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident 
Rules, 1998-Implementation of the 138 Report 
of the Committee Subordinate legislation, 
Rajya Sabha. 
 
6-11 
III. The Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 
 
12-40 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
41-42 
 
5. MINUTES* 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien     
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak    
4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
5. Ms. Mabel Rebello  
6. Shri Vikram Verma     
7. Shri Raghudandan Sharma    
8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
9. Shri Ali Ansari Anwar    
10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy      
11. Shri Abani Roy 
12 Shri Tiruchi Siva 
13. Shri Biswajit Daimary   
14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
*15. Dr. Bimal Jalan. 
#16. Shri Bharatkumar Raut    
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi  Deputy Director 
4. Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director 
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
 
     
* Dr. Bimal Jalan resigned w.e.f. 29th August, 2008. 
# Shri Bharatkumar Raut appointed to this Committee w.e.f. 5th September, 2008. 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having b een 
authorized by the Committee, to present the Report, do hereby present on its behalf 
this Hundred and Seventy-Sixth Report of the Committee. 
 
1.2  The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 21st 
October, 2008.  
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues relating to them along with the comments received from 
the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                                                                                                                                                                            
Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
___________, 2008 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Report item on 
The Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations 2003-Implementation 
of 163rd Report of the Committee on Subordinate legislation, Rajya Sabha. 
 
 The Airports Authority of India (Lost Properties) Regulations 2003 framed 
under the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 were examined and the C ommittee 
in its 163rd Report which was presented to the House on 23rd May, 2006 recommended 
as follows:-  
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry had agreed to replace the words “any 
officer” occurring at a number of places in the Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations, 2003 with the words “Duty Airport manager/Duty Officer 
Control Tower as the case may be”. However, with regard to regulation 6 the 

Committee desired that the Ministry should prescribe a time limit in the regulation 
itself to make it unambiguous and also to ensure that the lost property, if claimed, is 
restored to the rightful claimant within a stipulated time period. The Ministry vide 
their O.M. dated the 21st February, 2006 clarified as under:- 
 
 “Attention of the Committ ee on Subordinate Legislation may be drawn to 
Regulation 7 (1) of the Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003, 
wherein a time period of three months for restoring the lost property to the claimant 
has already been prescribed.” 
 
 The Committee thereafter accepted the clarification of the Ministry. 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed to notify amendments in 
regulations 3 (1) and (2) and regulation 4 by substituting the words “any officer” with 
the words “ Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be” 
as suggested by the Committee. The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall notify 
the amendment expeditiously. 
 
2. The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts from the 163 rd Report to the 
Ministry of Ci vil Aviation on the 5 th June, 2006 for necessary action. The Ministry 
furnished the Action Taken Note on the 1 st July, 2008.  The point raised by the 
Committee, the Ministry’s comments, the Committee’s observation and the 
Ministry’s Action Taken Note are reproduced below: 
 
Point raised by the Committee 
 
 The Committee noted that the Ministry had agreed to replace the words “any 
officer” occurring at a number of place in the Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations, 2003 with the words “Duty Airport manager/Duty Officer 
Control Tower as the case may be” . However, with regard to regulation 6 the 
Committee desired that the Ministry should prescribe a time limit in the regulation 
itself to make it unambiguous and also to ensure that the lost pro perty, if claimed, is 
restored to the rightful claimant within a stipulated time period 

 
Ministry’s comments dated 21st February, 2006 
 
 Attention of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation may be drawn to 
Regulation 7 (1) of the Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003, 
wherein a time period of three months for restoring the lost property to the claimant 
has already been prescribed 
 
Committee’s observation as contained in its 163rd Report 
 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry have a greed to notify amendments in 
regulations 3 (1) and (2) and regulation 4 by substituting the words “any officer” with 
the words “ Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be” 
as suggested by the Committee. The Committee hopes that th e Ministry shall notify 
the amendment expeditiously. 
 
Ministry’s Action Taken Note 
 
 The Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their OM dated the 1 st July, 2008 stated 
that in compliance with the directions contained in the 163rd Report of the Committee 
on Subor dinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, the Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations, 2003 have been amended by notifying the Airports Authority 
of India (Lost Property) Amendment Regulations, 2007 (Annexure) on 26.04.2008. 
 
 The relevant amendments carried out by the Ministry in compliance with the 
directions of the Committee are reproduced below: 
 
 (3) for regulation 3, the following regulation shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
3. Lost property to be handed over to  an officer:- (1) Subject to the provisions 
of the Customs Act and of the rules and regulations made thereunder, any 
person (other than Duty Airport Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as 
the case may be) who finds any lost property shall hand it over immediately to 

the Duty Airport Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be 
in the same condition in which he finds it and inform the Duty Airport 
Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be, of the 
circumstances in which it was found. 
(2)  The Duty Airport Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as the case 
may be referred to in clause (1) shall be responsible to maintain a register 
containing the description of the lost property, the name, address and the 
signature of the person and the officer handing it over and taking it over”, 
 
(4) in regulation 4, 
 
(a) in sub -regulation (1) for the words “any officer” the words “Duty 
Airport Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in the provisio, for the words  “the officer” occurring at both the places the 
words “Duty Airport Manager or Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may 
be” shall be substituted; 
 
3. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has 
carried out the amendments as suggested by the Committee in Regulations 3(1) & (2) 
and Regulation 4 of the Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003 
by substituting the words “any officer” with the words “Duty Airport Manager/Duty 
Officer Control Tower as the ca se may be” thereby, making the provisions more 
specific, and decided not to pursue the matter further.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report item 
on 
Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident Rules, 1998- Implementation 
of the 138th Report of the Committee. 
 
 The Statutory Investigation into Railway Accident Rules, 1998 framed under 
the Railways Act, 1989 were examined and the Committee, in its 138 th Report 
presented to the House on the 14th March, 2002 recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
are not aware of the correct legal position insofar as the requirement of laying 
of Rules in hand before the Parliament is concerned when they say that the 
Railways Act, 1989 does not specifical ly provide for laying of the Rules before 
Parliament. This is not factually correct. The Committee draws the attention of 
the Ministry to Section 199 of the Railways Act, 1989 which provides that all 
Rules framed under the Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation should have checked up the position thoroughly 
before responding to the Committee. The Committee expects the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation to be more careful in future while passing information to 
Parliamentary Committees. 
 
The Committee is not convinced with the comments furnished by the 
Ministry on the question of treating reports on Railway Accident as 
confidential. The Committee still holds the view that such Report should not be 

treated as confidential in a routine manner since in major accidents the public 
and Parliament are entitled to know of the causes and remedial action being 
taken. If necessary, a portion of a Report may be kept confidential for a period 
of time and that too for reasons to be recorded in writing. The Committee hopes 
that the Ministry realizes the need to be transparent in its functioning so that 
public trust is build up with regard to the efficiency and reliability of public 
services. The Committee trusts that the Ministry of Civil Aviation would review 
the position and make suitable amendment in the rule under intimation to it.” 
  
2. The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts of the 138 th Report to the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation for necessary action on the 1 st April, 2002. The Minis try 
furnished Action Taken Note on the recommendations of the Committee on the 15 th 
December, 2002. The observations / suggestions of the Committee as contained in the 
138th Report and the Action taken by the Ministry thereon are reproduced below: 
 
(i) Committee's observation / suggestion on laying provision 
 
The Committee is unhappy to note that the Ministry of Civil Aviation are not 
aware of the correct legal position insofar as the requirement of laying of Rules in 
hand before the Parliament is concerned  when they say that the Railways Act, 1989 
does not specifically provide for laying of the Rules before Parliament. This is not 
factually correct. The Committee draws the attention of the Ministry to Section 199 
of the Railways Act, 1989 which provides tha t all Rules framed under the Act shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament. The Ministry of Civil Aviation should have 
checked up the position thoroughly before responding to the Committee. The 
Committee expects the Ministry of Civil Aviation to be mor e careful in future while 
passing information to Parliamentary Committees. 
 
 Action taken by the Ministry (15.12.2002) 
 
The Ministry is in agreement with the points raised regarding laying of Rules before 
Parliament about Statutory Investigation into Railw ay Accident Rules, 1998, and regrets that Section 
199 of Railways Act, 1989 containing the provision of laying the Rules before Parliament had been 
missed inadvertently. 
 
(ii) Committee's observation / suggestion on Railway Accident 
Reports 
 
The Committee is not convinced with the comments furnished by the Ministry 
on the question of treating reports on Railway Accident as confidential. The 
Committee still holds the view that such Report should not be treated as confidential 
in a routine manner since in maj or accidents the public and Parliament are entitled 
to know of the causes and remedial action being taken. If necessary, a portion of a 
Report may be kept confidential for a period of time and that too for reasons to be 
recorded in writing. The Committee h opes that the Ministry realizes the need to be 
transparent in its functioning so that public trust is build up with regard to the 
efficiency and reliability of public services. The Committee trusts that the Ministry of 

Civil Aviation would review the posit ion and make suitable amendment in the rule 
under intimation to it. 
 
 Action taken by the Ministry (15.12.2002) 
 
As regards the question of treating reports on Railways Accident as 
confidential, the matter has been considered in this Ministry, and the Ministry agrees 
with the views expressed by the Committee. In fact, in case of air accidents enquiry 
reports are not treated as confidential, and are made public after their acceptance by 
the Government. It may  be mentioned that recently, when this Ministry was 
considering the recommendations of Railway Safety Review Committee, a similar 
view was taken as follows:- 
 
Item No./ 
Para No. 
Railway Safety Review 
Committee Recommendations 
(in brief) 
Views of Ministry o f Civil 
Aviation 
120/6.7.4 Inquiry reports of the 
Commissioner of Railway 
Safety should be made available 
to the public immediately after 
finalisation. 
The Inquiry Report may be 
made public once 
recommendation made in Para 
121 is accepted. Till then 
existing practice may continue 
121/6.7.4 A clause should be included that 
the Commissioner of Railway 
Safety who has powers of a Civil 
Court cannot be called as 
witness. 
Accepted. 
 
However, since the overall responsibility for Railway Safety lies with the 
Ministry of Railways, we have asked for the views of the Ministry of Railways also. 
Once their views are known, this Ministry will initiate further necessary action for 
amendment of relevant Rules in the light of the recommendations of the Hon'ble 
Committee.  It is also requested that further time of three months my kindly be given 
for sending the final reply. 
 
3. The Ministry of Civil Aviation were, accordingly, granted extension of time 
upto the 15 th March, 2003 for completing all action in the matter. In response the 
Ministry on 20th March, 2003 informed as under: 
 
 "……..the Ministry of Civil Aviation is in agreement with the view expressed 
by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation Rajya Sabha in its 138th Report 
on inquiry of Rail Accidents. The Railway Safety Review Committee (RSRC) 
1998 has also made similar recommendations vide recommendation 
No.120/6.7.4. and 121 / 6.7.4. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has sent its views 
on these points to Ministry of R ailways who are the administrative Ministry 
in finalizing the views of the 'Government' on the recommendations made by 
RSRC. It was intimated in that letter that this Ministry was not in a position 
to initiate the amendments as the overall responsibility for Railway Safety lies 
with the Ministry of Railways and their views are being ascertained. Once the 
views of Ministry of Railways are known, this Ministry will initiate the further 
necessary action to amend the relevant rules. 

 
  However, irrespective of our repeated reminders to the Ministry of Railways their views on RSRC 
recommendations are still awaited. Because of which we are unable to initiate further necessary action for 
amendment of relevant rules in the light of the recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee. Therefore, it is 
requested further period of 3 months from 15.3.2003 may kindly be provided for sending the final reply. 
 
  Recently, the matter has also been taken up with the Ministry of 
Railways at the Minister's level for expediting their v iews on RSRC 
recommendations".  
 
Accordingly, the Ministry was granted extension of time upto the 15 th June, 
2003. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their communication dated the 
16th June, 2003 informed that Section 116 of the Railway Act, 1989 provides that the 
Commissioner of Railway Safety while conducting an inquiry shall be deemed to be a 
Civil Court for the purpose of Section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  The Ministry of Civil Aviation is of the opin ion that by adding a 
new sub clause in Section 116 of the Railways Act, 1989 as follows, Commissioners 
could be provided desired immunity from being called as a witness in court of law in 
cases which arise from investigation done by them: 
 
 “The Commissioners while conducting an Inquiry shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Judge for the purpose of Section 121 of the Indian Evidence Act and the protection 
available under the above Section will be extended to the Inquiries conducted by 
them.” 
  
The Ministry of Railw ays were, accordingly, advised by the Civil Aviation 
Ministry  to carry out the suggested amendment to the Railway Act, 1989 and 
thereafter the Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 1998 would be 
amended to make it possible to publish Inqui ry Reports immediately after 
finalization. 
  
The Ministry of Civil Aviation, accordingly, requested that further time of 6 
months beyond 15th June, 2003 may kindly be given for sending the final reply.  The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, accordingly, on the 2 4th November, 2003 stated that the  
Ministry of Railways turned down the suggested amendment in the Railways Act, 
1989 citing legal standpoint.  In the meantime, Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken 
certain decisions on 3.11.2003 on the publication of Accidents Inquiry Reports of the 
Commissioner of Railway Safety as an interim measure to restore public faith in the 
institution and to bring transparency in the system until immunity to the 
Commissioners of Railway Safety is made available to finally remove t he 
confidentiality of the Accident Inquiry Reports.  These decisions are as under:- 
 
 Henceforth all preliminary Reports of the railway accident shall be 
made public immediately. 
 The accident inquiry reports of the accidents occurred during 1999 -
2000 onwards in which Railway Board’s comments have been received 
shall be compiled in abstract form and published in six monthly 
periodicals starting from 1st January, 2004. 

 The above periodical shall be distributed to various authorities as per 
mailing list for the  distribution of Accidents Reports on publication 
besides uploading the same on Website also. 
 
5. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 25th February, 
2004.  The Committee noted that its suggestion to make public the report on railway 
accidents had been accepted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. As the Ministry of 
Railway was also agreeable to the amendment of Section 116 of the Railways Act as 
this stage, the Committee decided to grant extension of ti me to the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation upto June 2004 for carrying out the necessary amendments. As a follow up 
to their action taken note, the Commission of Railway Safety published the 1 st issue 
of the compiled abstract of the Railway Accident Inquiry Reports. 
 
6. Thereafter, the Ministry of Civil Aviation again sought extension of time in the 
matter on two occasions, upto 30.6.2005 and 31.12.2005, respectively which were duly 
granted.  In response to their further request for extension of time upto the 30.6.2006, 
this Secretariat issued a D.O. letter to the Ministry seeking status of the amendment 
of Section 116 of the Railways Act, 1989 and the likely time by which the same would 
be carried out before their latest request for extension of time upto the 30th June, 2006 
was processed. Also views/comments on the amendment of the Railways Act was 
sought from the Ministry Railways. 
 
7. The Ministry of Civil Aviation on 22 nd May, 2006 replied that six monthly 
periodicals containing abstracts of finalized Accident  Inquiry Reports are being 
published and distributed regularly to various authorities.  Thus the cause of accident 
and the decision of the Government on the recommendations made by the 
Commission suggestion measures to prevent recurrence of similar accidents in future 
and for overall improvement in safety in railways is being made public through these 
periodicals.  These publications are being uploaded on the website of the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, thus making them accessible to the general public.  The Ministry also 
stated that with the coming into force of the Right to Information Act, 2005, 
information regarding Commissioner of Railway Safety’s Reports on Railway 
Accident can be made available on case to case basis, as per the provisions of RTI Act, 
2005.  
 
 The Ministry of Railways vide their D.O. letter dated 9 th August, 2006 stated 
that they have obtained the opinion of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 
Affairs and that the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs in detailed 
deliberations with Legal Adviser has opined that the proposed amendment in Section 
116 is not legally sustainable. 
 
8. The Committee noted the reply furnished by the Ministry of Railways  and 
accordingly asked them to furnish a copy of the legal advice tendered by the Ministry 
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs .  The Ministry of Railways furnished the same 
on the 26th May, 2008 which states that: 
 
 “This issue has been discussed with the Law Secretary in detail.  Legal Advisor 
(Railway) vide note dated 05.03.08 at page 81/N has stated that Ministry of Railways 
D.O. dated 09.08.2006 to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat (as Sl.no.76) is contrary to that 
advice tendered by the Ministry of Law and Justice. 

 
 The main issue before the Legal Adviser while tendering opinion at page 71/N 
dated 21.2.2006 pertains to amendment of Section 116 of the Railway Act, 1989 to 
provide legal immunity to Commissioner of Railway Safety from being called as 
witness in the Court of Law.  Opinion of Legal Adviser dated 21.2.2006 as well as legal 
advice tendered by the present Legal Adviser dated 05.03.2008 have again been 
perused.  The advice as tendered by the then Legal Adviser dated 21.2.2006 appears 
to be legally correct and he opined that legal immunity to Commissioner of Railway 
Safety from being called as witness in the Court of Law cannot be provided under the 
law.  Hence, the proposal put forward by the Safety Directorate “is not legally 
sustainable”.  Accordingly, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) may take further 
necessary action.” 
 
  
9. The Committee, after considering the advice tendered by the Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) that legal immunity to Commissioner of 
Railway Safety from being called as witness in the Court of Law cannot be provided 
under the law, is satisfied with the advice and decided not to pursue the matter 
further.  
 
 
Report item 
on 
The Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 
 
 The Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2006  framed under the Agricultural 
Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 were examined and a questionnaire on the 
subject was referred to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) for their comments / clarifications on the 28th June, 2006. The Ministry 
furnished their comments / clarifications on the 22 nd November, 2006.  The points 
raised by the Committee and the comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry 
are reproduced below: 
 
(1) Point raised 
 
The Species Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 seem to have been framed in 
supersession of a number of rules pertaining to different spices, framed from time to 
time under the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937. 
 

What is the background in which this consolidated set of rules have been 
enacted, the salient features of this new set of rules, vis-à-vis the earlier ones, and the 
objective sought to be achieved therefrom? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
 Background 
 
(i) These rules were framed and notified between 1962 and 1998.  The Spices 
Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 have bee n enacted as there are a number of 
changes in terms of technology/technique of sorting, drying, introduction of modern 
instruments to analyse active components that are responsible for quality of spices 
and introduction of stringent food safety parameters.  Promotion of export of spices 
and their competitiveness in the global market are also the factors that led to 
supersession of the earlier rules by this new rule. 
 
(ii) The limits of food safety parameters were not prescribed in the earlier rules 
which have been taken care of in the existing Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 
2005. 
 
Salient Features of this new set of rules:- 
 
1. Spices Grading & Marking Rules, 2005 are more stringent than old 
one. 
2. The limit of food safety parameters have been prescribed in the  new 
rules whereas it was not prescribed in the old one. 
3. New quality parameters like Curcuminoid content in Termeric, 
Capsaicinoid in Chillies, Piperine content in Black Pepper and increase 
in Volatile oil have been prescribed to avoid adulteration and 
assessment of the quality. 
4. The new standards prescribed in the Spices Grading & Marking Rules, 
2005 will take care of international and domestic grade standard 

requirements, so that they may become competitive in domestic as well 
as international markets. 
 
Objectives of the Spices Grading & Marking Rules 2005 are as follows: 
 
(1) To harmonize the parameters of grade standards and Food safety with ISO 
and CODEX Standards so as to facilitate competing in the global markets. 
(2) To include food safety parameter to meet the requirement of the 
International Market and Prevention of Food Adulteration for domestic 
market. 
(3) To protect the consumer from the adulteration by introducing new quality 
parameters. 
(4) To boost export of the Indian spices so that farmers may get remunerative 
prices for their produce. 
 
(2) Point Raised 
 
As per Rule 1(2), the Rules shall be applicable to the 11 specified spices.  Is the 
list of spices enumerated in Rule 1 (2) exhaustive and if not, which spices have 
been left out and why? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
The Spices Grading & Marking Rules, 2005 containing 11 Spices (whole and 
Powder) is not an exhaustive list of spices.  In first phase, the standards of 11 
Spices which are considered to be more important and having good marketing 
potential, have been harmonized with International Standards.  The standards of 
remaining spices namely Poppy seeds, Saffron, Garlic, Curry Powder, 
Compounded Asafoetida, Seedless Tamarind, Sundried Raw Mango Slices and 
Powder, Nut-meg, Tejpat, Clove, Caraway and Black caraway and Mixed masala 
that were notified under Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937, 
will be revised on the above pattern. 
 

(3) Point Raised  
 
In Rule 2, there is a reference to the General Grading and Markin g Rules, 
1988. What is the number of commodities for which specific Marking and Grading 
Rules have been framed (for example in case of spices in the instant case) and what 
is the justification for having such specific rules when the general Rules already 
exist. 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
The Spices Grading & Marking Rules, 2005 contains only 11 spices (whole and 
powder).  The General Grading and Marking Rules, 1988 provide general 
principles of grading and marking to all the agricultural and allied commodities 
covered under the Agricultural Produce (Grading & Marking) Act, 1937.  The 
General Grading & Marking Rules, 1988 also prescribe provisions for 
grant/charges of Certificate of Authorisation (C.A.), issue of duplicate C.A, 
suspension or cancellation of C.A., app roval of chemist, provisions of grade 
designation marks, packing and marking, payment of charges and fees, 
Certification of Agmark grading (CAG), redressal of consumer grievances and 
complaints, power of entry into the premises, inspection and search, seiz ure, 
detention and disposal etc. and how to make an appeal mechanism. 
 
Whereas the Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 prescribed grade 
standards in terms of physical and chemical parameters for each specific 
commodity separately.  These rules will be a dministered under the provision of 
the General Grading & Marking Rules, 1988. 
 
(4) Point Raised-Rule 5 Grade designation mark-  
 
The grade designation mark shall consist of “AGMARK Insignia” consisting 
of a design incorporating the certificate of authorization number, the word 
“AGMARK” name of commodity and grade designation resembling the design as 
set out in Schedule-XXIX. 

 
What is the number of quality control agencies and grading laboratories in 
existence in the country; the Ministry may furnish state-wise status in this regard.  
The Rules do not provide for inspection of such agencies and laboratories.  
Whether Government have any objection in providing for inspection of the 
agencies/laboratories, and also the frequency of such inspection and the rank/level 
of the officer-in-charge of such inspection in the rule itself? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
The Directorate of Marketing and Inspection with its 11 Regional Offices, 26 
Sub Offices, 16 Regional Laboratories spread all over the country and a Central  
Agmark Laboratory are responsible for monitoring the quality of agricultural 
produce “as quality control agencies”.  In addition, the Officers of the 27 
State/Union Territories have been delegated powers under General Grading and 
Marking Rules, 1988 for u ndertaking grading and marking of agricultural 
produce. 
 
At present, there are 74 Private Commercial Laboratories, 117 State Govt. 
Grading Laboratories, 7 Co -operative laboratories under existence providing 
analytical facilities to the AGMARK packers to gr ade and mark their produce 
under AGMARK. 
 
The State-wise status is enclosed separately as Annexure-I. 
 
Gazetted Technical Officers of the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection of 
and above the rank of Marketing Officer are authorized by the Agricultural 
Marketing Adviser, on his behalf, for inspection of these Laboratories and 
monitoring of methods of marking and labeling. 
 
(5) Point Raised Rule 6(1) Method of packing- 
 

Spices (whole and powder) shall be packed in gunny bags/jute bags, poly 
woven bags, poly p ouches, cloth bags or other suitable packages which shall be 
clean, sound, free from insects, fungal infestation and the packing material shall 
be as permitted under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 made 
under Section 23 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954). 
 
When the material to be used for packaging is required to be as per the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 what is the justification for 
enumerating some packaging materials like gunny bags, jute bags, etc. in Rule 6.  
Further the words “clean, sound, free from insects…..,”in rule 6(1) are capable of 
varied interpretation.  Whether Government have any objection in making the 
provisions of Rule 6(1) more specific. 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
The gunny b ags, jute bags, polywoven bags, poly pouches, cloth bags are 
traditional way of packing spices and condiments as per the prevalent trade 
practices.  Hence, these packing material has been prescribed in the Rule 6(1). 
 
The words clean, sound and free from insect mentioned in rule 6(1) also occur 
in National as well as International standards for maintaining high order of food 
hygiene and to increase shelf life and safeguarding the quality of the spices.  Hence, 
the word clean, sound and free insect mentioned in the Spices Grading & Marking 
Rules, 2005 are relevant words and admit no ambiguity and question of objection 
by the Government in making specific provision in the rule 6(1) does not arise. 
 
(6) Point Raised Rule 6(2) Method of packing- 
 
 Suitable lining of  food grade polypropylene/polyethylene/metallic shall be 
used for packing of Spices, (whole and powder) in gunny bags/jute bags, poly 
woven bags, cloth bags, paper bags and cardboard cartons. 
 

The word ‘suitable lining’ admit of varied interpretations.  Wh ether 
Government have any objection in substituting these words with appropriate 
words with certain specificities so as to make the provisions of the rules more 
specific? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
Scientific research and development took place from time to time i n the field 
of packaging material and suitable thickness of lining of food grade material is 
required for safeguarding the spices from moisture, fungal growth and safe 
transportation to maintain its own characteristics and quality. 
 
 
(7) Rule 6(3) Method of packing- 
 
Container and packaging material, shall be made of substances which are safe 
and suitable for their intended use.  They should not impart any toxic substance 
or undersirable odour or flavour to the product. 
 
Whether Government have any objection in specifying in the rule itself the 
substances with which the containers and packaging materials shall be made of 
for the purpose of the rule to make the rule specific. 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
  The packaging material certified by the CFTRI, Mysore is allowed to be used 
for packing to ensure /safeguard the quality of the spices.  As the research work 
to improve the quality of the packaging material to increase the shelf life of the 
product and to protect quality, the change  in the parameter of the food grade 
packaging material take place from time to time.  Hence, it will not be appropriate 
to specify the same in the Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 and objection 
from Government in specifying in the rule does not arise. 
 

(8) Point Raised Rule 7(1) & (4)- 
 
(1) A grade designation mark shall be securely affixed to or printed on each 
package in a manner approved by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser or 
an officer authorized by him in this behalf in accordance with Rule 11  of 
the General Grading and Marking Rules, 1988. 
(2) The authorized packer, may, after obtaining prior approval of the 
Agricultural Marketing Adviser or an officer authorized by him in this 
behalf, mark his private trade mark or trade brand on the graded 
packages provided that the same do not indicate quality other than that 
indicating by the grade designation mark affixed to the graded packages 
in accordance with these rules. 
Who may be the officer authorized by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser on 
his behalf for the purposes of the above rules?  Can the minimum level/rank of such 
‘officer’ not be specified in the rule itself? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
Gazetted Technical Officers of the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection of 
and above the rank of Marketing Officer are au thorized by the Agricultural 
Marketing Adviser, on his behalf, for monitoring methods of marking and labeling. 
 
The minimum level/rank of such ‘officer’ are not required to be specified in 
the rules itself. 
 
(9) Point Raised  Rule 8 (1) Special conditions of certificate of authorization- 
 
The authorized packer shall either set up his own laboratory or have approved 
grading laboratory for testing of Spices (whole and power). 
 
The rule gives option to the authorized packer to either set up his own laboratory 
or have access to an approved grading laboratory for testing of spices.  What about 

conditions governing the setting up of private laboratory and where these are 
specified? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
In respect of a commodity which require l aboratory testing for quality 
assessment, there is a provision under Rule 8 of General Grading and Marking Rules, 
1988 about setting up of own laboratory and approval  of State Grading Laboratory 
or Cooperative /Association Laboratory or a Private Commerci al Laboratory.  
According to Grading & Marking Rules, 1988 the authorized packer shall either set 
up his own laboratory or have access to an approved grading laboratory for testing 
of Spices (whole and powder).  The guidelines/instruction for setting up of  
laboratories is issued by an administrative order from time to time.  As these 
guidelines/instructions change from time to time as and when new parameters 
prescribed or new methodology of analysis of the parameters take place.  Hence, it 
will not be appro priate to specify in the Spices Grading & Marking Rules, 2005.  A 
list showing number of approved grading laboratories functioning in States and 
Union Territories has been placed at Annexure-I. 
 
(10) Point Raised Rule 8 (2) Special conditions of certificate of 
authorization- 
 
The premises shall be maintained in hygienic and sanitary conditions with 
proper ventilations and well lighted arrangement.  The personnel engaged in these 
operations shall be in sound health and free from any infections, contagious or 
communicable diseases. 
 
In what manner Government purposes to (i) implement the requirements of 
hygienic and sanitary conditions of the premises and (ii) ensure that personnel 
engaged in these operations are in sound health and free from any infectious, 
contagious or communicable diseases?  Whether Government have any objection in 
specifying the details in this regard in the rule itself? 
 

Ministry’s reply 
 
Provision of inspection of premises, hygienic and sanitary conditions with 
proper ventilation etc. are ens ured by issuing administrative instructions from time 
to time as per General Grading and Marking Rules, 1988 issued under section 3 of 
the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937. 
 
The guidelines generally change from time to time in the inter est of 
safeguarding the shelf life and quality of the spices, maintaining good sanitary 
conditions and enhancing the quality.  Hence, it is not appropriate to specify the 
details in this regard in the Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 and objection 
from Government in specifying in the rule does not arise. 
 
(11) Point Raised Rule 8(3)-  
 
The premises shall have adequate storage facilities with pucca floor and free 
from rodent and insect infestation. 
 
The word ‘adequate’ admit of varied interpretations.  Whether Government 
have any objection in substituting the word with some more appropriate words/phase 
so as to make the provision of rule 8(3) specific? 
 
Ministry’s reply 
 
The size of the storage depends on the capacity of the factory or machineries 
installed by the packer.  Therefore, the authorized packers have different size of 
storage facilities as per their requirements. 
 
Hence, the word ‘adequate’ is a suitable word and admit no ambiguity. 
 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the matter with the regi onal 
representatives of the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection alongwith the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) at 

Thiruvananthapuram on the 5 th January, 2007and a study note on the subject has 
been placed at Annexure II.  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation) vide their O.M. No. 18011/8/2002 -M.II(Pt) dated 1 st June, 2007 
have furnished their comments on the points that came up during the said visit 
(Annexure-III). 
 
3. The Committee not es that the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation) is not in agreement with most of the suggestions raised 
by the Committee such as: 
 
(i) In Rule 5 to provide for inspection of the quality control 
agencies/grading laboratories, and also to specify the frequency of such 
inspection and the rank/level of the officer-in-charge of such inspection.  
(ii) In Rule 6 (1) to make the provisions more specific as the words “clean, 
sound, free from insects…” particularly the word “sound”, are capable 
of varied interpretation. 
(iii) In Rule 6 (2) to substitute the words “suitable lining” which admit of 
varied interpretation with more appropriate words so as to make the 
provisions of the rules more specific. 
(iv) In Rule 6 (3) to specify in the rule itself the sub stances with which the 
containers and packaging materials shall be made to make the rule 
specific. 
(v) In Rule 7 (1) & (4) to specify he minimum level/rank of the officer who 
may be authorized by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser on his behalf 
for the purpose of these rules. 
(vi) In Rule 8 (3) to substitute the words “adequate” which is subject to 
varied interpretations with some more appropriate word so as to make 
the provision specific. 
 
The Committee recommends that changes may be suitably incorporated in the 
Spices Grading and Marking Rules, 2005 in view of the above suggestions.  
 

The Committee expresses its unhappiness at the quality and purity of spices 
available particularly with the local sellers. The Committee observes tha t there is 
need for specifications to meet the international standards not only in respect of spices 
meant for export but also those for consumption in the domestic market. The 
Committee takes serious note of the reports of rampant adulteration of these items in 
the local markets. In view of this, the Committee strongly recommends that 
certification of spices should be made mandatory.  The Committee further observes 
that some items being sold under AGMARK license do not meet the desired quality 
and there is  fake imprint of AGMARK on items sold by the local sellers. The 
Committee therefore strongly recommends that the Ministry should take steps to 
ensure that specialized and technically advanced equipments are used while making 
AGMARK insignia so that it is i mpossible to replicate/forge it. The nodal Ministry 
should curb such malpractices and impose strong punitive measures. 
 
The Committee is concerned about the fact that India’s share in the world 
spice market is dwindling.  The Committee is of the view that while the price of spices 
in the international market are soaring our farmers are deprived of the profit. The 
Committee observes that the Ministry should disseminate the appropriate 
information to the farmers living in the countryside regarding prices, etc . The 
Committee observes that in the globalised market, Spices Board should devise 
mechanism to help farmers increase their productivity which is much lower in India 
than the world standard.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 