    COMMITTEE ON 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi      
                             TWO HUNDRED AND 
(i)  THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
2007;  AND  
(ii)  THE FRAMING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE NATI ONAL 
TRUST F OR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUT 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES  ACT, 
1999-IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 220 
ON SUBORDI N
             (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi                                
April, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST  
ON 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
THE FRAMING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE NATI ONAL 
OR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUT 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES  ACT, 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 220 TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
NATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHIA  
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  10 th   April,   201 7
                                                                                                                             
REPORT 
NO.  
231 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION  
                                                                   
 REPORT 
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION REGULATIONS, 
THE FRAMING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE NATI ONAL 
OR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUT ISM, CEREBRAL 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES  ACT, 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
7) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 
E-Mail: rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in  
 
  

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI 
 
TWO HUNDRED AND 
(I)  The Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
(II)  The Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National Trust for 
Welfare of Persons With Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation 
and Multiple Disabilities Act, 
of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabhia 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDI NATE LEGISLATION 
TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
The Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regulations 
The Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National Trust for 
Welfare of Persons With Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation 
and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999-Implementation of the 220 
of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabhia 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10 th   April , 2017)
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
April, 2017/ Chaitra, 1939 (Saka) 
 
Hindi  version of this publication is also available 
NATE LEGISLATION  
REPORT  
Regulations , 2007; and  
The Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National Trust for 
Welfare of Persons With Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation 
Implementation of the 220 th  Report 
of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabhia  
) 
version of this publication is also available  

 
C O N T E N T S 
      
                                                            PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
2 
3.. 
INTRODUCTION 
ACRONYMS 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT ON  
(i)  THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES  
                  COMMISSION REGULATIONS, 2007; AND 
(ii)  THE FRAMING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE NATI ONAL 
TRUST FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUTISISM, CEREBRA L 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES  ACT, 
1999-IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 220 
TH  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   15 th  SEPTEMBER, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
2.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari      
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
*4.  Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh 
5. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
6. Shri Chunibhai Kanjibhai Gohel 
7. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
8.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
9. Shri S. Muthukaruppan 
10. Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
11. Shri K. Parasaran 
12. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
13. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*     Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 8 th  November, 2016 in place of Prof. Jogen 
Chowdhury  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri J.G.Negi , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3. Shri  R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5. Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director  
 
 
  
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and Thirty 
First Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission Regulations, 2007 and  issues relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government. The Committe e also took into consideration the 
status of implementation of its recommendations as contained in its 220 
th  Report on the 
Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National  Trust for Welfare of Persons With 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in i 
ts meeting held on the       
28 th   March, 2017. 
 
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY  
Chairman  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,  
 Rajya Sabha  
 
NEW DELHI  
April  10, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
KVIC-Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
CPF-Contributory Provident Fund 
MSME-Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
 
 
 
  

(i)  REPORT ON  
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 
REGULATIONS, 2007 
  
I.  BACKGROUND 
 
The Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regulat ions, 2007 
(Annexure-I)  were framed in supersession of the Khadi and Villa ge Industries 
Commission Regulations, 1958, in exercise of powers  conferred by Section 27 of 
the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 19 56. The Regulations were 
taken up for detailed examination by the Committee and a questionnaire on the 
subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Micro, Sma ll and Medium Enterprises 
for their comments/clarifications on the 2 nd  December, 2008. After repeated 
reminders, the Ministry furnished their replies on the 17 th  May, 2010 (Annexure-
II) . During the course of its examination, the Committ ee also had discussion with 
the representatives of Khadi and Village Industries  Commission (KVIC), State 
Government of Uttar Pradesh along with the Ministry  of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises at Lucknow on 14 th  June 2015. Study note on the said study visit is 
enclosed as Annexure-III .  
 
2. The Committee enquired about the reasons that ne cessitated the framing of 
the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regulat ions, 2007, in supersession 
of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regu lations, 1958. The Ministry 
of MSME  replied that with a view to revamp the str ucture and functioning of 
KVIC, the Government had constituted an Expert Comm ittee in December 2004 
to recommend suitable measures for revamping of KVI C after reviewing its 
structure, functioning and performance. Based on th e recommendations of the 
Expert Committee, KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 to am end the KVIC Act, 1956 
was drafted and introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22 
nd  August, 2005. Finally, the 
KVIC (Amendment) Bill, 2005 as passed by both House s of Parliament, after 
receiving the assent of the President in March 2006 , became an Act of Parliament 
and the amended provisions came into force with effect from 15 th  May, 2006. 

 
3. Consequent upon the amendment to KVIC Act, 1956 and KVIC Rules, 
2006, many of the provisions of the existing KVIC R egulations 1958 became 
outdated and there was a necessity to suitably amen d the then existing KVIC 
Regulations, 1958. Accordingly, the Government of I ndia, in supersession of the 
KVIC Regulations 1958, notified the KVIC Regulation s, 2007 in the Gazette of 
India on the 31 
st  October, 2007.  
  
II  EXAMINATION OF REGULATIONS, OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
4. In response to the important points/ issues rais ed by the Committee 
through a detailed questionnaire and discussion wit h the   representatives of the 
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), the  Ministry of Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprises etc., the Ministry has furnish ed their comments/ 
clarifications which are elaborated in the succeedi ng paragraphs along with the 
observations/ recommendations of the Committee. 
 
5. Regulation 3(7) provides that Commission may grant study leave to i ts 
employees in order to enable them to undertake stud y or research or to obtain 
specialized training in scientific, technical or ec onomic subjects connected with 
the work of the Commission, subject to such terms a nd conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Commission. The Committee enquire d from the Ministry how 
many employees have been granted study leave within  the last 4-5 years, in what 
fields and in what way the Commission has been bene fited from such study 
leaves. The Ministry replied that KVIC has reported  that no such study leave has 
been granted during the last 4-5 years by exercisin g the provisions of Regulation 
3(7). The Committee observes that the power to frame the terms and 
conditions to grant study leave to its employees un der the Regulation 3(7) 
have been further delegated. The Committee is of th e view that under the 
power given by this Act to frame regulation on give n items cannot be further 
delegated. These terms and conditions should have b een included in the 

Regulations itself. Therefore, the Committee recomm ends that the terms and 
conditions for granting of study leave should be fr amed by the Commission 
and included in the Regulations itself . 
 
6. Regulation 3(8) provides that the Commission may, with the prior 
approval of Government, make regulations regarding  grant of gratuity, medical 
aid, contributory provident fund, conduct, discipli ne and appeals, etc. The 
Committee enquired about the status of framing of r egulations on these fields. 
The Ministry replied that existing (i) KVIC Employe es (Gratuity) Regulations, 
1975; (ii) KVIC Employees (Medical Attendance) Regu lations, 1961 and (iii) 
KVIC Employees (CPF) Regulations, 1958, which were framed as per the KVIC 
Regulations, 1958 are under revision. The Committee notes that Section 27 (2) 
(a) empowers the Commission to frame Regulations re garding the terms and 
conditions of appointment and service and scales of  pay of officers and 
servants of the Commission. The Committee, however,  notes that instead of 
providing details regarding grant of gratuity, medi cal aid, contributory 
provident fund, conduct, discipline and appeals, et c, Regulation 3(8) simple 
states that the Commission may, with the prior appr oval of the Government 
make regulations on these issues. The Committee is of the view that these 
details should be provided for in the KVIC Regulati ons, 2007 itself as 
mandated by the Act.  The Committee, accordingly, r ecommends that 
Regulation 3(8) should be made more detailed and al l matters delegated 
under it should be provided in the Regulations itself.  
 
7. Regulation 4(3) provides that  the Commission may, by order in writing, 
waive the condition regarding the production of hea lth certificate, within one 
month from date of appointment, altogether in speci al cases if it deems it 
necessary to do so in the interest of the work of t he Commission. The Committee 
pointed out that it should be specified as to what could be the special cases 
wherein a condition for production of health certif icate will be waived and what 
interest it would serve for the Commission. Ministr y replied that practically no 

relaxation is granted by the KVIC in the production  of health certificate and that 
this provision is required to be suitably modified in consultation with KVIC and 
accordingly, action will be taken . The Committee notes the reply of the 
Ministry that practically no relaxation is granted by KVIC for production of 
health certificate and, accordingly, recommends that the provision for waiver 
of production of health certificate should be deleted from these Regulations.  
 
8. Regulation 23 provides that  the Commission may delegate necessary 
financial powers to its officers for ensuring exped itious disposal of work and 
smooth and efficient functioning of the organizatio n and that the Commission 
may make suitable rules in this behalf for the guid ance of its staff in order to 
ensure that these powers are judiciously used by th e officers concerned. The 
Committee notes that Section 27(2)(c) empowers the Commission to frame 
regulations regarding the delegation of powers and duties to any employee of 
the Commission. The Committee, however, notes that Regulation 23 has 
further delegated powers to the Commission to frame  rules for judicious use 
of financial powers by officers of the Commission w ithout providing the 
details in the Regulations itself. The Committee, t herefore, recommends that 
Regulation 23 should be made more detailed by inclu ding the rules for 
judicious use of financial powers by the officers o f the Commission in the 
Regulations itself.  
 
9. Regulation 24 (1) provides that the Commission shall appoint one or 
more 
Certification Committees which shall grant certific ates to producers of, or dealers 
in khadi or the products of any village industry an d Regulation 24(2)  provides that a 
Certification Committee shall consist of such numbe r of members as the 
Commission may think fit to appoint thereto, and on e of them shall be appointed 
as the Chairman of the Committee. The Committee, however, notes that the 
number of members, the manner/procedure of appointm ent of members of 
the Central Certification Committees and Zonal Cert ification Committees, 
the qualification, experience, etc of the members should have been prescribed 

in the Regulations. The Committee, accordingly, rec ommends that the 
number of members of the Certification Committee, t he manner/procedure 
of appointment, the qualifications, experience, etc should be prescribed in the 
Regulations itself. 
 
III SUMMARY OF THE OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
Regulation 3(7) 
 
10. The Committee observes that the power to frame the terms and 
conditions to grant study leave to its employees un der the Regulation 3(7) 
have been further delegated. The Committee is of th e view that under the 
power given by this Act to frame regulation on give n items cannot be further 
delegated. These terms and conditions should have b een included in the 
Regulations itself. Therefore, the Committee recomm ends that the terms and 
conditions for granting of study leave should be fr amed by the Commission 
and included in the Regulations itself . 
 
Regulation 3(8) 
11. The Committee notes that Section 27 (2) (a) emp owers the 
Commission to frame Regulations regarding the terms  and conditions of 
appointment and service and scales of pay of office rs and servants of the 
Commission. The Committee, however, notes that inst ead of providing 
details regarding grant of gratuity, medical aid, contributory provident fund, 
conduct, discipline and appeals, etc, Regulation 3( 8) simple states that the 
Commission may, with the prior approval of the Gove rnment make 
regulations on these issues. The Committee is of th e view that these details 
should be provided for in the KVIC Regulations, 200 7 itself as mandated by 
the Act.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends th at Regulation 3(8) 
should be made more detailed and all matters delega ted under it should be 
provided in the Regulations itself.  
 

Regulation 4(3) 
12. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry t hat practically no 
relaxation is granted by KVIC for production of hea lth certificate and, 
accordingly, recommends that the provision for waiv er of production of 
health certificate should be deleted from these Regulations.  
 
Regulation 23  
13. The Committee notes that Section 27(2)(c) empow ers the Commission 
to frame regulations regarding the delegation of po wers and duties to any 
employee of the Commission. The Committee, however,  notes that 
Regulation 23 has further delegated powers to the C ommission to frame 
rules for judicious use of financial powers by offi cers of the Commission 
without providing the details in the Regulations it self. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that Regulation 23 should be made more detailed by 
including the rules for judicious use of financial powers by the officers of the 
Commission in the Regulations itself.  
 
Regulation 24 (1) and 24(2)  
14. The Committee notes that the number of members,  the 
manner/procedure of appointment of members of the C entral Certification 
Committees and Zonal Certification Committees, the qualification, 
experience, etc of the members should have been pre scribed in the 
Regulations. The Committee, accordingly, recommends  that the number of 
members of the Certification Committee, the manner/ procedure of 
appointment, the qualifications, experience, etc sh ould be prescribed in the 
Regulations itself. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
Study Note  of the Meeting of the Committee on  Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha  
 
 The Committee met at 300 P.M on the 14 th  June, 2015  at Lucknow to 
discuss various  rules/regulations about (i) Khadi and Village Industries  
Commission Regulations, 2007 (ii) SIDBI General Reg ulations, 2000; Sukanya  
Samriddhi Account Rules, 2014; the Nationalized Ban ks (Management and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970; implementat ion of Pradhan Mantri 
Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and other Priority Sector L ending  Schemes with 
particular reference to weavers, farmers, women and artisans iii)   Standards of 
Quality of service of Basic Telephone Service (Wire line) and Cellular Mobile 
Telephone Service Regulations, 2009 and its subsequ ent amendments.  (iv) 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission  (Power S ystem Development Fund) 
Regulations, 2014 and legislative framework for Pow er Purchase Agreements 
and power generation.  The following Members of the  Committee and officers 
and representatives of Central Government, State Go vernment and different 
organizations were present during the meeting:- 
Present:  
1.  Dr. T.  Subbarami Reddy   Chairman 
Members:   
                   2.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari    
  3.  Shri K. P. Ramalingam 
  4.  Shri Arvind Kumar Singh 
5.  Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
6.  Shri Palvai Govardha 
n Reddy  
7.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 

 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat: 
1.   Shri N. K. Singh, Additional Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri R. S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
 
Representatives of Central Ministries, State Govern ment and 
various organisations/institutions. 
 
1.  Shri Anirudha Singh, Principal Secretary, UP Government 
2.  Shri Ashok Kumar Bhardwaj, Special Secretary, UP  
Government 
3.  Shri Mukul Singhal, Principal Secretary, KVIB, UP 
Government 
4.  Shri Vanketeshwar Lu, Commissioner & Directorate of  
Industries,  UP Government 
5.  Shri Sanjay Prasad, MD, UPRVUNL UP Government 
6.  Shri Rakehs Sethi, CMC, Allahabad Bank 
7.  Shri BP Shrma, MD & CEO, Bank of India 
8.  Shri P Srinivas, MD & CEO, United Bank of India 
9.  Shri Ram S. Sangapure, ED, Punjab National Bank 
10.  Shri Bhupinder Nayyar, ED, Oriental Bank of Commerce 
11.  Shri Suresh N. Pate, ED, Oriental Bank of Commerce 
12.  Shri Arbinda Misra, GM, UCO Bank 
13.  Shri Sudhanshu Gaur, Chairman, Allahabad UP Gramin     
Bank 
14.  Shri J.S. Ravi Kumar, chairman, Gramin Bank of Aryavart 
15.  Shri Chatrapati Shivaji, Chairman SIDBI, Govt. of India 
16.  Shri A.K. Jha, Commissione, Govt. of India 
17.  Shri B.N. Sharma, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Powe r, Govt. 
of India 
18.  Shri A.K. Singh, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Power , Govt. of 
India 
19.  Shri B.H. Anil Kumar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of MSME, 
Govt. of India 
20.  Shri A.K. Chauhan, Joint Director, National Savings  
Institute, Govt. of India 
21.  Shri A.K. Mishra, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India 
22.  Shri R.N. Nayak, Chairman, PGCIL 
23.  Shri P.J. Thakkar, Director, REC 
24.  Shri I.J. Kapoor, Directore, NTPC 
25.  Shri Suresh Kumar Gupta, Principal Advisor, TRAI 

26.  Shri Mahidhar Pant, DDG (UP-East), BSNL 
27.  Mrs Shubha Sharma, Secretary, CERC 
 
2.           At the outset, on behalf of the Commit tee the Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha w elcomed the Members of 
Committee and officers present in the meeting.  He further stated that the 
mandate of this committee is to examines and report s to the House whether 
the powers to make rules, regulations etc., delegat ed to the Government have 
been properly exercised.  It also monitors if these  rules and regulations have 
been published in the Gazette of India and laid on the Table of the House.                 
3. The Committee then taken up for discussion the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission Regulations, 2007 . These Regulations have replaced 
the earlier Regulations of 1958 and deal with setti ng up of Zonal Committees, 
issues related to salaries and allowances of the em ployees of the Commission 
etc. however as compared to the KVIC Regulations, 1 958 some changes have 
been made like for example abolition of the post of  Secretary, deletion of the 
Regulation 20 related to the duties & powers of the  CEO, setting up of Zonal 
Committee. In this respect the Ministry as well as the KVIC may inform the 
Committee reasons for the same and also the efforts  been made to associate 
the traditional craftsmen of UP like zari workers, carpet weavers, Chickan 
workers with it and the success achieved in this re spect.  What is the role of 
self help Groups (SHG) in development of Khadi and Village Industries with 
particular reference to women SHGs in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Whether the 
problems of weaver and other craft workers associat ed with KVIC is being 
properly addressed and KVIC is providing any financ ial help to artisans, 
weavers and craftsmen in this regard. 
4. The representatives of KVIC detailed about the b road aspects of KVIC 
Regulations, 2007.  He stated that to give effect t o provisions of KVIC Act, 
1956, Govt. has made KVIC Regulations in 1958 which  were subsequently 
superseded by KVIC Regulations 2007.  The KVIC Regu lations broadly deals 

with the aspects such as the terms and conditions o f the appointment of 
employees and related aspects; entitlement of vario us allowances to the 
committee employees, appointment of Committee and S ub committees; Notice 
of meeting, business, quorum, casting of votes, min utes of the meeting of 
Commission, committee and Board, Custody and invest ment of money, 
procedure of payment, deposits and investment; dele gation of financial power; 
and formation certification committee etc. 
5. The representative of U.P. Khadi and Village Ind ustries Board while 
stating the progress report of 2014-15 said that  t he PM’s employment   
generation programme is being run by three agencies  i.e. KVIC, UPK1B and 
Industry   Department of  Uttar Pradesh.  During th e year 2014-15 revised 
estimates were to provide employment to 24840 perso ns and margin money 
was Rs.3971.82 Lakh through 3105 units.  The achiev ement during the period 
was generation of 15368 employment and total Rs.483 5.98 lakh margin money 
were distributed by nodal bank branches through 149 2 units.  Under the 
PMEGP, the targets for  year 2015-16 in the UP stat e was generation of 16000 
employment through Rs. 4275.91 margin money and tot al investment planned  
is Rs.12829.73 Lakh through 2000 units.  It was fur ther informed that 
presently there are 14 Khadi Production Centres  ac tive in Uttar Pradesh and  
during 2014-15 total 96565  persons were provided e mployment through 
different schemes.  The representatives of the KVIB   was of the view that 
interest under CBC Yojna should be exempted and  on e time settlement (OTS) 
Yojna may be implemented.  Other suggestions were ( i) in view of increasing 
demand of Khadi, there is need of solar energy for NMC spinning wheels which 
would enhance the production and income of people e ngaged in the sector (ii), 
modernization of buildings of Khadi institution whi ch would attend high end 
customers for high sale of products, and   (ii) bro ader Marketing and 
Advertisement Programme to establish the new identi ty of Khadi through 
Printed electronic media. 

Report  
On  
The framing of Rules & Regulations under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999- 
Implementation of the 220 th  Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha. 
 The Committee took up for consideration the status  of framing of rules/regulations under 
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Auti sm, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and 
Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999. During the course of examination the Committee observed a 
number of discrepancies in the framing of rules and  regulations and accordingly presented its 
220 th  Report on the subject to the Rajya Sabha on 18 th  December, 2014. 
2. The Committee had inter-alia given the following  recommendations: 
“23.        The Committee is pained to find that se nsitivity shown by Parliament to 
have made a pioneering law to provide much needed h elp and succour to the most 
vulnerable and needy sections of our society is bei ng dealt in the most insensitive 
and callous manner.  The manner in which this law i s being implemented leaves 
much to be desired.  The absence of specific guidel ines, rules, regulations, etc. on 
various aspects for enforcing the Act as per its le tter and spirit, has bred to secrecy, 
scope for discretion and hence lack of transparency  in the working of National 
Trust.  Thus, the Ministry due to reasons best know n to it, failed to perform its 
responsibility as an administrative controller as i t did not carefully see that all the 
Guidelines, Rules and Regulations have been framed.   More serious thing is that 
the Ministry, it appears, did not consult Legislati ve Department in vetting the 
Rules, Regulations as is usually done by all the Mi nistries.  Had it been done so, 
much of the problems pointed out by the Committee n ow may not have arisen at 
all.   
24.  The Committee re-emphasizes that the Ministry should expedite framing 
the Recruitment Rules not only for the post of Chai rman, National Trust but also 
for the officers and employees of the National Trust at the earliest. The Committee 
is of the view that this process can be completed i n a fixed time schedule given 
that much ground work on the educational qualifications and experience required 
for the said post has already been done with help o f DOPT.  Even the suggestions 
of the DoPT have not been properly ingrained into t he existing criteria.  Further, 
notifying the Rules would give the candidates an op portunity to know the 
requirements for the requisite post apart from givi ng publicity to the working of 
the National Trust. 
 
25. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shou ld re-visit the 
Rules/Regulations framed under the National Trust f or Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Mult iple Disabilities Act, 1999 

and re-examine them in the light of the observation s made by the Committee in 
the preceding paragraphs and effect necessary modifications as needed. 
 
26. The Committee further recommends that the Minis try may look into the 
possibility of increasing the Corpus Fund of the Na tional Trust. In Committee’s 
view, lack of adequate funding should not be a limi ting factor for the working of 
the National Trust for fulfilling its mandate.  Inc reased corpus is needed urgently 
keeping in view the enhanced coverage of the scheme s being operated by the 
National Trust.  
 
 27.  The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry wo uld carry out the 
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously unde r intimation to it. The 
Committee would further like to impress upon the Ministry that proper monitoring 
and inspection are essential for the proper and eff ective implementation of Rules 
and Regulations, and, stresses upon the Ministry to  strengthen its enforcement 
mechanism to ensure that the objectives of the Order are achieved.” 
 
3. The Report was forwarded to the Ministry of Soci al Justice & Empowerment 
(Department of Disability Affairs) on 22 
nd  December, 2014 for information and immediate 
necessary action. The Ministry submitted its interi m Action Taken Note on 12 th  March, 2015 
(Annexure I) . Ministry was thereafter again requested vide  this Secretariat Office Memorandum 
dated the 22 nd  May, 2015 to furnish the status of implementation of the 220 th  Report of the 
Committee with special reference to revision of the Rules/Regulations framed under the National 
Trust Act, 1999 and to furnish a detailed note on t he status of ARUNIM regarding its legal 
status. The Ministry furnished final Action Taken N ote on  8th  June, 2015 (Annexure II). The 
comments/clarifications furnished by the Ministry w ith regard to the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 220th Report are reproduced in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
4. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should, without any further delay, 
frame guidelines with details regarding the basic q ualifications including educational 
qualifications and experience along with the proced ure for appointment of the Chairperson, 
National Trust.  
 
5.  In response the Ministry informed that they had  amended the National Trust Rules to 
incorporate educational qualifications, selection p rocedure for appointment of Chairperson, 
National Trust vide  Notification No. G.S.R. 7(E) dated 4 
th  February, 2015.  
 

6. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the M inistry has taken prompt action on its 
recommendation regarding basic qualifications inclu ding educational qualifications and 
experience along with the procedure for appointment  of the Chairperson, National Trust. The 
Committee wishes that the Ministry has ensured that  the intent of the Committee as expressed 
through this  recommendation has been properly incorporated in the amendments made in the 
National Trust Rules. 
  
7. As regards the Committee’s observation and recom mendation that the words “ or until his 
successor shall have been duly appointed, whichever  is longer” may be deleted by bringing an 
amendment in Section 4(1) of the Act, the Ministry informed that issue of amending Section 4(1) 
of the National Trust Act, 1999 has been taken up w ith the Ministry of Law & Justice and its 
opinion was awaited.  
 
8. The Committee took note of the Ministry’s commen t that the recommendation 
regarding amendment of Section 4(1) of the Act had been taken up with the Ministry of Law & 
Justice.  The Committee, however, is of the opinion that the Ministry instead of dragging it for 
such a long time should have amended the section by  now, to incorporate the views of the 
Committee.  The Committee, accordingly, directs the  Ministry to expedite the process of 
amendment of the Act in accordance with the letter and spirit with which the Committee had 
made the recommendation. This was the most abused s ection of the Act about which 
Committee had expressed a strong opinion.    
 
9. The Committee  noted  that  as regards  its  recomme ndations on  the  issues   
pertaining to  (i) framing of Rules clarifying the procedure for selection of the Board 
Members other than ex-officio including re-nominati on and removal of Members; (ii) re-
examination of the Regulations 4(4) and 4(5) for ir oning out any discrepancies in the 
subordinate legislation framed by the National Trus t/ Ministry; and (iii) 
 redrafting of  
Regulations7(1) and 8(1) & (2) to avoid further del egation of power, the Ministry had set up a 
Committee headed by the Secretary, Department of Em powerment of Persons with Disabilities 
to review the Rules/ Regulations under the National  Trust Act, 1999 and the Committee held 
its first meeting on 22 nd  April, 2015.  

 
10. The Committee appreciates the Ministry for its promptness in setting up the committee 
under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities to look into its recommendations.   Ho wever, as per the information supplied the 
Committee observes that since the formation of said  committee only one meeting was held on 
22 
nd  April, 2015 wherein  some broad decisions were tak en on the issues raised by the 
Committee. The Committee takes serious note of the fact that since then almost two years have 
elapsed and the Ministry till date has not bothered  to approach the Committee to inform it 
about the status on these issues. The Committee fee ls that since these rules/regulations have 
not been amended, in effect it means that during th is period the existing  rules about which 
the Committee recorded its observations are being i mplemented. The Committee wants to 
know the status of the Rules/ Regulations on the sa id issues and expects the Ministry to 
intimate it of the same at the earliest.  The Commi ttee further hopes that the Committee set up 
by the Ministry has taken into consideration all as pects upon which the Committee had 
dwelled in its 220 th  Report on the matter, and, accordingly modify the rules/regulations.  
 
11. The Committee observed that its recommendation regarding looking into the possibility 
of increasing the Corpus Fund of the National Trust  was not accepted by the Ministry of 
Social Justice & Empowerment as the Ministry of Fin ance turned down the proposal. The 
Committee, however, was satisfied that the Finance Ministry was considering to provide 
financial/ budgetary support to the flagship scheme s of the National Trust to enhance its 
activities.   Committee’s main concern is that lack  of adequate funding should not be a 
limiting factor for the working of the National Tru st for fulfilling its mandate and hopes that 
the newly granted budgetary fund would provide the adequate financial support to the 
National Trust through its flagship schemes and enhance it’s activities.       
 
12. On the issue of ARUNIM, the Committee notes the obs ervation of the Board of 
National Trust that the Association for Rehabilitat ion under National Trust Initiative 
Marketing (ARUNIM) was technically an organization not a scheme and it should be 
registered with the Trust for funds. As per decisio n taken by Board ARUNIM became a 
registered organization of National Trust and conse quently no financial support was given to 

them during 2014-15. ARUNIM also refunded balance f und which was unutilized by the 
Trust. The Committee expresses its concern over the  association of ARUNIM with the 
National Trust without getting it registered with it as it was organization and not a scheme and 
recommends that the Ministry should, in future, ens ure that proper safeguards are installed to 
ensure that such organizations are associated with it by following the proper procedures. 
 
13. Further, the Committee is not satisfied by the Note containing information 
regarding the setting up and later disbanding the o rganisation called ARUNIM within the 
National Trust, the Committee would like to term it  as fiasco committed by the over-
enthusiasm of the persons who failed to observe est ablished procedures. How could they go 
on allocating funds during 2008-2014 without any cl ue about its utilization and 
achievement for which it was set up. Merely refunding a part of the amount out of the more 
than Rs two crore given, does not absolve the perso ns of their responsibility. The 
Committee in view of the manner ARUNIM fiasco has h appened is constrained to 
recommend that it needs to be enquired further and responsibility fixed. The entire 
exercise needs to be completed within two months and report be furnished to be Committee 
for consideration.  
14. The Committee deliberating on Recruitment Rules als o emphasized that the 
Ministry should expedite framing of Recruitment Rul es not only for post of Chairman, 
National Trust but also for the Officers and employ ees of the Trust at the earliest. The 
Ministry in their reply stated that as regard to Re cruitment Rules for other employees, the 
necessary action to framing of Recruitment Rules is being taken by the National Trust. The 
Committee takes serious view of the fact that even after lapse of almost one and half years 
Ministry did not bother to inform the Committee of the steps taken by the Trust in this 
regard. The Committee expects that the Ministry sho uld take pro-active role and 
accordingly impress upon the Trust to frame the Rec ruitment Rules for the employees on 
priority basis and accordingly inform the Committee.   
 
15. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry will car ry out the recommendations of the 
Committee expeditiously under intimation to it. The  Committee is also of the opinion that 
proper safeguards are essential for giving effect t o the spirit with which the Parliament passed 

the  National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation 
and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 and stresses up on the Ministry to ensure that the benefits 
incorporated in the Act reach the intended recipients.  
  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDIN ATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
III 
 Third Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 pm on Tuesday, the 28 th  March, 2017 in Room No.126-C 
(Committee Chairman’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy    Chairman 
Members 
2. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
3. 
 Shri K. Parasaran 
4.  Dr.K. Keshava Rao 
5.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
6.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
 
Secretariat 
1. 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
4.  Smt. Monica Baa, Deputy Director 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting.  The 
following draft reports were taken up for consideration and adoption by the Committee: 
(i) 
      Draft 230 th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during its 
240 th  Session; 
(ii)        Draft 231 st  Report on the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Regulations, 2007 and 
The Framing of Rules and Regulations under the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999- 

Implementation of the 220 th  Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha;  
(iii)    Draft 232 nd  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during its 
241 st  Session; and 
(iv)        Draft 233 rd  Report on Notification issued by Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) on Demonetization. 
 
3. The Committee considered the reports and unanimously adopted the draft 230 th , 231 st , 232 nd  
and 233 rd  Reports and decided to present these Reports to the House on the 3 rd  April, 2017.  
Accordingly, it authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Sanjay Seth and Shri Ali Anwar Ansari , 
Members of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
4. *    *    * 
 
5     The meeting adjourned at 3.30 p.m. 
 
 
_______________________ 
*** *** Matter not related to the subject.  