 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
(Presented on 19 December, 2008) 
 
 
 
Report on All India Institute of Medical Sciences Regulations, 
1999. 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2008/ Pausa,1929  (Saka) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
 
 
 All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Regulations, 1999 
 
1-28 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
29-41 
 
5. MINUTES* 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
ANNEXURE  
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   28TH MAY, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla  Chairperson 
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien     
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak    
4. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal    
5. Ms. Mabel Rebello  
6. Shri Vikram Verma     
7. Shri Raghudandan Sharma    
8. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
9. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari    
10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy      
11. Shri Abani Roy 
12 Shri Tiruchi Siva 
13. Shri Biswajit Daimary   
14. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya  
15. Shri Bharatkumar Raut 
    
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi  Deputy Director 
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director 
5. Shri Ranjan Chaturvedi, Research Officer 
 
     
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Seventy-Eighth Report of the Committee. 
 
1.2       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
17th December, 2008. 
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise  out of the scrutiny of All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences Regulations, 1999.  The observations and recommendations 
of the Committee are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA                                                              
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI 
___________, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

Report on the 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences Regulations, 1999 
 
 
After the independence of India in 1947, the founding fathers of the country 
visualized the setting up of a world -class institution in the field of medi cal education; 
research and patient care so that the doctors in the country could get the benefit of a 
high standard of medical education and research in the country itself instead of going 
abroad. Accordingly, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences ( AIIMS) was set up as 
an autonomous body under the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act, 1956. Section 
13 of the AIIMS Act, 1956 outlines the objectives of the Institute as: 
 
a.       to develop patterns of teaching in under -graduate and post -graduate m edical 
education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education 
to all medical colleges and other allied institutions in India; 
b.   to bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the 
training of personnel in all important branches of health activity; and 
c  to attain self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education. 
 
2. It was envisaged that there should not be any unwarranted bureaucratic/executive 
control in the day-to-day functioning of AIIMS.  In fact, the then Hon’ble Union Health 
Minister, Madam Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur while piloting the bill with regard to AIIMS 
in Lok Sabha on the 18th February 1956, had specifically stated:  
 
“Subject to such minimum control as the Government of India may ex ercise through its 
rule-making powers, the Institute will enjoy a large measure of autonomy in order that 
it may fulfill the objectives…The Government of India will, of course, make itself 
responsible for providing adequate funds for the maintenance of the institute…. 
The future of the Institute will lie ultimately in the hands of the Directors, the Professors 
and other members of the teaching staff and students…” 
 
3. The AIIMS Act, 1956 provides for framing of rules by the Central Government 
under Section 28 and framing of regulations by the Institute, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, under Section 29. Accordingly, AIIMS, with the prior 
approval of the Central Government have framed the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences Regulations, 1999.  
 

4. These Regulations were identified for examination by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha in 1999 and the Committee had been in correspondence with 
both the Department of Health and AIIMS since then on various issues. During the 
course of its examination, the Committee took the oral evidence of  the representatives 
of the Department of Health and AIIMS, on the 27th September, 2001, the 28th January, 
2005, the 27th September, 2006 and the  29th March, 2007.  The main issues that cropped 
up during these exercise have been enumerated below:  
 
Delay in framing of regulations 
 
5. The Committee noted that although the AIIMS was set up under AIIMS Act, 1956 
the regulations contemplated thereunder were framed after about 43 years in 1999.  
When asked about the inordinate delay in the framing of the regulations and that how 
the AIIMS was regulated all these years in the absence of these regulations, the Ministry 
clarified that the first set of these regulations were formulated and approved by the  
Government on the 14th October, 1958.  The same had to be notified by publishing in the 
Official Gazette, but due to oversight AIIMS failed to do it, instead they had wrongly 
forwarded it to the Accountant General, Central Revenue.  Later on, although fou r 
amendments were carried out, but this discrepancy was not discovered.  It was only in 
1998, when the proposal to amend the regulations for increasing retirement age in 
compliance with the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission was sent to Law 
Ministry, this mistake came to the notice of the Ministry.  After discussions with the 
Ministry of Law a new set of regulations was notified in 1999 including all the 
regulations notified earlier, so that retrospectively they get regularized.  The Law 
Ministry felt that the past actions do not need any revalidation.  
 
6. The Committee is dismayed over recurrence and persistence of an oversight for 43 
long years despite the existence of Section 29 sub Section (3) in the Act which stipulates 
that the regulations framed under such Section should have been laid before each House 
of Parliament as soon as they are made. The Committee ho lds the Ministry responsible 
for such omission. As evident in the succeeding Para graphs of this Report, during the 
detailed examination of the AIIMS Act, 1956, the Committee gathered an unmistakable 
impression that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare purposely and 
systematically abrogated the objective of the Act by retaining ambiguities in the 
Regulations.   
 

Regulation 4 (2) (b) of the AIIMS Regulations, 1999 regarding Minutes of the Meeting of 
the Institute Body 
 
7. The regulation reads as follows:- 
“All proceedings of the meetings of the Institute shall be entered in a Minutes Book to be 
maintained by the Secretary for the purpose and e ach minute shall be signed by the 
President of that meeting after the same is duly confirmed.” 
 
8. The sub-regulation is silent about the procedure regarding circulation of minutes to 
the members of the Institute particularly for the benefit of those members who could not 
attend the meeting on a particular day. The Committee queried whether the Ministry 
have any objection in incorporating such a provision in the regulation. 
 
9. The Committee also observed that the regulations regarding (a) calling of a meeting, 
(b) preparation of agenda, (c) procedures for circulation of minutes like who will record 
the minutes, who will circulate the minutes, whether the minutes to be circulated to the 
members for approval has to have prior approval of the chairman first, (d) the  time-
frame for circulating the minutes and seeking the approval from the members, (e) who 
will prepare the final draft of the approved minutes and finally (f) entering the minutes 
in the minute -book with due authentication by the signature of both the sec retary and 
the president/chairman are specious.  
 
10. Similarly, regulation 4 (9), that empowers President to include in the Agenda 
fresh/supplementary items, has been a controversial regulation for many years.  Often 
agenda items of far reaching importance are included at the last moment leaving no time 
for the members to participate in a meaningful and considered manner.  The Committee 
feels that it should be done in rarest of the rare cases and ordinarily, no important 
matter should be taken up without prior notice of all the members unless it is an urgent 
issue which has emerged after the meeting has been fixed and an Agenda has been 
circulated. 
 
11. With regulation 4 (2) a President has the power to decide the place, date and the time 
of the meeting.  All India  Institute of Sciences is situated in Delhi itself if the local 
situation is not favorable for which the reasons to be recorded then only meeting should 
be held at any other place, date and time as per convenience of the President. 
 

12. With respect to regulat ion 4 (11) the Institute is being run directly by the Director 
and he is responsible and accountable for its day -to-day affairs. So, which matter is 
urgent and/or important no one else except the Director is in a better position to decide. 
This decision sh ould not be left solely with either the President or the Government of 
India. 
 
13. The regulation is silent about fate of the members who often remained repeatedly 
absent in the meetings. There needs to be a clause for their removal, if they remain 
consistently absent in participating in the meetings without informing for more than 
twice. 
 
14. The Ministry vide its O.M. dated the 25th January 2000, informed that the minutes of 
the meeting were circulated to all the members as soon as the same was approved by the 
Chairman after the meeting, for inviting objections, if any. However, the Ministry said 
that it had no objection to the incorporation of such a provision in the Regulations. 
 
15. The Committee in its communication to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
dated the 13th June, 2003, enquired about action the Ministry had taken in this regard. 
The Ministry replied that the existing procedure regarding circulation of minutes had 
the approval of the Ministry and that the directions of the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha were being followed. However, a proposal for necessary 
amendment to this effect was under process for approval of the Institute Body. 
 
16. The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its 
OM dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that proposed amendments to  the 
Regulations pertaining to the circulation of minutes had  not been placed before the 
Institute Body/ Governing Body. However, some three months have already lapsed since 
then and the Committee considers that the Institute /Governing Body should have taken 
a positive view of the proposed amendments during the interregnum. The Committee is 
of the opinion that Regulations must clearly fix the periodicity of the meetings of 
Governing Body and the Instit ute Body. The Committee feels that instead of leaving the 
decision on the President/ Chairman, at least one meeting of these bodies  should be held  
every quarter. The Verbatim records of the meetings should be kept along with the final 
minutes.  The Commit tee also recommends that the Draft minutes of the meetings of 
IB/GB should be circulated under the signature of the Director of the Institute and only 
the final minutes  duly confirmed by the members present, should be signed by the 

President and filed in the Minutes Book. Minutes may be circulated and confirmed by 
the Members electronically. 
 
Regulation 4(9) P owers  of the President to include fresh/supplementary items in the 
agenda for the meeting 
 
17. As regards Regulation 4(9) that empowers the President to  include 
fresh/supplementary items, the Committee recommends that any issue so included by 
the President or with his approval should be first adopted by the simple majority of 
members present and any decision thereon should be taken with 2/3 majority of th e 
membership of I nstitute. Similar practice should be adopted in respect of Regulation 
8(9) with respect of Governing Body with an exception that all the decision should be 
unanimous.  The Committee recommends that necessary provisions should be 
incorporated in the relevant Regulations.  
 
Regulation 4 (6)- Time period for calling extraordinary meeting 
 
18. The sub -regulation provides that an extraordinary meeting of the Institute can be 
called if at least nine members of the Institute desired so in writing. The  Committee 
wanted to know the justification for calling the meeting within one month and not at a 
shorter notice, especially when the notice period for calling an extraordinary meeting by 
the President was seven days, and for an ordinary meeting the notice  period was two 
weeks. 
 
19. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 25 th January, 2000, replied that the 
regulation provided for calling of an extraordinary meeting of the Institute within a 
period of seven days. Hence, the meeting may be called within a period  of 7 days or a 
fortnight but not later than one month. 
 
20. The Committee  further inquired that when there is a provision for calling an 
extraordinary meeting by President in seven days, why regulation 4(6) should also not 
provide for a period of ‘seven days’ for calling an extraordinary meeting of the  Institute 
instead of one month. The Ministry replied that normally, the meetings of the Institute 
Body or the Governing Body are called at the convenience of the President of the 
Institute. In case of urgency, the President can call an extraordinary meeting of the 
Institute Body/Governing Body for which a notice of seven days would be sufficient. The 

Ministry replied that the existing provisions are adequate for providing a notice period 
of one month in case of written request of 9 members of the Institute. However, it was 
assured by the Ministry that the views of the Committee would be placed before the 
Institute/Governing Body for their consideration. 
 
21. A proposal to have amendment in AIIMS Regulations, 1999 as suggested by the 
Committee was placed before the Governing Body in its meeting held on 3.4.2002. The 
Institute Body also concurred with the decision of the Governing Body in its meeting 
held on 11.9.2002. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has approve d the said 
amendment and this amendment has been carried out in the AIIMS Regulation, 1999, in 
regulation 4 (6) as under:- 
 
“An extraordinary meeting of the Institute may be called on a written request of  not 
less than 9 members of the Institute within 7 days of the receipt of the requisition and 
the request made by members for a requisitioned meeting shall indicate the purpose of 
the meeting.” 
 
22. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has carried out  the amendments 
suggested by it, incorporating t he provision that an extraordinary meeting of the 
Institute can be called on a written request of not less than 9 members of the Institute 
within 7 days of the receipt of the requisition vide regulation 4 (6) of the AIIMS 
Regulations, 1999. The Committee recommends that relevant background papers on the 
issue of such extraordinary meeting must be electronically or otherwise circulated 
among the members at least 5 days in advance. The relevant regulation must be 
amended accordingly.  
 
Regulation 4 (14) Confi rmation of business transacted through circulation of papers -
incorporation of savings clause 
 
23. This sub -section prescribes that the business of the Institute may be transacted by 
circulating paper and acted upon, if approved unanimously.  The resolution and  action 
taken thereon shall be placed before the meeting for confirmation.  The Committee felt 
that in case the resolution in this regard failed to acquire the confirmation there had to 
be a savings clause validating the things done in pursuance of the dec ision arrived at by 
circulating papers.  The Ministry in their reply dated 25 th January 2000, said that if the 
resolution had been unanimously approved by the members by circulation, the same 

was expected to be confirmed in the regular meeting, since the s ame members who had 
unanimously approved by circulation, will be present in the regular meetings also.  
 
24. The Committee reiterated its stand that there is nothing wrong in inserting a saving 
clause in regulation 4 (14), for saving any action taken in pursua nce of business 
transacted by circulating papers.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vide their 
communication dated the 20th February, 2002 informed that the suggestions given by the 
Committee were noted and AIIMS was being asked to put up an agend a item for that 
purpose for the approval of the Governing Body/Institute Body.   The Ministry on the 
27th June 2005, informed that a proposal to have an amendment in AIIMS Regulations, 
1999, as suggested by the Committee, will be placed before the Institut e Body for 
approval. 
 
25. The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its 
OM dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that proposed amendments to the 
Regulations pertaining the insertion of saving clause had  not been placed be fore the 
Institute Body/ Governing Body. However, three months have already lapsed since then 
and the Committee considers that the I nstitute/Governing Body should have taken a 
positive view of the proposed amendments during the interregnum.  The Committee 
strongly recommends that there must be inserted a saving clause in regulation 4 (14) for 
saving any action taken in pursuance of business transacted by circulating the papers 
and accordingly, AIIMS Regulations, 1999 , be suitably amended and a proposal to th at 
effect be approved by the Institute Body at the earliest. 
 
Regulation 18-Revision of fee for various courses 
 
26. The regulation provides for the fee payable for the Post Graduate and Under 
Graduate courses at the AIIMS.   The Committee found that the fees f or courses 
conducted at AIIMS were highly subsidized and wanted to know the justification for 
prescribing such subsidized rates of fee.  The Ministry vide their OM dated the 25 th 
January 2000, said that there was no justification at all to carry on with th e highly 
subsidized fees for all courses in the Institute.  In fact, a proposal to increase the fee in 
respect of all courses was placed before the Academic Committee/Governing Body that 
was approved.  However, the implementation of the same has been kept in abeyance by 
the Governing Body. 
 

27. When asked about the reason for keeping in abeyance the implementation of the 
decision to increase the fee in respect of all courses, the Ministry replied that the 
proposal to enhance the tuition fees in respect of all t he courses of AIIMS was 
considered by the Academic Committee on the 13 th January 1998, as recommended by 
the Deans Committee and Staff Council. While agreeing to the proposal, the Academic 
Committee decided that enhancement of tuition fee will be made appl icable to the 
prospective candidates and the same may be mentioned in the prospectus. The 
recommendations of the Academic Committee were placed before the Governing Body 
on 5.6.1998/17.61998. The Governing Body, after taking into consideration all aspects of 
the issue, decided to keep in abeyance the enhancement of tuition fees. It was also 
desired that this matter might be re -looked by various committees. Accordingly, the 
Deans’ Committee considered the matter in a meeting held on 23.2.2000 and the 
recommendations of the Deans’ Committee were also considered by the Staff Council on 
8.8.2000. It was decided that tuition fees be enhanced five times of the present fees 
prospectively from the next batch. Regarding hike in fee for Ph. D. students, it was 
decided that a Committee be appointed to go into details. A Sub -Committee had been 
constituted on 12.9.2000 to discuss all the issues concerning fee hike, under the 
Chairmanship of Professor Kusum Verma, head of the Department of Pathology and the 
recommendations of the Committee are still awaited. After the receipt of 
recommendation of the committee, Academic Committee as well as Governing Body 
would consider for implementation of the decision.   The Ministry on the 27 th June 2005, 
informed that a complete propos al in this regard would be submitted by AIIMS to the 
Ministry after its approval by the Institute Body, as the Ministry might like to 
rationalize the rates further in view of prevailing or proposed rates in the other medical 
institutions. 
 
28. The Committee ta kes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its 
OM dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that  issues pertaining to revision of fee 
have yet not been taken up by the Institute.  The Committee expresses its concern about 
the intermi nable delay in rationalizing  fee struct ure in AIIMS . The Committee wants 
further clarification on the issue as to why the matter of rationalizing fee structure has 
been  pending for such a long time and if any further developments have taken place the 
Committee should be informed about it.  The Committee of the view that fee structure 
should be realistic and rational. The fee structure should be reviewed periodically after 
every five year.  
 

 
Appointment of Dean and Sub-Dean 
 
29. The Committee was informed that one la dy sub-dean was appointed in the Institute 
by the Director and sacked by the Ministry witho ut assigning any reason.  A s such the 
Committee feels strongly that one post of Dean and one post of sub -dean be earmarked 
for the lady members of faculty only.  The  Committee expresses its deep anguish over 
the manner in which a prominent Professor was removed from the post without letting 
her complete her tenure.  The Committee also recommends clear guidelines in the form 
of regulations for the appointment to the po sts of Dean and sub -Dean and that there 
should not be any overlapping of powers between Director, AIIMS and President of 
Institute Body so far as the appointment to such academic posts are concerned and such 
powers should remain the exclusive domain of Director, AIIMS. 
 
Role of President, Governing Body of AIIMS and autonomy of the Institute 
 
30. Section 7 of the AIIMS Act, 1956, provides that: 
 
There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by the Central 
Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute. 
 
The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such function as are laid down 
in this Act or may be prescribed by rules or regulations. 
 
31. Further Section 10 (3) of the AIIMS Act, 1956 provides that the Presi dent of the 
Institute shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman thereof shall 
exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations. 
 
32. To understand the spirit behind creating of an institute of national imp ortance, and 
mandate which was given to the executive and the assurance given to the Parliament can 
be better appreciated if the relevant extracts from the speeches taken up from the 
Parliamentary debates when the AIIMS Bill was discussed in the Parliament  in 1956 on 
18th February 1956, Shri T.S.A Chettiar (Tiruppur) sought clarification regarding 
official and non -official members of the Institute Body. He demanded to have more 
number of non-officials, doctors and scientists to be appointed to this institut e.  To have 
a majority of non -officials would always be a healthy convention as such the people 

would be least likely to be influenced by the orders given, written or otherwise.  On 20 th 
February 1956, again Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur, Health Minister further c larified in Lok 
Sabha as to the official character of the Governing Body. She said; “I may bring to the 
notice of Members that there are merely three or four officials out of the seventeen 
members, because the non -medical scientists and those representing the Indian Science 
Congress certainly won’t be officials. Representatives of the medical faculties are not 
likely to be officials. Then there are three members of Parliament who certainly are not 
officials. So that objection really does not stand”  
 
33. On 7 th May, 1956, to Dr. Radha Kumud Mukherji’s query whether Ministry of 
Health would be represented in the Institute, she said that that the Director General of 
Health Services, Government of India, would be ex-officio member of the body. 
 
34. On 8 th May, 1956, Ra j Kumari Amrit Kaur further clarified about the non -official 
character of the Institute Body when  she said.” And if you will look at the membership 
in clause 4 (a), 4 (e) and 4 (f), you will see that the non official element is very, very much 
present there.” 
 
35. Similarly, on 9 th May, 1956, once again she clarified that in clause 4 (e) there were 
five persons to be nominated by the Government of India of whom one shall be a non -
medical scientist, representing the Indian Science Congress. 
 
36. From the above assurance given by the then Hon’ble Minister of Health, Raj Kumari 
Amrit kaur while piloting the AIIMS. Bill in Lok Saba and Rajya Sabha, it is obvious 
that anybody coming under 4 (a), 4(e) and 4 (f) meant to be non officials. Further, it is 
clear that all the five persons nominated under 4 (e) has to be from Indian Science 
Congress of whom one will be a non medical scientist. Further while clarifying regarding 
the representation of the Ministry of Health in the Institute Body, stated categorically 
that other th an DGHS, who is the ex -officio member, there won’t be any additional 
representation from the Ministry of Health. 
 
37. To respect the assurance given to Parliament after establishing the Institute, she 
remained the President of the Institute (while being only R ajya Sabha MP) without 
being Health Minister from 1957 to 1964 (till her death) but subsequently except a few 
occasions these position has been diluted by nominating health Minister as the President 
of the Institute and the Governing Body. 

 
38. Regarding President of the Institute, Shri P.N. Sapru said in Rajya Sabha during the 
debate on the Bill that the President of the Institute should be an independent person 
and that he must be either the Chief Justice of India or the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or 
some person of high status not identified with any political party. He emphasized that in 
order that this institute must inspire confidence, the President should be a person of 
independence and character who would be free from the control of the executive 
government. 
 
39. After 1964 i.e. with the death of Dr. Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur almost after 8 years of 
establishment of AIIMS, Health Ministers started becoming the member and also the 
President of Institute Body and Chairman of the Governing Body, expect on few 
occasions. After August 2000, amendment with respect to the membership of Hon’ble 
MPs in the Institute body, they lose their membership after they become 
Speaker/Deputy Speaker/Deputy Chairman/Cabinet Minister/Minister of State: 
 
“Provided that the term of office of a member elected under clause (g) of section  4 
comes to an end as soon as he “becomes a Minister or Minister of State or  Deputy 
Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the  People; or the 
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States of “ceases to be a  member of the House 
from which he was elected. (Inserted by Act 33 of 2000)” 
 
40. Except for a brief period, there has been a practice of appointing the Health Minister 
to be appointed as the President of the Institute with the approval of the Prime Minister.  
But none of the provisions of the Act provides for such nomination.  The AIIMS has 
always argued that the autonomy of the Institute stands undermined by nominating the 
Health Minister as the President who is ex -officio Chairman of the Governing Body.   
Thus the AIIMS, which should be independent of the government, actually comes under 
the direct control of the Health Minister.  
 
41. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is, however, of the opinion that this did 
not in anyway jeopardize the autonomy of AIIMS.  The Ministry argued that the 
government was providing about Rs.400 crores every year to the Institute both under 
Plan and Non -Plan and the amount was steadily increasing.  Further, since AIIMS was 
set up under an Act of Parliament, it has to be accountable to the legislature as well.  
This accountability is best ensured if both the Health and Family Welfare Ministry and 

Secretary (Health) are brought on board of the institute.  Under these circumstances, the 
government have always no minated the Health and Family Welfare Minister and 
Secretary (Health) as Chairman and Member respectively, in the Institute Body of 
AIIMS so that the interests of the government are adequately protected.  In fact, the 
appointment of the Health and Family W elfare Minister as President of the Institute is 
the bone of contention between the Ministry and AIIMS.  
 
42. The Committee also notes that the Health Minister, having an overwhelming 
majority of his nominees in the Institute Body as well as the Governing Body  has been 
able to carry through decisions as desired by him in these bodies.  The Committee also 
notes that the Standing Finance Committee, Standing Selection Committee and 
Academic Committee are also directly run and controlled by the Ministry of Health. 
 
43. The Committee is deeply concerned about the ominous implications of the 
appointment of the Health Minister as the President of  the Institute. The country had 
seen enough of it during the recent past.  The Committee notes that when the AIIMS  Bill 
was considered in Parliament in the year 1956, concern for guarding Institute’s 
autonomy was very much reflected in speeches made there .  Even t he then Health 
Minister also gave  assurance that it will be ensured.  She said that the Bill clearly 
provides that in the Institute’s Body, except for 2 -3 representatives from the 
Government out of total membership of 17, all others will be non -official. There shall 
not be any unwarranted bureaucratic/executive control in the functioning of AIIMS; 
and the power to run/manage functioning of AIIMS shall be completely vested with the 
Director, faculty, resident doctors and staff of AIIMS.   
 
44. The Committee is not convinced with the Ministry’s justification for appointment of 
the Minister of Health and Family Welfare as the Preside nt of the Institute Body  to 
protect the interest of Government and the funds are being provided by the Ministry of 
Health.  No doubt funds are provided by the Government, but if the institute adheres to 
the broad financial policy of the government, interfe rence by the Ministry in its day -to-
day functioning is highly undesirable.  The Committee expressed its deep anguish about 
this bizarre justification extended by the Ministry.  The Committee only wonders if the 
Ministry at all has the authority to interpret the provisions of the Act in contradiction to 
what was conveyed to the Parliament by the then Minister of Health. The Government 
should keep the interest of millions of people and their health and medical research 
uppermost in their mind.  The funds are allocated by the Ministry of Finance to all the 

Ministries and Government institutions from Consolidated Fund of India.  However, 
this does not entitle the Finance Minister to be the presiding functionary of all such 
institutions.  The Parliament being the  watchdog over all the executive bodies, can 
always point out and hold these bodies responsible for their malfunctioning or financial 
misappropriation. The noble duties which the AIIMS has to perform namely, patient 
care and treatment, high quality medical education and path-breaking medical research, 
etc. cannot be effectively achieved if the functional autonomy of AIIMS was not ensured.  
The Committee , therefore,  reiterates its stand for preserving and protecting the 
autonomy of the Institute, as a statutory body, which stands undermined by nominating 
the Health and Family Welfare Minister as President of the Institute , whereby he 
automatically assumes the position of Chairman of the Governing Body.  The 
Committee recommends that the Standing Finance Commi ttee and Academic 
Committee should be headed by the Director of AIIMS alongwith the academicians of 
repute in the fields of medical sciences.  The Committee feels that such a prestigious 
institution should be kept free from government control in order to e nsure efficiency 
and in the interest of the country.  
 
45. The Committee finds that relevant Regulations  pertaining the role of President of 
Institute, Governing Council and its President are conspicuously ambiguous. Going by 
the language of Regulation (6), th e Committee also apprehends if the Governing Body 
also exercises such functions in addition to those mentioned in Schedule I. Further, the 
President of the Institute works in twin capacity – President of the Institute and the 
Chairman of the Governing Body , in addition to his/her personal capacity. The 
Committee considers the entire drafting of the Regulations has been kept specious. 
While no specific powers and functions of the President of Institute in his twin capacity 
have been defined in the main body of the Regulations except in the Schedule, the 
President of the Institute dose have a overbearing power in his/her three capacities. 
While the Regulations define Governing Body as the executive body of the Institute, no 
specific executive powers are confer red upon the Chairman of the Governing Body 
individually. Therefore by delegating the core executive powers in Chairman, the 
Governing Body has over delegated its power in one individual, thereby defeating the 
very purpose of Governing Body to a large exte nt. Such delegation of power may create 
twin centers of authority i.e. the Chairman of the Governing Body and the Director of 
the Institute, who by the Regulations has been made the administrative head of the 
Institute. In context of the prevalent trend of appointing the Minister in the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare as the President of the Institute, such concentration of 

power seriously undermines the position of the Director and imperils the autonomy of 
the AIIMS. Obviously such a scheme goes contrary to the spirit of the present legislation 
which was reflected in the statement made by the then Minister Rajkumari Amrit Kaur  
before the Parliament. The Committee therefore recommends that AIIMS must 
overcome such under-regulation in respect of role and functions of Governing Body and 
its Chairman by incorporating substantive  provisions in the regulations. 
 
46. The Committee notes that the Ministry has cited the judgment of the Supreme Court 
in the case B. Shankaranand Vs Common Cause and others ( Civil A ppeal No. 
4662/1996) for justifying the nomination of Minister and the Secretary as the Member of 
Institute under Section 4(e) of the Act. Inter alia the Minister also becomes the President 
of Institute and the Chairman of the Governing Body. This situatio n was never 
envisaged in the Act. Referring in detail to the  reply of the then Minister of Health to 
the numerous queries of the MPs apprehending the predominance of Government 
nominees wherein the Minister  categorically denied such possibility on the fl oor of the 
House, the Committee considers that it was a solemn assurance given by the Minister of 
Government of India to the Parliament. Such assurance has not been reverted ever since 
either by amending the Act or through any other instrument like Motion or Resolution 
in the House. It is therefore extremely important that the Supreme Court judgment 
should be read alongwith the statement of the then Minister before the Parliament, to 
avoid any possible conflict between the two organs.  
 
Service rules 
 
47. At many places in the Regulations, such as  Regulation 14 (2), 27, 28 (1), 33 (1) & (2) 
and 35, reference has been made to the fundamental rules as well as rules regulating 
leave, GPF, Pension, Conduct of the employees belonging to the Central Civil Service.  
As per these regulations, the rules/regulations applicable to CCS employees have been 
made applicable to the employees of the Institute.  The Committee wanted to know 
whether these rules meant for the civil services are working well in the case of 
medical/teaching/technical officers/staffs in AIIMS. 
 
48. The Ministry vide their communication dated 28 th February, 2002 stated that the 
maximum category of posts created in the Institute are similar to the posts available in 
the Ministries except the faculty posts.  The pay scales and qualifications for recruitment 
to the categories of posts other than faculty posts are also similar to that of Central 

Government employees.  As such, similar rules were made applicable to the employees 
of the Institute.  The Ministry sa id that the administrative rules meant for the civil 
services are working well in AIIMS. 
 
49. The Committee at its meeting held on the 20 th May, 2003 expressed serious concern 
over a large number of service related cases pending against the Institute.  Accordi ngly, 
a communication dated the 13th June, 2003  was addressed to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare seeking clarification on the issue.  The Ministry vide their 
communication dated the 30 th July, 2003 have informed that AIIMS has various 
functional divisions such as Personnel, Hospital, Academic, Vigilance, Horticulture etc.  
Out of the 240 cases pending 145 relate to service matters which comes to around 2% of 
the number of personnel in position.  Keeping in view the staff structure and multi -
dimensional cadre structure existing in the Institute, the percentage of court cases 
cannot be said to be on the higher side. 
 
50. The other 96 cases pending before the various courts against the Institute relate to 
Hospital Affairs, Examination and Students relate d matters.  This number is also quite 
low, if one takes into consideration student strength and examination for various 
medical courses conducted by the Institute. 
 
51. Moreover, in order to redress the grievances of the employees a Computerized 
Grievance Cell  has been established at the Institute.  On the directive of the Hon’ble 
High Court, a Permanent Negotiating Machinery headed by Dean, Institute and 
Members of the various recognized union too has been established to look after the 
grievances of various se ctions of the Institute employees and doctors to avoid friction 
and unrest. 
 
52. The Committee is of the opinion that  there has been gross under -regulation under 
the Sections 28 and 29 of the Act. The Regulations framed under these Sections are 
generic and lac k specific details. This has led to discrepancies in interpretation and 
application, thereby causing avoidable litigations.   Certain Regulations pertaining the 
service conditions draw heavily from the Central Rules. The Committee is of the opinion 
that AIIMS being a statutory body should have its own proper subordinate legislation as 
it is considered a centre of excellence.  Therefore rules and regulations should be laid 
down, that are suitable  to its own requirements.  If it was not so, it would be rendered 
merely as  a part of the Department of Health. The Committee is of the opinion that 

AIIMS should have its own elaborate and specific rules and regulations so there is 
adequate transparency in service matters and unnecessary controversies are avoided . In 
respect of certain Policy decisions taken by the Central Government in respect of 
retirement age or reservation, the AIIMS can refer to framework determined by the 
DOPT, however, other service conditions should be specifically detailed in the 
Regulations.  
 
53. The Committee takes very serious note that while Regulation 23 recognizes the 
temporary posts at AIIMS, no detailed regulations regarding their service conditions 
have been made. As such there are grave and justified grievances of Resident Doctors. 
The limit of working hours per week for the Resident Doctors is routine violated. Their 
stipend and allowances have not been revised for years. There have been apprehensions 
about irregularity in the selection of senior residents.  Taking cue from the recent 
decision by the Courts in respect of disclosure of marks, it will be prudent on the part of 
AIIMS, that the marks of theory and practical are disclosed separately in the selection 
of Senior Residents.  The Committee also recommends that the relevant Standing  
Committee of the Governing Body should look into to accommodations and amenities to 
which Resident Doctors are entitled.  
 
54. The Committee would specifically like to comment upon the service conditions of the 
physiotherapists. The discipline is growing in p rofile with introduction of new aids. 
Disease specific rehabilitation therapies are required. Accordingly the Government has 
introduced new Degree courses in physiotherapy. It is therefore required to improve the 
service conditions and emoluments be  of the physiotherapist and the AIIMS may also 
take a view on allowing them the Non-Practicing Allowance. 
Regulation 24(1)-Qualification for appointment 
 
55. The regulation provides that age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to 
a  post under the Institute shall be prescribed by the appointing authority, keeping in view 
the qualifications and experience prescribed by the Central Government for similar posts.  
When asked whether the age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to a pos t 
in the Institute had been prescribed,  the Ministry informed (on 25 th January, 2000) that it 
had been done for both, faculty and non-faculty posts and the same were being  followed for 
appointments to various posts in the Institute. It needs to observe t hat age, experience and 
qualifications are invariably left to appointing authority without being notified either as 
rule or regulations. Various service conditions like promotions are not defined in the 

regulations. Instead there is reference in AIIMS regu lations 35 that the Central 
Government service conditions will apply to the AIIMS employee, thus leaving a wide gap 
and error due to reference and interpretation of Central Government service condition, 
which has resulted in various litigations purely due to irregularities in the implementation 
of various service conditions in AIIMS employees.  
 
56. It would be pertinent to refer here to following observations made by the Hon’ble 
Division Bench of Delhi High Court in the case W.P. (c). No. 8485 of 2006 and LPA No. 
2045-2046 of 2006 –Decided on 29.3.2007 
 
…..We direct the Government of India and the Institute Body to formulate a 
policy covering the various facets and conditions of service of its employees including the 
Director of the Institute in accordance with  law and to uniformly apply such policy in 
the times to come. This would not only help the Institute and the Government in 
reducing the litigation, but would also increase the prestige of the Institution. 
 
57. The Ministry on the 28 th February 2002, informed t he Committee that they had 
agreed to prescribe age, qualifications, etc for each post. However, as the Regulations 
generally dealt with the policy issues, the age, qualifications, etc. could be prescribed 
separately by way of notified rules.  These rules c ould be published through a gazette 
notification and AIIMS had been asked to do the needful urgently.  Subsequently, on the 
27th June 2005, the Ministry informed that in view of the new format and requirement 
as per DOPT, the Recruitment Rules were being r ecast.  Immediately after 
incorporating necessary changes, the Recruitment Rules will be put before the 
Governing Body for approval.  They will be notified immediately after this approval, 
assured the Ministry.  
 
58. Taking view of the submission made by the M inistry on 28 th February 2002, the 
Committee notes with reservation that even after passage of more than  six years  the 
Ministry have not been able to notify through Gazette  the age and qualification  in 
respect of each post.  The Committee notes that pr ovisions under the Regulation remain 
specious leaving scope of random arbitrariness which is evident from the mounting 
number of court cases. The Committee also finds it objectionable that Regulations have 
hinged qualifications and experience for appointme nts with those prescribed by the 
Central Government. The Committee feels that AIIMS was set up as an institution of 
academic and research excellence and was given autonomy. However, over the years 

there has been definite pattern in depleting the autonomy a s is evident from 
predominance of Central Government nominees in the Governing Body and Institute. 
The Committee wonders if the AIIMS regulations at all reflected the objective of the 
Act? Instead the intended autonomy has become an excuse for the Ministry ’s unbridled 
intervention. The AIIMS and its Academic Standing Committee should be made the 
competent authority to prescribe the qualification and experience for the appointment. 
Further the ‘Appointing Authority’ for different grades has been defined only  in the 
Schedule. The Committee considers that only the Governing Body and the Director have 
Executive and administrative functions as envisaged in the Act. It will not be 
commensurate with administrative scheme as provided in the Act. Neither the Act nor 
the Regulations provide that the Governing Body can delegate its core functions to its 
Chairman. It is therefore recommended that Other than Director, for all the Grade A 
and B positions the Governing Body should be Appointing Authority. And for Grade C 
and D, the Director of the AIIMS should be made the appointing authority. As per the 
Act the President in his individual capacity has not been entrusted with any 
administrative role except for heading the Governing Body. By delegating executive 
powers in its Chairman, the Governing Body is over-delegating its core function.   
 
Regulation 26-Regulation of seniority of employees of the Institute 
 
59. The provisions of Regulation 26 states very fundamental criteria for regulating the 
seniority of the employees of th e Institute and that too only in case of persons recruited 
directly.  There has been a lot of changes in the rules/guidelines that regulate the 
seniority of employees recruited through different modes.  The Committee wanted to 
know whether the provisions of Regulation 26 were found sufficient by the Institute or it 
was referring to the Government of India rules/guidelines in the matter.  The Committee 
was informed on the 28 th February 2002, that normally the seniority was being 
determined on the basis of pe rsons recruited by the mode of direct recruitment. This 
principle of seniority was also applicable in promotions by “Selection on merit/selection -
cum-seniority”. If we read Regulation 26 with Regulation 35, almost all the rules of 
recruitment of seniority would be covered for regulating the service conditions of 
employees. There did not seem to be any reason for changing the same. However, in case 
of any discrepancy, the Institute can refer the matter to the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare for consultation which is already in practice.  
 

60. The Committee is of the strong view that age, qualification, seniority of employees, 
etc must be prescribed separately for each post in the Regulations itself rather than 
leaving it to the discretion of appointing author ity This will go a long way in minimizing 
scope for malpractices and putting in place a fair recruitment policy for this premier 
institute of the country. 
 
Regulation 29-Absence of the employees of the Institute for long periods 
 
61.  The Regulation states “Absence from duty -unless otherwise decided by the 
President in exceptional circumstances, no permanent employee of the Institute shall be 
away from his post, otherwise than on leave or because of suspension, for more than two 
years at a stretch.” 
 
62. The Minist ry on the 28 th February 2002 clarified to the Committee that generally, 
the faculty members of the Institute were being allowed to acquire new techniques and 
experience from other institutions either in India or abroad, which may require at least 
two years  time.  The experience acquired by the respective employees would be 
extremely useful in furthering the research and other activities in AIIMS.  The Ministry, 
accepting long absence to be against the interests of the Institute, informed that the 
AIIMS was being asked to put up proposals for various measures before the Institute 
Body.  Accordingly, the Committee was informed on the 27 th June, 2005 that as per the 
new guidelines that have been issued, nobody is allowed absence from duty due to any 
type of ass ignment for more than two years.  If the concerned person does not return 
after completion of two years, it will be construed, as resignation and the case would be 
processed accordingly. 
 
63. The Committee learnt that some people were allowed to remain absent for longer 
periods or holding two substantive posts simultaneously without there being any 
supporting rule or regulations making exception in the regard. Their lien were extended 
while holding two substantive posts, also violates the central government rul es in this 
regard.  In fact both Supreme Court in Dr. Kakkar case ex -Director, AIIMS and the 
Delhi High Court in the recent judgement has concluded as under: 
 
…..The Director of the Institute cannot hold and have lien on two posts i.e. tenure 
 post of Dire ctor as well as post of Professor, Head of the Department, in 
his own  specialty. On his appointment as a Director in accordance with 

Rules, his lien on  the post of Professor should be terminated and steps should 
be taken to fill up the  resultant vacancy without delay, in the larger public 
interest. 
 
64. The Committee is also of the view that allowing permanent employees of the Institute 
to remain absent from duty for two years at a stretch is not in the best interest of the 
Institute.   It should be done onl y in exceptional circumstances and such circumstances 
should be defined in the Rules itself. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that 
penal measures should be introduced to disincentivise the permanent employees of the 
Institute who are away from their posts other than leave or suspension for more than six 
months. This will not be applicable to those teaching faculty members who have served 
for 5 years and thus are entitled for one year of extra ordinary leave/sabbatical or other 
type of permissible leave/academic leave.  This may be used for a maximum of 2 years at 
a stretch, if the person has served for 10 years including 2 years of leave. In no 
circumstances can a person be on leave or an assignment for more than 3 years at a 
stretch. As regards sabbati cal leave, it should be for fixed duratio n, i.e. 15% of service 
 period, or a maximum of 7 years. The faculty should be given the flexibility to avail it 
(at minimum 1 month to maximum o f 3 years period for any given 
assignment/sabbatical). Individual avai ling assignment/sabbatical of less than or equal 
to 6 months should be allowed to receive 50% of basic pay in order to maintain the 
family in Delhi. The Academic Standing Committee of the Governing Body should 
periodically review the provisions with a view to give maximum professional exposure to 
the faculty. 
 
Regulation 33 (2) (d)-Consultation with UPSC and adhoc manner of filling up of posts 
 
65. The regulation provides that no consultation with the Union Public Service 
Commission shall be necessary in any ca se.  When asked about its reasons, the Ministry 
vide OM dated the 25 th January 2000, informed that the Institute being an autonomous 
body set up under an Act of Parliament had its own rules and regulations.  The UPSC, 
therefore was, not consulted in matter s pertaining to recruitment, appointment, etc as 
the Institute had its own appointing and disciplinary authorities. 
 
66. The Committee took serious note of the adhocism in filling up of posts in AIIMS and 
the Ministry/AIIMS were asked to comment on it.  Accord ingly, the Committee was 
informed on the 7 th April, 2003 that prior to January, 1983, there was no reservation in 

faculty posts at the Institute.  The Institute Body at its meeting held on 11.1.1983 decided 
that the policy of reservation for SC/STs as pres cribed by the Government be followed 
for appointment to faculty posts at entry level only which means at the level of Assistant 
Professor only.  Accordingly, reservation policy was made applicable from January, 
1983 onwards in recruitment to the posts of L ecturer (re -designated as Assistant 
Professor w.e.f. 1.1.1986) which is the entry level post. 
 
67. When the OBC reservation came in, it was introduced by the Governing Body of the 
Institute in its meeting held on 27.5.1994.  Against this decision, the Faculty Association 
of AIIMS filed a writ petition in Delhi High Court.  In the petition, the faculty 
association pleaded not to have reservations in the Institute for the faculty posts as these 
belong to Speciality / Super-speciality cadres.  In that case, the High Court gave a stay to 
all reservations.  In the meantime, the vacancies at the level of Assistant Professor were 
filled by adhoc appointees. 
 
68. The Delhi High Court in its judgement dated 26th November, 2001 held that: 
 
For the present, nothing came in the  way of Union of India and the AIIMS to apply 
reservation rule for making regular appointment to the post of Asst. Professor and that 
none of the judgments of the Supreme Court imposed any bar or prohibition in this 
regard. 
 
As regards regularization of th e services of the adhoc appointee, the court did not give 
any relief to them. The court, however, held that since the petitioners had rendered 
adhoc services for quite some time and that selection for regular appointment to the post 
of Asst. Professor woul d take some time, they shall be allowed to continue in their 
position till regularly selected appointees joined. 
 
69. The AIIMS was directed to take immediate steps to complete the selection process 
within 5 months from receipt of this order and to take necess ary follow up action 
without further delay. Faculty Association of All India institute of Medical Sciences,   
New Delhi moved to the Hon’ble Supreme Court and thus the matter is now pending 
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. However, the Hon’ble Supreme Cour t has passed 
the following interim order on 11.2.2002: 
 

“Any appointment to be made hereafter in accordance with the reservation policy will 
be only tentative in nature until further orders.” 
 
70. Consequent upon the judgments of the Courts the vacant posts of  Assistant 
Professors were advertised and regular appointments being made with a special note i.e. 
the appointment against the advertisement will be “tentative in nature” and subject to 
final outcome of the SLP No. 2106/2002 pending before the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
71. The Committee strongly feels that in the absence of adequate staff/faculty, the 
existing ones working in AIIMS were under undue pressure and that adhocism in this 
regard has not only diluted the standards of the Institute but has also created 
uncertainties in the mind of the adhoc faculty members.  As a result, there had been 
exodus of faculty during the period from 1993 to 2003. 
 
72. However, the Institute Body and Governing Body on more than one occasions did try 
to address this issue between 2000  to 2003.  After filling up 163 posts on regular basis in 
2003, extraordinary situation was created when a large number of faculty members who 
worked for varying periods from 3 months to almost ten years on adhoc basis, were 
treated at par in seniority. Th is obvious anomaly was partly corrected by taking a 
decision to consider the period of adhoc services as a one-time measure. Still, there were 
about 45 faculty members who were not given their seniority because of the limitation of 
the existing scheme of A ssessment Promotion, where a person has to have served as 
associate professor for 4 years to be promoted as additional professor. This created 
dissatisfaction among adversely affected faculty members. This also led to some 
litigation as most of the selecti ons have been challenged is Courts.  Appointment at 
Assistant Professor level has created an anomalous situation and there had been some 
appointment as “lateral entry” as Associate or Additional Professor Level. All these 
anomalies need to be corrected for  all the time to come and a clear -cut policy has to be 
framed for direct recruitment posts and assessment promotion scheme (APS). There had 
been ambiguity in the seniority of professors coming from direct recruitment and APS.  
 
73. Therefore, the regulations m ust be made as comprehensive as possible. Also, in 
Central Health Scheme, a person becomes professor just in 6 years and this creates 
dissatisfaction in AIIMS faculty, where it takes 11 -12 years for direct professor post and 
17-20 years in APS. Sometimes, ridiculous situations arise because of this as the student 
of AIIMS who joins CHS and becomes professor comes as an expert after 6 -7 years and 

his/her own teachers appear before them for selection as additional professor/professor. 
Faculty association has also given a representation as follows:  
 
(i) The promotional avenues need to be restructured. The eligibility forpromotion 
from additional professor to pro fessor should be after 4 years compared to 
present 7 years the ceiling of 75% from associate professor to  additional 
professor level and 50% from additional professor to professor level should be 
removed. 
 
(ii) The retirement age should be raised to 65 years across the board for faculty. 
No extension should be given on individual basis beyond the retire ment age. No 
professor should be made head of the department beyond the age of 62 years. 
 
(iii) The concept of rotating headship to be introduced as there are instances that 
one faculty member by virtue of being senior even by a day remained HOD for 
20-30 years and other faculty members never got an opportunity to become HOD 
at all. 
 
74. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate 
steps to fill up all vacant posts on permanent basis.  The Committee also takes serious 
note of the manner in which appointment to various administrative posts at AIIMS are 
being made directly by the Health Ministry without consultation with the Director, 
AIIMS and perceives this as an attempt to further handicap the efficient functioning of 
the Director, AIIMS. 
 
75. The Committee would like to consider the points i, ii and iii given above as submitted 
by the faculty association for implementation.  The Committee accordingly recommends 
that the Faculty Association is a stakeholder in the issue and should be co nsulted by the 
Governing Body. However, increase in retirement age should not be applicable to those 
already on extension. This may lead to discrepancies.  
 
76. The Committee is particularly concerned about the implantation of reservation. The 
Committee recomm ends that the issue should be addressed within the framework of 
DOPT Rules. 
 
 

 
Comparison with private hospitals 
 
77. The Committee during the oral evidence of AIIMS held on 28 th January, 2005 
wanted a comparison between reputed private hospitals and AIIMS on the basis of 
treatment given to patients. 
 
78. The Committee was informed that the facilities available in AIIMS are, in fact, more 
modern than some private hospitals.   As far as equipment is concerned, the Committee 
was assured that AIIMS is equipped with st ate-of-the-art equipment.  In terms of 
economics the minimum charges for a simple straightforward operation in private 
hospitals like Apollo and Escorts range from Rs.1.5 lakhs on the lower side to Rs.4 lakhs 
on the higher side.  The same operation will co st between Rs.40,000 to Rs.50,000 at 
AIIMS.  In addition to this, free treatment for those below the poverty line (BPL) is 
provided if any faculty member gives in writing that a person is poor and cannot afford 
the cost. 
 
79. The Committee notes that though th ere is the element of economy in AIIMS there is 
much scope for  improvement on service delivery system , especially in the attitude and 
behaviour of employees .  The Committee feels that the work culture of the institute 
should change.  The Committee also poi nts out that the cleanliness of the institute leaves 
much to be desired in comparison with private hospitals. While appreciating the fact 
that AIIMS is a centre of excellence in the field of research and medical education, the 
Committee wants the Institute  to concentrate on the aspect of patient care and attitude 
towards the patients. 
 
Valiathan Committee Report 
 
80. The Government constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. 
Valiathan on 11 th July, 2006 to study the functioning of AIIMS and to ma ke 
recommendations for further development of the Institute.   
 
81. The terms of reference of the Committee are as follows:- 
 
a. To examine the extent to which the purpose and objectives for which AIIMS 
has been established, have been achieved.  

 
b. To make recommen dations for developing AIIMS from an institution of 
national importance into a Centre of Excellence and a leader in the area of 
public health for the entire country. 
 
c. To make recommendations to empower and position AIIMS to make full use 
of emerging global opportunities. 
 
d. To make recommendations for enhancing and strengthening the autonomy of 
AIIMS in order to enable it to fulfill its stated objectives. 
 
e. To make recommendations on the efficient utilization of manpower resources 
with respect to attracting th e best talent, retention of faculty, provision of 
better opportunities for utilizing the talent available and optimization of 
scientific/technical/non-technical manpower. 
 
f. To examine the issues of critical infrastructural gaps and to suggest ways and 
means of bridging such gaps. 
 
g. To recommend measures to deepen and expand the existing research base in 
the Institute. 
 
h. To suggest any structural changes and amendments to the Act, Rules and 
Regulations that may be necessary to achieve the above objectives. 
 
82. The Committee submitted its report on the 10 th October, 2006.  The main 
recommendations of the Committee are: 
 
a. The institute should develop a Mission Statement which should be 
inspirational and, at the same time, indicative of its commitment to advance 
medical education, standards of hospital care and biomedical research for the 
well being of the Indian people and progress of the Indian economy. 
 
b. AIIMS should become an active participant in the Public Health Initiatives 
taken by the Government of India includi ng Public-Private Partnerships such 
as the Public Health Initiative and the Rural Health Mission. 

 
c. AIIMS should form consortia with other research institutions and industry to 
develop and transfer for commercialization a range of products and processes 
prioritized by the National Missions in Public Health. 
 
d. AIIMS should set up an affiliate, self -financing and non -profit organization 
‘AIIMS International’ which should draw upon the strengths of AIIMS for its 
global mission. 
 
e. The President of India should be the Visitor of AIIMS which would place the 
Government-Institute relationship on a time -tested and highly prestigious 
institution. 
 
f. It is no longer practical or productive for the Minister of Health to preside 
over individual institutions.  The Committee th erefore recommends the 
adoption of the time -tested model of MHRD for IITs and suggest that the 
Minister of Health may preside over a Joint Council of AIIMS, PGI and other 
AIIMS-type institutions, which should be created for this purpose. 
 
g. The selection for the Director’s post should be done by a search-cum-selection 
committee headed by the President of the Institute and consisting of the 
DGHS, DG, ICMR, VC, Delhi University; four members of the Institute Body 
nominated under subsection (e) and (f) of Sectio n 4.  The Institute should 
appoint the Director on the basis of the Committee’s recommendations with 
the prior approval of the Visitor. 
 
h. Age of retirement should be raised from 62 to 65 whenever the individual’s 
academic and research performance has been e xcellent and he/she continues 
to remain productive as determined by the AcademicCouncil /Research 
Council. 
 
i. The present OPD should be expanded to the adjacent land in the rear so that 
the capacity can be nearly doubled; this should be accompanied by 
corresponding expansion in laboratory and other support facilities. 
 

83. The Committee feels that the recommendations contained in the report of the 
Valiathan Committee has great relevance in the present context and while re -framing 
the AIIMS Rules/Regulations these  inputs should be taken into consideration so as to 
help maintain the autonomy of the institute and also to maintain its status as an institute 
of excellence. The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire 
vide its OM dated August  2008 wherein it was stated that the recommendations of the 
Valiathan Committee were under the consideration of the Government. The Committee 
directs that it should be informed whether the Government has taken final view of the 
Committee’s recommendations.  If, so it should be informed that which 
recommendations have been accepted and which have not been accepted and reason for 
not accepting such recommendations. And if implementation of such recommendation 
would require amendments to the Act or Regulations made thereunder.  
 
Non-furnishing of replies on questionnaire by the Ministry 
 
84. The Committee, during the course of its examination on the subject, had the oral 
evidence of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as well as AIIMS on the 29 th 
March, 2007.  During the course of the meeting, separate questionnaires were handed 
over to both the Ministry and AIIMS.  The Ministry was reminded on the 12th July, 2007 
and the 23 rd October, 2007 to furnish their replies but no response was forthcoming.  
Accordingly, D.O. letter was issued to the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (Department of Health) on the 13 th March, 2008 to expedite the replies as the 
Committee is in the process of finalization of a report on the subject to be presented to 
the House.  The Ministry in their reply dated the 31 st March, 2008 stated that, “…In the 
above context it is submitted that due to non-cooperation in past by the Director, AIIMS 
in providing information about the Questionnaire -II, the matter could not be examined 
and the information required could not be submitted as desired.”  
 
85. The Committee took serious note of the callous manner in which the Ministry have 
dealt with the queries of the Committee.  The Ministry is putting the entire blame for its 
inefficiency and shortcomings on the Director, AIIMS which is not a healthy trend.  The 
Committee strongly feels that this kind of indifferent attitude and labeling undue 
allegations on the head of a premier institute is highly uncalled for.  Efforts be made to 
ensure that such things are not repeated in future. 
 

86. In the AIIMS Act 1956, sections 28 and 29 stipulate subordinate legislation in 
various field governing the activities in the Institute. The Committee is anguished to note 
that at some places the provisions of the A ct have been reproduced in the AIIMS 
Regulations 1999. Section 14(1) says that Institute may create and appoint persons to 
professorships, readerships lectureships and posts of any description in accordance with 
regulations. This provision of the Act shoul d have found detailed expression in the 
regulations. However, Regulation 16 merely re iterate what has already been said in the 
Act without prescribing detailed eligibility criteria, academic qualifications etc.   
 
87. The Committee after having gone through th e rules/regulation of the AIIMS and 
also hearing views both of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the AIIMS 
authorities has come to the conclusion that the relevant rules/regulations needs to be 
reviewed/amended urgently. 
 
a. Unseemly controversies g enerated in AIIMS during the last few years, have 
done more harm than good to this premier institution. The Committee feels 
that it could have been avoided, had there not been so many grey areas as 
pointed out by the Committee in the Report in the rules an d regulations, 
particularly those relating to its autonomy, selection, promotions, etc. 
 
b. The Committee feels that the Central Universities model where President of 
India being a Visitor has the power to intervene and issue directive/ enquiries 
etc, should the need for it arise due to any problems or undue interference in 
the normal functioning of the Institute. The Committee would like to have 
Ministry’s response to this. 
 
88. The Committee is also of the view that apart from the option suggested by the 
Valiathan Committee, another option regarding the appointment of Director can be 
considered by the Ministry. The appointment of Director, AIIMS and in other such 
institutes being established by the Government can be made by the search Committee 
that has an indepe ndent chair, capable of exercising the highest quality of judgment. 
The direct involvement of administrative Ministries can result in unfortunate situations.    

 
SUMMARY OF REPORTS AND OBSERVATIONS 
 
Delay in framing of regulations 
 
The Committee is dismay ed over recurrence and persistence of an oversight for 43 long 
years despite the existence of Section 29 sub Section (3) in the Act which stipulates that 
the regulations framed under such Section should have been laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as they are made. The Committee holds the Ministry responsible for 
such omission. As evident in the succeeding Para graphs of this Report, during the 
detailed examination of the AIIMS Act, 1956, the Committee gathered an unmistakable 
impression that the M inistry of Health and Family Welfare purposely and 
systematically abrogated the objective of the Act by retaining ambiguities in the 
Regulations.    
 
Regulation 4 (2) (b) of the AIIMS Regulations, 1999 regarding Minutes of the Meeting of 
the Institute Body 
 
The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its OM 
dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that proposed amendments to  the Regulations 
pertaining to the circulation of minutes had  not been placed before the Institute Bo dy/ 
Governing Body. However, some three months have already lapsed since then and the 
Committee considers that the I nstitute/Governing Body should have taken a positive 
view of the proposed amendments during the interregnum. The Committee is of the 
opinion that Regulations must clearly fix the periodicity of the meetings of Governing 
Body and the Institute Body. The Committee feels that instead of leaving the decision on 
the President/ Chairman, at least one meeting of these bodies  should be held in  every 
quarter. The Verbatim records of the meetings should be kept along with the final 
minutes.  The Committee also recommends that the Draft minutes of the meetings of 
Institute/Governing Body should be circulated under the signature of the Director of the 
Institute and only the final minutes  duly confirmed by the members present, should be 
signed by the President and filed in t he Minutes Book. Minutes may be circulated and 
confirmed by the Members electronically. 
 
Regulation 4(9) P owers  of the President to in clude fresh/supplementary items in the 
agenda for the meeting 

 
As regards Regulation 4(9) that empowers the President to include fresh/supplementary 
items, the Committee recommends that any issue so included by the President or with 
his approval should be first adopted by the simple majority of members present and any 
decision thereon should be taken with 2/3 majority of the membership of I nstitute. 
Similar practice should be adopted in respect of Regulation 8(9) with respect of 
Governing Body with an excep tion that all the decision should be unanimous.  The 
Committee recommends that necessary provisions should be incorporated in the 
relevant Regulations.  
 
Regulation 4 (6)- Time period for calling extraordinary meeting 
 
The Committee is happy to note that t he Ministry has carried out  the amendments 
suggested by it, incorporating the provision that an extraordinary meeting of the 
Institute can be called on a written request of not less than 9 members of the Institute 
within 7 days of the receipt of the requis ition vide regulation 4 (6) of the AIIMS 
Regulations, 1999. The Committee recommends that relevant background papers on the 
issue of such extraordinary meeting must be electronically or otherwise circulated 
among the members at least 5 days in advance. The  relevant regulation must be 
amended accordingly.  
 
Regulation 4 (14) Confirmation of business transacted through circulation of papers -
incorporation of savings clause 
 
The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its OM 
dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that proposed amendments to the Regulations 
pertaining the insertion of saving clause had  not been placed before the Institute Bod y/ 
Governing Body. However,  three months have already lapsed since then and the 
Committee considers that the I nstitute/Governing Body should have taken a positive 
view of the proposed amendments during the interregnum.  The Committee strongly 
recommends that there must be inserted a saving clause in regulation 4 (14) for saving 
any action tak en in pursuance of business transacted by circulating the papers and 
accordingly, AIIMS Regulations, 1999, be suitably amended and a proposal to that effect 
be approved by the Institute Body at the earliest. 
 
Regulation 18-Revision of fee for various courses 

 
The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response to the questionnaire vide its OM 
dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that  issues pertaining to revision of fee have 
yet not been taken up by the Institute.  The Committee expresses  its concern abo ut the 
interminable delay in rationalizing  fee struct ure in AIIMS . The Committee wants 
further clarification on the issue as to why the matter of rationalizing fee structure has 
been  pending for such a long time and if any further developments have taken place the 
Committee should be informed about it.  The Committee of the view that fee structure 
should be realistic and rational. The fee structure should be reviewed periodically after 
every five year.  
 
Appointment of Dean and Sub-Dean 
 
The Committee was i nformed that one lady sub -dean was appointed in the Institute by 
the Director and sacked by the Ministry witho ut assigning any reason.  A s such  the 
Committee feels strongly that one post of Dean and one post of sub -dean be earmarked 
for the lady members of  faculty only.  The Committee expresses its deep anguish over 
the manner in which a prominent Professor was removed from the post without letting 
her complete her tenure.  The Committee also recommends clear guidelines in the form 
of regulations for the ap pointment to the posts of Dean and sub -Dean and that there 
should not be any overlapping of powers between Director, AIIMS an d President of 
Institute Body so far as the appointment to such academic posts are concerned and such 
powers should remain the exclusive domain of Director, AIIMS. 
 
Role of President, Governing Body of AIIMS and autonomy of the Institute 
 
The Committee is deeply concerned about the ominous implications of the appointment 
of the Health Minister as the President of  the Institute. The country had seen enough of 
it during the recent past. The Committee notes that when the AIIMS Bill was considered 
in Parliament in the year 1956, concern for guarding Institute’s autonomy was very 
much reflected in speeches made there .  Even t he then Health Minister also gave  
assurance that it will be ensured.  She said that the Bill clearly provides that in the 
Institute’s Body, except for 2 -3 representatives from the Government out of total 
membership of 17, all others will be non -official. There shall not be any unwarranted 
bureaucratic/executive control in the functioning of AIIMS; and the power to 

run/manage functioning of AIIMS shall be completely vested with the Director, faculty, 
resident doctors and staff of AIIMS.   
 
The Committee is not convinced with the Ministry’s justification for appointment of the 
Minister of Health and Family Welfare as the President of the Institute Body  to protect 
the interest of Government and the funds are being provided by the Ministry of Health .  
No doubt funds are provid ed by the Government, but if the institute adheres to the 
broad financial policy of the government, interference by the Ministry in its day -to-day 
functioning is highly undesirable.  The Committee expressed its deep anguish about this 
bizarre justification  extended by the Ministry.  The Committee only wonders if the 
Ministry at all has the authority to interpret the provisions of the Act in contradiction to 
what was conveyed to the Parliament by the then Minister of Health. The Government 
should keep the in terest of millions of people and their health and medical research 
uppermost in their mind.  The funds are allocated by the Ministry of Finance to all the 
Ministries and Government institutions from Consolidated Fund of India.  However, 
this does not entit le the Finance Minister to be the presiding functionary of all such 
institutions.  The Parliament being the watchdog over all the executive bodies, can 
always point out and hold these bodies responsible for their malfunctioning or financial 
misappropriation. The noble duties which the AIIMS has to perform namely, patient 
care and treatment, high quality medical education and path-breaking medical research, 
et.c cannot be effectively achieved if the functional autonomy of AIIMS was not ensured.  
The Committe e, therefore,  reiterates its stand for protecting and preserving  the 
autonomy of the Institute, as a statutory body, which stands undermined by nominating 
the Health and Family Welfare Minister as President of the Institute , whereby he 
automatically assume s the position of Chairman of the Governing Body.  The 
Committee recommends that the Standing Finance Committee and Academic 
Committee should be headed by the Director of AIIMS alongw ith the academicians of 
repute in the fields of medical sciences.  The Co mmittee feels that such a prestigious 
institution should be kept free from government control in order to ensure efficiency 
and in the interest of the country.  
 
The Committee finds that relevant Regulations  pertaining the role of President of 
Institute, Governing Council and its President are conspicuously ambiguous. Going by 
the language of Regulation (6), the Committee also apprehends if the Governing Body 
also exercises such functions in addition to those mentioned in Schedule I. Further, the 
President of the Institute works in twin capacity – President of the Institute and the 

Chairman of the Governing Body, in addition to his/her personal capacity. The 
Committee considers the entire drafting of the Regulations has been kept specious. 
While no specific powers and functions of the President of Institute in his twin capacity 
have been defined in the main body of the Regulations except in the Schedule, the 
President of the Institute dose have a overbearing power in his/her three capacities. 
While the Regula tions define Governing Body as the executive body of the Institute, no 
specific executive powers are conferred upon the Chairman of the Governing Body 
individually. Therefore by delegating the core executive powers in Chairman, the 
Governing Body has over delegated its power in one individual, thereby defeating the 
very purpose of Governing Body to a large extent. Such delegation of power may create 
twin centers of authority i.e. the Chairman of the Governing Body and the Director of 
the Institute, who by t he Regulations has been made the administrative head of the 
Institute. In context of the prevalent trend of appointing the Minister in the 
administrative M/O Health and Family Welfare as the President of the Institute, such 
concentration of power seriously  undermines the position of the Director and imperils 
the autonomy of the AIIMS.  Obviously such a scheme goes contrary to the spirit of the 
present legislation which was reflected in the statement made by the then Minister 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur before the Parliament. The Committee therefore recommends 
that AIIMS must overcome such under -regulation in respect of role and functions of 
Governing Body and its Chairman by incorporating substantive  provisions in the 
regulations. 
 
The Committee notes that the Mini stry has cited the judgment of the Supreme Court in 
the case B. Shankaranand Vs Common Cause and others ( Civil Appeal No. 4662/1996) 
for justifying the nomination of Minister and the  Secretary as the Member of Institute 
under Section 4(e) of the Act. Inte r alia the Minister also becomes the President of 
Institute and the Chairman of the Governing Body. This situation was never envisaged 
in the Act. Referring in detail to the  reply of the then Minister of Health to the 
numerous queries of the MPs apprehending the predominance of Government nominees 
wherein the Minister  categorically denied such possibility on the floor of the House, the 
Committee considers that it was a solemn assurance given by the Minister of 
Government of India to the Parliament. Such assurance has not been reverted ever since 
either by amending the Act or through any other instrument like Motion or Resolution 
in the House. It is therefore extremely important that the Supreme Court judgment 
should be read alongwith the statement of the then Minister before the Parliament, to 
avoid any possible conflict between the two organs.  

 
Service rules 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that  there has been gross under -regulation under the 
Sections 28 and 29 of the Act. The Regulations framed under the se Sections are generic 
and lack specific details. This has led to discrepancies in interpretation and application, 
thereby causing avoidable litigations.   Certain Regulations pertaining the service 
conditions draw heavily from the Central Rules. The Comm ittee is of the opinion that 
AIIMS being a statutory body should have its own proper subordinate legislation as it is 
considered a centre of excellence.  Therefore rules and regulations should be laid down, 
that are suitable to its own requirements.  If it  was not so, it would be rendered merely 
as a part of the Department of Health. The Committee is of the opinion that AIIMS 
should have its own elaborate and specific rules and regulations so there is adequate 
transparency in service matters and unnecessary controversies are avoided. In respect of 
certain Policy decisions taken by the Central Government in respect of retirement age or 
reservation, the AIIMS can refer to framework determined by the DOPT, however, 
other service conditions should be specifically detailed in the Regulations.  
 
The Committee takes very serious note that while Regulation 23 recognizes the 
temporary posts at AIIMS, no detailed regulations regarding their service conditions 
have been made. As such there are grave and justified grieva nces of Resident Doctors. 
The limit of working hours per week for the Resident Doctors is routine violated. Their 
stipend and allowances have not been revised for years. There have been apprehensions 
about irregularity in the selection of senior residents.   Taking cue from the recent 
decision by the Courts in respect of disclosure of marks, it will be prudent on the part of 
AIIMS, that the marks of theory and practical are disclosed separately in the selection 
of Senior Residents.  The Committee also recomm ends that the relevant Standing 
Committee of the Governing Body should look into to accommodations and amenities to 
which Resident Doctors are entitled.  
 
The Committee would specifically like to comment upon the service conditions of the 
physiotherapists. The discipline is growing in profile with introduction of new aids. 
Disease specific rehabilitation therapies are required. Accordingly the Government has 
introduced new Degree courses in physiotherapy. It is therefore required to improve the 
service conditions and emoluments of the physiotherapists and the AIIMS may also take 
a view on allowing them the Non-Practicing Allowance. 

 
Regulation 24 (1)-Qualification for appointment 
 
Taking view of the submission made by the Ministry on 28 th February 2002, the 
Committee notes with reservation that even after passage of more than  six years  the 
Ministry have not been able to notify through Gazette  the age and qualification  in 
respect of each post.  The Committee notes that provisions under the Regulation remai n 
specious leaving scope of random arbitrariness which is evident from the mounting 
number of court cases. The Committee also finds it objectionable that Regulations have 
hinged qualifications and experience for appointments with those prescribed by the 
Central Government. The Committee feels that AIIMS was set up as an institution of 
academic and research excellence and was given autonomy. However, over the years 
there has been definite pattern in depleting the autonomy as is evident from 
predominance of C entral Government nominees in the Governing Body and Institute. 
The Committee wonders if the AIIMS regulations at all reflected the objective of the 
Act? Instead the intended autonomy has become an excuse for the Ministry’s unbridled 
intervention. The AIIM S and its Academic Standing Committee should be made the 
competent authority to prescribe the qualification and experience for the appointment. 
Further the ‘Appointing Authority’ for different grades has been defined only in the 
Schedule. The Committee considers that only the Governing Body and the Director have 
Executive and administrative functions as envisaged in the Act. It will not be 
commensurate with administrative scheme as provided in the Act. Neither the Act nor 
the Regulations provide that the Go verning Body can delegate its core functions to its 
Chairman. It is therefore recommended that Other than Director, for all the Grade A 
and B positions the Governing Body should be Appointing Authority. And for Grade C 
and D, the Director of the AIIMS shou ld be made the appointing authority. As per the 
Act the President in his individual capacity has not been entrusted with any 
administrative role except for heading the Governing Body. By delegating executive 
powers in its Chairman, the Governing Body is over-delegating its core function.   
 
Regulation 26-Regulation of seniority of employees of the Institute 
 
The Committee is of the strong view that age, qualification, seniority of employees, etc 
must be prescribed separately for each post in the Regulations  itself rather than leaving 
it to the discretion of appointing authority This will go a long way in minimizing scope 

for malpractices and putting in place a fair recruitment policy for this premier institute 
of the country. 
 
Regulation 29-Absence of the employees of the Institute for long periods 
  
The Committee is also of the view that allowing permanent employees of the Institute to 
remain absent from duty for two years at a stretch is not in the best interest of the 
Institute.   It should be done only in  exceptional circumstances and such circumstances 
should be defined in the Rules itself. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that 
penal measures should be introduced to disincentivise the permanent employees of the 
Institute who are away from their posts other than leave or suspension for more than six 
months. This will not be applicable to those teaching faculty members who have served 
for 5 years and thus are entitled for one year of extra ordinary leave/sabbatical or other 
type of permissible leave/academic leave.  This may be used for a maximum of 2 years at 
a stretch, if the person has served for 10 years including 2 years of leave. In no 
circumstances can a person be on leave or an assignment for more than 3 years at a 
stretch. As regards sabbatical leave, it should be for fixed duratio n, i.e. 15% of service 
period, or a maximum of 7 years. The faculty should be given the flexibility to avail it (at 
minimum 1 month to maximum o f 3 years period for any given assignment/sabbatical). 
Individual availing assignment/sabbatical of less than or equal to 6 months should be 
allowed to receive 50% of basic pay in order to maintain the family in Delhi. The 
Academic Standing Committee of the Governing Body should periodically review the 
provisions with a view to give maximum professional exposure to the faculty. 

 
Regulation 33 (2) (d)-Consultation with UPSC and adhoc manner of filling up of posts 
 
The Committee strongly feels that in the absence of adequate staff/faculty, the existing 
ones working in AIIMS were un der undue pressure and that adhocism in this regard 
has not only diluted the standards of the Institute but has also created uncertainties in 
the mind of the adhoc faculty members.  As a result, there had been exodus of faculty 
during the period from 1993 to 2003. 
 
However, the Institute Body and Governing Body on more than one occasions did try to 
address this issue between 2000 to 2003.  After filling up 163 posts on regular basis in 
2003, extraordinary situation was created when a large number of faculty  members who 
worked for varying periods from 3 months to almost ten years on adhoc basis, were 
treated at par in seniority. This obvious anomaly was partly corrected by taking a 
decision to consider the period of adhoc services as a one-time measure. Still, there were 
about 45 faculty members who were not given their seniority because of the limitation of 
the existing scheme of Assessment Promotion, where a person has to have served as 
associate professor for 4 years to be promoted as additional professor. This created 
dissatisfaction among adversely affected faculty members. This also led to some 
litigation as most of the selections have been challenged is Courts.  Appointment at 
Assistant Professor level has created an anomalous situation and there had bee n some 
appointment as “lateral entry” as Associate or Additional Professor Level. All these 
anomalies need to be corrected for all the time to come and a clear -cut policy has to be 
framed for direct recruitment posts and assessment promotion scheme (APS). There had 
been ambiguity in the seniority of professors coming from direct recruitment and APS.  
 
Therefore, the regulations must be made as comprehensive as possible. Also, in Central 
Health Scheme, a person becomes professor just in 6 years and this crea tes 
dissatisfaction in AIIMS faculty, where it takes 11 -12 years for direct professor post and 
17-20 years in APS. Sometimes, ridiculous situations arise because of this as the student 
of AIIMS who joins CHS and becomes professor comes as an expert after 6 -7 years and 
his/her own teachers appear before them for selection as additional professor/professor. 
Faculty association has also given a representation as follows:  
 
i.The promotional avenues need to be restructured. The eligibility forpromotion 
from additional professor to professor should be after 4 years  compared to 

present 7 years the ceiling of 7 5% from associate professor to additional 
professor level and 50% from additional professor to professor level should be 
removed. 
 
ii.The retirement age should b e raised to 65 years across the board for faculty. No 
extension should be given on individual basis beyond the retirement age. No 
professor should be made head of the department beyond the age of 62 years. 
 
iii.The concept of rotating headship to be introduced  as there are instances that one 
faculty member by virtue of being senior even by a day remained HOD for 20 -30 
years and other faculty members never got an opportunity to become HOD at all. 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate steps to 
fill up all vacant posts on permanent basis.  The Committee also takes serious note of the 
manner in which appointment to various administrative posts at AIIMS are being made 
directly by the Health Ministry without consultation with the  Director, AIIMS and 
perceives this as an attempt to further handicap the efficient functioning of the Director, 
AIIMS. 
 
The Committee would like to consider the points i , ii and iii given above as submitted by 
the faculty association for implementation.  The Committee accordingly recommends 
that the Faculty Association is a stakeholder in the issue and should be consulted by the 
Governing Body. However, increase in retirement age should not be applicable to those 
already on extension. This may lead to discrepancies. 
 
The Committee is particularly concerned about the implantation of reservation. The 
Committee recommends that the issue should be addressed within the framework of 
DOPT Rules. 
 
Comparison with private hospitals 
The Committee notes that though the re is the element of economy in AIIMS there is 
much scope for  improvement on service delivery system , especially in the attitude and 
behaviour of employees .  The Committee feels that the work culture of the institute 
should change.  The Committee also poin ts out that the cleanliness of the institute leaves 
much to be desired in comparison with private hospitals. While appreciating the fact 
that AIIMS is a centre of excellence in the field of research and medical education, the 

Committee wants the Institute to concentrate on the aspect of patient care and attitude 
towards the patients. 
 
Valiathan Committee Report 
 
The Committee feels that the recommendations contained in the report of the Valiathan 
Committee has great relevance in the present context and whil e re-framing the AIIMS 
Rules/Regulations these inputs should be taken into consideration so as to help maintain 
the autonomy of the institute and also to maintain its status as an institute of excellence.  
The Committee takes note of the Ministry’s response  to the questionnaire vide its OM 
dated August 2008 wherein it was stated that the recommendations of the Valiathan 
Committee were under the consideration of the Government. The Committee directs 
that it should be informed whether the Government has taken final view of the 
Committee’s recommendations. If, so it should be informed that which 
recommendations have been accepted and which have not been accepted and reason for 
not accepting such recommendations. And if implementation of such recommendation 
would require amendments to the Act or Regulations made thereunder.  
 
Non-furnishing of replies on questionnaire by the Ministry 
 
The Committee takes serious note of the callous manner in which the Ministry have 
dealt with the queries of the Committee.  The Min istry is putting the entire blame for its 
inefficiency and shortcomings on the Director, AIIMS which is not a healthy trend.  The 
Committee strongly feels that this kind of indifferent attitude and labeling undue 
allegations on the head of a premier instit ute is highly uncalled for.  Efforts should be 
made to ensure that such things are not repeated in future. 
 
The Committee after having gone through the rules/regulation of the AIIMS and also 
hearing views both of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and  the AIIMS 
authorities has come to the conclusion that the relevant rules/regulations needs to be 
reviewed/amended urgently. 
 
a. Unseemly controversies generated in AIIMS during the last few years, have 
done more harm than good to this premier institution. Th e Committee feels 
that it could have been avoided, had there not been so many grey areas as 

pointed out by the Committee in the Report in the rules and regulations, 
particularly those relating to its autonomy, selection, promotions, etc. 
 
b. The Committee fee ls that the Central Universities model where President of 
India being a Visitor has the power to intervene and issue directive/ enquiries 
etc, should the need for it arise due to any problems or undue interference in 
the normal functioning of the Institute . The Committee would like to have 
Ministry’s response to this. 
 
The Committee is also of the view that apart from the option suggested by the Valiathan 
Committee, another option regarding the appointment of Director can be considered by 
the Ministry. The appointment of Director, AIIMS and in other such institutes being 
established by the Government can be made by the search Committee that has an 
independent chair, capable of exercising the highest quality of judgment. The direct 
involvement of administrative Ministries can result in unfortunate situations.    

 
SUMMARY OF REPORTS AND OBSERVATIONS 
 
Delay in framing of regulations 
 
The Committee is dismayed over recurrence and persistence of an oversight for 43 long 
years despite the existence of Section 29 s ub Section (3) in the Act which stipulates that 
the regulations framed under such Section should have been laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as they are made. The Committee holds the Ministry responsible of 
such omission. As evident in the succe eding Para of this Report, during the detailed 
examination of the AIIMS Act, 1956, the Committee gathered an unmistakable 
impression that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare purposely and 
systematically abrogated the objective of the Act by retaining  ambiguities in the 
Regulations.   
( Para 6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 