PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
  
HUNDRED AND FIFTY NINTH REPORT 
  
(Presented on 24TH August , 2005) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 2005/ Sravana-Bhadrapada,1927(Saka) 
C O N T E N T S 
                                                                                                 
1.Composition of the Committee   
2.Introduction    
3.Report   
I.NON- FRAMING OF REGULATIONS UNDER THE TRADE 
UNIONS ACT, 1926 --- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 74TH 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
II.THE PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS RULES, 1959 -- 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 121ST REPORT OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
III.THE AGRICULTURAL & PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS 
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY REGULATIONS, 1999 
--- IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 143RD OF THE COMMITTEE 
IV.THE BANK OFFICER EMPLOYEES’ (DISCIPLINE AND 
APPEAL) REGULATIONS, 1976 --- IMPLEMENTATION OF 
THE 144TH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
V.The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) 
Regulations, 2000 --- Implementation of the 151 st Report of the 
Committee 
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS    
5.MINUTES   
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 7TH AUGUST, 2004) 
             
     1.     Shri. A. Vijayaraghavan 
       2.     Shri Nabam Rebia 
       3.     Dr. RadhakantNayak 
       4.     ShrimatiSukhbunsKaur 
       5.     Dr. T. SubbaramiReddy 
       6.     ShriRamNathKovind 
       7.     Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
       8.     ShriRudraNarayanPany 
       9.     ShriNandKishoreYadav 
       10.   Shri N. Jothi 

       11.   ShriRavulaChandraSekarReddy 
       12.   ShriHarendraSinghMalik 
       13.   Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
       14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
       15.   Shri R.S. Gavai 
     Secretariat 
1.      Shri  N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
2.      ShriDeepak Goyal, DeputySecretary 
3.      Shri RamBehariGupta, Under Secretary 
4.      Ms. S. Pankajavalli, CommitteeOfficer 
INTRODUCTION 
      1.   I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Fifty Ninth Report of the Committee. 
. 
1.2  The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23rd 
August ,            2005. 
  
1.3  The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various  
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the comments received 
from the Government.   The observations and recommendations of the 
Committee  are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
  
NEW DELHI 
August 23,2005 
  
A. VIJAYARAGHAVAN 
 Chairman  
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                                                   
Report 
I 
Non-framing of Regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 -- Implementation of the 
74th Report of the Committee. 
            The Committee in its 57 th Report presented to the House on the 22 nd December, 
1983 considered the issue of non -framing of Regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 
1926. The Committee further considered the matter and made the following observations 
/ recommendations in its 74th Report presented to the House on the 27th August, 1987: 
  
              "5.5    The Committee notes that the Trade Unions Act, 1926 has since been 
brought into force in the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli w.e.f. 12th 
August,1985. The Committee is happy to note that the Administration of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli are taking action to frame regulations under Section 29 of the 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 and also to appoint Registrar of Trade Unions for that 
Territory under Section 3 of the Act. 
  

5.6     The Committee takes note of the confirmation made by the Ministry vide 
their O.M. dated the 8 th August,1984, that the Model Trade Unions Regulations 
under consideration of the working group under the Chairmanship of the 
Commissioner of Labour, Maharashtra when finalised would provide adequate 
guidance both for the State Governments and the Union Territory 
Administrations. The Committee hopes that the Model Regulations will be 
finalised expeditiously. 
5.7    In this connection the Committ ee takes note of the fact that there is no 
provision for laying of regulations made under Section 29 of the Trade Unions 
Act, 1926, on the Tables of the respective Legislatures. The Committee feels that 
laying of rules / regulations before Legislatures bei ng one of the most effective 
ways for the Legislatures to exercise control over delegated legislation, every 
piece of subordinate legislation made in exercise of the powers conferred by the 
Constitution or delegated by the Legislature should be laid on the  Tables of the 
respective Legislatures so as to afford an opportunity to Members to suggest 
modifications therein even if there is no provision for laying in the particular 
enactment. 
              5.8     The Committee recommends that the Government should bring forward a 
Bill on the lines of the Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Acts of 
1983 and 1985, so as to incorporate a laying provision in each of the remaining 
Central Acts including the Trade Unions Act, 1926, on the lines of the following  
laying formula earlier recommended by the Committee in para 57 of its 10 th 
Report:- 
               'Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in ma king any modifications in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modifications or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
the rule'." 
  
2.         Relevant extracts from the 74th Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment on the 3 rd December, 1987 for necessary action. The Ministry in their 
subsequent communications to this Secretariat till November, 1990 (Annexure I) kept it 
informed about the developments in the matter of the Trade Unions and the Industrial 

Disputes (Amendment) Bills which sought to amend the various provisions of the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926 and the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 on the passing and enactment of 
which the finalization of the Model Regulations as recommended by the Committee was 
dependent. 
3.         Thereafter, the Ministry in their subsequent communications to this Secretariat 
sought extension of time on several occasions for implementing the Committee's 
recommendations, giving   reasons therefor.   A statement showing the dates of 
communications received from the Ministry seeking extension of time, the reasons for 
seeking the same and the period upto which extension was granted is placed at (Annexure 
II).  In between, representatives from the Labour Ministry were also called before the 
Chairman of the Committee for explaining the extraordinary delay in the implementation 
of the recommendations of the Committee on two occasions. In the first instance, 
a  Director of the  Ministry of Labour, appeared before the Chairman of the Committee 
on the 7 th October, 1 992 who explained the reasons for not implementing the 
recommendations as contained in the 74th Report  of the Committee and assured that the 
new Industrial Relations Bill, after approval by the Cabinet and the Law Ministry, would 
be introduced for conside ration and passing during the ensuing session of Parliament. 
Consequent upon this, the Chairman of the Committee directed that the matter may be 
kept pending till the introduction of the Bill in Parliament.   On the second occasion, 
representatives of both the Ministries of Labour and Employment, and Law & Justice 
were invited before the Chairman of the Committee so as to have the action in the matter 
expedited. Accordingly, a Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
and the Additional Secretary of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
appeared before the Chairman of the Committee on the 15 th July, 1997 and they were 
asked to furnish a status note on the subject in the light of the said discussion and also to 
submit a fresh request for extension of time for consideration of the Committee. The 
status note deted the 13 th August,1997  furnished by the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment on the subject and the status note on the Third Delegated Legislation 
(Amendment) Bill furnished by the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice are placed at (Annexures III and IV), respectively.  
4.         Thereafter, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 26 th April, 2002,  informed as 
under: 
  
“The Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 2001 has been passed by the Parliament, 
and it has been enforced w.e.f 9th January, 2002.  Power to make regulations have 

been incorporated in the Amendment Act.   In view of this, the laying provisions, 
as recommended by the Committee have been made in the Amendment Act and 
assurance partly fulfilled. 
  
So far as framing of model regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 is 
concerned, it is proposed to constitute a Committee under the Chairmanship of 
the Chief Labour Co mmissioner  with five Labour Commissioners of the State 
Governments which have the largest industrial establishments in their 
States.  This Committee will be asked to submit its report on urgent basis.” 
The Ministry were again granted a further extension o f time for six months, i.e., 
upto the 31st August, 2002 in the matter. 
5.         The issue of implementing  the Committee's recommendations as contained in the 
57th and 74th Reports has been under the examination of the Ministry of Labour for over 
fifteen years.  The Committee had been receiving requests for extension of time from the 
Ministry periodically and the same had been granted also, but the pace of implementation 
seemed to be extremely slow. The latest request dated the 26 th April, 2002 for extension 
of time only mentioned about a proposal to constitute a Committee for the purpose of 
examining the matter.  Since a lot of time had elapsed and no clear movement towards 
implementation of the Committee's recommendations was visible, a D.O. letter was issued 
on the 28 th May, 2002 to the Secretary, Ministry of Labour seeking their action plan in 
the matter including the time frame required if the Ministry intended to frame the Model 
Trade Union Regulations as recommended by the Committee. 
 6.        Accordingly, the Ministry vide their communication dated the 12 th June, 2002 
furnished a detailed note on the subject which stated as under: 
"As reported to the Committee, the Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 2001 has 
since been passed by the Parliament and it has been enforced w.e.f  the 9th January, 
2002.  A number of provisions in the Draft Model Regulations will have to undergo 
substantial changes after passing of this Bill.   As such, Ministry of Labour has 
waited for finalization of this Amendment Act.  After passing of this Amendment 
Act, one part of the recommendations of the Committee has been made/fulfilled 
by making amendment in Section 29 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926.   So far as 
other part of the recommendation is concerned it may be stated that this Ministry 
did not get an opportunity to examine the recommendations made by the Working 
Group under the chairmanship of Shri A.N. Nimbalkar, the then Commissioner 
of Labour (Maharashtra) since it had all along been pre -occupied with the 

formation of the Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill.   The finalization of Model 
Regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 could only be taken after this Bill 
is passed and enacted. 
            So far as the suggestions made in the report of the Working Group which 
was constituted under the chairmanship of Shri A.N. Nimbalkar, the then 
Commissioner of Labour (Maharashtra) on the 7th January, 1983 would undergo 
substantial modifications.  It is with this background a new Working Group under 
the chairmanship of the Chief Labour Commis sioner with five Labour 
Commissioners of State Governments has been formed so that the Model 
Regulations are framed keeping in view the recent amendments in the Act and 
also the present industrial relations scenario in the country.   Orders for forming 
of t he Working Group have been issued on the 20 th May, 2002.   The Working 
Group has been asked to submit its report to the Ministry of Labour by the 31 st 
August, 2002 at the latest". 
6.1       Accordingly, the Ministry requested for a further extension of time  upto 
the 30th September, 2002 to examine the Report which was duly granted. 
7.         Finally, on the 13th July, 2004, the Ministry of Labour and Employment informed 
as under: 
"With regard to the provisions for laying of regulations, made under Section 29 of 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926, on the Table of the Legislatures is concerned, the 
provisions of Trade Unions Act were amended by the Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Act, 2001 and the amended provisions has come into force w.e.f. the 9th January, 
2002.  In section 29 of the Principal Act, after Sub -Section (2), the following sub -
section has been inserted, namely: - 
"(3) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -
section (1) of section 22, and every regulation made by it under sub -
section (1), shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the notification or regulation, or both Houses agree 
that the notification or regulation should  not be made, the notification or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modifications 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that notification or regulation." 
  
This Ministry had fulfilled the assurance partly regarding the laying provisions as 
recommended by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha and 
compliance report was furnished to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide O.M. dated 
the 26th April, 2002. 

As regards the other issue of framing Model Trade Unions Regulations a Working 
Group under the Chairmanship of Shri S. K. Mukhopadhyay, Chief labour 
Commissioner with five labour Commissioners of State Government of 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu,  West Bengal, Punjab and Rajasthan was 
constituted.  The Working Group has submitted its report along with the Draft 
Model Trade Union Regulations.  The Model Trade Union Regulations have been 
finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
The copies of the Model Trade Union Regulations (both in Hindi and English) 
were circulated to all the State Government/UT Administrations on the 30th April, 
2004."   
8.         The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
have ultimately implemented its recommendations as contained in the 74 th Report 
presented to the House on the 27 th August, 1987 which, inter alia  relate to (i) the 
incorporation of laying provisions in respect of regulations framed under section 29 of 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926; and (ii) the framing of Model Regulations under the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926. The Committee had dealt with this subject in its 57th Report also, which 
was presented to the House on the 22nd December, 1983. 
9.         The Committee is, however, unhappy over the fact that the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment have taken an unduly long period in implementing the Committee’s 
recommendations. One of the main reasons put forth by the Ministry for seeking 
extension of time for framing of t he Model Regulations has been that it was considering 
basic change in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as well as the Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
The Committee notes with regret that the legislation, pending the enactment of which, 
the framing of Model Regulations had been kept in abeyance, came into force after a lapse 
of well over a decade w.e.f.  the 9 th January, 2002 in the form of the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Act, 2001. But, the framing of the model regulations took another two-and-
a-half years after the enforcement of the Act w.e.f the 9th January, 2002. The Committee 
expects the Ministry of Labour and Employment to be more efficient in such matters in 
future. 
ANNEXURE I 
Communications received from the Ministry of Labour and Employment from 
December, 1987 to November, 1990. 
(i)         Ministry’s communication dated the  30th December, 1987  
            "The Model Regulations referred to in para 5.6 of the 74 th Report of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha were framed by the Working Group 

having regard to the provisions of the Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 1982 which was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 30 th April, 1982. The said Bill, however, lapsed with 
the dissolution of the Lok Sabha and thus could not be enacted. Subsequently, the matter 
was examined in the Ministry of Labour in the light of the recommendations made by the 
Sanat Mehta Committee for bringing about amendments to the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 and the Trade Unions Act, 1926. Specific proposals for far-reaching changes in these 
two enactments were thereafter formulated, and discussed in   various forums including 
the Standing Labour Committee (a national tripartite forum representing the workers, 
employers and the Government). These proposals were also discussed by the Minister for 
Energy and the Minister for Labour with the representatives of the Central Trade Union 
Organisations on the 26th November, 1986. The various proposals for amendment to the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the Trade Unions Act, 1926 have already been finalised 
and a Bill for the purpose is at present being drafted by the Ministry of Law. It is 
proposed to introduce the same in Parliament shortly. A number of provisions 
incorporated in t he draft Model Regulations, it is felt, will have to undergo substantial 
changes after the said Bill is enacted. As such, the finalisation of the Model Regulations 
will have to await the amendments that are finally to be carried out in the Trade Unions 
Act, 1926 following the introduction of Industrial Relations Bill. This may, however, take 
some time.  
            As regards the incorporation of the provisions for laying of Regulations made 
under section 29 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926 on the Tables of th e Legislatures, it may 
be stated that a   provision on the lines suggested by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation in para 5.8 of their Report was earlier incorporated in the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill, 1982 referred to above. The said Bill could not , however, be passed 
because of the dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The Ministry of Law have been requested to 
incorporate an amendment on these lines in the Bill to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 and the Trade Unions Act, 1926 which is being drafted by them. As regards a similar 
provision being made in the other Central Acts, a further communication will 
follow.           
(ii)        Ministry’s communication dated  the 17th August, 1990  
            "The Trade Unions and the Industrial Disputes (Ame ndment) Bill, 1988 seeking 
to amend the various provisions of the Trade Unions Act, 1926 and the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 13 th May, 1988. Clause 11 
of the said Bill sought to amend section 30 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926 so as to provide 
for laying of regulations made under the said Act before Parliament or the State 

legislature, as the case may be. The said Bill was, however, not processed further owing 
to strong opposition expressed by various Central Workers  and Employers' 
Organisations and other interests concerned against the different provisions of the Bill. 
The said Bill was finally withdrawn from the Rajya Sabha on the 30 th May, 1990 as per 
the recommendation made by the Indian Labour Conference, a tripartite national body, 
at its 29th Session held on the 21st and 22nd April, 1990. 
            Further, in pursuance of the recommendations made by the said Conference, a 
bipartite Committee comprising representatives of Central Trade Unions and 
Employers' Or ganisations was constituted on the 8 th May, 1990 to formulate specific 
proposals for a new Industrial Relations Law. The Committee has been requested to 
submit its report by the 31 st August, 1990. Further necessary action will be taken in the 
light of its report. As substantial changes may have to be made in the existing provisions 
of the Trade Unions Act, 1926, it is felt that it will be advisable to await the introduction 
of the new Industrial Relations Bill in the Parliament. This may take some time." 
(iii)       Ministry’s communication dated the 29th November, 1990  
  
“The Bipartite Committee constituted to formulate specific proposals for a new 
Industrial Relations Law had submitted its report and the same was under consideration 
of the Government. On the basis of that report, substantial changes would be 
incorporated in the Trade Unions Act, 1926.” 
ANNEXURE II 
Statement showing the grounds for seeking extension of time by the Ministry of Labour 
from time to time and the grant of the same.      
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry's 
communication 
dated 
Reason forwarded for seeking extension 
of time 
Extension of 
time granted 
upto 
  
1. 2nd January, 1991 The draft Model Regulations would have 
to be suitably amended on enactment of 
the proposed new Industrial Relation Bill. 
Consequently it is not possible to finalize 
the model regulations at this stage. 
  
30th June, 
1991 

2. 28th June, 1991 Report of the Ramanuj Committee to 
formulate specific proposal for a new 
Industrial Relations Law is still under 
examination in consultation with the 
Central Government/Union Territory 
Administration. Further it has been 
decided to place the Report before the 
Indian Labour Conference(ILC) at its 
next session. The meeting of the ILC can 
be held only aft er formulation of a new 
Government in June, 1991. It will 
thereafter, take some time to draft a new 
Industrial Relation Bill and introduce the 
same in Parliament. Under the 
circumstances, it is not possible to 
implement the recommendations of the 
Committee as contained in its 74th Report. 
  
30th 
September, 
1991 
3. 1st October, 1991 It has been decided to place the report of 
the Ramanuj Committee before the ILC 
which is likely to be held by the end of the 
year. It will take some time to draft a new 
Industrial  Relations  Bill and introduce 
the same in Parliament. Under the 
circumstances, it is not possible to 
implement the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
  
31st 
December, 
1991 
4. 9th  December, 
1991 
Work has been held up as the next session 
of ILC to consider the Ramanuj 
Committee Report scheduled to be held in 
October, 1991 could not take place. 
  
31st March, 
1992 
5. 23rd March, 1992 ILC could not take place. However, 
recommendations of the Ramanuj 
30th June, 
1992 

Committee Report were considered on the 
6th February, 1992. As per discussion of 
the  Conference, a Committee consisting of 
fiveStates Labour Ministers under the 
Chairmanship of Minister of State for 
Coal has been constituted to examine the 
areas of disagreement in the Ramanuj 
Committee Report with a view to arriving 
at a consensus. Thereafter, matter will be 
placed before ILC some time in May, 1992. 
  
6. 9th June, 1992 The report of the Ramanujam Committee 
was discussed in the 40th Labour Ministers 
Conference held in New Delhi on the 6 th 
February, 1992. In pursuance of the 
decision of the Conference, a group 
consisting of five State Labour Ministers 
under the Chairmanship of the Minister of 
State for Labour and Coal was constituted 
to examine the areas o f disagreement in 
the Ramanujam Committee Report with a 
view to arriving at a consensus and make 
recommendations for consideration in the 
next session of the Indian Labour 
Conference. 
  
30th 
September, 
1992 
7. 16th August, 1992 In pursuance of the decisio n taken in the 
Indian Labour Conference held on 7 th-8th 
September, 1992 action to draft the Bill 
amending the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 and the Trade Union Act, 1926 has 
been initiated.   The matter is being 
processed further in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law. 
31st October, 
1992 

8. 7th September, 
1992 
The group of Ministers constituted in 
pursuance of the decision taken in the 40th 
State Labour Ministers Conference has 
already examined the areas of 
disagreement in the Ramanujam 
Committee Report with a view to arriving 
at a consensus and to make 
recommendations for consideration in the 
next Session of the Indian Labour 
Conference which is likely be held on the 
7th-8th September, 1992. 
30th 
December, 
1992 
9. 30th November, 
1992 
In pursuance of the decision taken in the 
Indian Labour Conference held on the 7th-
8th September, 1992, action to draft a new 
Industrial Relations Bill has been 
initiated.  The Bill is likely to be placed 
before  Parliament in the ensuing Winter 
Session.  Thereafter, action will be taken 
to implement Committee 
recommendations. 
30th March, 
1993 
10. 15th December, 
1992 
In pursuance of the division taken in the 
ILC, action to draft a new Industrial 
Relations Bill has been initiated. 
  
30th March, 
1993 
11. 4th March, 1993 The Industrial Relations Bill is likely to be 
placed before Parliament in the ensuing 
Budget Session. 
  
30th June, 
1993 
  16th August, 1993 -do- 31st October, 
1993 
12. 14th October, 1993 In pursuance of the decision taken in the 
Indian Labour Conference held on 7 th-8th 
September, 1992 action to draft the Bill 
amending the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 and the Trade Union Act, 1926 has 
28th February, 
1994 

been initiated.   The matter is being 
processed further in consultation with the 
Ministry of Law. 
  
13 5th August, 1994 The proposal to amend the Trade Union 
Act has been referred for consideration 
and report to the Departmental related 
Parliamentary Committee on Labor and 
Welfare.  The proposal to amen d the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is yet to be 
finales. 
  
29th February, 
1995. 
14. 23rd February, 
1995 
 It has not been possible to finalise these 
regulations because of the impending 
amendment to the Trade Unions Act. With 
the amendment of the said Act , the 
regulations mentioned above would also 
need modifications. The Trade Unions 
amendment Bill has already been 
prepared and is presently under 
consideration of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Labour and 
Welfare. The said Committee has yet to 
examine it and submit a report. 
  
            The Ministry of Law have already 
initiated action in regard to the Third 
Delegated Legislation Provision 
(Amendment) Act incorporating the 
laying provisions in each of the remaining 
Central Acts including the Trad e Unions 
Act, 1926. The Ministry of Law are being 
reminded regularly for expediting the 
matter. 
28th August, 
1996 

15. 14th July, 1995 The enactment of the amendments to the 
Trade Unions Act will take some time as 
the report of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Labour and Welfare is still 
awaited. The matter of incorporating 
laying provision in the Trade Unions Act, 
1926 in regard to rules is under active 
consideration of the Ministry of Law. 
However, it would also take more time for 
the Ministry of L aw to incorporate the 
laying provision in each of the remaining 
central Acts including the Trade Unions 
Act, 1926. 
  
28th August, 
1996 
16. 30th August, 1995 -do- 31st 
December, 
1995  
  
  
17. 19th December, 
1995 
The Ministry of Law and Justice have 
initiated necessary action to bring forward 
a Bill on the lines of the Delegated 
Legislation Provision (Amendment) Act 
with a view to incorporating the laying 
provision in each of the remaining Central 
Acts including the Trade Union s Act, 
1926. The Ministry of Labour can fulfil the 
assurance of implementing the 
recommendations of the Committee only 
after the Law Ministry finalise the action 
of carrying out a suitable legislation 
incorporating the laying provisions in 
each of the rema ining Central Acts 
including the Trade Unions Act. 
31st August, 
1996 

18. 13th August, 1996 Fulfilment of the Committee’s 
recommendation depends upon the 
proposed amendments of the Trade Union 
Act, 1926 which are under process and on 
the finalization of th e Third   Delegated 
Legislation Provision (Amendment) Act 
by the Law Ministry. These are expected 
to take some more time. 
  
28th February, 
1997 
19. 13th August, 1997 The Cabinet has approved the Cabinet 
Note on the Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill, 1997 which  contains a laying 
provision with the amendment of section 
29 of the Trade Unions Act. The Labour 
Commissioner’s report on Model 
Regulations will be considered only after 
Trade Union (Amendment) Bill, 1997 is 
passed and enacted. 
  
  
28th February, 
1998 
20. 2nd February, 1998 The Cabinet Note on the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997, after approval of 
the Cabinet was to be introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha in the last winter session of 
the Parliament which contained a laying 
provision with the amendment of section 
29 of the Trade Unions Act.   So far as 
Model Regulations under the Trade 
Unions Act are concerned, the Labour 
Ministry did not get an opportunity to 
examine the recommendations made by 
the Working Group under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nimbalkar, the then 
Commissioner of Labour, Maharashtra 
since it had all along been pre -occupied 
31st August, 
1998. 
  

with the formulation of the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill.  The finalization of the 
Model Regulations proposed by the 
Working Group was kept pending at that 
time since the Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill, 1982 had been introduced in the 
Parliament.  The Labour Commissioner’s 
report would be considered only after the 
Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 1997 was 
passed and enacted. 
  
21. 3rd September, 
1998 
The C abinet Note on the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill, 1997 has been 
approved by the Cabinet which contains a 
laying provision with the amendment of 
Section 29 of the Trade Unions Act. 
            So far as Model Regulations under 
the Trade Unions Act is concer ned, this 
Ministry did not get an opportunity to 
examine the recommendations made by 
the Working Group under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nimbalkar, the then 
Commissioner of Labour Maharashtra 
since it had all along been pre -occupied 
with the formulation of th e Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill. The finalisation of the 
Model Regulations proposed by the 
Working Group was kept pending at that 
time since the Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill, 1982 had been introduced in the 
Parliament. The Labour Commissioner's 
report wil l be considered only after the 
Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 1997 is 
passed and enacted. 
  
28th February, 
1999 
  

22. 25th February, 
1999 
Cabinet Note on Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill, 1998 containing laying 
provision with the amendment of section 
29 of the Trade Unions Act, 1926 is under 
consideration of the Government. 
Regarding Model Regulation and Trade 
Union Act, the Labour Commissioner’s 
report on Model Regulations will be 
considered only after Trade Union 
(Amendment) Bill, 1998 is passed and 
enacted. 
  
31st August, 
1999 
23. 29th September, 
1999 
The finalization of model regulations 
under the Trade Union Act, 1926 can only 
be taken after the Trade Union 
(Amendment) Bill, 1999 is passed and 
enacted. 
  
  
29th February, 
2000 
24. 8th March, 2000 Finalisation of Model Regulations can be 
taken up only after the Trade Union 
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 is passed and 
enacted. 
  
31st August, 
2000. 
25. 22nd  September, 
2000 
With the introducing of the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Bill, 2000 in the Rajya 
Sabha on  the 28 th April, 2000, the same 
was referred by the Ministry of Labour to 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Labour and Welfare for their 
consideration and reporting. 
28th February, 
2001 
26. 16th March, 2001 The Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Labour and Welfare   examined the 
Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 2000 and 
submitted its report on the 29th November, 
31st August, 
2001 

2000.  The Bill to this effect was 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 1 st 
March, 2001 and was taken up  in the 
Rajya Sabha for discussions from the 12 th 
March, 2001. 
27. 8th August, 2001 The Trade Union (Amendment) Bill, 2000 
was finally passed by the Rajya Sabha on 
the 2nd August, 2001 to be followed by its 
introduction in the Lok Sabha. 
  
28th February, 
2002 
28. 26th April, 2002 The Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 2001 
has been passed by the Parliament, and it 
has been enforced w.e.f the 9 th January, 
2002.  Powers to make regulations have 
been incorporated in the Amendment 
Act.  In view of this, laying   provisions, as 
recommended by the Committee have 
been made in the Amendment Act and 
assurance partly fulfilled. 
            So far as framing of Model 
Regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 
1926 is concerned, it is proposed to 
constitute a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Labour 
Commissioner  with five Labour 
Commissioners of the State Governments 
which have the largest industrial 
establishments in their States.   This 
Committee will be asked to submit its 
report on urgent basis. 
31st August, 
2002 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
29. 12th June, 2002 The Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) with five Labour Commissioners 
of the State Governments, namely, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, 
Punjab and Rajasthan was constituted on 
 31st August, 
2002 

the 20th May, 2002 which had been asked 
to submit its report to the Ministry of 
Labour by the 31 st August, 2002 after the 
receipt of which the Ministry would 
require time to examine the report.  
  
30. 2nd September, 
2002 
The Committee under the Chairmanship 
of the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) with Five State Labour 
Commissioners of the State Governments 
of Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West 
Bengal, Punjab and Rajasthan has been 
constituted on 20 th May, 2002 . The 
Committee has been asked to submit its 
report to the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment by the 31 st August, 2002. 
Thereafter, the Ministry will examine the 
report. 
  
30th 
September, 
2002 
31. 18th October, 2002 The Committee under the Chairmanship 
of the Chief Labour Commissioner 
(Central) is yet to submit its report. 
  
30th 
November, 
2002 
32. 5th December, 
2002 
Fair copy of the Model Trade Union 
Regulations were sent to the Members of 
the Working Group on the 22 nd 
November, 2002. Reply is awaited fro m 
three Members. Thereafter, Ministry 
would require time to examine the Report. 
  
31st May, 
2003. 
33. 4th June, 2003 The working group had submitted its 
report along with the draft Model Trade 
Union Regulations which were under 
examination by the Labour Ministry and 
would require vetting by the Legislative 
31st August, 
2003 

Department of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice.   
34. 14th August, 2003 The report of the Working Group had 
been examined and the file was referred to 
the Legislative Department of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice for 
examination and vetting of the Draft 
Trade Union Regulations.   As per the 
provisions of Section 29 of the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926, the Draft Trade Union 
Regulations are to be published by way of 
notification.  As per section 30 of the Act, 
3 months time is required to be given to all 
persons likely to be affected and thereafter 
the objections or suggestions will be 
considered by the Central Government 
and thereafter final  Trade Union 
Regulations will be published by way of 
notification.  The Ministry, accordingly, 
sought extension of time for the same upto 
the 29th February, 2004 and again upto the 
31st August, 2004 for implementing the 
Committee's recommendations.   
  
  
February, 
2004 
35. 11th March, 2004 
  
Draft Model Trade Unions Regulations 
after approval by Hon’ble Labour 
Minister was referred to the Law Ministry 
(Legislative Department) for examination 
and vetting. 
  
31st August, 
2004 
  
ANNEXURE III 
Status Note furnished by the Ministry of Labour and Employment (dated the 13th 
August, 1997). 
  

The Cabinet Note on the Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 1997 has been approved 
by the Cabinet which contains a laying provision with the amendment of Section 29 of the 
Trade Unions Act. 
  
            So far as Model Regulations under the Trade Unions Act is concerned, this 
Ministry did not get an opportunity to examine the recommendations made by the 
Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri Nimbalkar, the then  Commissioner of 
Labour Maharashtra since it had all along been pre-occupied with the formulation of the 
Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill. The finalisation of the Model Regulations proposed by 
the Working Group was kept pending at that time since the Trade Unions (Amendment) 
Bill, 1982 had been introduced in   Parliament. The Labour Commissioner's report will 
be considered only after the Trade Unions (Amendment) Bill, 1997 is passed and enacted. 
            In view of the above position it is requested that the  Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha be moved for granting further extension upto 28 th February, 
1998. 
ANNEXURE IV 
Status Note on the Third Delegated Legislation (Amendment) Bill furnished by the 
Legislative Department of Ministry of Law & Justice (Dated the 26th August, 1997). 
The Committee of the Houses of the Parliament on Subordinate have from time to 
time been reiterating the need for ensuring that all enactments providing for delegation 
of legislative power contain standard provision for  the laying and scrutiny of such 
delegated legislation. There are a number of Acts passed by Parliament in the past which 
provide for the making of rules, regulations and other forms of Subordinate Legislation 
which are not in consonance with those recomme ndations. Either, they do not contain a 
provision for the laying of such rules, regulations and other forms of Subordinate 
Legislation before the Houses of Parliament or they do not expressly provide for the 
publication of the same and yet some contain pro visions for laying on lines which are 
different from the latest formula on the subject as approved by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation. In the past, when Bills for amending some individual Acts for 
implementing the aforementioned recommendations of  the Committees came up for 
consideration in the Houses of Parliament suggestions were made by the members that it 
would be better to bring forward a comprehensive legislation covering various 
enactments which require similar amendments. 
            With a view to bringing a comprehensive legislation covering all enactments which 
require amendments on the lines mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, this Ministry 

prepared a Bill entitled "The Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Bill", which 
covered 50 Acts in respect of which clearance had been received from the administrative 
Ministries concerned. The Bill was passed by Parliament in 1983. A similar Bill covering 
92 Acts in respect of which clearance had been received from the various Ministries an d 
Departments with which they were administratively concerned with the subject matter 
of the Acts was prepared by this Ministry and the same was passed by Parliament as Act 
4 of 1986. 
            Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice ha d been in 
correspondence with the various Ministries in relation to the enactments where for the 
delegation of legislative power provisions are still not in the standard form. In spite of 
repeated reminders so far we have been able to have the concurrence of Ministries in 
relation to 13 enactments where for necessary amendment is needed. The matter came 
up for consideration before the Standing Committee on Home Affairs also and that 
Committee has emphasized the need for bringing in the next comprehensive le gislation 
making provision for the standard provision for the laying and scrutiny of the delegated 
legislation. 
            The Note for the Cabinet proposing amendments to the Trade Unions Act, 1926 
including the proposal to provide for the laying of the regulations before the Houses 
of  Parliament has been approved by the Cabinet on the19th July, 1997. The Bill providing 
for the necessary amendments shall be introduced in the winter session of Parliament. 
            The Note for the Cabinet for introduci ng the Third Delegated Legislation 
(Amendment) Bill proposing amendments to 13 Acts of Parliament has been approved by 
the Cabinet on the 23rd August, 1997. The necessary Bill, therefore, will be introduced in 
the winter session of Parliament. In the meant ime we are taking up the matter with the 
Ministries concerned with the Acts of Parliament for which the amendment in relation to 
standardization of rule laying formula is yet to be carried out. 
II 
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 ---Implementation of the 121st Report of the 
Committee. 
The Committee had examined the Petroleum and Natural Gas (P&NG) Rules, 
1959 framed under the Oil Fields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 and its 
recommendations were included in the 103 rd Report, which was prese nted to the House 
on the 13 th May 1994. The Committee again took up for consideration the above 
mentioned rules in the context of the Government's New Exploration Licensing Policy 

(NELP). The Committee reported the matter vide its 121st Report which was pr esented 
to the House on the 28th July 1998. 
2. A copy of the 121 st Report was forwarded to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas on the 29th July 1998 for implementation of the Committee's recommendations. The 
Ministry furnished their Action Taken Note vide their communication dated the 30th July, 
1999. The Committee considered the same at its meeting held on the 14th September 1999 
and decided to call the representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for 
further clarifications. As the ma tter could, not come up before the Committee for quite 
some time, the Ministry were again requested to furnish the substantial changes that 
could have occurred in respect of point numbers   3, 5 & 6 (Paras -- 15, 16, & 18) of the 
Action Taken Note furnished  on the 30 th July, 1999. After receiving the Ministry's 
comments vide their communication dated the 22 nd May 2001, the Committee heard the 
Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the matter on the 17 th July, 2001. 
During the course of the hearing, the Committee was informed that its recommendations 
as contained in the 121 st Report had been compiled with and the proposed amendments 
had been sent to the State Governments for consultation and the rules would be finalized 
as and when the consultation process is completed. 
3. Thereafter, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas vide theircommunications 
dated the 2 nd April and 31 st October 2002, informed the Committee that the proposed 
amendments were in the advanced stage of consideration in consulta tion with the 
Ministry of Law and Justice. Finally, the Ministry vide theircommunication dated the 21st 
April 2003 forwarded a Notification GSR 295 (E) dated the 1 st April 2003 notifying the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (Amendment) Rules, 2003. 
  
4.         The Secretariat vide its communication dated the 20th February, 2004 again sought 
the latest position with regard to the action taken on the Committee's recommendations 
as contained in Paras 13-15 and 17-18 (Points 1-3 and 5-6) of its 121st Report. In response 
thereto, the Ministry forwarded the Action Taken Note on the 1 st April, 2004. The 
Committee at its meeting held on the 16 th September, 2004 considered the Ministry's 
comments. The Committee's recommendations as contained in its 121st report, the action 
taken by the Ministry thereon and the Committee's recommendations/observations are 
as follows: - 
               Committee’s recommendation 
            “Oneof the main grievance of the National Oil Companies was that they may be 
in a disadvantageous position vis-a-vis private companies due to procedural delays 

particularly in acquiring better technology. The Committee recommends that the 
Government should take every steps to minimize the procedural delay to ensure that the 
National Oil Companies are not put into a disadvantageous position due to procedural 
delays vis- a-vis Private Companies. If necessary and feasible the Government may allow 
the National Oil Companies to adopt pre -qualification of suppliers and limiting tenders 
for better technology to avoid procedural delays." 
            Action Taken by the Ministry 
                “Thenational oil companies namely, ONGC and OIL have been delegated powers 
under Navaratna and Mini Navaratna status, respectively to take decisions includ ing 
financial delegations. The National Oil Companies (NOCs) are free to determine 
tendering procedures including the procedure to adopt pre -qualification, if they so 
decide. Therefore, by delegating financial powers to NOCs, the respective organizations 
have powers to determine tendered procedure except for certain conditions of tenders 
such as purchase preference / price preference, which are decided by the Government 
from time to time keeping in view the interest of the Central Public Sector Enterprises 
and the domestic industries.” 
            Committee's Observations 
            The Committee notes the reply furnished by the Ministry. 
 
Committee's Recommendation 
  
"Theprivate companies which are entering the area of oil exploration are mainly 
interested in profit sans any national interest. Once they feel that it is not economically 
viable they leave the activity altogether. Whereas, the NOCs are not concerned with profit 
or no profit and will have to stay in the national interest. The Committee therefor e 
recommends that the NOCs should be given an option to work 'in the best part of the 
sedimentary basins resulting in more focused and economically viable approach to 
exploration." 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
TheGovernment has implemented the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP), 
which provides level playing field and identical terms and conditions to all the investors, 
including the national oil companies. NELP provides a transparent framework for 
allotting areas for exploration and provide competitive work programme and commercial 
terms to the Government. Further, by encouraging more players through open 
competitive bidding route, the Government may get, new geological ideas and 
technologies, which may help in finding untapped hydrocarbon resources in the country. 

A recent example of this oil are the discoveries made by Cairn Energy, a British 
Company, in Rajasthan, where no oil could be found earlier. 
          Committee's Observations 
             The Committee notes the Ministry's reply. 
Committee's Recommendation 
  
"TheCommittee feels that the Hydro Carbon Development Fund created by the 
royalty payments should be kept at the disposal of the proposed regulatory authority 
which will be responsible for collection of data from high seas as well as frontier areas. In 
the present dispensation of NELP the fund can be used only for the offshore areas. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the funds should be utilized for the activities in 
onshore areas as well." 
            Action Taken by the Ministry 
  
“The Hydrocarbon Development Fund has been proposed under NELP. Since the 
Fund is proposed to be collected out of offshore revenue, it was proposed that the Fund 
would be used for promoting offshore areas. The proposed Fund could be used for 
promoting off shore hydrocarbon sector including collection of geo -scientific data, 
geological model studies, etc. Since the licensing powers vest with the Government, it is 
considered prudent that the Government should have funds at their disposal to utilize 
them for p romoting hydrocarbon activities, including administrative functions such as 
training, studies, etc.” 
Committee's Observations 
            The Committee notes the Ministry's comments. 
Committee's Recommendation 
  
"TheCommittee further notes that the amendme nts to the Petroleum and 
Natural  Gas Rules to operationalise the NELP are yet to be flnalised. The Committee 
recommends that the amendments should be carried out expeditiously and while 
finalising the amendments the suggestions given by the ONGC and OIL s hould be duly 
considered because both these organizations have practical knowledge on each and every 
aspect of the activities proposed under NELP." 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
“The amendments to the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 including the 
Rules needed to operationalize NELP have been finalized and duly notified in the Gazette 
on the 1 st April, 2003 (Annexure). While finalizing the amendments all the stakeholders 

including ONGC, OIL, State Governments were consulted and their views were duly 
taken into consideration.” 
Committee's Observations 
            The Committee notes the Ministry's reply. 
Committee's Recommendation 
"TheCommittee reiterates its earlier recommendation as contained in the 103 rd 
report to reprint forthwith the Petroleu m and Natural Gas Rules rectifying all the 
printing errors and corrected copy thereof may be laid on the Table of the both Houses 
of Parliament." 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
            “Amendments to P&NG Rules were notified in the Gazette of India on th e 1 st 
April, 2004 and its copies were laid on the        Table of both Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha 
in April, 2004. However, further exercise of rectifying the printing errors in the 
publication of Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 has been initiated and the Rules 
will be reprinted shortly. The corrected copy will be laid on the Table of   both of the 
Houses.” 
Committee's Observations 
The Committee notes the Ministry's reply. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas would 
update an d reprint the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 expeditiously after 
rectifying all the printing errors. 
ANNEXURE 
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS  
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 1st April, 2003 
G.S.R. 295 (E). - In exercise of the powers conferred by sections. 5 and 6 of the 
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (Act No. 53 of 1948, the Central 
Government hereby makes the following rules further to amend The Petroleum and 
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 as amended from time to time, namely:- 
(1) These rules may be called the Petroleum Natural Gas(Amendment) Rules, 2003. 
(2)        They shall come into force with effect from the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
2.         In the Petroleum and natural Gas Rules, 1959 (hereinafter to be referred as the 
said rules), in rule 3: 
(i)         clause (aa) shall be omitted; 

(ii)        after the clause so omitted, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: 
"(ab)  'coal bed methance'means natural gas obtained from bore holes occurring 
in coal or lignite seams and consisting primarily of hydrocarbons. 
(ac)  'condensate' means those low vapour pressure hydrocarbons obtained from 
natural gas through condensation or extraction which are in the form of liquid at 
normal surface temperature and pressure conditions. 
(ad)   'continental shelf' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 as amended from time to time. 
(ae)   'contract' means an agreement entered into between the Government of 
India andany other party in relation to exploration and exploitation of 
hydrocarbon and/or coal bed methane for relevant area"; 
(iii)       for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
            "(b)   'crude oil' means petroleum in its natural state in liquid, viscous or solid 
form before it has been refined or otherwise treated from which water and foreign 
substances have been extracted."; 
(iv)       after clause  ( c) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(ca)   'exclusive economic zone' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 as amended from time to time."; 
(v)        after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(ea)   'gas hydrates' means naturally occurring solids composed of water 
molecules forming a rigid lattice of cages each containing a molecul e of natural 
gas."; 
(vi)       after clause (g) the following clause shall be inserted, namely;_ 
"(ga)   'hydrocarbons' means any organic compound of hydrogen and carbon."; 
(vii)      for clause (i) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
"(i)     ' natural gas' or 'gas' means gas obtained from bore -holes and consisting 
primarily of hydrocarbons but does not include helium occurring in association 
with such hydrocarbons."; 
(viii).     For clause (qq) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- 
"(qq)    'territorial waters' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976 as amended from time to time." 

3.         In the said rules, in rule 5 sub-rule (1) clause (i), after the words "territorial waters 
or the continental shelf" the words "or the exclusive economic zone" shall be inserted. 
4.         In the said rules, in rule 6 sub-rule (1):- 
(i)         in clause (i), for the figure and wor ds "Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees ten thousand)" the 
figure and words "Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees twenty five thousand)" shall be substituted. 
5.         In the said rules, in rule 7:- 
(i)         in clause (i),for the word "Iand" the word "area" shall be substituted. 
(ii)        in clause (ii), for the word "land" the word "area" shall be substituted. 
(iii)       in sub-rule (2), after the word "plants" and "equipment" the word "platform" 
and the words "and other facilities" shall be inserted respectively. 
6.         In the said rules, in rule 10, after the words "one year each" the words "till the 
expiry of the exploration period (s) provided under the agreement if any, or unless 
otherwise specified by the Central Government in this regard." Shall be inserted. 
7.         In the said rules, in rule 11:- 
(i)         in sub-rule (1), for the figure and words "Rs. 50,000/ - (Rupees fifty thousand)" 
the figure and words "Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh)" shall be substituted; 
(ii)        in sub -rule (2, the clauses (i) to (v) , the following clauses shall be substituted 
respectively, namely:- 
"(i)        Rs.50 (Rupees fifty) for the first year license; 
(ii)        Rs.100 (Rupees one hundred) for the second year license; 
(iii)       Rs.500 (Rupees five hundred)for the third year license; 
(iv)       Rs.700 (Rupees seven hundred) for the forth year license; 
(v)        Rs.1000 (Rupees one thousand) for the each subsequent year of renewal." 
8.         In the said rules, in rule 12, after the words 'shall ordinarily be twenty years' t he 
following provision shall be inserted, namely:- 
"provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary in public 
interest so to do, by notification, relax the condition regarding area aforesaid, in relation 
to any application for lease." 
9.         In the said rules, in rule 13:- 
(a)        in sub-rule (1):- 
(i)         in clause (a), for the figure and words "Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh)" the figure 
and words"Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakh)" shall be substituted; 
(ii)        in clause (b),for the figure and words "Rs.10,000/ - (Rupees ten thousand)" the 
figure and words "Rs. 30,000/- (Rupees thirty thousand)" shall be substituted;  

(b)        in sub-rule (2) in clause (a), for "Rs. 12.50" the "Rs.2500 (Rupees twenty five) and 
for "Rs.25.00" the "Rs.50.00" (Rupes fifty) shall be substituted respectively. 
10.       In the said rules, in rule 14 sub-rule(1) clause (a) sub-clause (ii):- 
(i)         for the words "a royalty for the period beginning on the 1st day of April        1990 
and ending on 31st day of March, 1993, at the rate of four hundred and eighty one rupees 
per metric tone of crude oil and casing head condensate and at ten percent of the value at 
wellhead of natural gas obtained by the lessee" the following shall be substitute nakedly:- 
"a royalty in respect of any mineral oil mined, quarried, excavate or collected by him 
from the leased area at the rate specified in schedule of the Act from time to time. The 
royalty shall be payable on monthly basis, as may be provided for in the lease and shall 
be paid by the last day of the month succeeding the peiod in respect of which it is 
payable."; 
(ii)        after the words "condensate, natural gas" the words "coal bed methane or gas 
obtained from gas hydrate" shall be inserted. 
11.       In the said rules, in rule 15, after the words "survey or re -survey" the words and 
figure "a fee of Rs. 10,000/- (rupees ten thousand) or" shall be inserted. 
12.       In the said rules, in rule 17, the provision shall be renumbered as sub-rule)1) and 
after the provision so renumbered the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
"provided that in case where a Contract has been signed between the licensee/lessee and 
the Central Government, the transfer or the assignm ent, as the case may be, shall be 
governed by the terms and conditions of the Contract, and will be effected in the manner 
laid down in such Contract." 
(ii)        After sub-rule (1) so renumbered a new sub -rule (2) shall be inserted as follows, 
namely:- 
"(2)      Upon receipt of the consent of the consent of the Central Government referred to 
in sub-rule (1) the license or lease, as the case may be, shall be issued in name of the 
transferee or the assignee, severally or jointly, to the extent of the transf er or the 
assignment, with effect from the date from which such transfer or assignment is made 
effective." 
13.       In the said rules, in rule 19, in clauses (a) and (b), for the word "land" the 
word  "area" shall be substituted. 
14.       In the said rules, in rule 19, the following new rule 19A shall be inserted, namely:- 
"19A. Recovery of helium from natural gas - (1)  Nothing contained in these rules or the 
terms  license or a lease or a contract will give right to a licensee or a lessee to use, sell or 
otherwise dispose of   Helium which may be produced with natural gas and the 

licensee/lessee shall dispose of such helium in accordance with such directions as may be 
issued in this behalf by the Central Government or by an officer or an age ncy duly 
authorised for this purpose by the Central Government. 
(2)        If  the Central Government desires to extract Helium from natural gas, the 
licensee/lessee, in order to enable the Government to install and operate equipment and 
facilities for carrying out helium recovery operation, shall make available to the Central 
Government or its nominee the area and utilities required for such operations and in such 
a case the licensee/lessee shall be entitled for compensation based on the internal company 
accounting practices to be mutually agreed between the licensee/lessee and the Central 
Government/its nominee." 
15.       In the said rules, in rule 20:- 
(i)         in sub-rule (1), After the words "the working of the" for the word "land" the 
word "area" shall be substituted. 
(ii)        in sub-rule (2) for the word "land" the word "area" shall be substituted. 
16.       In the said rules, in rule 21:- 
(a)        in sub-rule (1) 
(i)         in clause (b) and (c) for the word "land" the word "area" shall be substituted. 
(ii)        after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:- 
"(4)      Where the Central Government has entered into an agreement with the licensee, 
license and lease as the case may be shall automatically stand cancelled upon the expiry 
or termination of such contract." 
17.       In the said rules, for rule 22, the following rules shall be substituted, namely:- 
"22.      Delivery of premises upon determination of license or lease -(1) Upon 
determination or cancellation or relinquishment in part or in full of a license, the licensee 
shall deliver the area released on account of the determination or cancellation or 
relinquishment after restring it in good order and condition in accordance with 
international practices within s ix months from the date of such determination or 
cancellation or relinquishment, or within such further time as the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be, may allow. 
(2)        In the event of lessee opting not to continue mining o perations and opts to 
relinquish the leased area in part or in full, or a lease is to bedetermined, the lessee shall 
deliver up the area released by such relinquishment or determination of lease after 
restoring it in good order and condition in accordance with the abandonment plan 
approved by the Central Government. However, lessee shall have to give prior written 
notice of at least one year before the date of intended relinquishment or determination as 

the case may be, to the Central Government along with an abandonment plan 
incorporating all actions and steps necessary to restore the area in accordance with 
international practices, for approval of the Central Government. 
(3)        Upon cancellation of a mining lease under these rules, the lessee shall del iver up 
the area covered by such lease after restoring it in good order and condition in accordance 
with an abandonment plan, prepared in accordance with established international 
practices and approved by the Central Government. 
(4)        Upon determination or cancellation or relinquishment of a license or a lease, the 
holder of such license or lease, as the case may be, shall take all necessary steps to prevent 
consequent hazards to human life, property, environment, marine resources or 
navigation, to the satisfaction of the Central Government or the State Government as the 
case may be. 
(5)        The licensee or lessee shall, prior to the determination or cancellation or 
relinquishment of licensed or leased area, remove and dispose of any petroleum, stor es, 
equipment, tools, machinery from such area within six months of handing over the area. 
(6)        If such petroleum, stores, equipment, tools, machinery and improvements are not 
removed or disposed of and the area restored to good order and condition w ithin six 
months prior to the determination, relinquishment or cancellation of the license or lease, 
the Central Government or the State Government as the case may be, shall proceed with 
the removal and disposal of such petroleum, stores, equipment, tools,  machinery and 
restore the area at the risk and cost of the licensee or lessee. 
(7)        The net proceeds of such sale shall be held by the Central Government, or the 
State Government, as the case may be, until applied for and obtained by the licensee or  
the lessee." 
18.       In the said rule,s in rule 23 sub-rule (1), for the words" ten percent for each month 
or portion of a month during which such fees, royalties or other payments remain 
unpaid" the words" a penal rate of 200 (two hundred) basis points over the prime lending 
rate or State Bank of India for the delayed period." Shall be substituted. 
19.       In the said rules, in rule 24, sub-rule (1)in clause (a), for the word "land" the word 
"area" shall be substituted. 
20.       In the said rules, in rule 25, for the words "natural gas" the words "oil or gas or 
coal bed methane or gas hydrate" shall be substituted. 
21.       In the said rules, in rule 27, for the words "natural gas or both" the words "or oil 
or gas or coal bed methane or gas from gas hydrate" shall be substituted. 

22.       In the said rules, in rule 28, the words (i) "or licensee", (ii)"or licensed", (iii) "or 
licensee or into areas not covered by any license or lease" and (iv) "or licensed" shall be 
inserted after the words (i) "oper ations by a lessee", (ii) "boundary of the leased". (iii) 
"by other lessees" and (iv) "require the lessee" respectively. 
23.       In the said rules, in rule 29, for the words "gas bearing strata or to both" the 
words" oil bearing or to both or gas bearing or coal bed methane bearing or gas hydrate 
bearing strata" shall be substituted. 
24.       In the said rules, in rule 30 clause (vi), after the words "such suspension" the words 
"under intimation to the State Government" shall be inserted. 
25.       in the said rules, in rule 32A, after the words "Rule 14, Rule 19," the words "Rule 
21" shall be inserted. 
26.       In rule 33 after sub-rule (d) of the said rules, for the words "shall be setted by two 
arbitrators, one to be nominated by the Government a nd the other by the licensee or 
lessee; or, in case of disagreement between the arbitrators, by an umpire appointed by 
the arbitrators by writing under their hands before proceeding with arbitration. The 
arbitrators or the umpire shall also determine which party shall bear the expenses of the 
arbitration or whether such expenditure shall be divided between the two parties and if 
so, in what proportion. The arbitrators or the umpires, as the case may be, may from time 
to time, with the consent of all the par ties to the contract, enlarge the time, for making 
the award, subject as aforesaid, the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 and the rules 
thereunder for the time being in force shall applied to the arbitration proceedings under 
this clause" the following shall be substituted:- 
"shall be settled through arbitration and conciliation proceedings under the provisions 
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and the rules made thereunder as are 
applicable to such proceedings." 
27.       In the said rules, the new rule 35 shall be inserted as follows, namely:- 
"35.     Power to exempt from operation of certain rules: 
(i)         The Central Government may grant exemption under Section 12 of the said Act, 
subject to specified conditions to a licensee or lessee from the provisions of Rule 6(i) and 
(ii), Rule 11 sub-rules (1) and (2) or Rule 13, where it is in the public interest to do so. 
(ii)        The Central Government, may consult the State Government in the matter of 
granting exemptions in respect of onland areas under sub-rule(i). 
(No. 0-22013/1/2001-ONG-III) 
J.M.MAUSKAR, Jt. Secy 
III 

The Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 – Implementation of the 143 rd Report of the 
Committee.                                   
            The Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 framed under the Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority Act, 1985, were examined and the Committee in its 143rd Report, 
presented to the House on the 21st November, 2002, recommended as follows:- 
  
            “The Committee notes the comments of the Ministry on point nos. 1,2,6,9 & 
10.  The Committee is satisfied that the Ministry have agreed to its suggestions on 
Regulation 7 (point-3) for raising minimum strength of the quorum from 8 to 10 
Members, Regulations 10 and 26 (point-4) for modifying the existing provision of “second 
or casting vote” available to the Chairman or the Presiding Officer, Regulation -11(2) 
(point-5) for deleting the word “effectual” which was a printing   mistake, Regulation 
15(2) (point-7) for defining the words “of a policy nature”,   Regulation-16 (point-8) for 
providing a time limit within which the Authority can review the decision of the 
Committee, and Regulation-28(9) (f) (point-11) for substituting the words “basic monthly 
remuneration” with the words “monthly remuneration”. 
  
            The Committee recommends to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry to carry 
out the above amendments in the regulations expeditiously under intimation to it.” 
2.         The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts from its 143 rd Report to the 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry on the 8th January, 2003.   The Ministry had sought 
extension of time for implementation of the Committee’s recommendations upto the 30th 
April, 2004, the 30th June, 2004, and again upto the 31 st July, 2004, which were granted. 
The Ministry vide their communication dated the 4th August, 2004 forwarded the Action 
Taken Report wherein they had  stated that the amendments to regulation 7 (point 3), 
regulations 10 and 26 (point 4), regulation 11 (2) (point 5),  regulation 15 (2) (point 7) and 
regulation 28 (9) (f) (point 11), had been notified vide notification No 
F.No.APEDA/SEC/GEN/30 dated the 1 2th July, 2004 (Annexure).  On regulation 16 
(point 8) the reference made to the Ministry, their comments thereon and the 
Committee’s further observations  are reproduced below:- 
            Point referred 
  
            Regulation 16        Power of the Authority to review and revise 

 The Authority, shall have the right and power to review, after, and to or amend 
any decision of any Committee at any Special or Ordinary Meeting of the Authority, 
subject to the condition that contracts already entere d or executed or portions of the 
decisions under review already implemented shall not be subject to alteration or 
amendment or review by the Authority. 
            The Authority has been empowered to review the decision of the Committee but 
whatever action that has already been taken on the decision of the Committee has been 
saved under the regulation.  Whether Government have any objection to prescribe time 
limit within which this review can be done by Authority so as to avoid complications 
regarding cancellation of works. 
Ministry’s reply (26.9.2000) 
  
            The suggestion has been noted and will be appropriately considered. 
Committee’s Observations (21.11.2002) 
  
            The Committee noted that under regulation 16 the Ministry have accepted the 
suggestion of the Committee to prescribe time limit within which the review can be done 
by the Authority so as to avoid complications regarding cancellation of works. 
Action Taken by the Ministry  (4.8.2004) 
  
            Regulation 16 gives the Authority a residuary power to review and revise the 
decision of any Committee, if at all any such situation arises.   However, it also ensures 
that contracts already entered or executed or portions of the decisions under review 
already implemented shall not be subject to alteration or amendment or review by the 
Authority.  Hence, no further appropriate action is required. 
Committee’s  further Observations  
            The Committee notes the Ministry’s comments. 
  
3          The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry have 
notified the following amendments in the Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority Regulations, 1999, as recommended by it :- 
  
(1)               regulation 7 (point 3), by raising the minimum requirement of the quorum 
from 8 members to 10 members; 
  
(2)               regulations 10 and 26 (point 4), by substituting the words “ shall have a 
second or casting vote” by the words “shall have a casting vote”; 

  
(3)               regulation 11(2) (point 5), by substituting the words “shall be effectual and 
binding” by the words  “shall be effective and binding”; 
  
(4)                regulation 15(2) (point 7), by substituting the words “every   decision of 
each of the Committee of a policy nature” by the words “every decision of 
each of the Committee of a policy nature, viz, a decision having a 
permanent bearing on the functioning of the authority or a recurring 
financial implication for the Authority”   thereby defining the   words 
“policy nature”;  
as desired by the Committee.    
(5)               regulation 28(9)(f) (point 11), by substituting the words “having basic 
monthly remuneration” by the words “having monthly remuneration”.  
The Committee, however, accepts the Ministry’s comments on Regulation 16 
(point 8) regarding power of the Authority to review and revise. 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(Department of Commerce 
(AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSEDE FOOD PRODUCT EXPORTS 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY) 
NOTIFICATION 
F.No. APPDA/SEC/GEN/30 - In exercise of the powers conferred by section 33 of the 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 (2 
of 1986), the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority, 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government, hereby makes the following 
regulations to amend the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority Regulations, 199, namely:- 
1.                     (1)        These regulations may be called the Agricultural and Processed 
Food Products Export Development Authority (Amendment) Regulations, 
2004. 
(2)         They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the 
Official Gazette. 
2.         In the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 (hereinafter referred to as the said regulations), for regulation 5, the 
following regulation shall be substituted namely:- 

"5.       Power of Cntral Government to call mee tings:- Notwithstanding anything 
contained in these regulations, the Central Government may, at any time call a meeting 
of the Authority." 
3.         in sub-regulation (1) of regulation 7 of the said regulations, for the words "at least 
eight members", the words "at least ten members' shall be substituted.  
4.         In sub-regulation (2) of regulation 10 of the said regulations, for the words "shall 
have a second or casting vote", the words "shall have the casting vote' shall be substituted. 
5.         in sub-regulations (2) of regulation 11 of the said regulations, for the words "shall 
be a effectual and binding", the words "shall be effective and binding" shall be 
substituted. 
6.         In sub-paragraph of sub-regulation (2) of regulation 15 of the said regulations, for 
the3 words "every decision of each of the Committee of a policy nature", the words 
"every decision of each of the Comkmittees of a policy nature viz a decision having a 
permanent bearing on the functioning of the Authority or a recurring frinancial 
implication for the Aurhotiry", shall be substituted. 
7.         In sub-regulation (2) of regulation 26 of the said regulations, for the words "shall 
have a second or casting vote", the words" shall have the casting vote" shall be 
substituted. 
8.                  In clause (i) of sub-regulation (9) of regulation 28 of the said regulations, for 
the word "having basic monthly remuneration, "the words "having monthly 
remuneration" shall be substituted. 
  
File No. 7/1/2003-EP(Agric IV) 
K.S. MONEY, Chairman 
(ADVT/III/IV/166/04-exty-) 
IV 
The Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976-Implementation 
of the 141st Report of the Committee. 
  
            The Committee in its 141 st Report, presented to the House on the 31 st July, 2002, 
had inte ralia dealt with the implementation of its recommendations as contained in its 
106th Report on the Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976. 
The observations/recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 141st Report are 
as under:- 
 “The Committee notes with satisfaction that the managements of all the Banks 
are already following the ‘Sealed Cover Procedure’ as recommended by the 

Committee (para 2.23). The Committee hopes that the Ministry would issue 
specific guidelines in the matter of reinstatement of the officer who had been 
placed under suspension for being in police custody beyond 48 hours but later 
on cleared of the charges after trail/inquiry and intimate about the same to it. 
The Committee reit erates that the management of all the Banks should follow 
uniformly the practices of disposing the appeals within 90 days and hopes that 
the Ministry/RBI/IBA shall comply with its recommendation in this regard. The 
Committee, however, takes a serious exception over the unduly long time being 
taken by the Ministry in responding to its communications/recommendations 
and directs them to act promptly in such matters in future”. 
2.         Relevant extracts from the 141st Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance 
(Banking Division) on the 9th September, 2002 for necessary action. 
3.         The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) vide their communication dated the 
21st May, 2003 informed as under: 
 “The issues raised by the Hon’ble Committee have been examined in consultation 
with the Indian Banks’ Association and keeping in view the observations made 
by IBA, the matter is being further examined for making necessary amendments 
in the Discipline and Appeal Regulations.” 
3.1       The Ministry, accordingly , requested for extension of time upto the 31 st August, 
2003 for submitting the Action Taken Report which was acceded to. 
4.         The observations/recommendations of the Committee and the action taken by/ the 
Ministry thereon are reproduced below:  
I.          Committee’s recommendation  (para 6) 
            The managements of all banks should follow uniformly the practice of disposing 
the appeals within 90 days. 
            Action taken by the Ministry (25.5.2004) 
            The recommendation made by the Hon’ble Committee has been accepted and 
Indian Banks’ Association have issued necessary guidelines to the banks to make 
necessary amendments in the Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline & Appeal) 
Regulations, 1972/1982 for making a provision that appeals should be disposed off by the 
Appellate Authority within 90 days. However, a provision has been made that where an 
appeal remains pending for over 90 days the matter may be reviewed periodically by the 
Appellate Authority and reasons for non-disposal of cases should be recorded in writing. 
II.Committee’s recommendation  (para 6) 

            The Ministry should issue specific guidelines in the matter of reinstatement of the 
officer who had been placed under suspension for being in police custody beyond 48 hours 
but later on cleared of the charges after trial/enquiry. 
Ministry’s reply  (19.8.2004) 
            The matter has been examined in consultation with the Indian Bank’s Association 
and Reserve Bank of India and draft of the guidelines to be issued t o the banks was sent 
to the Ministry of Law and Justice for their views who have sought certain clarifications. 
The matter has been referred to the Indian Bank’s Association for further examination. 
Ministry’s further reply (19.11.2004) 
            The Indian Bank’s Association (IBA) after examining the matter has suggested 
that instead of issuing guidelines an amendment may be made in the Bank Officer 
Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976. The IBA has been asked to send 
a draft of the proposed amendments. After receipt of reply from the IBA, approval of the 
Competent Authority shall be taken for either issuance of guidelines or amendment to 
the regulations. 
Action taken by the Ministry (5.4.2005) 
            In accordance with the recommendat ions made by the Hon’ble Committee, the 
Indian Bank’s Association was advised to issue guidelines to the banks, who has since 
written to all the public sector banks. 
5.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the IBA has since issued guidelines to 
the banks for making necessary amendments in the Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline 
and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 for making a provision whereby appeals shall be disposed 
of by the Appellate Authority within a period of ninety days from the date of their receipt 
and further   that the cases lying pending for over ninety days shall be reviewed 
periodically by the Appellate Authority and reasons for their non -disposal shall be 
recorded in writing. The Committee is pleased to note that most of the nationalized banks 
have notified the amended Regulations. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of 
Finance shall ensure that the remaining banks also notify the amendment. 
6.         The Committee is further happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendation, 
the IBA has since issued guidelines under Regulation 12 of the Bank Officer Employees’ 
(Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 in the matter of reinstatement of the officer 
who had been placed under suspension for being in police custody beyond 48 hours bu t 
later on cleared of the charges after trial/enquiry and that the same have been circulated 
to all public sector banks for compliance. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of 

Finance shall ensure that all public sector banks take note and comply with the se 
guidelines 
V 
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims ) Regulations, 2000 --
Implementation of the 151st Report of the Committee. 
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 
2000 framed under the National Dairy Development Board Act, 1987 were examined and 
the Committee in its 151 st Report, which was presented to the House on the 22 nd 
December, 2003 recommended as follows:- 
  
"The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to take necessary 
action, based upon its recommendations in relation to (i) modification of definition of 
word 'court' in Regulation 2(1) (d) which was not proper in the opinion of the Committee; 
(ii) procedure to be followed on an application for certain relief by leaving it to the 
discretion of the court to pass appropriate orders, by modifying Regulation 4(1) (a) and 
by deleting Regulation 4(4); and (iii) rectification of mistakes referred to in Regulations 
9& 10. 
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Agriculture would carry out the above 
amendments expeditiously." 
2.         The Committee forwarded the  relevant extracts  from the 151st Report to 
the Ministry of Agriculture for necessary action on the 26th December, 2003. 
3.         The Ministry of Agriculture vide their communication dated the 21 st July, 2004 
forwarded Notification No.DEL:NDDB dated the 26 th April, 2004 notifying "The 
National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) (Amendment) 
Regulations, 2004" (Annexure) carrying out all the amendments as recommended by the 
Committee. 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Agriculture have 
notified necessary amendments in the National Dairy Development Board ( Enforcement 
of Claims ) Regulatons,2000 as recommended by the Committee .     
NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENTBOARD 
NOTIFICATION 
New delhi, the 26th April, 2004 
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) 
(Amendment) Regulations, 2004 

No. DEL: NDDB. -- In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 48 of the National 
Dairy Development Board Act. 1987 (37 of 1987), read with Section 30 and Section 31 
thereof, and of all other powers enabling them in that behalf, the Board of Directors of 
the National Dairy Development Board hereby makes the following Amendments to the 
national Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 2000 published 
in Part III -Section 4 of Gazette of India. Extraordinary, as Notification 
NDDB/LEGAL/4401 dated 12th July,2000, nakely:- 
1.   Shrot title and commencement: 
(1)        These regulations may be called the national Dairy Development Board 
(Enforcement of Claims) (Amendment) Regulations, 2004. 
(2)        Save as otherwise provided in the regulations, the provisions thereof 
shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Gazette of 
India. 
2.   Amendments to the national Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of 
Claims) Regulations, 2000:  
In the National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 
2000:- 
    (1)    In Regulation 2, for clause (d) of Sub -regulation (1), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely:- 
(d)         "Court" means the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in a district 
(which includes the High Court in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction), 
having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming rthe subject matter of 
the claims if the same have been the subject matter of a suit, but does not 
include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal civi l court, or 
any court of small causes." 
(2)     In Regulation 4:- 
(a)                        in Sub-regulation (1) 
(i)                          for clause (a), the following clause shall  be substituted, namely:- 
"(a)       in case of an Application seekin g relief under clause (i) 
thereof, pass such appropriate order, concerning the property 
pledged, mortared, hypothecated or assigned to national Dairy 
Development Board as security for the loan or advance, as it may 
deem fit and proper to ensure the ultimate recovery of such loan or 
advance." 

(ii)                        in clause (b), for the expression "clause (c)", the expression 
"clause (iii)" shall be substituted; 
(iii)                       in clause ( c), for the expression "clause (b)", the expression 
:clause (ii)" shall be substituted;  
(b)        sub-regulation (4) shall be omitted. 
(G)  In Regulationh 9, in sub -regulation (1), for the expression " under sub -
regulation (1) of regulation (7)", the expression "under regulation 7" shall be  
substituted. 
(4)        In Regulation 10, for the expression "sub -regulation (1) of regulation 7", 
the expression "sub-regulation (1) of regulation 4" shall be substituted.  
DEEPAK TIKKU. Managing Director 
(No. ADVT-3/4/Exty./132/04) 
Summary of Recommendation 
I 
Non- framing of Regulations under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 -- Implementation of the 
74th Report of the Committee. 
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
have ultimately implemented its recommendations as contained in the 74 th Report 
presented to the House on the 27 th August, 1987 which, inter alia  relates to (i) the 
incorporation of laying provisions in respect of regulations framed under section 29 of 
the Trade Unions Act, 1926; and (ii) the framing of Model Regulations under the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926. The Committee had dealt with this subject in its 57th Report also, which 
was presented to the House on the 22nd December, 1983. 
             The Committee is, however, unhappy over the fact that the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment have taken an unduly long period in implementing the Committee’s 
recommendations. One of the main reasons put forth by the Ministry for seeking 
extension of time for framing of t he Model Regulations has been that it was considering 
basic change in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as well as the Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
The Committee notes with regret that the legislation, pending enactment of which the 
framing of Model Regulations had been kept in abeyance, came into force after a lapse of 
well over a decade w.e.f. the 9 th January, 2002 in the form of the Trade Unions 
(Amendment) Act, 2001. But, the framing of the Model Regulations took another two -
and-a-half years after the enforc ement of the Act w.e.f the 9 th January, 2002. The 
Committee expects the Ministry of Labour and Employment to be more efficient in such 
matters in future. 

II 
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959-Implementation of the 121st Report of the 
Committee. 
  
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas would 
update and reprint the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959 expeditiously after 
rectifying all the printing errors. 
III 
The Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
Regulations, 1999 – Implementation of the 143rd Report of the Committee. 
  
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry have 
notified the following amendments in the Agricultural & Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority Regulations, 1999, as recommended by it :- 
  
(1)               regulation 7 (point 3), by raising the minimum requirement of the quorum 
from 8 members to 10 members; 
(2)               regulations 10 and 26 (point 4), by substit uting the words “ shall have a 
second or casting vote” by the words “shall have a casting vote”; 
(3)               regulation 11(2) (point 5), by substituting the words “shall be effectual and 
binding” by the words  “shall be effective and binding”; 
(4)         regulation 15(2) (point 7), by substituting the words “every   decision of 
each of the Committee of a policy nature” by the words “every decision of 
each of the Committee of a policy nature, viz, a decision having a 
permanent bearing on the functionin g of the authority or a recurring 
financial implication for the Authority”  thereby defining the words “policy 
nature”as desired by the Committee;  
(5)        regulation 28(9)(f) (point 11), by substituting the words “having basic 
monthly remuneration” by the words “having monthly remuneration”.  
The Committee, however, accepts the Ministry’s comments on Regulation 16 
(point 8) regarding power of the Authority to review and revise. 
IV 
The Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976-Implementation 
of the 144th Report of the Committee. 

            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the IBA has since issued guidelines to 
the banks for making necessary amendments in the Bank Officer Employees’ (Discipline 
and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 for making a provision whereby  appeals shall be disposed 
of by the Appellate Authority within a period of ninety days from the date of their receipt 
and farther that the cases lying pending   for over ninety days shall be reviewed 
periodically by the Ap pellate Authority and reasons for their non -disposal  shall be 
recorded in writing. The Committee is pleased to note that most of the nationalized banks 
have notified the amended Regulations. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of 
Finance shall ensure that the remaining banks also notify the amendment. 
            The Committee is further happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendation, 
the IBA has since issued guidelines under Regulation 12 of the Bank Officer Employees’ 
(Discipline and Appeal) Reg ulations, 1976 in the matter of reinstatement of the officer 
who had been placed under suspension for being in police custody beyond 48 hours but 
later on cleared of the charges after trial/enquiry and that the same have been circulated 
to all public secto r banks for compliance. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of 
Finance shall ensure that all public sector banks take note   and  comply with these 
guidelines. 
V 
The National Dairy Development Board (Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 2000--
Implementation of the 151st Report of the Committee. 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Agriculture 
have  notified necessary amendments in the National Dairy Development Board 
(Enforcement of Claims) Regulations, 2000 as recommended by the Committee.  