PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD REPORT 
(Presented on 23rd May, 2006) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 May 2006/Jyaistha 1928(Saka) 
C O N T E N T S 
                                                                                                                                                      
                   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
2. Introduction 
  
3. Report 
  
  I. The Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964. 
  
II. The Kandla Port Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964. 
  
III. The Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection and 
Monitoring) Rules, 2000 – Examination by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha. 
  
IV. The Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003. 
  
  V The Export-Import Bank of  India General Regulations, 1982. 
  
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS  
5. MINUTES 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 6TH AUGUST, 2005) 
1.          Shri A. Vijayaraghavan                    Chairman 
2.          Shri Nabam Rebia                                            
3.          Dr.Radhakant Nayak                                        
4.          Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur                                   
5.         Vacant                          
6.         Vacant                                      
  7.       Vacant                                                  
  8.       Vacant                                      
  9.       Shri Nand Kishore Yadav                                  
  10.     Shri N.Jothi                                                       
  11.     Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy                     
  12.     Shri Harendra Singh Malik                                 
  13.     Shri R.Shunmugasundaram                                 
  14.     Vacant                          

     Vacant         
              SECRETRAIT   
Smt. Vandna Garg, Joint Secretary 
  2.       Shri Deepak Goyal, Director 
  3.       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Under Secretary 
  4.       Ms. S. Pankajavalli, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
  
1.         I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Hundred and Sixty-Third Report of the Committee. 
. 
The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 22nd 
May,            2006. 
  
1.3       The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them along with the comments received from 
the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee are 
contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
  
NEW DELHI 
22nd May, 2006 
  
VIJAYARAGHAVAN 
Chairman, Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha 
  
Report 
I 
The Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964. 
  
The Committee took up for examination the Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of Pilots) 
Regulations, 1964 framed under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 and a questionnaire 
on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and 
Highways (Department of Shipping) for their comments/clarifications on the 20th June, 
2003. The Committee also discussed the subject matter with the Kandla Port Trust and 
the Department of Shipping at Kandla on the 2nd July, 2003.  Relevant extracts  from 
the above discussion were forwarded to the Department of Shipping for necessary 
action on the 29th April, 2004.  The Ministry vide their communication dated the 22nd 
July, 2005 furnished a copy of the draft Kandla Port (Authorization of Pilots) 
Regulations- Revised upto 2005 carrying out amendments to the Kandla Port Trust 
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 as per the Committee’s suggestions. The 
points referred to the Ministry, the comments/clarifications received thereon, the 
observations of the Committee and the amendments in the draft revised Kandla Port 
Trust (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations carried out by the Kandla Port / Ministry as 
per it’s suggestions are reproduced below: 
I           Point referred 
            Whether the Kandla Port (Authorisation of Pilots) Regulations, 1964 have since 
been laid on the Table of both the Houses and if  so, the date of laying thereof? 
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
The above regulations were laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament after which 
only the notifications have been issued. 
II          POINT REFERRED -REGULATION  2 

  
“Definitions- In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
  
“Board”, “Chairman”, “Deputy Chairman” shall have the same meaning as in the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963,  
  
“Limits of compulsory Pilot age waters” means the limits defined under sub-section (2) 
of section (4) of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908). 
  
“Deputy Conservator” means the officer in whom the direction and management of 
pilot age are vested.  
  
“Harbour Master” means the officer appointed by the Board to perform such duties as 
may, from time to time, be assigned by the Deputy Conservator 
  
“Port” means the Port of Kandla”. 
  
The term ‘pilot’ is generally associated with the Air Planes. But here it has been used 
for handling of vessels. Whether   Government have any objection in inserting 
definition   of word ‘Pilot’ in the regulation itself? 
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
  
The word “Pilot” means “one who conducts ships in and out of a harbour, along 
dangerous coast, etc.” Pilot of a Port is an officer appointed by the Board to perform the 
duty of guiding the ships from and to the Port in an advisory capacity and works under 
the direction of Harbour Master and Deputy Conservator. 
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)     
  
The Committee had desired that the word ‘Pilot’ should be defined in the regulation 
itself and while defining the word ‘Pilot’, it should conform to the qualifications 
prescribed under the separate regulations.  
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/ Ministry (22.7.2005) 
  
Regulation 2(5) of the draft revised Regulations defines ‘Pilot’ as ‘an officer appointed 
by the Chairman to perform the duty of guiding the ships from and to the Port in an 
advisory capacity and working directly under the Harbour Master and Deputy 
Conservator.’ 
  
III        Point referred -Regulation  6(1) (a)  “Qualifications of Candidates:- 
  
A candidate for a Pilot age license shall : 
  
(a)        produce certificates of good character and sobriety and be in possession of a 
Certificate of Competency as Master (Foreign-going) granted by the Government of 
India or its equivalent and should have, preferably experience of at least six months as 
First Mate on a foreign-going ship; 
  
(b)        obtain a certificate of physical fitness from such medical authority as may be 
prescribed by the Board for the purpose; 
             
(c)  unless the Board otherwise determines, serve a period of probationary training of 
not less than 6 months. On completion of the training, the probationer may, if 

recommended by the Harbour Master and subject to the approval of the Deputy 
Conservator, apply to be examined as to his qualifications to pilot ships.” 
  
The words ‘its equivalent’ are vague. Whether Government have any objection in 
making the provision of Regulation 6(1) (a) specific? 
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
The Certificate of Competency as Master (Foreign Going) has been equated with the 
Certificate of Competency as Dredge Master Grade –I as recommended by Director 
General of Shipping vide Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways 
(Department of Shipping) notification No. G.S.R. 536(E) dated the  22nd November, 
1996.  Also, in certain cases it is equated with the service certificate of a Naval Officer. 
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)      
  
The Committee desired that in order to make the provision specific, the requisite 
qualifications of candidates should be indicated in the regulations itself. 
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/ Ministry    (22.7.2005) 
   
Regulation 8(1)(a)(b)(c)(d) of the draft revised Regulations lays down the requisite 
qualifications of the candidates. 
  
IV        Point referred -Regulation 6(2) 
  
“The fee for a Pilot’s Licence shall be prescribed by the Board from time to time.” 
             
What are the existing rates of Pilot fee prescribed by the Board? When this fee was last 
revised? 
  
Ministry’s reply  (27.6.2003) 
  
So far, no fee for Pilots Licence has been prescribed because of the fact that a candidate 
appointed as Trainee/ Probationary Pilot in Kandla Port is issued with the licence for 
Piloting of the vessels in the Port after necessary training in the channels for various 
capacity vessels.  Further, the Trainee Pilot is an employee of the Port Trust.  Whenever 
the Pilot leaves his job from the Port, the licence issued to him is invariably taken back. 
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)   
  
The Committee was apprised that no fee for pilot’s licence is being charged and as such 
the provision is not relevant and hence could be deleted. 
  
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/ Ministry (22.7.2005) 
       
Regulation 8(2) of the draft revised Regulations provides that no fee for Pilot’s licence is 
recovered as the Trainee/ Probationary Pilot is an employee of the Port Trust and 
whenever the Pilot leaves the job from the Pilot Trust, the licence so issued to him is 
surrendered. 
  
V         Point referred -Regulation  8  “Examination Committee:-  
  
The examination shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the Board by an 
Examination Committee constituted as follows:- 
  
The Deputy Conservator(Chairman). 

The Harbour Master. 
A Master of a Foreign-going ship.” 
  
What is the manner in which the examination is conducted? Whether it is written or 
practical or both? 
  
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
  
The examination is conducted orally by the Committee after practical training under 
guidance of Senior Pilots for handling of vessels in the Port.  Prior to the examination, a 
declaration by the Trainee and recommendation of Senior Pilots regarding the 
capability of the trainee to pilot vessels is taken. 
Committee’s observation  
  
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry. 
  
VI        Point referred -Regulation  9   “Failure to pass on examination:-  
  
In the event of a probationer failing to pass the specified examination within nine 
months of his appointment, he will be liable to be discharged.” 
  
            How many trials a probationer gets during the period of 9 months. To what 
extent the provision of this regulation have been invoked in the past i.e., service of 
probationers terminated.  Are any options available to the probationers after the 
invoking of regulation  9, if so the details?  
Ministry’s reply  (27.6.2003) 
  
A Trainee pilot after completion of his training  period is subjected to an examination 
by the Committee constituted for the purpose.  In case, he fails the examination, he is 
given an extension of training period and permitted to appear in the examination 
second time.  In case his performance is found unsatisfactory in the second examination 
also, his services as Trainee Pilot is terminated. 
  
In so far as Kandla Port Trust is concerned, in one case the services of the Trainee Pilot 
were terminated in 1999 as he could not get through the examination inspite of giving 
him two chances, whereafter there has been no such cases. 
  
Committee’s observation  
  
The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry. 
  
VII       Point referred -Regulation  12  and  13  “Pilot’s behaviour:- 
             Regulation 12 
  
A pilot shall at all times exercise strict sobriety. He shall throughout the time he is in 
charge of a vessel, use his utmost care and diligence for his safety and the safety of other 
vessels and property. He shall, when necessary, keep the lead going while the vessel is 
underway. He shall not lay by the vessel aground without a written order from the 
owner or officer in command. 
  
            Regulation 13 
  

A pilot shall behave with due civility towards the Owner, Master and Officers of any 
vessel under his charge.” 
             
Whether the Board has in addition prescribed any code of conduct for the pilots, and if 
so, whether the same can not be made part of the regulations?  
What action is taken for violation of code of conduct?  
  
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
  
A regular Pilot is governed by the Kandla Port Employees Regulations, 1964 for all his 
service matters under which the Kandla Port Employees (Classification, Control and 
Appeal) Regulations, 1964 are applicable for initiating disciplinary proceedings against 
the Pilots in the event of any misconduct during his service period. 
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)      
  
The Committee desired that some provision should be incorporated in the regulations 
for putting in place some mechanism for evaluation of the Pilot’s behaviour within a 
time frame. 
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/ Ministry  (22.7.2005) 
     
Regulation 18 of the draft revised Regulations provides that the Pilot being an employee 
of the Board  shall be governed by the Kandla Port Employee’s Regulations, 1964 for all 
his service matters and in the event of any misconduct/ misbehavior while in service, 
liable for disciplinary proceedings under the Kandla Port Employee’s (CCA) 
Amendment Regulations, 2004. 
VIII      Point referred -Regulation 17 
  
“Pilots may leave vessels at anchor in the harbour if not provided with proper food and 
sleeping accommodation:- 
  
            A pilot shall be provided with reasonable accommodation, if necessary, and shall 
be supplied with breakfast between 7 A.M. and 9 A.M.; with lunch between noon and 2 
p.m. and dinner between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m. (I.S.T.) failing which the Master shall pay 
compensation for food, namely, Rs. 2 for any of the meals missed by the Pilot.” 
  
(i)     What is implied by the term  “ reasonable accommodation”?  
(ii)   In what background the above regulation was framed and to what extent it is 
relevant and being applied in the present times.  In case the provisions are still relevant, 
should the compensation not be reasonably revised and if otherwise, should the 
provision not be snapped? 
Ministry’s reply (27.6.2003) 
  
Generally the Masters of the visiting vessels are always taking care of the Pilot’s food 
requirement whenever they board the vessel for piloting the vessel and no complaint is 
received in this respect.  Most vessels have a specified Pilot’s Cabin where the Pilot can 
rest when  required.  ‘Reasonable Accommodation’ means a Cabin/ Accommodation 
commensurate with the status of a Pilot and generally means a separate cabin at par 
with the Cabin of a Senior Officer of the vessel. 
  
In Kandla Port, to and fro voyage time is about 4 hours and as such the Pilots are not 
normally required to stay on board the vessel during the operation of the 
vessel.  However, it becomes relevant if the Pilot is required to stay on board due to 

reason for a longer period e.g. waiting for turn of tide, etc.  So far as Vadinar Port 
under the administrative jurisdiction of Kandla Port is concerned,  where the Pilots are 
required to stay on board the vessel throughout the operation of the vessel suitable 
accommodation with all basic necessities including the food is always made available to 
Pilots by the Master of the respective vessels.  
Committee’s observations (2.7.2003)      
  
The Committee was informed that normally, situation never arose when a pilot was 
required to leave the ship for having a meal.  The Committee expressed a view that the 
provision needs to be updated. 
  
Amendments carried out by the Kandla Port/ Ministry (22.7.2005) 
              
Regulation 22 of the draft revised Regulations provides that the master of a vessel, shall 
provide the Pilot with reasonable accommodation,  necessary breakfast, lunch and 
dinner,  as the case may be, if the vessel is at anchor in the Harbour and at SBM in the 
case of Vadinar, failing which the Master of the respective vessel shall pay 
compensation at the rate of Rs. 200/- for any meal missed by the Pilot.  
  
2.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road 
Transport & Highways (Department of Shipping) had since prepared a draft of the 
Kandla Port (Authorization of Pilots) Regulations for carrying out necessary 
amendments in the Regulations of 1964 in line with similar regulations of the Mumbai 
Port Trust and also keeping in view its suggestions.  The Committee further notes that 
the existing regulations would be repealed once the proposed revised regulations are 
approved and notified in the Official Gazette. The Committee hopes that the Ministry 
would notify the above amendments expeditiously under intimation to it. 
II 
The Kandla Port Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964. 
  
The Kandla Port Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964 framed under the Major 
Port Trusts Act, 1963 were examined by the Committee and a questionnaire on the 
subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways 
(Department of Shipping) on the 20th June 2003. The matter was taken up for discussion 
with the representatives of the Kandla Port Trust along with the Ministry of Shipping, 
Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) on the 2nd July, 2003. during 
the Committee's visit to Sasan Gir The relevant extracts from the study note were 
forwarded to the Ministry on the 29th April, 2004 for an action taken note thereon. 
After, a prolonged correspondence, the Ministry furnished the action taken note on the 
21st March 2005. The points raised by the Committee, the comments of the Ministry, the 
Committee's observations and the Ministry's action taken note thereon are as under:-  
(1)        Point raised 
Whether the Kandla Port Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964 have since been 
laid on the Table of both the Houses and if so, the date of laying thereof? 
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 
The Kandla Port Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964 were laid in the Houses of 
Parliament, after which only the Notification had been issued. 
Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
The Committee desired the Ministry to lay the duly amended regulations on the table of 
both the Houses. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (21.3.2005) 
  

The regulations will be laid after amendment. 
  
(2)        Point raised -Regulation 3(2) (b) (iii) 
  
“ Study leave may also be granted for the studies which may not be closely or directly 
connected with the work of an employee, but which are capable of widening his mind in 
a manner likely to improve his abilities as an employee and to equip him better to 
collaborate with those employed in other branches of the port service.” 
  
This proviso gives wide discretionary powers to the sanctioning authority to grant study 
leave for the purposes other than those mentioned in Rule 3(1) & 3(2)(i) and 3(5) 
wherein it is clearly mentioned that the study leave is granted for the purpose of higher 
studies or specialized training in a professional or technical subject and not in case any 
academic or literary subject. What is the justification for vesting such a wide discretion 
in the matter of grant of study leave?   
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 
Till the Kandla Port was declared a Major Port and brought under the Major Port 
Trusts Act, in 1964 it was functioning as a Department of Central Government and was 
governed by the Fundamental Rules framed for Central Civil Services. Although the 
Kandla Port Trust has made its own Regulations in 1964 the guiding principles of the 
Fundamental Rules for Central Civil Services had been adopted to a great extent while 
framing the Regulations. 
The Kandla Port Trust being an industrial sector is required to operate in co-ordination 
with various Departments for its operational requirements. Two or more departments 
are required to work together for the efficient and smooth Port operations and 
therefore a necessity arises for interchange of technical and operational know-how even 
though the study by a particular employee is not directly connected with his own work, 
it may widen his knowledge and enable him to collaborate with other employees of a 
different branch which helps in the improvement of the efficiency of work in the service. 
Cases falling in this category are examined on merit of each case and therefore, keeping 
such discretion in such cases is justified. 
Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
The Committee noted the explanation of the Ministry. 
  
(3)        Point raised -Regulation 3(3) (i) 
  
“Study leave shall not be granted unless – (i) it is certified by the authority competent to 
sanction leave that the proposed course of study or training shall be definite advantage 
from the point of view of the port administration;” 
  
What is the validity of the certificate when the authority competent to sanction leave 
and the certifying authority is same? 
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 
In Kandla Port Trust, the authority competent to grant leave under the Kandla Port 
Employees (Leave) Regulations, 1964 is different from the authorities who grant study 
leave. While the study leave is granted by the Board, Chairman or Deputy Chairman, 
leave other than study leave for example Earned leave, Medical Leave etc. is granted by 
the Head of the Departments, Drawing Officers etc, as the case may be.  Normally the 
study leave is granted as above on the certification of the Head of the Department under 
whose control the applicant for study leave is employed. In the case of Kandla Port 
Trust, the certifying and the sanctioning authority are not same. 
  

Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
  
The Committee noted the explanation of the Ministry. 
  
(4)        Point raised -Regulation 3(5) (ii) (iii) 
  
Study leave shall not ordinarily be granted to an employee. 
  
(ii) “who does not hold a Class I or Class II post under the Board?” 
  
(iii)" who is due to retire or has the option to retire from the Board's service within 
three years of the date on which he is expected to return to duty after the expiry of the 
leave" 
  
There may be technical staff at the workshop level in the port who may not be holding a 
class I or II post but furtherance of studies in their cases may be beneficial; what is the 
justification of this provision? 
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 
  
The technical staff at the workshop levels or in any technical/operational branch are 
placed under the supervisory control of class I or II officers in this Port. We have 
Assistant Engineers and Executive Engineers in Class II & I capacity to look after the 
branches like Workshop etc. Often it is not economically viable to consider the 
employees at lower levels for grant of study leave. Besides, the technical staff and 
artisans are trained by virtue of their technical education and experience to cope up 
with the requirements of their duties. They are also given training at the place of duty. 
As these employees are expected to work under the highly skilled Class I & II Officers, 
there appears no justification to include ordinarily employees other than class I & II in 
the purview of the Study Leave Regulations. 
Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
  
The Committee desired that the regulation should be amended in such a way that 
officials of  class III and  IV category may also get an opportunity to avail study leave 
for upgrading their knowledge and skills. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (21.3.2005) 
Regulations 3 (5) (ii) shall be deleted.  After deleting sub-clause (ii) opportunity to class 
III & IV officials will be available. 
(5)        Point raised -Regulation 6 
“Combination of Study Leave with leave of other kinds: - (1) Study leave may be 
combined with other kinds of leave, but in no case shall the grant of this leave in 
combination with leave other than extraordinary leave involve a total absence of more 
than twenty eight months from the regular duties of the employee. 
Explanation: - The period of twenty-eight months of absence referred to in sub-
regulation shall include the period of vacation. 
(2) An employee granted study leave in combination with any other kind of leave may, if 
he so desires, commence his study before the end of the other kind of leave but the 
period of such leave considering with the course of study shall not count as study leave.” 
  
What is the significance of the condition of 28 months?  
How an employee is  allowed to commence study while on some other leave before the 
commencement of the study leave? 
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 

  
As already stated, the guiding principles for grant of study leave are derived from the 
Fundamental Rules applicable to the Government servants under Central Civil Services 
which provides for maximum period of study leave  to 24 months. The Central Rules 
also provide for continuation of study leave with other regular leave and permits 
commencement of study while on any other kind of leave before commencement of 
study leave. 28 months is the maximum period of study leave in the Kandla Port 
Employees (Study Leave) Regulations, which means that this can be shorter also 
depending on the nature and course of study. For example, in the case of Medical 
Officer, pursuing the post graduate study, it becomes necessary to grant leave to the 
extent of the period of prescribed course which may be even two years or more. Hence, 
the condition of  28 months in the Kandla Port Employees (Study leave) Regulations, 
1964. 
Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
  
The Committee desired that the Ministry should revise and update the provision so that 
the Board's employees desiring for courses of longer duration may also be benefited. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (21.3.2005) 
This is being proposed to be amended on the lines of the Central Civil Services (leave) 
rules. The duration of the study leave is restricted to the maximum of 36 months. 
(6)        Point raised -Regulations 15 & 16 
“Grant of Travelling Allowance: - An employee shall not ordinarily be paid travelling 
allowance but the Board may, in exceptional circumstances, sanction the payment of 
such allowance. 
Cost of Fees for Study: - An employee granted study leave shall ordinarily be required 
to meet the cost of fees paid for the study but in exceptional cases the Board may 
sanction the grant of such fees. 
            Provided that in no case shall the cost of fees be paid to an employee who is in 
receipt of scholarship or stipend from whatever source or who is permitted to receive or 
retain, in addition to his leave salary, any remuneration in respect of part time 
employment.” 
These Regulations give discretionary powers to the sanctioning authority.  Would the 
Ministry like to explain the term “exceptional circumstances” and “exceptional cases” 
where travelling allowance and cost of fee for study may be paid to an employee and 
mention the parameters suitably in the Regulations? 
  
Ministry's reply (27.6.2003) 
            All exceptional circumstances and cases can not be anticipated and defined in 
advance. The competent authority may consider conditions of employees considered for 
study leave viz-a- viz the utility of training for the organization, extremely poor 
economic background of the concerned employee etc.  
Committee's observations (2.7.2003) 
The Committee noted the explanation of the Ministry. 
  
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
and Highways (Department of Shipping) have agreed to carry out the following 
amendments in the Kandla Port Trust (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964:-  
(i)  In Regulation 3 (5) (ii) & (iii) by deleting clause (ii) so that the officers of  class III 
and IV category may also get an opportunity to avail the study leave for upgrading their 
knowledge and skills. 
(ii)  In Regulation 6 (i) by substituting  it as under:- 

"Regulation 6 (i): Study leave may be combined with other kinds of leave, but in no case 
shall the grant of this leave in combination with leave, other than extra ordinary leave, 
involve a total absence of more than 28 months generally and 36 months for the courses 
leading to Phd. degree from the regular duties of the employee. 
Explanation- The limit of 28 months/36 months of absence prescribed in this sub-rule 
includes the period of vacation. 99 so as to align this provision on the lines of the 
Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules. 
  
3.         The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall notify the above amendments 
expeditiously under intimation  to it.    
III 
The Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2000. 
  
The Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2000 
framed under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 were examined 
and a questionnaire was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry on the 
25th January, 2002.  The Ministry, vide their communication dated the 3rd May, 2002 
furnished their comments to the points referred to in the questionnaire. Furthermore, 
vide their communication dated the 5th February, 2003 the Ministry forwarded 
notification No. S.O. 3719 (E) dated the 30th November, 2002 publishing therein the 
Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection & Monitoring) (Amendment) 
Rules, 2002 (Annexure I). 
  
2.          The Committee at its meeting held on the 20th May, 2003 considered the subject 
matter.  It noted the Ministry’s comments on point numbers 1, 2, 5(i), 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 
14(a), 16, 17 and 18.  The Ministry accepted the Committee’s suggestions on point 
numbers 3(i) and (iii), 4, 5(ii), 6, 11 and 15.  The Committee was, however, not 
convinced with the Ministry’s replies to point numbers 3(ii), 9 and 14(b) and decided to 
seek further clarifications from the Ministry on these points.  The matter was discussed 
with the Export Inspection Council along with the officials of the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry during its visit to Mumbai on the 5th July, 2003.  Thereafter, a study note 
on the aforesaid discussion was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce & Industry on 
the 30th April, 2004 reiterating its earlier suggestions on the contentious points, i.e. point 
numbers 3(ii), 9 and 14(b).  Subsequently, the Ministry vide their communication dated 
the 25th June, 2004 furnished their clarifications on the aforementioned points. 
  
3.         The points referred to the Ministry, their comments thereon, the Committee’s 
further observations and the action taken by the Ministry are as follows: 
1.         Point raised: (25.01.2002) 
The Rules have been framed under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 
1963.  What are the reasons for taking a considerable period of 37 years in framing 
these rules.  In what manner the areas covered by these rules were being regulated in 
the absence of the rules? 
  
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
  
          It may be mentioned that as provided in section 17(1) of the Export (Quality 
Control and Inspection) Act, 1963, the main rules entitled the “Export (Quality Control 
and Inspection) Rules, 1964” were notified during the year 1964. 
  
Although India is one of the largest producers of milk, exports in this area is relatively 
insignificant.  However, export of milk products has grown in recent times.  Further, in 

WTO regime and in view of the SPS Agreement, the importing countries are imposing 
regulatory requirements for various agri and food items including milk products in 
terms of stringent health and safety parameters generally based on international 
standards.  To ensure that our exports meet the requirements of the importing country 
and are not rejected on arrival at the importing ports, the Central government had 
notified milk products under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 
vide Notification No. 2719 dated 16 December 2000.  Rules have been framed vide S.O. 
2720 dated 16.12.2000 which specify the manner of export certification.  This was 
intended to provide official assurance of quality and safety of milk products exported 
from India to the importing countries thereby facilitating exports. 
  
Further, the European Commission has a system of notifying the units whose products 
would be accepted in the EU member states, which is based on export certification by 
the official certifying agency of their trading partners.  The European Commission has 
already recognized EIC certification for marine products and basmati rice and the 
process for similar recognition for milk products and basmati rice and the process for 
similar recognition for milk products is on the anvil.  Without such recognition, it is not 
possible to export to EC member states.  It therefore, became necessary to cover milk 
products under compulsory export certification. 
  
Prior to the above Notification, there were no regulatory controls for export of milk 
products. 
  
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
2.         Point raised:  (25.01.2002)   
            Rule 2(b):  Definition of Agency 
  
            XXX                 XXX                 XXX 
  
            “Agency means any one of the Export Inspection Agencies at Mumbai, Calcutta, 
Cochin, Delhi and Madras established under section 7 of the Act. 
  
Whether these agencies established under rule 2(b) are efficient enough to meet the 
objectives for which these have been set up. Whether there are any such agencies at 
Visakhapatnam and Kandla and if not, the reasons therefor? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
             The Export Inspection Agencies have been established in 1966 under Section 7 
of the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 under the administrative and 
technical control of the Export Inspection Council and are fully equipped having 
sufficient technical manpower in the concerned area along with testing labs. The 
technical manpower has been empowered by giving training on food safety management 
systems like Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)/Good Hygienic Practices 
(GHP)/Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP) as well as testing as per 
international requirements. In addition, laboratories have been upgraded to provide for 
latest equipments capable of testing to international standards. 
  
            EIC, through Export Inspection Agencies, have a network of 42 Sub-offices all 
over the country including food lab. These Sub-offices provide logistic support at all 
major ports and industrial centres in India. There are Sub-offices at Visakhapatnam 
(under EIA-Chennai) and Gandhidham (Kandla – under EIA-Mumbai). 
  

Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
           The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
  
3.         Point raised:  (25.01.2002) -Regulation 2(x) Definition of UHT 
            XXX                 XXX                 XXX 
  
“UHT (Ultra High Temperature) Treatment” treatment of milk or cream is a high-
temperature/short time heat treatment aimed at producing a commercially sterile 
product, which can be stored at room temperature. The process aims to destroy all 
micro organisms; any residcal micro organisms are unlikely to cause spoilage under 
normal storage conditions. UHT-treated milk and cream are packaged aseptically into 
sterilized, hermetically sealed containers. The total heat treatment is equivalent in terms 
of its effectiveness against heat-resistant spores, to a minimum Fº value of 3 min.” 
  
(i)         Should the word ‘residcal’ not be read as ‘residual’ in the above provision. 
(ii)        The definition clause after defining the UHT spells out the purpose of the 
process which is not desirable in a definition clause. Should the two aspects not be 
separated? 
(iii)       The para immediately after regulation 2(x) describes what hermetically sealed 
container is. But the term has already been defined in regulation 2(m). Whether the 
repetition of definition of the term can be avoided? 
  
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
(i)      Yes, this is the typographical error and hence the word ‘residcal’ should be read 
as ‘residual’. 
(ii)     UHT indicates the process to which milk is subjected to and therefore it is 
essential to give the exact definition of the process and hence the two aspects need not be 
separated.  It may be added here that this aspect was finalized by a Standing Committee 
for milk products constituted under the Act comprising representatives of Agricultural 
Products Exports Development Authority (APEDA), Department of Animal Husbandry 
& Dairy, Ministry of Food Processing Industries.  National Dairy Development Board, 
Indian Dairy Research Institute, Dairy Association of India and Export Inspection 
Council.  
(iii)   Yes, the definition at 2(m) covers hermetically sealed containers and therefore the 
para immediately after 2(x) needs to be deleted and a suitable amendment would be 
issued. 
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
  
           The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments on point numbers 3(i) and 3(iii). 
On point number 3(ii),the Committee decided to seek further clarifications from the 
Ministry. 
  
            Committee’s further observation : (05.07.2003) 
  
            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s comments and desired that 
purpose and process of the UHT should be separated from the definition and suggested 
that the same could be indicated through a foot note. 
            Action Taken by the Ministry : (25.06.2004) 
           It has been decided to amend the Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, 
Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2003 suitably to separate the purpose and process of 
the UHT from the definition through a foot note as suggested by the Committee.  The 
necessary notification is being finalized in consultation with concerned departments viz, 

Legislative Department, OLLC, etc. and a copy of the same will be made available to 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat as and when it will be published in the Official Gazette. 
4.         Point raised: (25.01.2002) Rule 3(a): Basis of compliance 
            “It shall be the responsibility of the processors to ensure that the milk products 
intended for exports are handled processed at all stages of production, storage and 
transported under proper hygienic conditions so as to meet the health requirement laid 
down under these rules and that the product conforms to the specifications given in the 
Order by the Central Government under section 6 of the Act.” 
           The word “processors” used here needs to be defined as it is not clear from the 
regulation who actually fall within the meaning of the term “processors”. Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in defining the term? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
           The word “processor” is commonly being used in various notifications under 
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 and it has not been a practice to 
include the definition under various notifications. However, the suggestion has been 
noted and is agreed and action is being taken to include the definition of ‘processor’ in 
future notifications. 
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
5.         Point raised : (25.01.2002)  Rule 3(b)  Basis of Compliance: 
            XXX                 XXX                 XXX 
         “The Competent Authority shall ensure that all the processors comply with the 
requirement by regular monitoring of the plant as per the control measures prescribed 
in the Para of this part. For effective monitoring of the scheme, Council shall issue 
necessary instructions in this regard from time to time.” 
(i)         Whether the Council has issued any instructions for monitoring of the plants, if 
so, what are those instructions? 
  
(ii)        The words “para of this part” and “scheme” do not seem to fit into the scheme 
of the sub-rule. What are the comments of the Ministry in this regard? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
(i)         Yes, the Council has issued executive instructions for monitoring of plants which 
are intended for usage of the EIAs and also for exporters for their information. A copy 
of the same is enclosed at Annex-I. 
(ii)        There is a typographical error in this para. The words “para 4.18 of the Rules” 
should be substituted for the existing. The word “scheme” is correct and has also been 
used in other notifications.  
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
6.        Point raised : (25.01.2002) Rule 4 
  
           The numbering of paragraphs of rule 4 has been done in an unusual manner by 
showing them as 4.1, 4.2 etc; why the usual practice of numbering them as (i), (ii) etc. 
has not been adhered to? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
  
           Different systems on numbering may be used, namely 4.12, 4.2…. to reflect sub-
clauses of the main clause.  Similarly, (i), (ii),….or (a), (b),…..also reflect parts of the 
main clause.  Any of the systems may be used.  However, it is agreed that a uniformity 
needs to be maintained and will be kept in mind in future. 
Committee’s observation  : (20.05.2003) 

            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
7.         Point raised  : (25.01.2002)  Rule 4.13 
          “If the milk products examined show traces of residues in excess of the permitted 
levels fixed, they must not be allowed either for the manufacture of foodstuffs or for 
direct human consumption.” 
  
Whether the permitted levels have been fixed, if so, whether it is not possible to 
incorporate them in the rules itself? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
            The minimum residue levels have not been laid down and are proposed to be 
monitored according to the requirements of the importing country or as per 
international standards.  The processor under this scheme has to test residues as per the 
requirement of its target market.  Therefore, it may not be possible to place a single 
permitted level for residues.  Apart from this, the residue levels of different countries 
also undergo changes very frequently. 
Committee’s observation  : (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
8.         Point raised : (25.01.2002)  Rule 4.14 
  
            The Milk products for Export shall be subjected to the following conditions: 
            XXX                XXX                XXX 
            “Tests for residues must be carried out in accordance 
with  National/Internationally Recognized methods,” 
             
            Whether National/Internationally recognized methods have been 
defined/prescribed anywhere, if so. What are those methods and whether it is possible 
to incorporate them in the rules itself? 
Ministry’s Comments  : (03.05.2002) 
  
            Yes, the national recognised methods are those of importing countries and differ 
and so it is not feasible to incorporate all in the Notification. The internationally 
recognised methods are methods prescribed under Codex Alimentarius Commission. It 
is not necessary to incorporate  these in the rules, as it will make the notification very 
bulky. Further the methods also undergo changes frequently, which would make it 
difficult if these were incorporated in the Rules. However, EIC is in the process of 
compiling a manual on the methods of test to be used. 
Committee’s observation  : (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
9.         Point raised  : (25.01.2002) Rule 4.18 
            The Milk products for export shall be subjected to the following conditions: 
            XXX                XXX                XXX 
“The inspection and monitoring of plant and packaging centres shall be carried out 
regularly by the competent authority, which shall at all times have free access to all 
parts of the plants, in order to ensure that these rules are being observed. The health 
checks and supervision of production shall be carried out as per the elements given in 
Annexure D” 
What is the frequency of inspection and monitoring of the plants and processing 
centres; Whether it is possible to incorporate a time frame for these inspections; 
Further what effective checks exist in the Act/Rules to protect the owners from 
harassment in the name of inspection and monitoring? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 

           A 3-tier surveillance system is being operated comprising of monitoring visits, 
supervisory visits and corporate audits.  Yes, the frequency of  inspection has been 
prescribed under the executive instructions.  Initially, all processing plants shall be 
monitored once in 3 months by an officer of appropriate discipline not below the rank 
of Assistant Director of the Competent Authority and further, based on performance of 
the unit the frequency would be decided. A system of surveillance visit and corporate 
audit has been designed to execute a check on the monitoring officials and also ensure 
that procedures laid down are followed.  EIC has also a public grievance and vigilance 
mechanism to attend to any case of complaints and harassment.  The exporter has also 
an option of appeal to Central Government under the rules in case they are aggrieved 
by any decision of EIAs/EIC. 
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
  
            The Committee decided to seek further clarifications from the Ministry. 
  
            Committee’s further observation : (05.07.2003) 
            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry’s comments and it desired 
that the frequency of inspection and monitoring of plants and processing centers should 
be indicated in the rules itself instead of in the executive instructions. 
            Action Taken by the Ministry: (25.06.2004) 
           As regards incorporation of frequency of inspection and monitoring of plants and 
processing centers in the Rules, it is submitted that the executive instructions, which are 
operating instructions, are issued  for the use of inspecting officers of Export Inspection 
Agencies in line with the directives contained in the Notification.  These instructions 
contain additional details which assist in implementing the notification and also to 
ensure uniformity in interpretation of the notification at the field level.  The frequency 
of inspection and monitoring of plants is variable and dependent on the performance of 
individual plants.  It is, therefore, felt that there is no need to incorporate the frequency 
of inspection in the Notification and its incorporation in the executive instructions may 
continue. 
10.       Point raised :(25.01.2002) Rule 5(a) Certification 
“On request from the plant, the competent authority shall issue health certificate in the 
prescribed proforma after satisfying itself that the milk products are processed in 
approved processing plants having valid approval number and after satisfying the 
relevant requirement” 
(a)        The words ‘relevant requirement’ mentioned in the rule are not clear. Whether 
the Ministry have any objection in incorporating/indicating ‘relevant requirement’ in 
the rule itself? 
(b)        Whether proforma of certificate has been incorporated in the rules? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
(a)        The relevant requirements in this case would refer to the requirements of the 
importing country which needs to be reflected in the health certificate and which may 
vary from country to country.  It is not feasible to incorporate all such requirements in 
the notification. 
(b)        A general proforma of the ‘certificate’ has been incorporated in the executive 
instructions (Annexure-I) for countries not having any specified proforma. 
Committee’s observation: (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
11.       Point raised:(25.01.2002) Rule 5(b) Certification 
            XXX                 XXX                 XXX 

“The Competent Authority shall also issue vague certificates on request from the 
processor or exporter after satisfying itself that the requirements of the relevant 
standard are met.” 
            The term “vague certificate” is not clear. Would the Ministry clarify it? 
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
  
            It is a typographical error.  Hence the word “any other” needs to be substituted 
for the word “vague” and a suitable amendment would be issued. 
  
Committee’s observation  : (20.05.2003) 
  
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
12.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) Rule 6(a): Fee 
  
           “A fee of Rs.5000 shall be paid by the processor along with the application for 
approval of the milk processing plant.” 
(a)        A fee of Rs.5000/- fixed for approval of milk processing plant appears to be on 
higher side.  What is the justification for keeping the fee at this level; Whether Govt. 
have any objection in reducing the amount of fees to make it cost effective? 
  
(b)        What is the mode of payment of fee; Whether it is possible to prescribe in the 
rules for convenience of public? 
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
  
(a)        A fee of Rs.5000/- involves the processing charges of application including 
scrutiny of the documents as well as against cost incurred towards assessment.  The 
assessments are carried out by an Inter Departmental Panel consisting of atleast 3 
members and the costs of EIA member and thatof Indian DairyAssociation are met 
from this fee.   On many occasions there may be a second assessment in case the first 
assessment is not satisfactory, which is also covered in the fee.  Since EIAs have to be 
self-supporting, any fee charged has to cover cost of its operation including manpower 
charges.  Therefore, the fee laid is considered very reasonable. 
  
(b)        The payment of fee can be made through Demand Draft as well as cheque and it 
has been indicated in the application form.  Therefore, it may not be necessary to 
prescribe it in the rules. 
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
13.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) Rule 7 
  
          “Competent Authority shall take actions if the requirement cease to be met.” 
           The contents of rule 7 do not seem to be specific.  What are the actions that have 
been contemplated under this rule and what are the requirements referred to therein; 
Whether these are the same as have been provided under section 7(3A) and 11 of the 
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963, if so, should a reference of the 
section not be incorporated in the rules itself?  Further, whether any opportunity is 
given before taking any action? 
  
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
            Yes.  Whatever actions have been prescribed under the Act, are covered and can 
be taken.  In addition, any aggrieved processor can make an appeal to the Central 
Government under Rule 8. 

  
             However, the emphasis today on corrective actions by the processors whenever 
found deficient or non-conforming as prescribed in clause 7 of executive instructions 
(Annexure-I) and only in case of gross violation the actions prescribed under the Act are 
taken.  Any action taken is with due communication with the processor and after issuing 
a show-cause notice, wherever necessary, to give the processor an opportunity to 
present his case. 
  
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
  
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
14.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) Rule 8.2 
                      XXX          XXX             XXX 
          “Any person aggrieved by the decision of the competent Authority may prefer an 
appeal within 10 days of receipt of such decision to an Appellate Authority appointed by 
the Central Government.”  
              Rule 8.3 
  
            “The Appellate Authority shall consist of five members appointed for the 
purpose by the Central Government: 
(a)        Period of 10 days for appeal by the aggrieved party is quite less. Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in increasing this period suitably? 
(b)        Whether the appellate Authority envisaged under the rule is the same as has 
been provided in the Act; Whether the composition of the Appellate Authority and 
procedure prescribed under the rules are in variance with what has been provided in 
the Act. If so, how a Appellate Authority different from the one prescribed in the Act 
has been contemplated under the Rules; Whether it is not unexpected use of the power 
not envisaged in the Act? 
  
             Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
(a)        Since milk products is perishable commodity and therefore it may be effective to 
redress the appeal as early as possible and hence the period of 10 days is considered to 
be sufficient and therefore there may be no need to increase it further. Further, in the 
fish & fishery products notifications, which is being implemented for the last few years, 
the same time period has been provided and there has been no problem raised by the 
exporters. 
  
(b)        In exercise of the power conferred in Section 7(4) of the Export (Quality Control 
and Inspection) Act, 1963 to be read with Rule 8.3 of Export of Milk Products (Quality 
Control & Inspection, Monitoring) Rules, 2000, Appellate Authority for milk product 
has so far not been constituted and the same shall be constituted shortly to deal with 
such appeals under the provisions of the notification. 
  
Committee’s observation: (20.05.2003) 
  
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments on point number 14(a).On point 
number 14(b),the Committee decided to seek further clarifications from the Ministry. 
             
            Committee’s further observation: (05.07.2003) 
  

           The Committee noticed that the rules were notified in December,2000 but the 
Appellate Authority for the Milk Products could not be constituted so far. The 
Committee desired that the Appellate Authority should be constituted immediately.  
  
            Action Taken by the Ministry: (25.06.2004) 
  
The Appellate Authority on Milk Products has already been constituted vide this 
Department’s Order dated 13.8.2002 (copy enclosed) (Annexure II). 
15.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002)  
Annexure A item 2(2) 
  
            “Premises where milking is performed or milk is stored, handled or cooled must 
be so said and or constructed as to avoid all risk of contamination of the milk.” 
  
           The word ‘said’ appears to be misprint. Whether the Ministry would correct it? 
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
  
            Yes, it is a typographical error and should be “made”.  Amendment would be 
carried out 
Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
  
            The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
16.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) 
The rules appear to have been framed in exercise of the power of the Central 
Government under section 6 in regard to control and inspection of a notified 
commodities for sound development of export.  How many commodities have been 
notified so far under this section and for how many rules have been framed.  What is 
the criterion for selecting a commodity for notification?   
  
Ministry’s Comments : (03.05.2002) 
  
            Presently 949 commodities have been notified under this section and the rules for 
the same have also been framed. The criteria for selecting a commodity for notification 
generally has been: 
The quantity and value of the export of the concerned commodity 
If Indian product is facing competition and confidence can be gained by assuring 
quality through Inspection and Quality Control. 
The complains received against the concerned commodity by importers as well as 
importing countries. 
            However, as part of the economic reforms in 1991, various categories of 
exporters have been given exemptions from compulsory pre-shipment inspection. 
Therefore, export certification is in practice voluntary for most of the notified 
commodities. 
  
            Subsequently, in the WTO regime, many countries have started imposing health 
and safety requirements on food and agricultural products imported into their country. 
In view of this, it has become imperative for India to address these requirements 
through export certification. In fact, the European Commission is allowing import of 
certain food items into their member states only under EIC approval. Presently, marine 
products, milk products, egg products, meat products and honey are under compulsory 
export certification and other items like poultry products would be shortly covered. 
  

Committee’s observation : (20.05.2003) 
           The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
17.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) 
   
The rules envisage a lot of inspection and monitoring at various levels.  What is the 
implementation mechanism; Whether enough mechanism is in place to ensure proper 
implementation of the Rules? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
  
            The implementation mechanism has already been defined in detail in the 
executive instructions and there has been a regular monitoring by EIAs and Sub-offices 
in order to ensure proper implementation of the rules.  In addition, two more tiers have 
been added to the surveillance mechanism and the position in this regard has been 
explained in answer to Question No.9. 
  
Committee’s observation: (20.05.2003)            
The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
18.       Point raised  :(25.01.2002) 
The inspecting authorities have been given wide powers to inspect the plants etc; 
Whether enough safe guards have been provided to protect the owners from 
harassment if so, the details? 
  
Ministry’s Comments: (03.05.2002) 
  
           Yes, enough safeguards have been built up in the system to protect the owners 
from harassment as explained in answers to Question Nos.9 and 14. 
  
Committee’s observation: (20.05.2003) 
  
           The Committee noted the Ministry’s comments. 
4.         The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) vide their 
communication dated the 21st October, 2004 forwarded gazette notification No. S.O. 999 
(E) dated the 13th September, 2004 carrying out necessary amendment in rule 2(x). 
(Annexure III). 
5.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry have agreed to its suggestions on rules 2(x) (Definition of UHT) and Rule 8.3 
(Constitution of Appellate Authority for Milk Products).  However, on rule 4.18, the 
Committee does not agree to the viewpoint of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
to maintain status quo on the question of prescribing the frequency of inspections and 
monitoring of plants in the rules itself.  The Committee desires that the rules should at 
least carry some parameters for conducting inspections/monitoring. 
  
6.         The Committee, however, is happy to note that the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry have accepted its suggestions and notified the following amendments in the 
Export of Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2000: - 
In rule 2(x) the word “residcal” have been substituted by the word “residual” thereby 
correcting out a typographical error. 
In rule 2(x) by omitting the paragraph beginning with the words “A hermetically sealed 
container” and ending with the words “entry of micro-organisms”.  The Committee had 
suggested for avoidance of repetition in the definition of a “hermetically sealed 
container”. 

In rule 3(b) by substituting the words “sub-rule 4.18 of these rules” for the words “the 
para of this part”, thereby correcting a typographical error. 
In rule 5(b) the word “vague” has been replaced by the words “any other” thereby 
correcting a typographical error. 
In sub-item (2) of item 2 of Annexure A of the said rules the word “said” has been 
replaced by the word “made” thereby correcting a typographical error as pointed out 
by the Committee. 
IV 
The Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003. 
            The Committee took up for examination the Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations, 2003 framed under the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. A 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 17th 
May, 2004 for their comments.  The Ministry furnished their comments vide O.M. 
dated the 6th October, 2004.  The points raised by the Committee and the comments of 
the Ministry thereon are as under:- 
(1)        (i)Point raised 
The Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003 have been framed in 
supersession of the IAAI (Lost Property) Regulation, 1974, the IAAI (Lost Property) 
(Amendment) Regulations, 1992 and the NAA (Lost Property) Regulations, 1988. 
  
                        Whether the Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 
2003 are the first set of regulations framed under the Airports Authority of India Act, 
1994, if so, in what manner, this area was being regulated in the absence of the said 
regulations.  
                        Ministry’s comments 
            These are the first set of regulations on the subject of Lost Property framed 
under the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. Earlier the issue was governed by the 
two Gazette Notifications as under:- 
The International Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 1974. 
 The National Airports Authority (Lost Property) Regulations, 1988. 
The present Regulations superseded the aforesaid two Regulations. 
(ii) Point raised 
What necessitated the Government to bring in the regulations of 2003 in supersession of 
the earlier regulations as stated above and what are the major points of distinction 
between the regulations of 2003 and the earlier ones. 
 Ministry’s comments 
The Airports Authority of India was formed by Notification of AAI Act, 1994 and the 
IAAI Act, 1974 and NAA Act, 1988 were repealed.  Consequent on the notification of 
the appointed date of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, subordinate legislation 
in regard to framing of various regulations are required to be notified under Section 42 
of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994.  In terms of section 42 sub-section 2 clause 
(f) of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, the Authority is required to frame 
regulations pertaining to lost property for all its airports.  Similar regulations were 
framed and notified by the erstwhile IAAI and NAA for the airports under its control 
before they were merged. 
Major points of distinction between the regulations of  2003 and the earlier ones are at 
Annexure. 
(2)        Point raised 
            As per regulation 2(j), ‘Officer’ means an officer of the authority other than the 
Airport Director or Incharge of the Airport or Civil Enclave. 

            As an ‘officer’ under the regulations is required to discharge functions involving 
a lot of responsibility, would it not be appropriate if a minimum level of the officer is 
indicated in the definition for the purpose of these regulations.  
            Ministry’s comments 
            Suggestions of the Committee have been noted.  The word ‘officer’ is being 
replaced with the Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may 
be’. A suitable amendment to this effect in the Airports Authority of India (Lost 
Property) Regulations, 2003 is being proposed. 
(3)        Point raised 
As per regulation 3, the officer to whom any lost property has been handed over is 
required to maintain a register containing the description of the lost property and the 
name, address and signatures of the person etc. However, as per regulation 4, the officer 
to whom the lost property has been handed over is required to pass on the same to the 
Lost Property Office within 24 hours and in case the property is handed over to the 
claimant in the meantime, the officer is required to report the facts and give the name, 
address and description of the lost property to the Lost Property Office. 
            Do the regulations not contemplate maintenance of records at two places one 
with the officer under regulation 3 and the other in the lost property office under 
regulation 4; is there any scope for streamlining the provisions further. 
             
            Ministry’s comments 
            The Lost Property Office under Regulation 4 functions from 0930 to 1730 hrs on 
normal working days and therefore, will be closed after office hours and on 
holidays.  His office is located away from the passenger terminal building.  The officer 
mentioned under Regulation 3 i.e. the Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control 
Tower, is available round the clock subject to watch hours of the airport and any 
person finding the lost property can deposit the same with the Duty Airport 
Manager/Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be.  
Claimant can claim the property from the Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control 
Tower as the case may be, on round the clock basis subject to watch hours of the airport 
before it is deposited in the Lost Property Office. After the Lost Property is deposited 
with the Lost Property Officer, the claimant can claim the lost property from his office. 
            Therefore, in view of above, records of lost property are required to be 
maintained at both the places. 
(4)        Point raised  
            Regulation 6 deals with handing over of lost property to the claimant  
            What is normally the time taken for restoring property to the rightful claimant 
would it not be more appropriate if some maximum time period is prescribed so that 
the lost properties do not pile up in the Lost Property Office? 
            Ministry’s comments 
            The lost and found property is handed over to the rightful claimant immediately 
after the claimant proves the claim to the Duty Airport Manager/Duty Officer Control 
Tower, in-charge of the Airport of Civil Enclave.  In case no claim is received, the 
property is retained for three months and thereafter, disposal action is initiated as per 
the laid down procedure.  As such, to avoid piling up of lost property, the time limit is 
taken care. 
(5)        Point raised 
            As per regulation 7, in case the incharge of the Airport or the Civil Enclave is 
unable to secure a reasonable price, he is required to report the mater to the superior 
authority for suitable orders. 
  

            Is it not possible to prescribe some time schedule for action under regulation 
7(1)? 
  
            Ministry’s comments 
            As the disposal action is to undergo the process of assessment by an approved 
valuer, notification for disposal, etc., it is generally done once in a year or on 
accumulation of substantial quantity to make the process economically viable, 
whichever is earlier.  In case any item fails to secure reasonable price it is included in 
the future disposal action after reviewing the reserve price, if necessary.  Considering 
the above, it may not be possible to prescribe a time schedule for action under 
regulation 7(1). 
(6)        Point raised 
            As per regulation 7 (4), a person whose property has been disposed of is entitled 
to receive the proceeds of the same after deduction of reasonable expenses, which may 
not exceed 25 per cent of the same proceeds. 
            25 per cent of the sale proceeds does not seem to constitute reasonable expenses 
within the meaning of regulation 7 (4).  In what manner, Government have prescribed 
this time limit of 25 per cent and whether the same is  not on the higher side? 
            Ministry’s comments 
            Airports Authority of India incurs considerable expenditure towards carrying 
inventory for more than three months, assessment by an approved valuer, 
administrative cost on disposal, notification and conducting disposal by 
auction.  Airports Authority of India does not charge any expenses for handling the lost 
property in case it is handed over to the original claimant within three months.  Once 
the lost property is auctioned off after three months, a maximum of 25 per cent of sale 
proceed is deducted and the balance is given back to the owner on claim.  However, 25 
per cent is the upper limit and the actual amount recovered could be less than 25 per 
cent depending on the value of the lost property.  In view of above, it is considered that 
percentage specified is justified. 
  
(7)        Point raised 
  
            The regulations are silent about compensating the claimant/rightful owner of 
property in deserving cases; how and where this aspect of the matter has been dealt 
with? 
            Ministry’s comments 
            The regulation is dealing with lost and found property only.  The claimant is 
either given back the property or paid the proceeds of the sale after deducting 
reasonable expenses not exceeding 25 per cent of the sale proceeds. The Airports 
Authority of India is not responsible for any lost property, which has not been handed 
over to the Airports Authority of India. 
2.         The replies of the Ministry were considered by the Committee on the 17th 
November, 2005. The Committee noted that the Ministry had agreed to replace the 
words “any officer” occurring at a number of places in the Airports Authority of India 
(Lost Property) Regulations, 2003 with the words “Duty Airport manager/Duty Officer 
Control Tower as the case may be”. However, with regard to regulation 6 
the  Committee desired that the Ministry should prescribe a time limit in the regulation 
itself to make it unambiguous and also to ensure that the lost property, if claimed, is 
restored to the rightful claimant within a stipulated time period. The Ministry vide their 
O.M. dated the 21st February, 2006 clarified as under:- 
            “ Attention of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation may  be drawn to 
Regulation 7 (1) of the Airports Authority of India (Lost Property) Regulations, 2003, 

wherein a time period of three months  for restoring the lost property to the claimant 
has already been prescribed.” 
            The Committee, thereafter, accepted the clarification of the Ministry. 
            The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed to notify amendments in 
regulations 3 (1) and (2) and regulation 4 by substituting the words “any officer” with 
the words “ Duty Airport Manager/ Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be” as 
suggested by the Committee. The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall notify the 
amendment expeditiously.  
V 
The Export-Import Bank of India General Regulations, 1982 
  
            The EXIM Bank of India General Regulations, 1982 framed under the EXIM 
Bank of India Act, 1981 were examined and certain points were referred to the Ministry 
of Finance on the 7th June, 1995 for their comments. 
The Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of the EXIM Bank 
and the Ministry of Finance at Mumbai on the 21st June, 1995.  During the discussions, 
the Committee observed that the EXIM Bank of India Act, 1981 gives full powers to the 
Board but the provisions of regulation 10 (i) and (ii) have reduced the powers of the 
Board thus making this body redundant.  It desired that the regulations be reviewed as 
the Managing Committee constituted by the Board was usurping the powers of the 
Board.  The Committee also desired reviewing of regulation 6.  
The subject matter was again discussed with the representatives of the EXIM Bank and 
the Ministry of Finance at Mumbai on the 18th January, 1996.  The Committee 
reiterated its earlier views on regulations 6 and 10 that these be reviewed and amended 
as suggested by it.  
The Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) vide their communication dated the 12th 
September, 1996 stated that regulation 6 dealing with disclosure of interest by a 
Director of the EXIM Bank is in conformity with the General Regulations of other 
institutions and therefore, it was not necessary to carry out proposed amendment in 
regulation 6 and the Government also agreed with this view.  Regarding regulation 10, 
it has been stated that in compliance of the Committee’s direction the Ministry have 
suggested the EXIM Bank to effect changes in this regulation. 
Thereafter, the matter was placed before the Committee in its meeting held on the 15th 
May, 1998.  The Committee observed that it was not known whether the proposed 
amendments in regulations 3, 5 and 7 approved by the Board, have been notified or not 
and directed the Ministry to let it know if the notifications have been issued. On 
regulations 6 & 10 the Committee reiterated its earlier views on the matter. 
  
Its communication dated the 15th November 2000 the Ministry sought extension of time 
up to the 31st December, 2000 to comply with the Committee’s observations. The matter 
was then fervently pursued with constant reminders to the Ministry. In its 
communication dated the 25th February, 2002 the Ministry informed the Committee 
that its suggestions on regulation 6 have been examined in consultation with the EXIM 
Bank and it is not unusual for a Director to hold a minimum marketable lot of 100 
shares.  The acceptance of the Committee’s suggestion may pose practical difficulties in 
the matter.  In respect of regulation 10, it has been stated that the same is being 
examined in consultation with the Bank.  Thereafter, the Ministry sought extension of 
time up to the 31st March, 2002, which was later on, on the Ministry’s request, further 
extended till 31st December 2002.   
The Ministry vide their communication dated the 1st January, 2003 informed the 
Committee that the amendments to regulations 3(i), 3(iv), 3(vii), 5(i), 7(2) and 7(3) have 
been notified vide Gazette notification G.S.R. 1/2002 dated the 9th February, 2002 

(Annexure-I).  However, implementation of the Committee’s suggestion on regulation 
10 was still pending and the Ministry sought extension of time upto the 30th November, 
2003. 
The points raised in the questionnaire the Ministry’s comments thereon, Committee’s 
further observations and the Ministry’s comments thereto alongwith the Action Taken 
by the Ministry are as follows:- 
1.         Point referred: 
The Regulations under examination do not clearly and precisely specify the powers and 
the functions of the Chairman or Managing Director and other Members of the 
Board?  Whether the Regulations are proposed to be modified, accordingly. 
  
Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
In terms of Section 10(ii) of the General Regulations, the Chairman, if he is a whole time 
director or the Managing Director, is authorised to have full powers to do all the things 
required to be done by Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank) except to the extent 
provided in Section 10(i) of the General Regulations, which can be exercised only by the 
Board.  The powers of the Chairman or the Managing Director have also been 
described in Sections 10(ii), 11, 12(i) of the General Regulation. 
            Also, the Export-Import Bank of India Act in terms of Section 5(2) provides as 
follows: 
            “Save as otherwise provided in the regulations made under this Act- 
The Chairman, if he is a whole-time director or if he is holding offices both as the 
Chairman and the Managing Director, or  
The Managing Director, if the Chairman is not a whole time director, or, if the 
Chairman being a whole-time director, is absent, 
shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction and management of the 
affairs and business of the EXIM Bank and may also exercise all powers and do all acts 
and things which may be exercised or done by the EXIM Bank.” 
            As regards the powers of the Board, the Export-Import Bank of India Act, in 
terms of Section 5(1) provides as under: 
The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of 
the EXIM Bank shall vest in the Board, which may exercise all powers and do all acts 
and things which may be exercised or done by the EXIM Bank.” 
In view of the above, we do not propose to modify the Regulation. 
Committee’s observation :(21.6.95) 
The Committee felt that this provision requires reconsideration.  The Committee 
directed that a meeting with the Chairman of the Bank and the Ministry of Finance be 
fixed at Delhi, to chalk this out. 
Ministry’s further reply :(18.1.96) 
  
Relevant data from regulations of other financial institutions has been compiled and 
submitted to the Banking Division.  Provision similar to Regulation 10(i) of EXIM 
Bank’s General Regulations has been found in Regulation 11 of Industrial 
Reconstruction Bank of India’s General Regulations.  While in terms of Section 5(i) of 
the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981, the Board may exercise all powers and do 
all acts and things which may be exercised or done by EXIM Bank, the Management 
Committee has been given powers under Regulation 4(i) to transact all the usual 
business of EXIM Bank except the powers enumerated under Regulation 10(i) which 
have been specifically reserved only to the Board.  Besides, decisions taken by the 
Management Committee are reported to the Board at the following meeting.  Thus the 
supremacy of the Board is not affected in any manner. 
            Committee’s observation:(18.1.96)  

The Chairman of the Committee pointed out that these Regulations were last 
considered on 21st June, 1995 in Mumbai itself and the Committee then pointed out that 
the EXIM Bank of India Act, 1981 had given full powers to the Board but the 
Regulation 10(i) of the Bank had curtailed the powers of the Board to mere approval of 
balance sheet etc.  On the contrary, the Managing Committee, which should have been 
otherwise answerable to the Board, being the creation of the Board, itself has become 
more powerful than the Board.  The regulation has, therefore, gone beyond than what is 
permitted by the Parent Act i.e. the EXIM Bank of India Act, 1981.  The Committee on 
the previous occasion in June 1995 had directed the Bank and the Ministry of Finance 
to remove the anomaly by suitably amending the regulation. 
            The Committee was not satisfied with the reply tendered by the EXIM Bank and 
was of the view that the Bank has attempted to justify the existence of this regulation, 
i.e., Regulation 10(i) by citing similar provisions from other financial institutions such 
as IRBI etc.  The Committee opined that regulations can not and shall not override the 
Parent Act which has delegated the power to the Bank. 
            The Committee directed that the regulation may be suitably amended according 
to the letter and spirit of the Parent Act and the Committee may be informed about the 
proposed amendment within a reasonable period of time.  The Chairman of the EXIM 
Bank agreed to it and assured that the earlier matter including the observations made 
by the Committee in June, 1995 regarding Regulations 3(i), (iii), (vii), 5(i), 6 and 7(2), 
would be placed before the Board at its next meeting which is likely to be held in March, 
1996 and a decision would be taken on the issues. 
2.         Point referred: Regulation 3(i) 
“Meetings of the Board shall be convened by the Chairman or the Managing Director 
or, in their absence, by an Executive Director of the EXIM Bank nominated by the 
Chairman or Managing Director in this behalf, at least four times in each calendar year 
and at least once in each quarter.” 
Whether the Ministry have any objection, if the words ‘at least once in each quarter’ 
are substituted by ‘at least once in every three months’? 
Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
As the quarter also relates to a three-month period in a calendar year, the submission is 
that the word  ‘quarter’ may be retained. 
Committee’s observations (21.6.95) 
The Committee directed that this regulation be made more specific by inserting words 
“at least once in every three months” instead of “once in each quarter”.  The Chairman 
and the Managing Director of the Bank agreed to the proposal. 
Ministry’s Further reply (18.1.96) 
            The proposal would be placed before the Board for approval of the suggested 
amendment, in consultation with Banking Division. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (1.1.2003) 
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee. 
Point referred: Regulation 3(iii), 5(i) and 7(2) 
Regulation 3(iii), 5(i) and 7(2) provide that the meetings of the Board, Management 
Committee and other meetings of the Board, Management Committee and other 
Committees respectively shall be held at the Head Office of the EXIM Bank, or at such 
other place in India as may be specified in the notice convening the meeting. 
What is the justification for providing for convening meetings outside the Head Office 
of the EXIM Bank?  Whether the Ministry have any objection in limiting the number of 
Meetings? 
Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
Board meetings have so far been held only in Delhi and Mumbai, except one meeting in 
Kolkata in 1983  and one in Chennai in 1984.  All Management Committee Meetings 

have been held only in Mumbai, except three meetings in 1982 and one in 1983, which 
were held in Delhi. 
No criteria have been laid down for convening meetings of the Board or the 
Management Committee outside the Head office of EXIM Bank. 
            The Regulations prescribe the minimum number of meetings to be convened in a 
calendar year.  The Bank is a specialized financial institution dealing with international 
trade and finance, where competition is from overseas and as such, time is of essence in 
decisions.  Occasions could arise to convene emergency meetings of the Board or the 
Management Committee to take urgent decisions causing total number of meetings to 
exceed the minimum number of meetings prescribed in the Regulations. 
            Submission is that limiting the number of meetings in a calendar year or 
restricting holding a meeting at any other important commercial place, will deprive the 
Bank of the above flexibility in terms of convening emergency meetings for transacting 
urgent business. 
Committee’s observation (21.6.95) 
  
The Committee accepted the version given by the Bank. 
  
4.         Point referred: Regulations 3(iv), 5(i) and 7(2) 
Regulations 3(iv), 5(i) and 7(2) provide that sufficient notice shall be given to every 
Director for Meeting of Board, Managing Committee and Other Committees. 
The term ‘sufficient notice’ appearing in the Regulations is vague.  Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in specifying a minimum time limit for convening an 
emergency meeting of the Board, meeting of the Management Committee and the 
meeting of other Committees. 
Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
The term ‘sufficient notice’ is taken to reflect any notice period shorter than two weeks, 
which has concurrence of director attending a meeting.  In view of this, the submission 
is that a minimum time limit for convening an emergency meeting of the Board, meeting 
of the Management Committee may not be prescribed. 
Committee’s observation (21.6.95) 
The Committee directed that for emergent meetings a notice of 3 days would suffice.  A 
saving clause may be inserted “that under emergent conditions, the Chairman will act 
on behalf of the Board and report the same to the Board in the next meeting.” 
            Ministry’s further reply (18.1.96) 
The proposal would be placed before the Board for approval of the suggested 
amendment, in consultation with Banking Division. 
Action Taken by the Ministry (1.1.2003) 
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee. 
5.         Point referred 
Regulation 3(vi), 5(ii) and 7(3) provide for Quorum for the Meeting of Board, 
Management Committee and the other Committees.  It, however, does not govern the 
contingencies where the Quorum is not made out.  What is the fate of the meeting where 
adequate number of members to constitute the Quorum is not present pursuant to the 
notice? 
Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
  
If the Quorum is not made out at a meeting, no business will be transacted at such a 
meeting.  However, the meeting is deemed to have been convened as per 
Regulations.  So far, EXIM Bank has faced no difficulty regarding Quorum except in 
one case of a Board meeting in March 1991, as meetings are convened after ascertaining 
directors’ convenience and co-coordinating such convenience ensures a Quorum. 

Committee’s observation (21.9.95) 
The Committee accepted the comments of the Bank and decided not to proceed further 
in the matter. 
6.         Point referred 
            These Regulations are silent as to: 
What is the normal term of a member or a Director in the Board, Management 
Committee and other Committees? 
What is the present composition of the Members or Directors in the Board, 
Management Committees and other Committees; and 
What are the conditions for appointing the Directors or Members in the Board, 
Management Committee and other Committees? 
Whether the Ministry have any objection in specifying the same in the relevant 
Regulations? 
            Ministry’s reply (21.6.95) 
(1)        The Export-Import Bank of India Act in terms of Section 6(2) and (7) provides 
for the term of a member or a director in the Boards, Management Committee as 
under: 
Section 6(2): The Chairman and the managing director shall hold office for such term 
not exceeding (five years) as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and any 
person so appointed shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
Section 6(6): Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (7), any director 
nominated under clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1) and 
not being an official of Government or not being a whole-time director or official of the 
Reserve bank or the Development Bank or the said Export Credit and Guarantee 
Corporation Limited or a scheduled bank, shall hold office for such term, not exceeding 
three years, as the Central Government or, as the case may be, the authority 
nominating him, may specify in this behalf and thereafter until his successor enters 
upon office, and shall be eligible for re-nomination. 
            Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period 
exceeding six years;) 
Section 6(7): Any other director nominated under this section shall hold office during 
the pleasure of the authority nominating him. 
Clause (b), (c), (d), (e) of sub-section (1) referred in section (6) above provide as under: 
 one director nominated by the Reserve Bank; 
(c)        one director nominated by the Development Bank; 
(d)     one director nominated by the Export Credit and Guarantee  Corporation 
Limited, being a Government Company within the meaning of section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(e)        not more than twelve directors nominated by the Central Government of whom:  
five directors shall be officials of the Central Government; 
not more than three directors shall be from the scheduled banks; 
not more than four director shall be persons who have special knowledge   of, or 
professional experience in, export or import or financing thereof. 
  The present composition of the Board and Management Committee is as per Annexure 
IA and IB.  There is no other Committee constituted pursuant to Regulation 7. 
 The Export-Import Bank of India Act in terms of Section 6(1) provides for constitution 
of the Board as under: 
“6(1) The Board of Directors of the EXIM Bank shall consist of the following, namely: - 
a Chairman and a managing director appointed by the Central Government; 
Provide that the same person may be appointed to function both as Chairman and 
managing director; 
one director nominated by the Reserve Bank; 

one director nominated by the Development Bank; 
  one director nominated by the Export Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited, 
being a Government Company within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 
1956; 
   not more than twelve directors nominated by the Central  Government of whom: - 
five directors shall be officials of the Central Government; 
not more than three directors shall be from the scheduled banks; 
not more than four directors shall be persons with special knowledge of, or professional 
experience in, export or import or financing thereof.” 
No other conditions have been laid down for the appointment of members on our 
Board. 
Committee's observation : (21.6.95) 
            The Committee accepted the version of the Bank. 
(7)        Point referred: Regulation 3(vii) 
  
            "A copy of the minutes of each meting of the Board shall be circulated as soon as 
possible thereafter for the information of the Directors and shall be signed by the 
person presiding at that or the next succeeding meeting." 
  
The term 'as soon as possible' appearing in the Regulation is not clear. It is felt that a 
time limit be prescribed for circulating a copy of the minutes of each meeting of the 
Board and the Regulation be amended accordingly. 
  
            Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
            The copies of the draft minutes of the previous meeting of the Board are duly 
circulated with the agenda papers of the subsequent meeting and this procedure has 
been found to be adequate. 
            Committee's observation (21.6.95) 
  
            The Committee directed that the proceedings of the meeting should be circulated 
within 15 days. The Regulation may be amended accordingly. 
  
Ministry's further reply (18.1.96) 
  
            The proposal would be placed before the Board for approval of the suggested 
amendment, in consultation with Banking Division. 
  
 Action Taken by the Ministry:(1.1.03) 
  
The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee. 
  
(8)        Point referred: 
  
Regulation 4 (ii) and 7(ii) provide that the managing Committee and the other 
Committees shall be bound by such general or special directions as the board or the 
management committee may give from time to time. The passing of general or special 
directions may be resorted to in special cases only and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing.  
           Whether the Ministry have any objections in incorporating the provision in the 
Regulation itself? 
  

            Ministry's reply ( 21.6.95) 
  
            There has been no occasion so far for the Board to issue any general or special 
direction to the management Committee which indicates that the Board will resort to 
such directions only in exceptional cases. All Board Resolutions/Minutes are recorded in 
writing. As such any direction, issued by the Board will be in the form of a written 
Resolution. In view of this, the submission is that a specific provision in this regard is 
not considered necessary. 
  
            Committee's observation(21.6.95) 
  
            The Committee accepted the version given by the Bank. 
  
(9)        Point referred : Proviso to Regulation 6 (1) 
  
"Provided that it shall not be necessary for a Director or a member to disclose his 
concern or interest in any such contract or arrangement proposed to be entered into 
with a company or a foreign company within the meaning of the companies Act, 1956, 
where the concern or interest consists only in his holding either singly or together with 
any other director or directors of the Board or any other member or members of the 
management Committee, in the aggregate not more than two percent of the paid-up 
share capital in such company." 
  
(i)         What is the meaning of the word 'singly' as used in the proviso? Whether a 
Director or a Member would be presumed to hold interest singly, if such Director or 
Member had entered into a contract or arrangement with a company jointly with a 
member of his family or any other person, other than a Director of the Board or the 
member of the Management Committee?. 
  
What procedure is followed for the removal of a member or a Director who fails to 
disclose the nature of his concern or interest at a meeting of the board or the 
Management Committee?  
  
Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
(i)         The word singly' would construe and mean that the concerned director has 
interest either in his individual capacity all by himself or with any other person who is 
not a Director of the Board or a member of the Management Committee. 
  
 (ii)       There has been no occasion so far warranting removal of a Director of the 
Board or a member of the Management Committee. However, the need for such a 
procedure for incorporation in the Regulations will be considered. 
 (10)     Point referred : Regulation 6(2) (a) 
  
            "In the case of a proposed contract or arrangement, the disclosure required to be 
made by a director of the Board or member of the management Committee under sub-
regulation (1) shall be made at the meeting of the Board or the management Committee, 
as the case may be, at which the question of entering into contract or arrangement is 
first taken into consideration or if the director or member, was not, at the date of that 
meeting concerned or interested in the proposed contract or arrangement, at the first 
meeting of the Board or the Management Committee, as the case may be, held after he 
becomes so concerned of interested." 

  
What is the justification for providing proposed contract or arrangement in the 
Regulations? Whether the Ministry have any objection in specifying the nature and the 
outlines of contracts 
. 
            Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
            The proposed contract or arrangements relates to EXIM Bank's business. 
Regulation 6(1) provides as under: 
            "6(1) Every director of the Board and every member of the management 
Committee who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, concerned or interested in 
a contract or arrangement, or proposed contract or arrangement, entered into or to be 
entered into, by or on behalf of the EXIM Bank, shall disclose the nature of his concern 
or interest at a meeting of the Board or the Management." 
  
(11).     Point referred: Regulation 6(3) (c) 
  
            "No such general notice, and no renewal thereof, shall be of effect unless either it 
is given at a meeting of the Board or the management committee, as the case may be, or 
the director or member, concerned takes reasonable steps to secure that it is brought 
upon and read at the first meeting of the Board or the management Committee, as the 
case may be, after it is given." 
  
The term 'reasonable steps' is not clear. In what ways the Director or a member 
concerned brought up the notice and read at the first meeting of the board or the 
management Committee. 
  
            Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
`           A director sends his notice regarding his interest in a specified body corporate, 
or a specified firm to the Secretary to the board, who includes this notice in the Agenda 
for the next meeting of the Board. 
  
            Committee's general observations:(21.6.95) 
            Regulation 6(1), 6(2)(a) and 6(3) (c) 
  
            The Committee directed that the Regulation 6 needed to be reviewed completely. 
It would however be desirable that a Director having any interest whatsoever should 
not be allowed to remain a Director on the Board. 
  
            Ministry's further reply : (18.1.96) 
  
            The matter has been examined in the light of Regulations of other institutions. 
Similar provisions exist in General Regulations of IDBI, IRBI and IFC. IDBI and IRBI 
General Regulations have almost the same provisions as contained in Section 6 of the 
General Regulations of EXIM Bank while IFCI Regulations contain provision similar to 
Section 6 (1) of EXIM Bank's General Regulations and the proviso thereunder. 
Relevant data has been submitted to Banking Division. The matter is under further 
examination by the Banking Division and EXIM Bank. 
  
Committee's observation: (18.1.96) 
  

            The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's reply and reiterated its 
earlier views on regulation 6 that the regulation be reviewed and amended as suggested 
by it. 
Ministry's further reply:- (12.9.96) 
  
As regards Committee's recommendation in respect of regulation 6 (dealing with 
disclosure of interest by a Director), EXIM Bank is of the view that the existing 
regulation 6 is in line with General Regulation of other institutions viz, IDBI and IRBI.  
                       
Committee's further observation :(15.5.98) 
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's reply reiterated its earlier 
recommendation that the said Regulation needed to be reviewed completely and that a 
Director having any interest whatsoever should not be allowed to remain on the Board 
of the Bank.     
  
Ministry's further reply:- (25.2.2002) 
  
Regulation No. 6 of EXIM Bank General Regulations has been examined in consultation 
with the EXIM Bank. The Bank is of the view that it is not unusual for a Director to 
hold a minimum marketable lot of 100 shares in his personal capacity in a company 
whose proposal/contract may come under consideration before the Board of the Bank 
for approval. The acceptance of the recommendations of the Committee may cause 
frequent resignation of Directors, which may pose practical difficulties in the filling up 
of their vacancies and in the observance of quorum particularly at meetings of the 
Management Committee of the Board.   
  
(12)      Point Referred: Regulation 7(3) 
  
            "The Quorum for the meeting of any such Committee shall be one - third of its 
strength (any fraction contained in that one-third being rounded off as one) or two 
members, whichever is higher." 
  
            Is this number not too less for taking important decisions in the meetings? 
  
            Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
            No Committee has so far been formed under Regulation 7. 
  
Committee's observation (18.1.96) 
  
            The Committee directed that the Quorum for the meeting of the Committee be 
raised to one half of its strength or a minimum of 3 Members. 
             
Ministry's Further reply (18.1.96) 
  
The proposal would be placed before the Board for approval of the suggested 
amendment, in consultation with Banking Division.  
  
            Action Taken by the Ministry: (1.1.2003): 
  
            The Ministry have notified the amendment as suggested by the Committee. 

  
(13)      Point referred Regulation 8 (2) 
  
            "In addition to such fees, directors and members shall be reimbursed their 
traveling, halting, and other expenses including accommodation on such scales as may 
be fixed from time to time." 
  
            Whether any scales have since been fixed for reimbursement, if so, the details 
thereof. Whether the Ministry have any objection to incorporating the same in the 
Regulation. 
  
Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
Yes. Uniform scales have been fixed for reimbursement with the approval of the Board. 
The details are in Annexure-II. There is, therefore, no necessity of including this in the 
Regulation. 
  
 Committee's observation (21.6.95) 
  
The Committee accepted the reply.  
(14)      Point referred :Regulation 9 (1) (i) 
  
            "Any contract which, if made between private persons, would be, by law, 
required to be in writing, signed by the parties to be charged therewith, may be made 
on behalf of the EXIM Bank in writing signed by any person acting under its authority, 
express or implied, and may in the same manner be varied or discharged." 
  
            The term' any person acting under its authority' is not clear. Whether the 
Ministry have any objection in specifying the same in the Regulation. 
  
 Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
Regulation 10 (ii) provides for the Chairman or the Managing Director to delegate 
powers to other Officers of EXIM Bank either severally or jointly for various purposes 
through grant of power of attorney or by general or special order or otherwise. 
  
Committee's observation: (21.6.95) 
  
The Committee accepted the reply. 
  
(15)      Point referred Regulation 10 (i) (a) 
  
"Approval of the balance sheets relating to the General Fund and Export Development 
Fund." 
  
There is no mention of the existing procedures for approval of the balance sheets of the 
EXIM Bank of India. Whether the Ministry have any objection in outlining the same in 
the Regulation itself ? 
  
            Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  

The Export-Import Bank of India Act in terms of Section 19,20,22,23 and 24 prescribes 
procedures for audit and approval of accounts of Export Development fund and 
General Fund of EXIM Bank. 
  
(16)      Point referred : Regulation 10 (i) (c) 
  
"Approval of write-off of losses/bad debts in excess of Rupees one lakh."           
  
            Which authority is empowered to write off the loans below Rs. 1 lakh. What 
criteria have been laid down therefor. Please explain. 
  
           Ministry's reply (21.6.95) 
  
Management Committee has powers to authorize write off of bad debts upto Rs. 1 lakh. 
No norms have been laid down, as there has been no occasion for writing off losses/bad 
debts up to Rs. 1 lakh. 
  
Committee's general observations (18.1.96) 
Regulation 10 (i) (a), 10 (i) (c)  
  
The Committee was not satisfied with the Ministry's reply and reiterated its earlier 
views on regulation 10 that it be reviewed and amended as suggested by it. 
    
Ministry's further reply (12.9.96) 
  
            Regarding Regulation 10, it was suggested to EXIM Bank to effect changes in 
this Regulation which should clearly spell out that Management Committee/other 
Committee of Directors and CMD, EXIM Bank shall exercise such powers as may be 
prescribed through Regulations made by the Board or delegated to them by the Board 
of EXIM Bank. These are under consideration of EXIM Bank. 
  
            Committee’s further observation: (15.5.1998) 
  
            The Committee noted that the Ministry had already suggested to EXIM bank to 
carry out changes in the Regulations to give effect to its recommendation and that the 
matter was under consideration of EXIM Bank. It directed the Ministry to let it know 
immediately the present position in the matter. 
  
9.         In pursuance of deliberations on the matter with the Committee, the Ministry 
vide their communication dated the 24th February, 2004 forwarded the copies of the 
Gazette Notification Nos. LEG- 95(378) and LEG- 95(379) dated the 19th December, 
2003 (Annexure II) notifying amendments to regulations 10 (ii), 6(1) and (4) 
respectively. 
  
10.       The Committee notes Ministry comments on point no. 10 [Regulation 6(2) (a)] 
and no. 11 [Regulation 6 (3) (c)]  
  
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance have accepted its 
suggestions and notified the following amendments in the  EXIM  Bank of India 
General Regulations, 1982:- 
In regulation 3(i) the words “once in each quarter” have been substituted by the words 
“once in every three months” thereby making the provisions specific. 

In regulations 3(iv), 5(i) and 7(2), the words “sufficient notice” have been replaced by 
the words “at least two weeks’ notice” in case of an ordinary meeting and by the words 
“ a notice of at least three days” in case of an emergency meeting, thereby providing for 
specific notice period for convening the meeting of the Board. 
In regulation 3 (vii), the words “as soon as possible” have been replaced by the words 
“within fifteen days” for circulation of copies of the minutes of the meeting of the 
Board, thereby making the provisions specific. 
In proviso to regulation 6(1), a limit of one hundred equity shares has been fixed within 
which a director or member is not required to disclose his concern or interest in any 
contract or arrangement to be entered into with a company or a foreign company, in 
pursuance to the question poised by the Committee. 
In regulation 6(4) a limit of one hundred shares has been fixed for a director or member 
beyond which he shall not take any part in the discussion or vote on any contract or 
arrangement entered into or to be entered into by or on behalf of the EXIM Bank, on 
the basis of the question poised by the Committee. 
In regulation 7(3), the words “or two members” have been replaced by the words “or 
three members” for having quorum for the meeting of any Committee, as suggested by 
the Committee. 
(7) In regulation 10(ii), powers of the Chairman, if he is whole-time director or 
Managing Director, have been restricted to a limit as prescribed by the regulation made 
by the Board or delegated to him by the Board, as suggested by the Committee. 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
I 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & 
Highways (Department of Shipping) had since prepared a draft of the Kandla Port 
(Authorization of Pilots) Regulations for carrying out necessary amendments in the 
Regulations of 1964 in line with similar regulations of the Mumbai Port Trust and also 
keeping in view its suggestions.  The Committee further notes that the existing 
regulations would be repealed once the proposed revised regulations are approved and 
notified in the Official Gazette. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would notify the 
above amendments expeditiously under intimation to it. 
II 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport 
and Highways (Department of Shipping) have agreed to carry out the following 
amendments in the Kandla Port Trust (Study Leave) Regulations, 1964:-  
(i)  In Regulation 3 (5) (ii) & (iii) by deleting clause (ii) so that the officers of  class III 
and IV category may also get an opportunity to avail the study leave for upgrading their 
knowledge and skills. 
  
(ii)  In Regulation 6 (i) by substituting  it as under:- 
  
"Regulation 6 (i): Study leave may be combined with other kinds of leave, but in no case 
shall the grant of this leave in combination with leave, other than extra ordinary leave, 
involve a total absence of more than 28 months generally and 36 months for the courses 
leading to Phd. degree from the regular duties of the employee. 
  
Explanation- The limit of 28 months/36 months of absence prescribed in this sub-rule 
includes the period of vacation. 99 so as to align this provision on the lines of the 
Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules. 
  
The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall notify the above amendments 
expeditiously under intimation  to it.   

III 
  
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
have agreed to its suggestions on rules 2(x) (Definition of UHT) and Rule 8.3 
(Constitution of Appellate Authority for Milk Products).  However, on rule 4.18, the 
Committee does not agree to the viewpoint of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
to maintain status quo on the question of prescribing the frequency of inspections and 
monitoring of plants in the rules itself.  The Committee desires that the rules should at 
least carry some parameters for conducting inspections/monitoring. 
  
The Committee, however, is happy to note that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
have accepted its suggestions and notified the following amendments in the Export of 
Milk Products (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2000: - 
(i)         In rule 2(x) the word “residcal” have been substituted by the word “residual” 
thereby correcting a typographical error. 
(ii)  In rule 2(x) by omitting the paragraph beginning with the words “A hermetically 
sealed container” and ending with the words “entry of micro-organisms”.  The 
Committee had suggested for avoidance of repetition in the definition of a “hermetically 
sealed container”. 
(iii)       In rule 3(b) by substituting the words “sub-rule 4.18 of these rules” for the 
words “the para of this part”, thereby  correcting  a typographical error. 
(iv)    In rule 5(b) the word “vague” has been replaced by the words “any other” 
thereby correcting a typographical error. 
(v)        In sub-item (2) of item 2 of Annexure A of the said rules the word “said” has 
been replaced by the word “made” thereby correcting a typographical error as pointed 
out by the Committee. 
  
IV 
  
The Committee notes that the Ministry have agreed to notify amendments in regulation 
3 (1) and (2) and regulation 4 substituting the words “any officer” with the words “ 
Duty Airport Manager/ Duty Officer Control Tower as the case may be” as suggested 
by the Committee. The Committee hopes that the Ministry shall notify the amendment 
expeditiously.  
  
V 
The Committee notes Ministry comments on point no. 10 [Regulation 6(2) (a)] and no. 
11 [Regulation 6 (3) (c)] . 
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Finance have accepted its 
suggestions and notified the following amendments in the  EXIM  Bank of India 
General Regulations, 1982:- 
(1)        In regulation 3(i) the words “once in each quarter” have been substituted by the 
words “once in every three months” thereby making the provisions specific. 
(2)        In regulations 3(iv), 5(i) and 7(2), the words “sufficient notice” have been 
replaced by the words “at least two weeks’ notice” in case of an ordinary meeting and 
by the words “ a notice of at least three days” in case of an emergency meeting, thereby 
providing for specific notice period for convening the meeting of the Board. 
(3)        In regulation 3 (vii), the words “as soon as possible” have been replaced by the 
words “within fifteen days” for circulation of copies of the minutes of the meeting of the 
Board, thereby making the provisions specific. 
In proviso to regulation 6(1), a limit of one hundred equity shares has been fixed within 
which a director or member is not required to disclose his concern or interest in any 

contract or arrangement to be entered into with a company or a foreign company, in 
pursuance to the question poised by the Committee. 
In regulation 6(4) a limit of one hundred shares has been fixed for a director or member 
beyond which he shall not take any part in the discussion or vote on any contract or 
arrangement entered into or to be entered into by or on behalf of the EXIM Bank, on 
the basis of the question poised by the Committee. 
In regulation 7(3), the words “or two members” have been replaced by the words “or 
three members” for having quorum for the meeting of any Committee, as suggested by 
the Committee. 
(7) In regulation 10(ii), powers of the Chairman, if he is whole-time director or 
Managing Director, have been restricted to a limit as prescribed by the regulation made 
by the Board or delegated to him by the Board, as suggested by the Committee. 
  
  