Come '"'' ---
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SAB.HA 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLA110N 
·FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT 
(Presented on the 26th August, 1g83) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August 1983/Bhadra :1905 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PARA PAGES 
Nm. 
J 
:1. Composition of the Committee (i) 
2. Report : 
I. Introduction I-2 
II. (i) The Indian Posts and Tdegraphs Accounts and 
Finance Service, Telecommunication Wing, Group 
'B' ~Recruitment) Rules, tgllo (G.S.R. No. 887 of 
3-6 1980 . . . . . . I· 2 
(ii) The Indian Posts and Telegraphs Accounts and 
Finance Service, Postal Wing, Group'B' (Recruit-
ment) Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. 888 of r98o) • 3-6 I-2 
III. The Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats 
(Staff Car Driver) Recruitment Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. No. 
IO of 1981) , . . . 7-13 2-4 
IV. The Central Secretariat Clerical Service (Amendment) 
Rules, 1976 (G.S.R. No. 231 ofi976)-delay in imple-
mentation of the Recommendations of the Committee 14--25 5-9 
v. The "Ministry of Civil Supflies Recruitment Rules, 1980 
(G.S.R. No. 1022 of tg8o . . · . . . 26-30 IO•II 
VI. The Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Residences) Regu-
lations, 1979. [G.S.R. No. ro3(E) of 1979] . 3!-.j_O 12-23 
VII. The Tuticorin Port Employees (Leave) Regulations, 1979 
tG.S.R. No. 102(E) of 1979] . • . • · .p-50 24--29 
VIII. The Tuticorin Port Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 
1979 [G.S.R. No. too(E) of 1979] . . . . 51-62 30-38 
rJ 
IX. Ad hoc appointments an,d promotions in the Central lnfor-
mation Service 63-70 38-52 
X. (i) The General Provident Fund (Central Services) Sixth 
Amendment Rules, 198o (G.S.R. No. 1101 of 1g8o) 71-81 52-58 
(ii) The Contributory Provident Fund Sixth Amendment 
Rules (India), 1g8o (G.S.R. No. r 102 of 198o). 71-Sr 52-58 
3· Minutes of the meetings Gf the Committee. 6t-76 
:839 R8-l. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COM:MITTEE 
(1983-84) 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir 
1\IIEMBERS 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. .Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. ,Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
5. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
. 6. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
7. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
8. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
9 . .Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
10 . .Shri G. Swamy Naik 
11. Shri Ghanshyambhai . Oza 
12. Shri Rafique Alam 
13. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
14. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
15. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shriffiati K. K Chopra, ..(lddritional Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions 
! ,. 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
(i) 

'" 
• 
,,REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Cm;nmittee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
its behalf, present this Fifty-fourth Report. The Committee consi­
dered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 24th 
August, 1983. 
2. Observations of the Committee on matters arising out of the 
examination of various 'Orders', which in the opinion of the Com­
mittee should be brought to the notice of the House, together with 
the recommendations of the Committee thereon are contained in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
II 
(i) THE INDIAN POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS ACCOUNTS AND 
FINANCE SERVICE, . TELECOMMUNICATION WING, 
GROUP 'B' (RECRUIT:MENT) RULES, 1980 (G.S.R. NO. 887 
OF 1980) . 
(ii) 'li'HE INDIAN POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS ACCOUNTS AND 
FINANCE SERVICE, POSTAL WING, GROUP. 'B' (RECRUIT­
MENT) RULES, i980 (G.S.R. No. 8&8 of 1980) 
3. Rule 12 and Rule 11 res'Pecti.vel~ of \b.e above c'i.ted. 1\ules 
wbicb aTe similarly worded, read.as follows:-
''Interpretation-If any question relating to the interpre­
tation of these rules arises, it shall be decided. b~ tb.e 
Cen.\1:a\ Government." 
4. During the course . of the examination of these rules it was 
felt that the rule, worded, as it was, barred the jurisdiction of Courts 
on interpreation of the rules. The Ministry of Communications 
were addressed on the 2nd June, 1982 to clarify whether it was 
the intention of the G:overnment that the decision arrived at by the 
Government on the interpretation of the rules should be considElred 
as final · ' 
';-..' 

• 
2 
5. The Office of the Director General Posts and Telegraphs vide 
their O.M. dated the 14th July, 1982., informed as follows:-
"In terms of the provision contained in Rule 12 and Rule 11 
respectively of the rules mentioned above, the decision ot 
the Government on the interpretation of the rules should 
be considered as final.'' 
6. Tile Committee feels that the Ministry of Communications 
have barred the jurisdiction of the Courts by Rules. It is of fhe 
view that Court's jurisdiction could not be barred by Rules. If~ 
however, that was the intention of Govvernment, a specfic enact-
ment would be necessary. . . · 
m 
THE DIRECTORATE OF VANASPATI, VEGETABLE OILS AND 
FATS STAFF CAR DRIVER RECRUITMENT RULES, 1980 
(G.S.R. NO. 10 OF 1981) 
7. Column 12 of the schedule to the above rules providing for 
the composition of the Departmental Promotion Committee reads 
as follows:-
"Departmental Promotion Committee for Group 'C' Posts: 
1. Administrative Officer-Chairman . . 
2. Section Officer (EStt.)-Member 
3. Technical Officer concerned, if any-Member". 
8. The above rules were examined and it was observed that the 
composition of the Departmental Promotion Committee was not 
specific. The Ministry of Civil Supplies were, accordingly, request- · 
ed on the 17th May, 1982 to intimate wh~ther they had any objec­
tion to making the composition with regard to Sl. No. 3 (above) 
specific. 
9. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 29th May, 1982 stated 
that in their view the composition was specific. However, they' 
asked for the suggestion for making it specific. The Ministry were 
informed on the 3rd June, 1982 that the designation of the Member 
of the D.P.C. at Sl. No. 3 should be indicated as was done in cases 
of Sl. Nos. 1 and 2; as it was felt that would enable .the composition 
of the D.P.C. to withstand the test of judicial scrutiny. 

3 
10. The Ministry vide their O.M.. dated the 30th June, 19&2 
informed as follows:- i 
" ...... state that the. Ministry of Civil Supplies have no 
objection in making the composition of the Departmental 
Promotion C<*nmittee specific. A draft proposal for 
amending column 12 of the recruitment rules r.elating to 
the composition of the Departmental Promotion Com­
mittee is being sent to the Department. of Personnel & 
A.R. for their approval." 
11. In accordance with the direction given by the Committee at 
its meeting held on the 7th February, 1983, the Ministry were asked 
on the 12th March, 1983 to furnish the latest position ·in the matter, 
and was reminded on the 15th April, 1983. 
12. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 21st April, 1983 for­
warded a copy of the Notification dated the 26th August, 1982, pub­
lishing the Directorate of Vanaspat:i!. Vegetable Oils and Fats (Staft 
Car Driver) Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 1982, (AAnexure·I). 
13. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Food and Civil Suppli.;, had made suitable amendments in the 
Recruitment R:tdes of 1980, with a view to making the composition 
of the Departmental Promotion Committee specific. 

.. 
3 
10. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 30th June, ,1982 
informed as follows:- I 
" ...... state that the Ministry of Civil Supplies have no 
objection in making the composition of the Departmental 
Promotion C~mittee specific. A draft proposal for 
amending column 12' of the recruitment rules J:elating to 
the composition of the Departmental Promotion Com­
mittee is being sent to the Department of Personnel & 
A.R. for their approval." 
11. In accordance with the direction given by the Committee at 
its meeting held on the 7th February, 1983, the Ministry were asked 
on the 12th March, 1983 to furnish the latest position ·in the matter, 
and was reminded on the 15th April, 1983. 
12. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 21st April, 1983 for­
warded a copy of the Notification dated the 26th August, 1962, pub­
lishing the Directorate of Vanaspat:il Vegetable Oils and Fats (Sta:ll 
Car Driver) Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 1982, (AAnexure-I). 
13. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
Food and Civil Suppli~ had made suitable amendments in the 
Recruitment R.oles of 1980, with a view to making the composition 
of the Departmental Promotion Committee specific . 

ANNEXURE-I 
(Vide para 12 of the Report) 
' 
[To be published in the Gazette of India Part II Section 3(i)] 
GOVEll.NMENT OF INDIA 
MiJ¥stry of Civil Supplies 
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi. 
Dated, the 26th August, 1982. 
NOTIFICATION 
G.S.R. .......... In exercise of the powers conferred by the 
proviso to arti.cle 309 of the Constitution, the President hereby 
makes the followin·g rules to amend the Directorate of Vanaspati, 
Vegetable Oils and Fats (Staff Car Driver) Recruitment Rules, 
1980, namely:-
1. (1) These rules may be called the Directorate of Vanaspati, 
Vegetable Oils and Fats (Staff Car Driver) Recruitment (Amend­
ment) Rules, 1982. 
(2) They shall come .into force on the date of their publication 
in the Official Gazette. 
2. In the Schedule. to the Directorate of V anaspati, Vegetable 
Oils and Fats (Staff Car Driver) Recruitment Rules, 1980, under 
column 12, for the entry "Technical Officer concerned, if any­
Member", the entry "Assistant Director-Member", shall be substi­
tuted. 
Sd/-
(M. L. JATAV) 
Under Secretary to the Government of India. 

-
IV 
THE CENTRAL S1..l.!RETARIAT CLERICAL SERVICE (AMEND­
MENT) RULES, 1976 (G.S.R. NO. 231 OF 1976)-DELAY IN 
lMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
. COMMITTEE 
14. The Committee had earlier scruitinised the Central Secre­
tariat Clerical Service (Amendment) Rules, 1976 and made observa­
tions as under:-
"Sub-clause (a) of clause 1 of regulation 2 of ·the Third Sche­
dule appended to the Central Secretariat Clerical Service Rules, 
1962 provides aslollows:-
'Offi.cers of the Lower Division Grade in that cadre who have 
rendered not less than eight years approved service in 
the grade and are within the range . of seniority in that 
grade subject to the rejection of the unfit will be placed 
in the Select List.' 
It was felt that a provision for recording of Teasons in the event 
of rejection of the unfit from the Select List should be made in the 
said regulation and that the reasons sho'Uld also be communicated 
, to the person concerned enabling him to make up his deficiency." 
[Para 69 of Thirty-third Report]. 
15. On a suggestion made by the Committee, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and Administrative Re­
forms) decided to amend the relevant provisions of the rules so as 
to provide for recording of reasons in the event of rejection of an 
officer considered unfit and not included in the Select List and to 
communicate the same to the concerned Officer. 
16. On the 3rd August, 1979 the Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms was asked to furnish a copy of the proposed 
amendment so as to enable the Committee to take a final decision -J 
in the matter. The Department of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms sent a copy of the draft amendment proposed to be made 
to the Central Secretariat Clerical Service Rules, 1962, with the 
assurance that similar amendments would be carried out in the 
5 

6 
Central Secretariat Seryice/Central Secretariat Stenographers' Ser­
vi<:e Rules, in 'consultation with the Union Public Service Commis~ 
sion after issue of the amendment under reference, which was ' . 
published in the Gazette of India as G.S.R. No. 5, dated the 5th Janu-
ary, 1980, copy enclosed (Annexure II) 
17. The Committee, after due consideration of ·the proposed 
amendment had observed in its 33rd Report as follows:-
' 
"The Committee approves the draft amendment which the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) propose to make to the Cent~al 
Secretariat Clerical Service Rules, 196;2, and notes the 
assurance that suitable amendment will be made to the 
rules of other Central Services also.'' 
[Para 73 of the Report] 
. 1&. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) vide their O.M. dated the 9th June, 1981, 
stated that the approval of the U.P.S.C. was still awaited and· that 
further action would be taken on receipt of U.P.S.C.'s approval. 
19·. At its sitting held on the 18th July, 1981, the Committee 
considered the above position and directed that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs be asked to expedite the finalisation of amendments 
to the Central Secretariat Service/Central. Secretariat Staogra­
phers' Service Rules on the lines of amendments made to the Cen­
tral Secretariat Clerical Service Rules. The Committee further 
directed that it should be informed of the amendments made. 
2(). Accordingly, the Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of 
Personnel and Administrative Reforms) were informed of the ·~ 
decision of the Committee and were asked to intimate as to how the 
matter regarding the finalisation of the amendments to the Central 
Secretariat Service/Central Secretariat Stenographers' Service Rules 
on the lines of amendments made to the Central Secretariat Clerical 
Service R•ules stood then. 
21. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) vide their O.M. ·dated the 8th June 1982 
stated as follows:- ' ' 
"2. I n pursuance of the assurance given that similar amend-
~ents will be. carried out in the Central Secretariat Ser­
vu:e Rules, 1962, and the Central Secretariat Steno-

7 
fl1'a.phers' Service Rutes, 1969, the ~tter has ~ consi~ 
dered in consultation with the Union Public Service CQ~ 
mission. The Commission have commented as follows:....:. 
'Once amendment to the two Service Rules are made for 
recording of reasons in writing in the event of rejection 
of the unfit and communicating the same to the Gov• 
ernment servant, it would be difficult to resist adoption 
of similar procedure in respect of other services and 
posts where promotions are made on the . basis of 
seniority-cum-fitness and also where promotions are 
made on the basis of merit. Government may, there­
fore, keep in view the possible repercussion on other 
services and other modes of promotion while amending 
the Centrat Secretariat Service and Central Secretariat 
Stenographers' Service Rutes.' 
The Government have considered the matter carefully and are 
of the view that there is a lot of force in the 
observations made by the .Commission. However, since 
an assur~nce was given to the Committee, the Govern­
ment feels that this aspect should be brought to the notice 
of the Committee with a request that they may not 
press for fulfilment · of the assurance. In case the Com­
mittee r;o desires, the Secretary, Department of Personnel 
will be glad to appear before it to explain the position in 
detail." . 
22. At its meeting held on the 18th April, 1983, the Committee 
considered the advice of the U.P.S.C. and heard the Secretary, 
Ministry' of HQme Affairs (Department of Personnel and Adminis­
trative Reforms) in the matter. 
23. During the . course of the evidence, the Secretary informed 
· the Committee that apart from the limited competitive examination, 
promotions were made 100 per cent on seniority in the case of 
clerical services. So the rules were amended to say that if a person 
was not promoted, the reasons would be recorded and communi­
cated to him. . It was not that a chance was given before the pro­
motion was made but promotion was made only on the basis of 
seniority and if somebody was not promoted even though being 
senior, then the reasons were recorded ·and communicated to him .. 
24. The Secretary further stated that in other Secretariat Ser­
vices also, like the Stenographers' Service and the Central Secre-
' I 
I 

8 
tariat service, promotion was by seniority and only at a higher 
level it was by merit. In some cases, promotion wa.s not made, 
because of adverse entries in the Confidential Reports .which were 
required to be communicated to the individual concerned who 
could always submit a representation in that regard. At the pro­
motion stage no new material came into play unless there was a 
vigilance case and lack of integrity. Pending completion of vigi-
lance enquiry, his assessmey:tt would be kept in a sealed cover. So, ,, 
at the time of making a promotion or withholding a promotion, 
nothing new was there to be communicated to him. That is why 
in none of these services, ther,e was any provision to that effect. The 
Union Public Service Commission when consulted in the matter, in 
view of the recommendations of the Committee with regard to the 
Clerical Service, which had been. accepted . by Government, had 
opined that any amendment in the rules relating to these Services, 
would 1ead . to further correspondence and· perhaps more of paper 
work and that would also lead to such demands from other services. 
4 
25. The Committee does :not accept the comments of the Ministry 
on the grounds of justice and fair play. There is no reason to deny 
the people in a particular service the right of being communicated 
the reasons for rejection or the reasons for non-selection, when 
that is available to other services as that will be discriminatory and 
violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. Accordingly, the 
Committee recommends that a similar provisiott as was made in 
the Central Secretariat Clerical S~rvice be incorporated in the 
Central Secretariat Service and the Central Secretariat Steno­
graphers' Service Rul~s. The Committee further desires that it 
should be informed of the amendments made in the 1tules. 
.. 

ANNEXUREU 
(vide para 16 of the Report) 
(Department of Personnel a:ncf Admin.listrative Reforms) New Delhi, 
the 24th December, 1979 
G.S.R. 5-In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to 
article 309 of the Constitution, the President hereby :makes the 
following rules further to amend the Central Secretariat Clerical 
Service Rules, 1962, namely: 
1. (i) These Rules m~ be called the Central Secretariat 
Clerical Service (Amendment) Rules, 1979. 
(ii) They shall come into force on the date of their publica­
tion in the Official Gazette. 
2. In the Third Schedule to the Central Secretariat Clerical 
Service Rules, 1962', in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of 
Regulation 2 · the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted and the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"Provided that where an officer of the Lower Division 
Grade is rejected as ~nfit, the reasons for such rejection 
shall be recorded in writing and communicated to the 
officer concerned; and". 
. 9 
[No. ll/1/76-CS(U) ]r 
K. B. NAIR, 
Under Secretary . 

v 
THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL SUPPLIES RECRUITMENT RULES, 
1980 (G.S.R. No. 1022 OF 1980) 
26. Column 12. of the SChedule to the above. mentioned rules 
provided for the Constitution of the Departmental Promotion Com­
mittee for Group 'C' posts in the following terms:-
"D.P.C. for Group 'C' posts-
1. Under Secretary Administration Chairman 
2. Under Secretary in charge . of Administration 
from another Ministry Member 
3. Technical Officer concerned, if any Member 
4. Section Officer Administration Member" 
27. On examination it was felt that the constitution of the 
. D.P.C. was not specific and accordingly the Ministry of Civil Sup-
plies were asked to clarify the position. 
28. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 18th September, 1982, 
informed as follows:-
" .... the Technical Officer concerned, if any, was included in 
the DPC on the basis of recruitment rules for other posts 
in this Ministry. , On a re-examination of the recruit­
ment rules this Ministry feel that there is no need for a 
Technical Officer in the DPC for the Staff Car Drivers. 
A suitable amendment to these rules is being made in 
conS'Ultation with the Department of Personne 1. The 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat will be informed when the final 
decision in the matter is taken.'
1 
29. The Ministry after being reminded in the matter on the 28th 
F'ebruary, and the 15th April, 1983, informed the Secretariat vide 
their O.M. dated the 27th April, 1983, as follows:-
".· ... a suitable amendment to the Recruitment Rules for the 
Staff Car Drivers has been made vide this 'Ministry's' 
~otification dated the 8th Mar~, 1983. A copy ~hereof 
1s enclosed for ready reference." (Annexure III) . 
. ~0. The .committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of 
C1vll Supplies have on a suggestion agreed to make suitable amend­
ment in the above rules. 
10 

ANNEXURE. ill 
(Vide para 29 of the Report) 
(To be published in the Gazette of India Part- II Section 3 (i)] 
GoVERNMENT OF. !ND:rJ\. 
Ministry of Civil Supplies 
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi, · 
Dated the 8th March, 1983. 
NOTIFICATION 
GSR ........•. In exercise of the powers conferred by the pro~ 
viso to article 309 of the Constitution, the President hereby makes 
the following rules further to amend· the Ministry of Civil Supi>lies 
(Staff ·car Driver) Recruitment rules, 1980 namely: 
(1) These rules may be called the Ministry of Civil Supplies 
(Staff Car Driver) Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 
1983. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publica­
tion in the Official Gazette. 
bl the Ministry of Civil Supplies (Staff Car Driver) Recruit­
ment. l;tules, 1980, in the Schedule under· column 12, for the existing 
entryr the following shall be substituted, namely: 
''Departmental ProJl1otion Committee for Group 'C' posts:' 
.(1) Under Secretary, Administration-Chairmim 
. (2) Under Secr.etary in ch,arge of Administration from other 
Ministry~l\tem:f)er ~ . , 
.,...,.-,,,t" ,., ••• - . ' .• 
Sd/-. ~· ' . 
" . ,. : : ' ., . . (0. P. MAKHIJA) 
·Under' Secretary to the GovernU>.ent of India .. 
11 

VI 
•nlht TUTICORIN PORT TRUST {ALLOTMENT OF RESI­
DENCES) REGULATIONS, 1979. {G.S.R. 103 {E) OF 1979) 
31. On the 29th October, 1009, the Ministry of Shipping and 
Transport were requested by the Secretariat to intimate how the 
seniority for the purpose of allotment of residences would be deter-
mined in terms of proviso to sub-regulation {i) of regulation 3 of · • 
the above regulations in cases where, other things being equal, two 
or more employees are at par with each other in respect of their 
emoluments and length of service. 
32. The Ministry of Shipping and Transport, vide their O.M. 
dated the 26th February, 1980, informed as follows:-
"Regulation. 3{i) of Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Resi­
dences) Regulations, 1979, provides that the priority date 
of an employee in relation to a type ·if residence to which 
he is eligible shall be determined by the earliest date 
from which he has been continuously drawing emolu­
ments relevant to a particular type of residence. Where 
the priority date of two or more employees is the same, 
seniority among them shall be determined {i) by the 
amount of emoluments drawn by each such employee at 
the time of allotment of residence and/or {ii) where the 
emoluments are equal, by the. length of the service under 
the Board (i.e. the date ~of first appointment). 
It may be stated that the above procedure bas been working 
smoothly and no problem has so far been experienced 
·It is felt that situation of the type mentioned in the Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat's O.M. under reference may not arise .. 
However, in the unlikely event of occurance of such a 
situation, the Chairman/Board may dedde the matter 
keeping in view the ~rsonal circumstances of the 
vidual employees e.g. size of the family, personal cir,cw:n• 
stances germane to the issue etc. tf a decision on 
a"t>ove basis is also not possible, the allotment of 
modation could possibly be decided en the basis of 
ing lots." 
12 

13 
33. At its meeting held on the 18th April, 1980, the Committee 
heard the Secretary in the Ministry. of Shipping and Transport. 
During the course of his deposition the Secretary reiterated the 
above stand of the Ministry. However, he was asked to ascertain 
the position in respect of other ports and whether in their case any 
occasion-arose when draw of lots was resorted to determiD.e the 
allotment of a residence to an employee. 
34. In the meantime the Committee visited the Tuticor1n Port in 
,July, 1980 in connection with the Tuticorin Port Employees Regu. 
lations, 1979. The Study Note of the Committee's visit is enclosed 
(vide Annexure IV). The Chairmai of the Tuticorin Port Trust 
apprised the Commitee that the Port Trust Board had issued an 
amendment to the third proviso to Regulation 3 (i) governing allot­
ment of residences to employees in a situation where the priority 
date of two or more employees was the same. He clarified that in 
a case where emoluments drawn, the length of service and the age 
were equal, the matter would be decided by draw of lots. 
35. On 23rd June, 1982, the Ministry of Shipping a~d Transport 
were requested to supply a copy of the amendment for being 
placed before the Commitee. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated 
the 6th July, 1982 stated as under:-
" ..... to forward herewith a copy of the draft regulation 
(Annexure V) for amending the Tuticorin Port Trust 
(Allotment of Residences) Regulations so as to provide 
for allotment of quarters where emoluments and length 
of service in the Port are equal, on the basis of seniority 
in age as per the date of birth, received 'from the Port 
Trust in July, 1000. The Law Ministry were, however, of 
the opinion that the draft was not happily worded and 
desired that the amendment of regulations be recast as 
follows:-
' "In the third proviso to clause (i) of regulation 3 of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Residences) Regula­
tions, 1979-
(i) in item (i) the word "and" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) after item (ii) the following item shall be inserted 
namely:-
(iii) where the emoluments and length of service under the 
Board are also equal, on the basis of seniotlty in age 
according to the date of birth of the employees;"'. 
839 RS-2. 

14 
The Port Trust was accordingly asked to recast the draft 
amendment and get it re-published in the State Gazette. 
The Port Trust has informed that the proposed amend- · 
ment had been kept in .abey~nce with a view to bringing 
out comprehensive amendments, in the Allotment of 
Residences Regulations necessitated by other develop­
ments. The Port Trust is being asked to expedite the 
draft comprehe:r:sive am.endments. Meanwhile, the Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat is requested to indicate whether the 
amendment as suggested by the Ministry of Law will 
serve the purpose." 
36. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that earlier 
the Ministry in theh O.M. dated the 26·th February, 1982 and subse­
quently in his deposition before the Committee on the 18th April, 
1980 the Secretary of that Ministry had given his considered opinion 
that if after taking into account the personal circumstances a de­
cision was not possible, the allotment issue could be decided by 
draw of lots. The Chairman of the Tuticorin Port Trust had also 
reiterated the same position. The above view had, however, not 
found place in the draft amendment. 
37. At its meeting held on the 14th De1cember, 1982, the Com­
mittee decided to take up the above subject along with the roles/ 
regulations of the Cochin Port Trust on the same subject, for consi­
deration during its visit to Cochin on the 24th December, 1982. 
38. The Committee visited Cochin Port on 24-25th December, 
1982. Relevant extracts from the Study Note in respect of the visit 
are enclosed, (Annexure VI). Duri:ng their visit the Committee 
desired to have a consolidated note indicating the action taken by 
the Ministry of Shipping and Transport on its various recommen­
dations in regard inter-alia to Regulations governing the Allot­
ment of Residences of Tuticorin Port Trusts. 
39. Accordingly, the Ministry of Shipping and Transport vide 
their O.M. dated the 22nd March, 1983, forwarded a detailed state­
ment indicating action taken by them on various recommendations 
of the Committee in regard inter alia to the Allotment of Residence 
Regulations, as follows:- \ 
'Regulation 3 (i) 
Provided also that where the priority date of two or more 
employees.· is the same, seni?rity among them shall be· 

• 
15 
determined (i) by the amount of emoluments drawn by 
each such employee, the employee in receipt of higher 
emoluments taking precedence over the employee in 
receipt of lower emoluments; and (ii) where the emolu­
ments are equal, by the length of service under the Board. 
Observation of the Committee: 
In accordance with the third proviso to sub-regulation (i) of 
regulation 3, in case the priority date of two or more 
employees is the same, seniority among them shall be 
determined by facts such as (i) amount of emoluments 
and/or by (ii) the length of service. It is, however, not 
clear as to how the seniority for the purpose of allotment 
of residences would be determined in cases, where, other 
things being equal two or more employees are at par with 
each other in respect of their emoluments and length· of 
service. 
Action taken on the Committee's observation: 
It has been decided to amend the regulation so as to provide 
for allotment of quarters where emoluments and length 
of service in the port are equal on the basis of seniority 
in age as per the date of birth. 
The proposal for amendment to the regulations was received 
from the port trust and examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law who felt that the draft was not 
happily· worded and desired that the amendment should 
be recast as under:-
"3. In the third proviso to clause (ii) of regulation 3 .of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Residences) Regu­
lations, 1979-
(i) in item (i) the word "and" occuring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(ii) after item (ii) the following item shall be inserted, 
namely; 
(iii) where the emoluments and length of service under 
the Board . are also equal, on the basis of seniority in 
age according to the date of birth of the employee;" 
In July, 1982, the Port Trust was asked to recast the draft 
amendment and get it re-published in the State Gazette 

16 
before sending it to the Government for consideration. The 
Port Trust informed the Ministry that the proposed 
amendment had been kept in abeyance with a view to 
bringing out comprehensive amendments in the allotment 
of residences regulations necessitated by other develop­
ments. 
Under the Ministry's O.M. of 5-7-82, Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
were requested to indicate whether the amendment sug­
gested by Ministry of Law will serve the purpose. The 
reply from the Rajya Sabha Secretariat is awaited. Mean-­
while the proposal for comprehensive amendments has 
been received from the Port Trust for Government's ap­
proval in principle.' 
40. In view of the stand taken by the Ministry that the sugges­
tion made by the Committee for an appropriate amendment of the 
Rules will be taken into consideration while framing model rules 
on the subject applicable to all the Port Trusts in the country, the 
Committee decides not to pursue the matter further and hopes that 
the Ministry would finalise the model rules expediti9usly. 

ANNEXURE IV 
(Vide paras 34, 44 and &7 of the Report) 
NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMlT'IEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION TO 
TUTICORIN FROM 14TH TO 16TH JULY, 1980. 
In pursuance of the decision taken at the meeting of the Com· 
mittee on Subordinate Legislation on the 18th April, 19:80, the Com­
mittee visited Tuticorin from 14th to 16th July, 1980 to have an on 
the spot study of the points arising from the following three sets 
of regulations. pertaining to the Tuticorin Port, namely:-
(i) The Tuticorin Port Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 
1979; 
(ii) The Tuticorin Port Employees (Leave) Regulations, 1979; 
and 
(iii) The. Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Residences) Re­
gulations, 1979. 
2. Members of the Committee assembled at 3.00 P.M. on the 15th 
J'Uly, 1980 at the Port Guest House, Tuticorin. The following Mem­
bers were present:-' 
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nand-Chairman 
2. Shri Dhaneshwar Majhi 
3. Shri Ibrahim Kalaniya · 
4. Shri J agdish Prasad Mathur 
5. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal 
6. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur. 
The Committee had an informal meeting with representatives ot 
Port Workers Unions to ascertain their views on certain provisions 
of the Regulations cited above. A list of the representatives who 
appeared before the Committee is enclosed. · 
3. The Chairman invited the representatives of the Workers• 
Unions to express their views on the provisions of the regulations. 
The representatives, however, expressed their inability to offer their 
comments at that moment as they were not aware of the precise 
scope and meaning of the provisions of the regulations under con-
17 

18 
sideration of the Committee. The Chairman agreed to give them 
time upto 31st July, 1980 to enable them to furnish their comments 
1o the Rajya Sabha Secretariat. 
4. The Committee heard the views of Shri v. Sundram, Chair­
man of the Tuticorin Port Trust. He was assisted by Shri T. Thama­
raipandy, Secretary· of the Port Trust and Shri S. R. Rajagopala­
krishnan, Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust. The Chairman of the Port Trust informed 
members of the Committee that the Board had sent their reply to 
the Ministry on the points raised by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
and that the matter rested with the Ministry. 'Regarding the pro­
gress of action taken by the Board on a reference made to them 
by the Ministry in respect of the regulations, he sabmitted a note to 
the Commi~tee, a copy of which is annexed. 
As to the point raised in respect of the Tuticorin Port Trust 
(Allotment of Residences) Regulations, 1979, the Chairman of the 
Trust apprised the Committee that the Board had issued an amend­
ment to the third proviso to Regulation 3 (i) governing allotment . 
of residences to employt!es in a situation where the priority date of 
two or more employees was the same. He clarified that in a case 
where emoluments drawn,. the length of service and the age were 
equal the same would be decided by draw of lots. 
The informal discussion ended at 6.50 P.M. 
5. At 7.30 in the morning of the 16th July, 1980 Members of the 
Committee met the following trustees of the Tuticorin Port Trust:-
1. Shri J. P. Villavaryer 
2. Shri V. V. D. Dhanapalan 
3. Shri M. Chockalingam 
4. Shri M. S. Arunachala N adar 
They generally endorsed the stand taken by the Chairman of 
the Tuticorin Port Trust with regard to the Tuticorin Port Employees 
Regulations under the consideration of the Committee. 
Thereafter, representatives of the staff of Tuticorin Port Trust 
appeared before the Committee. They had no comments to offer 
on the provisions of the Regulations. 
The Chairman thanked the Chairman and other officers of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust for the personal touch and keen interest taken 
by them for convenience of the Members during the Committee's 
visit. 

ANNEXURE V 
(Vide para 35 of the Report) 
(To be published in Part III- Section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Gove,rn~ 
ment Gazette) 
Notifications by heads of Departments 
TUTICORIN PORT TRUST 
Draft Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment of Residences) Amendment 
Regulations, 1980. 
No .............. . No. 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 28 of the Major 
Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Tuticorin Port Trust Board 
hereby makes subject to approval of the Central Government, tlie 
following Regulations further to amend the Tuticorin Port Trust 
(Allotment of Residences) Regulations, 1979 [Published at G.S.R. 
W3 (E) 1979'] and the same is published herein as required under 
Section 124 of the above Act.' . 
1. These regulations may ·be called the Tuticorin Port Trust 
(Allotment of Residences) Amendment Regulations, 1980. 
2. They shall come into force on the ...................... . 
3. In clause (i) of Regulation 3 of Tuticorin Port Trtl;,i (Allot~ 
ment of Residences) Regulations, 1979:-
(i) the following shall be added to the Third proviso after 
the words "under the Board"-"and (iii) where the emo­
luments and length of service in the Port are equal, the 
senior most in age will get preference on the basis of the 
date of birth." 
(ii) the word "and" appearing in the sixth line of the third 
proviso between "Emoluments" and '' (ii) where" shall be 
deleted. 
Administrative Office Building, 
Tu ticorin 628004 
April 1980. 
19 
V. Sundaram, 
Chairman. 

, 
' 
' 
l. 
' 
ANNEXURE VI 
(Vide paras 38,. 47 and 60 of the Report) 
ExTRACTS FROM THE STUDIY NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE' COMMITTEE 
ON SUBORDINATE: LEGISLATION TO COCHIN, LAKSHADw:EEP AND 
TRIVANDRUM 
In pursuance of the decision taken at its meeting held on the 
18th Novemberb HJ82., tthe Commit:tee :on Subordrinate Legi~slation 
visited Cochin, Lakshadweep and Trivandrum from the 20th to 27th 
December, 1982, as per the following programme:-
** ** ** 
2. A brief note/summary of the subjects studied/discussed by 
the Committee duri:qg the above visits is given in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 
** ** ** 
86. At about 6.30 P.M. the Committee accompanied by the officers 
61 the Secretariat and the Union Labour Ministry, left Kavarattit 
by boat, by the same route· by which it had come to the I·sland 
earlier in the morning. Thus, as in the onward journey, it took 
about H hours' cruising through the rough waters of the Lagoon 
for the boat to reach the ship waiting at the Lagoon enterance for 
its return journey to Cochin. 
COCHIN 
87. The port of Cochin is situated on the south-west coast, at 
Latitude lo.
0 
North and Longitude 76• East, a:bout 930 kilometer 
south of Bombay and 320 kilometer north of Kanyakumari. 
Sit Being located on the direct sea· route to Australia and Far 
East from E:urope, it ha'S been the centre of a flourishing interna­
tional trade. With its strategic location on the south-west coast, 
the port is also a natural gateway to the vast industrial complex 
and produce market of south-west India. The hinterland of the 
port includes the whole of Kerala and parts of Tamil Nadu and 
Karnataka. 
20 

2I 
89. The modern Port of Cochin was developed during the 
period from 1920 to 1940. It was declared a major port in 1936. 
With effect from 29th February, 1964, the administration of the 
port h:as been vested in an autonomous statutory body "The 
Coch:in Port Trust'' constituted under the provisions of the _Major 
Port Trusts Act, 1963 .. Besides ihe Chairman and Deputy Chair­
man, appointed by the Central Government, the Board of Trustees. 
consists of 16 members. The day-to-day administration of the Port 
is carried on under the ·.supervision and control of the Chairman 
assisted by the Deputy Chairman and Heads of 7 Departments of 
the Port Trust. 
90. The Port has on its roll more than 7,000 employees consist~ 
ing of officers, staff and labour. Modern welfare amenities in the 
form of recreation clubs, canteens, credit societie·.s, etc. have been 
provided; to t'he €(mployees. A we!l-equipped hosp)]tal with all 
modern amenities and special medical services is available for 
treatment of port employees and their families-. Scholarship's are 
awarded to de'Serving children of the port employees prosecuting, 
technical, professional and general education, according to a 
scholarship scheme. 
December, 2'4, 1982 
91. On 24th December, 1982, at about 10.00 A.M. the Committee 
arrived at Cochin harbour after about 12 hours' night-journey by 
m.v. Amindivi. 
92. The Members were received by the Chairman of the COchin 
Port Trust, Shri T. N. J ayachandran, and other officers of the Port 
Trust. 
93 .. At about 11.00 A.M. the members assembled in the Confer­
ence Room in the Office of the Cochin Port Trust. The following 
were present for the discussion. 
ME:M:BERS 
{i) Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
(ii) Shri T. Ba'Sheer 
(iii) Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
(iv) Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
{v) Shri Dipen Ghosh 
(vi) Shri B. D. Khobragad!:l 
(vii) Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
(viii) Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu. 

22 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, CMef Legislative Committee Officer. 
** ** ** 
REPRESEN'l'ATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF $HIPPING AND TRANSPORT, 
NEW DELHI. 
Shri D. K. Jain, Joint Secretary. 
'REPREsENTATIVEs OF THE COCHIN PoRT TRusT 
Shri T. N. Jayachandran, Chairman 
Capt. M. K. Mathew, Deputy Chairman 
Shri M. J. Kurian, Secr,etary 
Shri James K. Joseph, Finance Adviser and: Chief Accounts 
Officer. 
Shri S. Sivrarman, Estate Manager 
Shri K. A. Nair, Lega~ Adviser. 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE. TUTICORIN PORT TRUST 
Shri T. Thamarapandy, Secretary 
Shri S. Velumani, Asstt. Secretary. 
** ** ** 
100. The Committee, thereafter, held a general discussion (on 
various aspects of (i) the Cochin Port Employees (Leave) Regula­
tions, 1978; (ii) the Cochin Port Trust (Conduct) Regulations, 1964; 
and (iii) The Cochin Port Trust (Allotment of Residence) Regula­
tions, 1979, in the light of the corresponding Regulations of the 
Tuticorin Port Trust made under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. 
The Cochin Port Trust Authorities had made available to the 
Committee brief notes containing a comparative study of the rele-
vant rules of the two ports to facilitate discu<ssion. 
101. After some discussrion, Shri D. K. Jain, Joint Secretary in 
the Ministry of Shipping and Transport assured the Committee that 
hi:s Ministry was seized of the Committee's views in respect of the 
Rules under consideration and the Ministry would make every 
effort to finalise all the Rules and Regulations by September, 1983, 
keeping in view the Committee's ·thinking in respect thereof. He 
also assured that the question of carrying out necessary amend­
ments in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 would also be thrashed 

out soon, so that an amending Bill could be brought before Parlia­
ment at an early date. Shri Jain promised to submit a compre~ 
hensive note in the matter, shortly. 
102. The Chairman, then on his own behalf and on behalf of the · 
Members and officers o_f the Committee, thanked the Chairman 
and other officers of the Cochi~ Port Trust for the ex,cellent arrange­
ments made by them in connection with the visit of the Committee 
to Cochir1. The Committee placed on record the untirin·g services 
rendered to it by the officers of the Port Trust, particularly, Shri 
P. R. R.. Panikkar, Public Relations Officer, but for whose coopera­
tion it would not have been possible for it to complete its work at 
· · Cochin sn successfully. 
** ** 

VII 
THE TUTICORIN PORT EMPLOYEES (LEAVE) REGULATIONS., 
1979 (G.S.R. No. 102: (E) of 1979). 
41. The Tuticorin Port Employees (Leave) Regulations, 1979, 
were examined in the Secretariat and the following points were 
referred to the Ministry of Shipping and Transport for their com­
ments/clarification, on the 29'th October, 1979: 
"1. Extraordinary Leave.-Regulation 25(2) (d) (i) refers to 
"recognised sanatoriums" for curing aiinents suc!h as 
"pulmonary tuberculosis.'' etc. The term "recognised 
sanatoriums'' has not been defined in these regulations. 
It may please be indicated whether there is any list of 
such approved sanatorium.<; with the Tuticorin Port Trust 
for the· purpose of grant of leave to employees. 
2,. Seamen's SiCk Leave.-One of the conditions, as provided 
in sub-regulation (2) of regulation 39 which a Seaman 
must fulfil :to claim: leave salary equal to. full pay for a 
maximum period not exceeding 3 months, is as follows:-
(2) (c) .---'The vacancy caused by his absence must not be 
filled. 
As the filling of a vacancy would depend on a number of 
administrative factors over which an employee has no 
control at all, :it i\S felt that this would deprive a Seaman 
in availing the benefits otherwise admissible under the 
regulation. The said provision would appear · to he 
oppressive.". 
42. The Ministry of Shipping and · Transport vide their O.M. 
dated the 17th April, 1980, informed as follows:-
''Extraordinary Leave.-The definition for the term "recog­
nized sq.natorium'' appearing in the Regulation 25 (2) (d) 
(i) of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Leave) Regulation'S, 
1979, would be as indicated in the Central Services · 
(Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 which has been 
adapted by the Tuticorin Port Trust by virtue of the 
provisions contained in Tuticorin Port Trust· (Adaption 
24 

of Rules) Regulations, 1979 [G.S.R. 97 (E) of 1979] 
(Annexure VII ') ~ ·' .• 
Seamen's Sick Leave.-The conditions as provided in sub­
regulation (2.) of Regulation 39 of the Tuticorin Port 
Employees (Leave) Regulations, 1979 i'S based on Rule 
47 of CCS (Leave) Rules which regulate Seamen's Sick 
Leave and which also contains a similar condition. This 
matter is being examined in consultation with Deptt. of 
Personnel & Administrative Reforms. A final reply in 
this regard will be sent soon." 
43. 'I'he Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of 
Shipping and Transport on the 18th April, 1980. The representa­
tives told the Committee ·that as regards the Tuticorin Port Emp­
loyees (Leave) Regulations, 1979, the term, 'recognised sanato­
rium' was ascertainable to the provisions contained in Central 
Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944 adopted for application 
to the employees of Tuticorin Port Trust. As regards "Seamen's 
Sick Leave," the Secretary of the Ministry, · while conceding the 
point, sought permission of the Committee to further examine the 
point. 
44. Subsequently, the Committee visited the Port of Tuticorin 
[The Study Note of the Committee's visit is annex.ed (see An­
nexure IV at page 17] and held. informal discussion with the 
representatives of the workers' unions who were requested to ex~ 
pre'SS their views on the provisions of the regulations. The repr~ 
sentatives, however, expressed their inability to offer their com­
ments at that moment as they were not aware of the precise scope 
and meaning of the provisions of the regulations under consideration 
of the Committee. The Chairman agreed to give them thne upto 
31s:t July, 1980, to enable them to furnish their comments to the 
Secretariat. No comments were however received from any of the 
trade unions eventually. 
45. On being reminded in October, 1980, for expediting the matter 
the Ministry of Shipping and Tran•sport vide their O.M. dated the 
9th October, 1980 informed as follows:-
"Department of Personnel and A R. under their letter No. 
P.3022'j1j80-LU dated 7th October, 1980 have stated that 
the Seaman's leave granted iS' not the only kind of a 
special leave granted to the Central Government ser­
vant as an additional benefit. There are some other 

26 
kinds of leave also which can be granted to a Central 
Civil Government servant like the study leave, special 
disability leave, hospital leave, maternity leave, etc. in 
different circumstances. In those :special kinds of leave, 
there. is no restriction to the effect that the vacancies 
caused owing to the grant of such kind of leave should 
not be filled. In view of this, that Department feels that 
if the restriction laid down in Rule 47 (2) (c) of the CCS 
Rules of 19·72: is removed, it will be easier to grant to 
seamen sick leave in deserving cases without any fur­
ther difficulty. Since the policy relating to the CCS 
(Leave) Rules, 1972 continues to be with the Ministry of 
Finance, the case is being examined by the Department 
of Personnel and A.R. in consultation with the Ministry 
of Finance. Department of Personnel have said that the 
observations of the Committee are being examined by 
them in depth, in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance and that a final view in the matter will be taken 
shortly. We shall write to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
as soon as we hear from the Department of Personnel. 
46. Subsequently, the Ministry of Shipping and Transport vide 
their O.M. dated the 13th October, 1981 informed as follbws.:-
"The Rajya Sabha Secretariat in their O.M. dated 29,th 
October, 1979 had sought clarification in respect of two 
provisions viz., Extra-Ordinary leave and Seamen's Sick 
Leave existing in TPT Employees (Leave) Regulations. 
In respect of Extraordinary Leave the final reply was 
sent to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide this Ministry's 
O.M. of even number dated 17th April, 1980. 
As regards the other provisions i.e. the Seamen's Sick Leave, 
the Department of Personnel & A.R. were consulted. 
They have stated they are considering the general ques­
tion of amendinK the CCS (Leave) Rules, 1972 on the 
lines recommended by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation. In the meanwhile, they have advised this 
Ministry to consider the desirability of amending the 
Tuticorin Port Trust Regulations. Accordingly, the ques­
tion of aJmending regulations 39(2.) (e) of TPT Employees 
(Leave) Regulations, 1979 was ~onsdiered by this Minis-
try and it has been decided to delete the said provision 
hy making an amendment under Section 124 (1) of the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. The Port Trust is being 
advised to take necessary action for deleting the said 
provisions.'' 

' 
27 . 
47. At its meeting held o11 the 14th December, 1982 the Com­
mittee decided to take up the above memorandum alongwith the 
rules/regulations of the Cochin Port Trust on the same subject, for 
consideration during its visit to Cochin on the 24th .December, 1982. 
Relevant extracts from the study note in respect of the visit of the 
Committee are enclosed. (See Annexure VI at page 25). 
48. During their visit the Committee desired to have a consoli­
dated note indicating the action taken by the Ministry of Shippmg 
and Transport on its various· recommendations in regard inter aUa 
to the Leave Regulations of Tuticorin Port Trust. 
49. Accordingly, the Ministry of Shipping and Transport vide 
their O.M. dated the 23rd March, 1983, forwarded a detailed state­
ment indicating inter alia the position as under:-
(i) Definition of ''Recognised Sanatorium":-A registered 
sanatorium would be one as indicated in the Central 
Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1944, which had 
been adapted by the Tuticorin Port Trust by virtue of 
the provisions contained in Tuticorin Port Trust (Adap-
tion of Rules) Regulations, 1979. · 
(ii) Regarding the condition of non-jill~ng of vacancy caused 
by the absence of seamen: That it had been decided to 
delete sub-regulation 2(c) of regulation 39' by a formal 
amendment. 
50. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Shipping and 
Transport have, on a suggestion made by the Committee, agreed to 
m~e ~uitable amendments in the above rules and hope or that 
action m the matter will be. taken expeditiously. 

ANNEXURE VII 
(Vide para 42 of the Report) 
G.S.R. 9'7 (E)-In exercise of the powers conferred by section 120, 
read with sections 26 and 134, of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 
(38 of 1963), the Central Government hereby makes the following 
first regulations, namely 
1. Short title and commencement:-(1) These regulations may 
be called the Tuticorin Port Trust (Adaption of Rules) Regulations, 
191'79. 
(2) They shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1979. 
2. App!ication:-They shall apply to the Port Trust of Tuticorin. 
3. Definitions:-In these regulations, unless the context other­
wise requires,-
(a) "Act" means the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963; 
{b) "appointed ·day" means the date on which ·the Act is 
made applicable to the Port Tuticorin; 
(c) "Board" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Act; 
(d) "existing rules and orders" means the rules and orders 
made under the various Acts and rules in force prior to 
the appointed day in connection with administration of 
the Port; 
{e) "Port" means the Port of Tuticorin. 
4. Existing Rules to continue:-Existing rules and orders and 
subsequent amendments thereto made on or after the appointed 
day relating to the following matters shall, to the extent they are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or any regulations 
made thereunder, and until they are altered, repealed or amended 
by the Board, continue in force as' if they were made by the Central 
Government under the Act, namely-
(i) matters specified under section 28 of the Act; and 

(ii) matters specified in clause (b) and clauses (e) to (n) o! 
section 123 of the Act. 
Provided that an~r amendment aforesaid to the existing rules 
and orders, not adv(;l.ntageous to an emp~oyee, shall not be made 
applicable to such empJ.oyee unless the Board obtains the previous 
sanction of the Central Government. 
5. Form of Receipt: The receipt to be given in pursuance of sub­
section (2) of section 42 of the Act shall, as far as practicable, be 
in the form set out in the Appendix to these reg•ulations. · 
6. Period of Notice: The period within which notice of loss or 
damage shall be given under sub-section (2) of secti0p, 43 of the 
Act shall be seven clear working days from the date of taking 
charge of such goods under s1;1b-section (2) of section 42 of the Act. 
7. Period of Responsibility: No responsibility shall attach to the 
Board under section 43 of the Act after a period of seven clear 
working days from the date of taking charge of the goods by the 
Board, in respect of such goods. . 
Explanation: -In computing the . period of seven clear working 
days referred to in this regulation or regulation 6, account shall 
not be taken of the day of taking charge of the goods. 
[F. No. PTB-16/78] 
339 RS-3. 

VIII 
THE TUTICORIN PORT E.MPLOYEES. (CONDUCT) 
REGULATIONS, 1979 (GSR NO. HJO(E) OF 1979) 
51. On an examination of the above cited regulations a reference 
was made to the Ministry of Shipping and Transport on the 25th 
September, 1979 on the following points. 
(i) The rationale underlying provisions to clause (b) of sub­
regulation' (2) or regulation I extending immunity to 
Class III and Class IV employees drawing pay less than 
Rs. 500/.:. p.:rii.: from the application of certain provisions 
of the· Regulations was not comprehensible~ 
(ii) The provisions of sub-regulation (6) of regulation 3, 
providing for action against an employee for not mairi'" 
taining a standard of conduct in his piivate life; were 
intended for all employees irrespective of their sex. It 
was accordingly suggested to that Ministry that the 
words "neglect ·of· his wife ·and family" be modit\ed to 
read "neglect of the spouse and family". 
(iii) Sub-regulation (3) of regulation 4 relating to participa­
tion in Politics and Election read as under:-
"If any question arises whether any movement or activity 
falls within ·the scope of this regulation, the decision 
of the Board thereon shall be final". 
It was felt that the sub-regulation vests in the Board the 
ultimate power to interpret the movement or activity 
attracting mischief of regulation 4. It was, therefore, 
pointed out that this power should be given to the Cen­
tral Government and not to the Board. 
The Ministry were also informed that sub-.regulation (5) (ii) 
of Regulation 4 dealing with participation by employees 
in strikes appeared to fetter the right of employees/ 
workers to strike with a vfew to seeking redressal of 
their grievances particularly when such workers were 
members of the registered trade unions and unless the 
strike had been held illegal. 
go 

31 
(iv)· ~ reg~r~s fegul~tion 9 it was poifited. out that the objec­
tion taken in terms of EXplanation ( 4) may. not stand the . . ) ' 
test of reasonableness particularly in view of the per-
missive character of section 16 of the Trade Unions Act, 
1926, which reads as follows:-
"16. (1) A registered Trade Union may constitute a separate 
fund, frorn contributions separately levied for or made 
to that fund, from which payments may be made, for the 
promotion of the civic and political interests o£ its mem­
bers, in furtherance of, any of the objects specified in 
sub-section (2). 
(2) The objects referred to in sub-section (1) are:-
(a) the payment of any expenses incurred, either 
directly, by a candidate or prospective candidate for 
election as a member of any legislative body constitu­
ted· under the constitution or of any local authority, 
before; during or after the election in connection with 
his candidature or election; or 
(b) the holding of any meeting or the distribution of any 
literature or document's support of any such candidate 
or prospective candidate; or 
(c) the maintenance of any' persop. who is a member of 
any legislative body constituted under the Constitu­
tion or of any local authority; or 
(d) the registration of electors or the selection of a 
candidate for any legislative body constituted under 
the Constitution or for any local authority; or 
('e) the holding of political meeting of any kind, or the 
distribution. of political literature or political docu­
ments of any kind. 
(3)' No member ~hall J;>e compelled to contribute to the 
f~~ C?~stituted 'Under sub-se~tion (1); and a member 
who does not contribute to the said fund shall not be 
~~~l'uded from any benefits of t}1e Trade Union or 
pla~ed i,n , an~. r?spect . either dlr·ectly . or indir~ctly 
und~~ a~y, d1sab1llt~ qf at apy disadvantage .. as com:. 
pared w1th other members of the Trade Union (exce·pt 
fn relation to the control or management of the said 

32 
.. fund) by reason of his not contributing to the said 
fund; an·d contributlOn to the sa1d fund shall not be 
maae a condition for admission to tile Trade Union.'' 
Based on the earlier observations of the Committee in respect 
of J;he l::Somoay Pon Trust Employees (Conduct) Regu· 
latons uno 1t was pointed out to the Mmistry that it ' ' 
would be difficult for an employee to control all act10ns 
of a member of his family as envisaged in· sub-reg"Ulation 
(1) of Regulation 10. The M1mstry were accordingly 
advJ.sed to do away with such restrictions as were laid 
down L'1. thut regulation. 
( v) Absence of cross references of Form I & ·II and Annexures 
'A' and 'B' to the corresponding regulations was also 
pointed to the Ministry. 
52. The Ministry of Shipping and Transport vide their O.M . 
.dated the 22nd February, 1980 ·informed as follows:-
''the observations made by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat are 
still under examination in consultation with the Tuticorin 
Port Trust. The Port Trust have since furnished their 
comments/suggestions which are being considered in the 
Ministry. A further communication to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat will be sent after a final decision in the matter 
has been arrived at." 
53. The Committee heard the Secretary in the Ministry of Ship­
ping and Transport on the 18th April, 1980. During the course of 
deposition he informed the Committee that the Tuticorin Port 
Trust Employees (conduct) Regulations were still under their 
consideration. The Secretary agreed to most of the suggestions 
made by this Secretariat vide their O.M. dated the 25th September, 
1979. In respect of the first point, he however maintained that the 
'immunity to Class III and Class IV employees drawing pay less 
than Rs. 500/- P.M. from the application of certain provisions of the 
Regulations, as provided for in Clause (b) of sub-regulation (2) of 
regulation I, was in line with the provisions as contained in the 
Governi:nen ~· (Conduct) Rules and that conduct rules of the Port 
Trust cannot be more restrictive than those of Government servants 
54. In the light of the evidence tendered by the Secretary in 
that Ministry, the Committee felt it necessary to have the reaction 

I • 
\ 
33 
both of the management and employees to the provisions contained 
in those regulations. The Committee therefore decided to visit the 
Tuticorin Port. 
55•. In the mean time, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 
17th April, 1980, had informed as •under:-
"Sub-regulation (6) of Regulation 3 expects maintenance of 
reasonable and decent standard of conduct in private 
life by an employee. ln cases where an employee con~ 
ducts himself in a manner unbecom:ng of a servant of 
the Board, action could be taken against him on that 
score. As has been indicated in the aforesaid sub­
regulation, 'neglect of wife and family' has been given 
an 'instance' of such conduct in his pr'vate life for which 
action could be taken against an employee. Obviously, 
neglect of husband and family, if done by a woman 
employee would also attract action under the Regulations. 
If this aspect is kept in view no amendment of the sub~ 
regula+ion 'would be necessary. 
The above clarification may be brought to the ·notice of the 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation. If the Com­
mittee, however feels that the words 'neglect of his wife 
and family' should be substituted by the words 'neglect 
of spouse and family', we may be informed of it and the 
. amen?ment would then be carried out. 
As regards the 'suggestion of the Committee regarding Sub­
regulation (1) of Regulation 10, (relating to non accept­
ance . of gif~s by a member of family of the employee) the 
Bureau . of Public Enterprises are the coordinating 
authority for such matter In respect of all Public •under­
takings and, as has been the practice, they have been 
approached in the matt~r for taking a policy decision on 
th~ issue." 
56. In continuation if their above O.M. the Ministry vide their 
.O.M. dated 13th May, 1980 gave the following further inrormation:-
"In pursuance of the assurances given by the Transport 
Secretary to the Committee on Subordinate Lemshtion 
on 18·4-1980, the following actions have been taken on the 

34 
points raised in the Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. dated 
25~~'-1979:-
(i) In connection with the exemptions granted under pro­
visions to Clause B of Sub-Regulation (2) of Regula­
tion 1, the Department of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms have been approached to intimate the rationale 
for granting similar concessions in the CCS . (Conduct) 
Rules. The rationale would be intimated to Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat when received from Deptt. oi Per­
sonnel and A R. and the Regulation in question will 
be examined in the light of the ra~ionale of Deptt. of 
Personnel and Administrative Reforms. 
(ii) The Tuticorin Port Trust have been requested to 
initiate necessary amendments to the Tuticorin Port 
Employees (Conduct) Regulation 1979 so as to substi· 
tute the words "neglect of his spouse and family" for .• the words "negle~t of his wife and family" occurring in 
sub-Regulation (6) of Regulation 3 ibid. 
(iii) As regards sub-Regulation (3) of Regulation 4 ibid 
regarding power to interpret about the movement 01 
activity of an employee attracting the mischief of the 
Regulation, the Tuticorin Port Trust has been request­
ed to initiate necessary amendment in this regard. 
(viz the power of interpretation should be vested with 
the Central Government and not with the Board of 
Trustees as provided in the present Regulation). 
Simultaneously the Law Minis~ry have been approach­
ed to confirm that the proposed amendment would be 
in order. 
(iY) The Bureau of Public Enterprises who are the coordi .. 
nating authority for all Public Undertakings, have lJeen 
req:uested to give their views/comments or take a 

'· 
r 
• 
35 
policy decision . on the recommendation of the Coil,'l­
mittee on Subordinate Legislation in respect of B'!lb­
Regulation (5) (ii) of Regulation 4, Explanation 4 
below Regulation 9 and sub-Regulation (1) of ~gu,la· 
tion 10. After receipt of BPE's views/decision on the 
above points, the Tuticorin Port Employees . (Conduct) 
Regulation will be examined further. 
(v) The Tuticorin Port Trust have been requested to make 
necessary amendments for giving references in. respect 
of Forms I & II and Annexures A & B of the Regula­
tions in question. 
The Rajya Sabha Secretariat are requested to kindly apprise 
the Committee on Subordinate Legislation accordingly." 
57. The Committee visited the Tuticorin Port Trust from the 
14th to 16th July, 19.80 and held discussions with the representatives 
of port Workers Unions to ascertain their views on the subject. The 
Study Note of the Committee's visit is enclosed (vide Annexure lV) 
The representatives were invited to express their views on the provi­
sions of the regulations. They, however, expressed their inability 
to offer their comments at that moment as they were not aware of 
the precise scope and meaning of the provisions of the regulations. 
under consideration of the Committee. The Chairman, therefore, 
agreed to give them time upto 31st July, 1980. 
58. The Committee also heard the Chairman and other repl·e-
sentatives of the 'I'uticorin Port Trust. The Chairman apprised the 
Committee inter alia that the Board had sent their reply to the 
Ministry on the points raised by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat a11d 
that the matter rested with the Ministry. 
59. As a re);ult of further <:orrespondence and discussions wi'th 
the Ministry the following final position emerged:-
PQ\nt Remarks 
1. The.rationale underlying immunity to Class The above proviso was inw:>rporated in 
UI .l!t IV employe~ dr~w~~ pay l.esa than the conduct Regulations <~f Tu~ic<!rin 
RS.5()0/-f:olll Cefl!.m p~oviStofis ts not com- Port Employees on the basL~ of stmdar 
rehen•ible. · · · provision existing in the Central Civfl 
' Service (Conduct) Rules, 1964 ; After 
consulting the Deptt. of Personnel & 
A.R. and the Mmistry of Law, with 
reference to the specific regulalions from 
which exemption has been granted, it is 
felt that there is no need to provide f(,r 
such exemptions and it is, as such, pro­
posed to delete the two provisions under 
regulation 1(2) (b) of Tuticorin Port 
Employees (Conduct) Regulation.,, I!J79· 
~·"'- ·--------------------------

36 
~------------------------------------------------
Point Remarks 
g. The words, 'neglect of his wife' and family" The Tuticorin Port Trust 
occurring in regulation 3(6) shquld be modi- vised to initiate necessary 
fi~ to read "neglect of the spouse and this behalf 
have been ad­
amendments in: 
family". 
g. The ultimate power to interpret the move- As regards Sub-Regulation (3) of Regu-· 
ment or activity attracting mischief of regu- lation 4 ibid regarding power to interpret 
lation 4(3) must vest in the Central Gover· about the movement or activity of an 
nment instead of the Board. employee attracting the mischief 
of the R;egulation, the Tuticorin Port 
Trust has been requested to initiate 
necessary amendment in this regard 
(viz. the power of interpretation should 
be vested with the Central Government 
and not with the Board of Trustees as 
provided in the present Regulation) 
Simuftaneously the Law Ministry have 
been approached to confirm that the 
4· Sub regulation (5) (ii) of regulation 4 fet­
ters the right' of employees to strike. 
propo~ed amendment would be in order. 
The objections r'aised by the Committee 
have been examin~d in consultation with 
the Bureau of Public Enterprises, Minis­
try of Labour and Ministry of Law. 
It is proposed to incorporate the follow­
ing proviso under regulation 4 (5) (ii) 
of the Tuticorin Port Employees (Con­
duct) Regulations, 1979, with a view 
to ensuring that the restrictions envisaged 
· in this sub-Regulation do not take away 
the lawful right of the industrial workers 
tO strike : 
• "Notwithstanding anything contained 
in this 'SUb-regulation, an employee 
\covered by (he definition· of 'workman' 
Under the industrial Disputes Act; i941 
(14 of r947), would, however, have the 
opportunity for redressal of his grievances 
as permissible under the aforesaid Act." 
5• Explanation (4) below regulation 9 is un~ ''Explanation 4 below Regulation g, regard 
reasonable particularly in view of pernlissive ing approach to the public for collecting 
character of section x6 of the Trade Union funds for the Union." 
Act, 1926.; 
The objection raised by the Committee 
on Subordinate Legislation have been 
examined in consultation with the 
Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry 
of Labour and Ministry of Law, While 
examining the Committee's objection in 
regard to explanation 4 below Regulation 
g, explanation 3(ii) below Regulation 9' 
bas also been reviewed. It is proposed 
to delete explanation 3(ii) below regu­
lation 9· As regard explanation (4) below 
regulation g, the intention behind its 
inclusion in the Conduct Regulations 
is to prevent the employees from misuse 
of their official position. In fact, it is 
felt that there is a need to make the 
existing provision more stringent so as 

37 
Point 
----··- ·---- ---·---
Remarks 
to ensure that no official of the Port 
Trust misuses his official position and 
grants favour to the members of the public 
in return for donation of funds by the 
concerned member of public for the 
purpose of the Unions. With this 
end in view, explanation 4 below 
regulation 9 is proposed to be a mended 
as follows:-
"No employee of the Board sha II al(p­
roach the general public or any indlVi· 
dul or any industrial or com mercia! · 
firm, organisation etc. with whom the 
P.ort has any type of dealings for 
collecting funds for the Unions." 
6. Sub-regulation (1) Ofregultion IO should It is proposed to amend regulation w(t) 
be deleted in the light of Committee's reco- as under: 
mmendation regarding T.P.T. Employees 
(Conduct) Regulations). · 
6. Cross references cor;·csponding to :Forms I 
& II and Annexures 'A' & 'B' ~hould be 
made in the regulations-
"Ko person employed in the Port shall 
accept or permit any member of his 
family or any person acting on his behalf 
to accept any gift from any individual 
having official dealings with him or from 
any industrial or commercial firm, 
organisation etc. with whom the Port 
Trust has dealings.'' 
The Tuticorin Port Trust have been re­
quested to make necessary amendments 
for giving references in respect of Forms 
I & II and Annexures A & B of the 
Regulations in question. 
60. Thereafter the Committee visited Cochin Port on 24-2Sth 
December, 1982. An extract from the study note in respect of the 
visit of the Committee is enclosed. (See Annexure VI at page 25) 
During their visit the Committee desired to have a consolidated 
note indicating the action taken by the Ministry of Shipping and · 
Transport on its various recommendations in regard to tbe Conduct 
Regulations of Ttiticorin Port Trust. 
61. At its meeting held on the 18th July, 1983, the Committee 
considered a detailed stlatement forwarded by the Ministry of 
Shipping and Transport vide their O.M. dated the 23rd March, 1983 
indicating action taken by them on various recommendations of the 
Committee. 
'\ '~ 
62. The Committee lecitles not to pursue the matter in vjew of 
the stand taken by the Ministry that the suggestion made by the 
Committee for 'an appropriate amendment of the Jt.ules would be 

\ 
37 
_____ .,_ ··--- -----
Point Remarks 
----------··------ --····------
to ensure that no official of the Port 
Trust misuses his official position and 
grants favour to the members of the public 
in return for donation of funds by the 
concerned member of public for the 
purpose of the Unions. With this 
end in view, explanation 4 below 
regulation 9 is proposed to be amended 
as follows:-
"No employee of the Board sha II a{lp· 
roach the general public or any indivi­
dul or any industrial or com mercia! · 
firm, organisation etc. with whom the 
P.ort has any type of dealings for 
collecting funds for the Unions." 
6. Sub-regulation (1) Ofregultion 10 should It is proposed to amend regulation 10(1) 
be deleted in the light of Committee's reco- as under: 
mmendation regarding T.P.T. Employees 
(Conduct) Regulations). 
6. Cross references corccsponding to Forms I 
& II and Annexures 'A' & 'B' should be 
made in the regulations. 
"No person employed in the Port shall 
accept or permit any member of his 
family or any person acting on his behalf 
to accept any gift from any individual 
having official dealings with him or from 
any industrial or commercial firm, 
organisation etc. with whom the Port 
Trust has dealings.'' 
The Tuticorin Port Trust have been re· 
quested to make necessary amendments 
for giving references in respect of Forms 
I & II and Annexures A & B of the 
Regulations in question. 
60. Thereafter the Committee visited Cochin Port on 24-25th 
December, 1982. An extract from the study note in respect of the 
visit of the Committee is enclosed. (See Annexure VI at page 25) 
During their visit the· Comn::dttee desired to have a consolidated 
note indiCating the action taken by the Ministry of Shipping and · 
Transport on its various recommendations in regard to the Conduct 
Regulations of Tuticorin Port Trust. 
61. At its meeting held on the 18th July, 19.83, the Committee 
consid,ered a· detailed statement forwarded by the Ministry of 
Shipping and Transport vide their O,M. dated the 23rd March, 1983 
indicating action taken by them on various recommendations of the 
Committee. 
62. The Committee l~ifles uot to pursue the matter in view of 
the stand taken by the Ministry that the suggestion made by the 
Committee for 'an appropriate. amendment of the ltules would be 

38 
taken into consideration while framing model rules on the subject 
applicable to all the port Trusts in the country and hope's that the 
Ministry \vould finalise the model 1·ules expeditiously. 
IX 
AD HOC APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS IN THE CEN­
TRAL INFORMATION SERVICE 
63. The Committee earlier considered the question of ad hoc 
appointments and promotions in the Central Information Service 
following complaints that ad hoc appointments were being made in 
a m:1nner different from the provisions of the CIS Rules, 1959. In 
its 48th Repoflt the Committee recommended as follows:--
"The Committee directs the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcas:ing:-
(i) to see to it that the process of direct recruitment, right 
from Grade IV, is acc.eleration; 
(ii) to finalise the seniority lists in time; 
(iii) to ensure that the D.P.Cs. are properly constituted and 
meet regularly; and 
(iv) not to make any further ad hoc appointments to the 
t'arious posts in contravention of CIS Rules. 
Taking note of the fac: that the Ministry have since consti­
tuted a Board to review the situation and to sort out the 
}:':)roblems afflicting the C.I.S., the Committee directs the 
Ministry to complete the entire exercise by the 31st 
January, 1982, and submit a report in that beh~lf to the 
Committee for its consideration." 
(Pan1s ll and 12) 
6l'i. The Ministry of Information aad Broadcasting vide their 
were requested to take action as per the direction of the Committee 
and furnish to the Secretariat the requisite report by the middle of 
February, 1982. 
65. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting vide their 
O.M. dated the 18th February, 1982 forwarded a note containing the 
details or. action taken by that Ministry upto 31st January, 1982 for 
, 

39 
the implementatio_n of the directives given by the Committee. The 
note reads as follows:-
(i) Acceieration of the process of direct recruitment 
(l) Grad~ IV 
In accordance with the CIS Rules, 1959, the posts in Grade IV of 
CIS are required to be filled up by direct recruitment from open 
market on the basis of the recommendations of the UPSC. A re­
quisition was accordingly placed upon the Commission to nominate 
suitable candidates for appointment to 110 vacancies in Grade IV of 
CIS. As this would still leave over 120 posts unfilled, the matter 
was reviewed recently on the advice of the CIS Board. The 
Commission have been requested to recommend candidates for 229 
vacancies instead of 110 vacancies as originally notified. 
The UPSC conducted a written test for the posts in November, 
1981 and are at present in the process of evaluating the answer 
books. · It is expected that the Commission will finalisG the process 
of selection in about three months. 
(2) Grade III 
The CIS Rules, 1959, as amended from time to time, provide 
that posts in Grade III of CIS shall be filled up by promotion from 
amo>.1gst Grade IV officers of CIS with 5 years, continuous approved 
service, failing which, by direct recr'Uitment. Art no recruitment 
has been made to Grade IV of CIS for last over 10 years, there is 
no Grade IV officer available to be considered for promotion to 
Grade III of GIS. The UPSC WqS q.ccordingly requested to fill up 
100 available vacancies in Grade III of CIS by the method of direct 
. recruitment. The Commission have since concluded the interviews 
of the candidates who had applied for appointment to grade III 
~~tf CIS. It is expected that 1lhe Ct!Rnmission wiU make available its 
recommendations veFy shortly. 
(3) Gr.ade II 
The CIS Rules, 1959, provide for filling up of 50 p~r cent of 
permanent posts in Grade II of CIS by the method of direct recruit­
ment through the UPSC. The Commission was requested te fill 10 
Tacancies in Grade II of CIS (earmarked for direct recruits) on the 
basis of Civil Services Examination, 1981. With a view to accelarat­
ing the process of direct recruitment and on the basis of the recom­
mendation of the CIS Board, the matter concerning the minimum 

40 
number of posts which could be filled on the basis of the results of 
Civil Services Examination, 1981 was re-considered and the Com­
mission have now been requested to send their recommendations 
for filling up 27 vacancies. 
(ii) Finalisation of the seniority list 
'rhe seniority list of officers in all Group 'A' Grades of Central 
Information Service has been finalised and circulated vide this 
Ministry's U.O. Note No. A-4218/4/81-'CIS dated 11-12-1981. 
The above mentioned seniority list showed the seniority of the 
direct recruits appointed to Junior Administrative Grade of CIS 
in 1977, only on a provisional basis. This was because of the fact 
that there existed a dispute in terms of inter-s,e seniority between 
the direct recruits and the departmental promoi.:ees. This 
has since been resolved in consultation with the Department of 
personnel, Ministry of Law and UPSC. The CIS Rules, 1959 have 
been formally amended vide this Ministry's Notification No. A-23012/ 
1/77 CI.S Vol. II dated 6-1-82 which was published in the Extra~ 
ordinary Gazette of the Government of India on 6-1-1982. The 
final s~niority of the direct recruits has now been fixed in accord­
ance with the amended provisions and circulated vide this Ministry's 
U.O. No. A-4201814181-CIS dated 19-1-1982. 
(iii) Meetings of the Departmental Promotion Committee 
(1) Grade ill of CIS 
. The Rules provide that posts in Grade III of CIS may be filled 
up by promotion from amongst Grade IV officers with 5 years' 
approved service, failing which by direct recruitment, No recruit­
ment in the feeder Grade of Grade IV of CIS has been made for the 
last over 10 years. The Grade IV officers, who could be considered 
for promotion to Grade III of CIS have since been promoted and 
there does not, therefore, arise any question of convening a meeting 
of the Departmental Promotion Committee to consider promotions 
to Grade III of CIS during next few years. 
(2) Grade U of CIS 
Recruitment to Grade II of CIS is made both by direct recruit­
ment and promotion 50 per cent of th«i permanent vacancies are ear­
marked for direct recruits whereas the· remaining 50 per cent of 
the permanent vacancies as also all the temporary vacancies are 
earmarked for promotion. The last DPC to consider promotion to 
f 
• 

41 
Grade II of CIS was held in July, 1001 and on the basis of. its recom­
mendations 102 officers were · promoted to Grade I of CIS. The 
action to convene a meeting of the Departmental Promotion 
Committee for the year 1982 will also be initiated after taking into 
account the fact that this Ministry's Cadre Review proposals envi­
sage reduction in the total number of posts in Grade II of CIS. The 
proposals concerning Cadre Review of the Central Information 
Service are at present under consideration of the Department of 
Personnel and Administrative Reforms. 
(3) Grade I of CIS 
'l'he posts. in Grade I of CIS are required to be filled up by 
promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness from amongst Grade 
II officers with 5 years approved service in the Grade. The number 
of such officers as have completed 5 years' approved servi.ce in 
Grade II is only 3, as against over 100 Grade I posts to which 
regular appointment is required to be made. The UPSC was 
accordingly requested to grant relaxation from the existing provi­
sions so that all such Grade II officers as have completed 3 years 
(instead of 5 years) of approved service in Grade II of CIS are 
rendered eligible for promotion to Grade I of CIS. This was agreed 
to by the Commission and· 47 Grade II officers who have completed 
3 years of approved service in the Grade have been rendered eligi­
ble for regular promotion to Grade I of CIS. A meeting of the 
Departmental Promotion Committee was convened in January, 1982: 
to consider the suitability of these 47 officers for promotion on 
regular basis to Grade I of CIS. The Committee has since made 
available its recommendations and the caders of the appointing 
authority are being obtained for the acceptance of the recommen­
dations of the said Departmental Promotion Committee. 
It may be observed that even after these 47 officers are appointed 
on a regular basis to Grade. I of CIS, there will s+ill remain over 
53 posts e:ther unfilled or filled, purely on an ad hoc basis. The 
matter was considered in depth and the Commission were requested 
to grant further relaxation in the existing provisions so as to render 
all such Grade II officers eligible for promotion to Grade I of CIS 
as have put in not less than 8 years continuous approved 
service in Grade III/II taken togel.:her. This was also agreed by the 
Commission but was made subject to the condition that only such 
Grade II officers would be considered eligible for promotion to 
Grade I of CIS as have at least put in 2 years regular service in 
Grade II of CIS and have also been confirmed in the Grade. Apart 

42 
from· the aforesaid 47. officers who have .completed 3 years regular 
service in Grade II of CIS, there is no Grade U Officers at present 
available who has completed 2. years' regular service in the Grade. 
A fresh request has accordingly been made to the UPSC to recon­
sider the earlier request of this Ministry so that all such Grade 
II Officers as have put in not less than 8 years .continuous approved 
service in Grade III/II taken together are rendered eligible for 
regular promotion to Grade I of CIS. The Commission's response is 
awaited and in the event the Commission agrees. to the proposal 
made, immediate steps will be taken to convene yet another meet­
ing of t:Q.e DPC to consider filling up of remaining Grade I posts 
also on regular basis. 
(4) Junior Administrative Grade 
The posts in Junior Administrative Grade of Central Informa­
tion Service are required to b~ filled up by promotion by selection 
from amongst Grade I Officers with .5 years approved service in th12 
Grade. The last meeting of the DPC took place in March, 1981. 
The Commission has been again requested ~o convene another 
meeting of the Departmental Promotion Committee to consider 
promotion of eligible Grade I Officers to JAG of the service. It is 
expected that the Commission will shortly convene the meeting of 
the DPC. . 
(5) Senior Administrative Grade (J'unior Scale) 
The posts of Senior Administrative Grade (Junior Scale) of the 
Central Information Service are filled up by promotion by selection 
from amongst officers in JAG of the service having 4 years conti­
nuous approved service to their credit. No meeting of the DPC to 
consider promotions to SAG (JS) could be convened after 1977 in 
view of a dispute .concerning inter-seniority of Direct recruits 
apf>ointed to .JAG in 1977 and the departmental promo"'ees. This 
dispute has been . as st~ted earlier in this not~, now resolved and 
complete papers have been referred to the UPSC to enable them to 
convene a meeting of. the DPC to .. consider promotions to SAG ( JS) 
of CIS. We expect tha+ the UPSC will very shortly convene the 
DPC also. 
(6) Senior Administrative Grade (Senior Scale) 
In accordance with the CIS Rules, l959, as are required to be 
filled amended from time to· time, the posts· in· SAG SS) from 

43 
amongst officers in SAG (JS) of CIS with two years approved ser­
vice to their credit. The officers who have been appointed on ad hoc 
basis to SAG (SS) of CIS have not been regularly appointed in 
SAG (JS) of CIS also. This is because of the fact, as stated above, 
that there existed a dispute in terms of interest-seniority between 
the direct· recruits and the departmental promotees in JAG of ihe 
service, which made it impossible to convene DPCs for the higher 
Grades of SAG (JS) and SAG (SS). It has also been explained 
above that with the finalisation of the said dispute, complete papers 
have been forwarded to UPSC to enable it to convene the meeting 
of the DPC to consider promotion on regular basis of eligible 
officers to SAG (JS) of CIS. As son as the present ad hoc 
appointees in SAG (SS) of CIS are appointed on regular basis to 
SAG (JS) of CIS on the basis of the recommendations of the said 
DPC, immediate action will be taken to reguhirise the appointments 
of the present ad ho·c appointees in SAG (SS) also. 
(7) Principal In£ormatiton .o'mcer 
The post of Principal Information Officer was excluded from the 
Central Information Servtce for a period of 4 years w.e.f. 15-6-1978. 
The term of tM present incumbent· of the post of PIO, who has 
been appointed on contract basis, is also due to expire on 14-4-1982. 
A proposal has accordingly been made to the UPSC to convene a 
rrie~ting of the DPC to consider suitability of SAG (SS) officers of 
t CIS· for promotiott to the post of PIO. 
(iv) Ad hoc appointments in contravention of the CIS Rules 
The directive of the Committee not to make ariy further appoint­
ment to the various posts in contrf.vention of the CIS Rules has been 
noted and is be1ng implemented: . The Committee considered the 
reply received from· the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
at its meeting held on the 26th August, 1962 and decided to hear the 
Secretary of the Ministry in the matter. • 
66. The Secretary in the Mb:iistty was accordingly invited to 
appear before the Committee. Iri the mean time, the Ministry vide 
their D.O. letter dated the 22nd October, 1982 forwarded a note 
indicatfng'action taken till then with regard to the implementation 

of the directives given by the Committee, which inter alia stated as 
follows:-
A. ACCELERATION OF THE PROCESS OF DmECT 
RECRUITMENT 
All efforts have been made to fill up direct recruit vacancies in 
various grades of the Central Information Service, at the earliest. 
The position is briefly given as follows:-
(i) Grade II (Rs. 700-1300) 
In November, 1980 a requisition was placed with the UPSC to 
fill. up 10 vacancies under the direct recruitment quota in Grade II 
of the CIS. But after a reassessment in November, 1981 a revised 
requisition was sent for 27 vacancies instead of 10. The Commission 
on the basis of the results of Civil Services Examination, 1981 have 
since recommended the candidates for appointment and the candi­
dates have since been appointed to Group 'A' Central Services 
which includes the CIS and are currently attending the Founda­
tional course at Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy, Mussoorie. 
(ii) Grade III (Rs. 650-1200) 
The UPSC has nominated in March 1982, 93 ,candidates for such 
appointment. Eighty of the selected candidates have since been 
offered the appointment in-Grade III of CIS and 64 have since re~ 
ported for duty and their appointments have duly been notified. 
(iii) Grade IV (Rs. 470-750) 
A revised requisition has been placed with UPSC to fill up 229 
vacancies, as against the 100 vacancies notified earlier. The Com­
mission have since held the written test and the interviews of the 
candidates who had applied for appointment in Grade IV of CIS. It 
is believed that the Commission will shortly send their recommenda­
tions to the Ministry. 
B. FINALISATION OF THE SENIORITY LIST 
* * * * 
The seniority list of officers in Central Information Service 
(Group A) as circulated vide this Ministry's U.O. Note dated 11-12-
1981 did not indicate seniority of the officers in Senior Administra­
tive Grade (Junior Scale) of the Service. This was because of the 
fact that the officers who were working in this grade had been 
appointed on ad hoc basis only. A meeting of the Departmental 

'* 
45 
·Promotion Committee was convened in August, 1982 to consider 
regular appointments in this grade and on the basis of the Commit­
tee's recommendatios the posts in the Grade have been :filled on 
regular basis. The seniority of officers promoted on regular basis to 
SAG (JS) of CIS was also thereupon duly circulated vide this Min­
istry U.O. Note No. A22012/2/82-CIS dated the 1-9-1982. 
It would be therefore, seen that the seniority in all the grades of 
CIS has been :finalised. 
The seniority list of officers in CIS {Group 'B') has also been 
:finalised and was circulated vide this Ministry's U.O. Note No. A-
42018/4/81-CIS dated 11-2-1982. 
C. MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENTAL PROMOTION COM­
MITTEE 
(a) Promotions 
Concentrated efforts were made to convene meetings of the De­
paremental Promotion Committees to consider regular appoint­
ments in various grades. This has enabled the Ministry, as the table 
given below would indicate, to regularise most of the ad hoc 
appointments in the Service: 
Sl. 
No. 
Grade and payscale 
--------
No. of 
posts 
as on 
IO·l0•8:2 
No. of ad hoc No. of ad hoc 
appointments appintments 
which exist when at present as on 
;'!ecretary I &B :20·10·82 
appeared before 
the committee in 
October, 1981 
-··---- .. ---·-~-~~,- -- ·-----
I Selection Grade Nil Nil (Rs. 3000/· fixed) 
2 Senior Adfuinistrative Grade (S:&'l"IOR 5 4 S<?ALE (Rs. 2ooo- 2:250) 
3 Senior Administrative Grade (JUNIOR I2 9 SCALE) (Rs. r8o6- 2000) 
4 Junior Administrative Grade 
(Rs. 1500....-·1800) ' 40 Nil 
5 Grade I (Rs. IIoo-=r6oo) 185 g8 3 
6 Grade II (Rs. 700-1390) 171 Nil Nil 
7 Grade III (Rs, 650'-1200) 460 
g Grade; IV (Rs. 470-·750) 265 
Total 1139 II4 7 
839 RS-4. 

46 
The details are as given as follows:-
(i) Selection Grade (Rs. 3000/-) 
This grade consists of only one post i.e. Principal Information 
Officer. At present Additional· PIC-cum-Additional Information 
Adviser (PM's Office) PIB has been given, in addition to his own 
duties, current charge of the routine duties if the post of PIO. 
Action is being taken to fill up the post. 
(ii) Senior Administrative Grade (Senior Scale) Rs. 2000-2250 
A meeting of the Departmental Promotion Committee to consi­
der regular appointments in SAG (SS) of CIS was held on 18th 
October, 19H2, UPSC have recommended officers for appointment 
to SAG (SS) as a sequal to the DPC meeting. Further necessary 
action to appoint the approved officers to SAG (SS) is being 
taken. 
(iii) Senior Administrative Grade (Junior Scale) Rs. 1800-2000 
All but on ad hoc appointments in this grade have since been 
regularised on the basis of the recommendations of the DPC. Ad hoc 
appointment of only one officer is being continued because of a dis­
ciplinary case pending against him. 
(iv) Junior Administrative Grade (Rs. 1500-1800) 
Not only have all the appointments in the Junior Administrative 
Grade been regularised but additional officers have also been pro­
moted on regular basis against the available vacancies on the basis 
of the recommendations of the DPC. 
(v) Grade I (Rs. 1100-1600) 
The largest number of ad hoc appointments existed in Grade I 
of CIS. All but three of these ad hoc appointments have since been 
regularised. This became possible by convening the meetings of the 
DPCs twice in this year-in January a.nd April, 19H2. 
One of the three ad hoc appointments in Gr. I of CIS could not 
be regulaTised as there was a disciplinary case pending against him. 
In respect of the remaining two officers, who had also beep consi­
dered by the earlier DPC and found unfit for promotion, have been 

47 
continued on ad hoc basis. It is proposed to request the DPC to 
review its recommendations . 
. (vi) Grade II (Rs. 700-1300) 
No vacancy is at present available under the promotion quota in 
· Grade II of CIS. 
(vii) Grade III (Rs. 650·1200) 
There is no officer available for promotion to Grade III of CIS. 
(viii) Grade IV (Rs. 470-750) 
All the posts of Grade IV are required to be filled by direct recruit­
ment. Action in this regard has been indicated in para (iii) of page 
2. 
(b) Confirmations 
(i) Senior Administrative Grade (Senior Scale) (Rs. 2000-2250) 
Four SAG officers officiating on regular basis in SAG (SS) of 
CIS have been confirmed in the grade against the available perma­
nent vacancies. 
(ii) Junior Administrative Grade (Rs. 1500·1800) 
. The total number of permanent vacancies available in this grade 
is 26. The Departmental Promotion Committee has recommended 
· 26 officers for substantive appointment in this grade. These recom­
mendations have been sent to UPSC for their approval. 
I (iii) Grade I (Rs. 1100-1600) 
There were 125 permanent vacancies available for confirmation 
in this grade. 121 officers have been confirmed on the basis of the 
recommendations of the DPC. 
(i.v) Grade UI (Rs. 650·1200) 
. There' ~ere 225 permanent vacancies available in Grade III of 
CIS. The DPC has recommended 225 officers for confirmation. Its 
recommendations ha~ bee:p. sent to UPSC for their approval. 
·(D) Ad-hoc Appointments in Cotttravention of the CIS Rules 
' . 
The directive of the Committee that no ad hoc appointment be 
made in contravention· of the CIS· Rules has been scrupulously im­
plemented. 

48 
67. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Information 
and Hroadcasting on the 11th January., 1983. The Secretary ex­
plained that all the problems in the service arose. due to the non­
implementations or improper implementations of the rules. As 
on illustration, he stated that the last recruitment in Grade II took 
place in 1973 and ti111982' there was no recruitment with the result 
that persons not fulfilling the condition for the prescribed expe­
rience were appointed in Grade II on ad hoc basis•. Those appoint­
ments could be regularised only by the D.P.C. but the meetings 
of the D.P.C. were not frequent. The Secretary, however, main­
tainefl that during the previous one year and t~ee months, the'Y 
had tried to solve all problems·, and they had largely succeeded 
too. On rthe 12th October, 198'1, they had 114 ad hoc ·appointees, 
but in a year's time,. the number had come· down to only 7. They 
had also held several meetings of the D.P.C. got the DRs updated, 
and with :the cooperation of the U.P.S.C. had done en01.1gh to re­
move the problems in the Service. The Secretary also informed 
that the Ministry were expediting fresh recruitments. 
The Secretary further agreed to furnish the information relat­
ing to representations as receiwd from Junior Time Scale (Grade· 
IT) officers of the CIS regarding their problems to Senior Ti'me 
Scale (Grade I). 
6a. The Ministry, vide their O.M. dated the 5th March, 1983 
furnished :their comments as under:-
"Identical representations have been received from some of 
the officers promoted to Junior Time Scale (Grade· II) 
of the Service in 1981 for further promotion to Senior 
Time Scale (Grade I) of the Service. These represen­
:tations essentfally relate to the following points:-
(i) Induction of officers, especially at Grad·e· IV and Grade 
III levels in the past, has adversely affected the 
seniority of the serving officers in t:qis grade; 
(ii') A number of officers, including the representationists, 
were appointed to Grade IV of the Service in 1965 on 
the basis of competitive examination conducted by ' 
the UPSC. Some of truese officers who were· promoted 
to Junior Time Scale· (Grade II) of the Service in 
1980 have further been promoted to· Senior Time Scale 
(Grade I) of the Se:J:.;vice. However, the representa­
tionists, who were also recruited in l965 in Grade IV 

49 
of CIS, still work in Junior Time Scale (Grade II) of 
the Service, and 
(iii) The officers, induding the representa1jion.ists, promot­
ed to Junior Time Scale (Grade II) of the Service in 
1981 may be placed en-block senior :to the direct re­
cruits appointed on the basis of Civil Services Examina­
tion, 1981. 
2. These points are e·xamined in detail as follows:­
(i) Induction 
Rule 6,.B (1) of the CIS Rules, 1959 provides that the Gov­
ernment may, in consultation with the UPSC, include 
in the Service any posts other than those included in 
the Schedules or exclude from the service a post in­
cluded in the Schedules from time to :time, by way of 
amendment of the relevant Schedule and when a 
Schedule is so ameru:led, any reference to that Schedule 
in the rules shall be construed as a reference :to such 
Schedule as so amended. Rule 6-B (2) p17ovides that 
Government may, in co:rlsultation with the UPSC 
appoint an officer, the post held by whom is included 
in the ·Service, under sub-rule (1), to the appropriate 
grade of the Service, in a temporary capacity or in a 
substantive capacity, as may be deemed fit and fix his 
seniority in the grade, again in consultation with the 
Commission whereupon such a post shall not be reckon­
ed for determining the number of posts to be filood by 
promotion or by direct recruitment, under rule 6 of tihe 
CIS Rules, 1959~ 
It was in accordance with these p17ovisions that a number of 
, officers holding posts, the functions whereof were similar 
to those obtaining in CIS, were inducted in CIS Sifter 
the posts they were previously holding were included in 
the Servic~. The inter.se seniority of these inductees 
'Vis-a..-vils the officers already serving in the particular 
grade in the, service was also fixed strictly accordiug to 
the rules in consultation with the. UPSC· · 
:{ii) Promot!i~ to Senior Time Scale (Grade :1) 
In accordance with CIS Rules, 1959, ~e posts in Senior Time 
Scale (Grade I) of the Service are required to be filled 
by promotion from am.on~"t Junior Time Scale (Gra:de 

i 
I 
l 
50 
II) officers with 5> years contirtuous approved service in 
the grade .. Departmental Promotion Committee met 
twice in 1982, to consider regular appointments in Senior 
Time Scale (Grade I) of the Service. It was seen that 
only 3 Junior Time Scale (Grade II) officers fulfilled the 
requirement regarding length of service. The UPSC was, ' 
however, requested to give a one time relaxation so that 
all such Junior Time Scale (Grade II) officers as have 
put in 8 years continuous approved service in Grade III 
and Grade II taken together are rendered eligible for 
promotion to Senior Time Scale (Grade I). 
2.. The necessary relaxation was granted by the Commission 
and as a :result the Ministry was able to promote, unless 
otherwise found unfit, all those Junior Time Scale officers 
to the Senior Time Scale (Grade I) who had been 
appointed in Junior Time Scale in 1980. However, the 
officers including the representationi·sts appointed in 
Junior Time Scale of the Service in 1981 could not be 
covered under this relaxation as. their approved service 
in Grade III commenced from 1978 only, :i.e. they had 
rendered less than 8 years continuous approved service 
in Grade III and Grade II taken together. 
(iii) Fixation of lnter-~e-Seniority 
The CIS Rules, 195e1 provide that 50 per cent of the perma­
nent vacancies in Jumor Time Scale (Grade II) of the 
Service would be filled by direct recruitment through 
UPSC. No direct recruitment was, however, made in 
this grade from 1974 to 1980. It was resumed in 1981 
when a formal requi'S'ition was made to UPSC to re­
commend candidates for appointment in Junior Time 
Scale (Grade II) against some of the accumulated 
direct recruit vacancies on the basis of the results o:f 
Civil Services Examination, 198'1. The rules governing 
fixation of inter-se seniority between the direct recruits · 
and promotees in a grade provide for earmarking of 
s~ots in accordance with the quota reserved in the re­
cruitment rules. for dir'ect recruits and promotees. 
Since no direct recruitment had been made between. 
1974 and 1980:, a number of vacancies: falling under 
direct recruitment quota were accumulated. It was. ' 
observed that on resumption of direct recruitment 
1981 the application of normal rules governing 

I) 
51 
of inter'-se-seniority between the! di.iect recrui:ts and 
the promotees would give an unintended benefit to the 
direct recruits. In order to avoid such an occurance the 
CIS Rules, 1969 were amended in consultation with 
UPSC so that direct recruitment to Junior Time Scale 
of the Service was formally suspended from 1-1-74 to 
31-12'-1980. The amendment :further provided that the 
officers promoted to Junior Time Scale of :the Service 
upto the end of December, 1980 would be placed en­
block senior to the direct recruits to be· appointed on 
resumption of direct recruitment on the basis of the 
results of Civil Services Examination, 19Hl. It is not 
possibe t~ deem direct recruitment having been sus­
pended beyond Dec~mber, 1980 iri view of the fact that 
a requisition had beeh placed with UPSG for filling up 
of some of the direct recruit vacancies on the basi's of the 
Civil Services Examination, 1981. 
It is, howewr, not a fact that the officers promoted to Junior 
Time Scale of the Service after 31-12-1980 would rank 
en-block junior to the direct recruits appointed on. the 
basis of the Civil Services EKamination, 1981. The rules 
governing fixation of inter-se-seniority between the direct 
recruits and promotees in a grade provide, as stated 
above, for earmarking above 'Slots in accordanctl with 
tlie quota reserved for direct recruits and promotees. 
The recruitment rules for GI8 provide that 50 per cent 
of the permanent vacancies in Junior ·Time Scale, (Grade 
II) of the Service will be filled by direct recruitment 
· and the remaining 50 per cent of the permanent vacan­
cies shall be filled by substantive appointment of tem­
porary Grade II officers in order of their seniority sub­
ject to the rejection of the unfit. Thus, the inter-se­
seniority between the direct recruits and the promotees 
of 1981 will be based on l : 1 ratio which i'S the ratio 
fixed for direct Tecruitment and promotion in the grade 
under the recruitment rules. 
69. The Ministry in their above O.M. also explained the circum­
stances under which offers of appointment were not made to 7 out 
of 93 candidates recommended by the UPSC for appointment in 
Grade III of CIS . 
. 70. The Commit.tee notes tltat Secretary, Ministry of Informa­
tion and Broadcasting had admitted that problems in the Central 

Jnformatio.n Service arose on account of the non-implementation 
or improper implementation of the recruitment rules. The last 
recruitment in Grade II was d~me in 1973 and t.lll 1982 there was 
no recruitment. with the result that persons not fulfilling the con­
ditions were appointed in · Grade II on ad hoc basis, and those 
appointments could be regularised only by the D.P.C. but the meet­
ings of the D.P.C. were not frequent. The Secretary further ad­
mitted j!hat o,n. the 12th October, 1981 there were 114 ad hoc 
appointees but in a year's time the number had come down to 7. 
The D.P.C. also met frequently and C. Rs. were got updated and 
as such most of the service problems were solved. 
The Committee would have been happy if the Ministry of Infor­
mation and Broadcasting had dealt with the matter sU:o-moto rather 
then after it was taken up by the. Committee. 
X 
(i) THE GENERAL PROVIDEN';L' FUND (CENTRAL SERVICES) 
SIXTH AMENDMENT RULES, 19HO (G.S.R. 1101 OF 1980) 
(ii) THE CONTRlBUTORY PROVIDENT FUND SIXTH AMEND­
MENT RULES (INDIA), 1980 (G.S.R. No. 1102 OF 1980). 
71. The G.P.F. (Central Services) Sixth Amendment Rules, 1980 
have added sub-rule (7) after sub-rule (6) in rule 11 of the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, which reads as 
follows:-
" (7) In case a subscriber is found to have drawn from the 
Fund an amount in excess of the amount standing to his 
credit on the data of the drawal, the over-drawn amount 
shall be repaid by him with interest thereon at the rate · 
determined under sub-~e (i), irrespective of whether 
the overdrawal occurred in the course of an advance or 
a withdrawal or the final payment from the fund. The 
interest realised on the overdrawn amount shall be 
credited to Government account under a distinct sub­
head "Interest on overdrawals .from Providen: Fund" to 
be opened under the had "049-Interest Receipts-C-other 
interest receipts of Central Government--other Receipts." 
72. The above sub-rule was examined in the Secretariat and it 
was felt that a subscriber might unknowingly apply for some loans 

53 
which might be in excess of his General Provident Fund contribu· 
tion. As, in every case, loan application is scrutinized in the Ac· . 
counts Department, some responsibility should also be. fixed on the 
concerned employees in the Accounts Department. 
! 
73 The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) were, accordingly requested to info:rnn 
this Secretariat whether they had any .objection in amending sub­
rule (7) of rule 11 of the G.P.F. (Central Services) Rules, 1960 in 
the light of the above observation. 
The Ministry bf Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) vide their O.M. dated the 217th April, 1982 
had stated as follows:-
" ...... that the point raised therein :ttas been examined in this 
Department. Normally, every Government servant is. 
expected to be aware of the balance that he has or 
should have in his. P.F. account at any particular point 
of time as the statements of accounts are supplied to him 
annually. Even in cases of advances/withdrawals taken 
by the subscribers, he should be aware of the latest posi~ 
tion. However, cases can and do occur where the De­
partments/Ministries have a large staff and the subscri­
bers have to undergo frequent transfers with the result 
that the accounts authorities may not be upto-date as to 
the exact balance on the date of application. In such 
cases reliance has per force to be placed on the statement 
of the subscriber. It is only in such a situation where 
though the administrative and the accounts authorities 
may . exercise adequate. scrutiny, it may not. always be 
possible for the accounts authorities to detect over pay~ 
ment/over drawals while sanctioning and permitting the 
advance/withdrawal. Though it is agreed that in all such 
cases, responsibility should be fixed, this Department is 
df the view that since this will be in the nature of 
administrative action, the P.F. Rules would not be the 
appropriate plac~ for incorporating a suitable provision in 
!his regard. The question of issuing suitable executive 
ms:ructi~ns to all. Ministries/Departments, bringing to 
their notice the views ~;pressed by the Committee on 
S~~or~inate Legislation and the need for fixing responsi­
bility In such cases, is under active consideration." 
.I 

54 
74. The Ministry in a subsequent communication dated the 27th 
January, 1983 forwarded a copy of their instructions dated the 21st 
December, 1982, addressed to all Ministries/Departments of the · 
Government of India, which inter-alia reads as under: 
"* * * * * 
A point has been raised during the course of the examination 
of the above sub-rule by the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation of the Rajya Sabha that a subscriber may 
unknowingly apply for some advance v.;hich may be in 
excess of the General Provident Fund contribution and 
that as. in such case loan application is scrutinised in the 
Accounts Department, some responsibility should also b~ 
fixed on the concerned employee(s) of the Accounts 
Department. 
Normally, every subscriber is expected to be aware of the 
balance at least broadly-to his credit in his Provident 
F'Und Account at any particular point of time as the state­
ments of accounts are supplied to him annually. Even 
in cases of advances taken withdrawals made, the sub­
scriber sho1,1ld be aware of the latest position. However, 
cases can occur, especially when the Deparme,nts/Minjs­
tries have a large staff and the subscribers haveto under­
go frequent transfers, where the administrative or ac­
counts authorities may not have upto-date information 
about the balance on the date of the application. In such 
cases reliance has per force to be placed on the statement 
of the subscriber. In such a situation, though the ad~ 
ministrative and the accounts authorities may exercise 
adequate scrutiny, it may not always be possible for them 
to take into account by advances taken or withdrawals 
made a little earlier. Whatever be the reasons of the 
over-drawals, since the subscriber cannot draw the 
amount unless it is sanctioned, the sanctioning and/or 
accounts authority also have a responsibility in . the over­
drawal. Instructions may therefore, be issued that all 
requests for advances/withdrawals are to be closely 
scrutinised and in cases where over-payments occur, 
responSibility should be fixed and action talCen both 
against the administrative and a<;counts authorities.'• 
f 
.. 

55 
(ii) 
· 75. The C.P.F. Sixth Amendment Rules (India), 1980 have added 
sub-I'ule (7) to rule 12 of the Contributory Provident Fund Rules 
(India), 1962 .which reads as follows:-
,, (7) In case of a subscriber is found to have drawn from the 
Fund and advance or withdrawal in excess of the amount 
of subscriptions, interest thereon and incentive bonus 
standing to his credit on the date of the drawal, or the 
amount finally drawn by him from the Fund on quitting 
service is found to have been in excess of the amount 
standing to his· credit in the Fund, the over-drawn amount 
shall be repaid by him with interest thereon at the rate 
determined under sub-rule (1). The ihterest tealised on 
the overdrawn amount, shall be credited to Government 
account under a distinct sub-head-'Interest on over­
drawals from Provident Fund' to be opened under the 
head "049-lnterest Receipts-C.-other interest receipts 
of Central Government-other receipts." 
76. The above sub-rule was examined in this Secretariat and it 
was felt that a subscriber might unknowingly apply for some ad­
vance/withdrawal which might be in excess of his C.P.F. accumu­
lfltions standing to his credit on the date of application. As, in 
every case, application for advance/withdrawal were scrutinized 
by the Administration Accounts Departments, some responsibility 
should also be fixed on the concerned staff/ officer in the Adminis­
tration AccO'Unts Department. 
77. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) were, accordingly asked to inform this 
Secretariat whether they had any objection in amending sub-rule 
(7) of rule 12 of the Contributory Provident Fund Rules, (India), 
1962 in the light of the above observations. 
78. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and 
Administrative Reforms) vide their O.M. dated the 27th January, 
1983 forwarded a copy of their instructions dated the 21st Decem­
ber, 1982 addressed to all Ministries/Departments of the Govern­
ment of India which. inter-alia reads as under: 
"* * * * 
A point has been raised during the course of the examination 
of the above sub-rule by the Committee on Subordinate 

56 
Legislation of the Rajya Sabha that a subscriber may un­
knowingly apply for some advance which may be in ex"' 
cess of the C.P.F. Contribution and that as in each case 
loan application is scrutinised in the AccO'unts Depart. 
ment; some responsibility should also be fixed on the 
concerned employees in the Accounts Department. 
Normally, every subs,criber is expected to be aware of their 
balance at least broadly-to his credit in his Contributory 
Provident Fund Account at any particular poiri.t of time 
as the statements of accounts are supplied to him annually. 
Even in cases of advance taken/withdrawals made the 
subscriber should be aware of the latest position. How .. 
'eveD, cases can occur, especially when the Departments/ 
Ministries have a large staff and the subscribers have to 
undergo frequent transfers, where the administrative or 
accounts authorities may not have uptodate information 
about the balance on the date of the application. In such 
cases reliance has per force to be placed on the statement 
of the subscriber. In such a situation, though the admin­
istrative and the accounts authorities may exercise ade­
quate scrutiny, it may not always be possible for them to 
take into account any advances taken or withdrawals made 
a littl~ earlier. Whatever be the reasons of the over­
drawals, since the subscriber cannot draw 'the amount 
unless it is sanctioned, the sanctioning and/or account,s 
authority also have a responsibility in the overdrawal. 
Instructions may, therefore, be issued that all requests 
for advances/withdrawals are to be closely scrutinised 
and in cases where over-payments occur, responsibility 
should be fixed and action taken both against the ad­
ministrative and the accounts authorities:'' 
79. The Committee at its meeting held on the 7th June, 1983, 
,considered both the aforementioned amending rules in the light o:f 
'the comments of the Department of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms of the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
'fhe Committee was of the view that with the issue of the instruc. 
tions for fixing the responsibility of the Administrative and the 
Accounts Authorities for excess payment from the GPF /CPF 
account of an employee, the disposal in such cases might be even 
delayed because the sanctioning authorities would be over cautioug 
. and ultima+ely the instructions would ~o ag-ainst the interests ot 
the subscribers. The Committee, therefore, decided to discuss· the 

.. 
57 
matter in detail with the representatives of. the Department o:t · 
Personnel and Ad~inistrative 'Reforms. 
80. The Committee heard the representatives of the Department 
of Personnel and Administrative Reforms and the Controller-Gene­
ral o·f Accounts in the Ministry of Finance, at its meeting held on the 
16th July, 1983. 
At the outset, the Committee expressed its. displeasure over the 
attitude of the Ministry in issuing instructions in the very first 
instance without seeking the opinion of the Committee in the mat­
ter. It was of the opinion that the instructions issued by the 
Ministry wo•uld rather result in delay in disposing of cases of ad­
vances/withdrawals as henceforth, the officers would become extra­
cautious. Thus the instructions might become disadvantagious to 
the subscribers rather than being helpful to them. 
The Committee also took the view that the instructions issued 
by the Ministry were not happily worded. ~The phrase 'that the 
responsibility should be · fixed' would lead to the conclusion that · 
whenever there was an overdrawal there was necessarily the respon­
sibility of the sanctioning authorities and that for overdrawal/ · 
overpayment from the fund action must be taken· against the con-
. cerned official(s). The representatives of the Ministry, however, in­
formed the Committee that the instructions were flexible. Any 
,case of over-payment was to qe ·gone into, the intention and the 
circumstances seen as to why and how the ov.erdrawal/overpayment 
took place, whether it was due to the default of the subscriber or 
of the administration and only thereafter, a view would be taken 
whether action against anybody was required to be taken or not. 
The representatives further explained that fixing of responsibility 
was not automatic and that it involved the due process of calling 
for explanation and the consideration of the reply of the concerned 
official and if there was no cause for fixing of responSibility, it 
would not be fixed . 
. The represe~tatives realised the adverse consequences that 
might ·follow . on account of the issue of instructions as pointed out 
by ~be Co~ittee in case of both the rules, and agreed to issue 
clan:fi~tory mstructions in that regard. 
. 81. The Co~ittee notes the assurance given . by the representa­
tives o~ the Mm~stry of Home Atlalrs and hopes that the Ministry· 
would ISsue elardicatory instructions expeditiously so as to pre* . 
I 

58 
vent any delay in the disposal of cases for withdrawal/payment of 
advance from General Provident FundiContributory Provident Fund 
Accounts. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 24, 1983, 
BHAI MAijAVIR, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 

MINUTES 

MINU'rES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE; COMMITTEE ON SUB­
ORDINATE LEGISLATION 
Ll 
FIFTY-FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lOth April, 
1980. 
MEMBERS ·PRESENT 
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda-Chairman 
2. Shrimati Pratima Bose 
3. Shri Dhaneshwar Majhi 
4. Shri Ibrahim Kalaniya 
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur 
6. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal 
7. Shri s. K. Vaisnampayen · 
8. Shri Alexander Warjri 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Chief Examiner of Questions 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decision on the following 
Memorand~:-
(i) Memor.mdunt No. 9.1 regarding Tuticorin Port Trust Employees 
Regulations. 
The Committee took exception to the inordinate delay on .the 
part of Ministry of Shipping and Transport to :fu.irnish their com­
ments on the points re:fer:red ·to them with· regard to the following 
seU; of regulations:-
(a) Tu'ticorin Port Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1979 
[G.S.:R. 100(~) of 19'79']. 
(b.} T'he~ Tt;fiffieo'l"':rn Pm-t Em:p·loy-ees (Leave) Regulations, Hi79 
[G.S.R. 102(E) of 1979]. 
61 
839 RS-5. 

G2 
The Committee directed the Secretariat to examine 
similiar provisions existed in regulations made for other major 
The Committee decided to hear the Secretary of the Ministry 
Shipping and Transport at its next meeting on the. 18th April, 
'I'he Committee. deferred consideration of the reply furnished 
the Ministry with regard to the Tuticorin Port Trust (Allotment 
Residences) Itegulations, 1979 [G.S.R. 103(E) of 1979]. 
(ii) to (iv) X X .X 
The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to 
3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th April, 1980. 
··-1" 
LII 
FIFTY-SECOND MEETING 
X 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th April, 1980. 
MEMBERS P:RESENT 
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda--Chairman 
2. Shrimati Pratima Bose 
3. Shri Ibrahim Kalaniya 
4. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur 
5. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur 
6. Shri S. K. Vaishampayen 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SHIPPING AND 
2. 
TRANSPORT . 
Shri s. Y. Ranade, Secretary 
Shri D. K. Jain, Joint Secretary, 
Shri Bimal Pandey, Under Secretary, 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Chief Examiner of Questions 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Leg·is!ative Committee Officer. 
* * * * 
---------- ·- --------------- -------- .......,--------:-
****Relates to matter not included in this Report 

83 
3. The Committee heard the representatives of Ministry of Ship­
ping and Transport in connection with Memorandum No. !}1 regard~ 
ing Tuticorin Port Employees Regulations. The representatives 
told the Committer;! that Gover:q.ment's views on the points pertain­
ing . to Tuticorin Port Employees (Cond•uct) Regulations were still 
under consideration. As regards the Tuticorin Port Employees 
(Leave) Regulations, 1979, the representatives explained to the 
Committee that the term 'recognised sanatorium' w~s ascertainable 
to the provisions contained in Central Services (Medical Attendance) 
. ·• Rules, 1944. adopted for application to the employ'ees of Tuticorin 
Port Trust. As regards the Seamen's Sick Leave, the Secretary of 
the Ministry, while 'conceding the point, sought permission of the 
Committee to further examine the point. 
· A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
In the light of the evidence of the representatives. of the Ministry, 
the Committee felt it necessary to have the rea~tion both of the 
management and employees to the provisions contained in those 
regulations. The Committee, therefore, decided, subject to the per­
mission of the .Chairman, Rajya Sabha, to visit the Tuticorin Port 
to have an on-the-spot study of the subject matter. Tlle Committee 
also . authorised the Chairman to approach the Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, for his permission +o the Committee to visit the Tuticorin 
Port sometime in May, 1980. 
The Committee considered its future programme of sittings and 
decided to hold its next meetings on the 28th and 29th April, 1980 . 
.; The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 P.M. !o meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 19th April, 1980. 
LI 
FIFTY-FiRST MEETING 
The Comnti:ttee met at ll.OO.A.M. on Saturday, the 18th July, 1981. 
ME:M:EiERs PRESENT 
1. Shri Narasing~a ·Prasad Nanda'"'-'Chairman, 
2. Shri B.. N. Banerjee 
3. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare 
4. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde . , 
5. Shri Bhagatram Manhar. 

@4 
e. $bri J'ag~sll l?rl;l~a.d Mathur 
7. ShP:i Narsingh Naram P~d.~y 
8. Shr:i Ram Bhagat Paswan 
9. Dr. (Sb.rim~ti) Rajinder Kaur 
lO. Shri Syed. S.hahedullah. 
SECRE'l'ARIAT 
S~i K. :Pay~ Gh~1 Le¢&t~tiue Comm.itWe Offier. 
Shri B . .R. Ooel. SeniOT Ugi8lat:~ve Comm:;.~tee QJJicer. 
2 'lld 3. 
4. Memorandum No. 75. 
The Central Secretart(l,t Cleric.«< Service (ll:mendment) Rules, 
1976 (G.S.R. 231 of 1976). 
Thf;.' Committee considered the memorand\ll!ll and directed that the 
~ini~tcy of Home 4\.ffa.ira may be asked to expedite the finalisation 
o{ amendro.en.ts to the Central ~.cretariat Service/Central Secretariat 
S.t.e.no~~avhe~$.' Service J;l.ul,es on the lines of amendments made to 
th.e Central Sec~tru::at Clerical Service Rules. The Committee fUr­
ther d~:cectQd ~t it should be i_:p.forrned of the amendments made . 
5 to 7 • • 
Vlll N 
EIGHTH . MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 26th August, 
1982, in Committee R.00:m; :t{Q. ~. FiiSt Fl(')Qr, Parliament HO'Use 
New Delhi. 
MEIM:BE:Rs Plu!:smNT 
1. Shri Susbil Chand Mohunta-~n the Chair. 
~. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shrl B. D. Khobragade 
uuRelates to matters not included iJa tll~ ~PQit. 

5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Santosh Kwnar Sahu 
8. Shri N g. Tompok Singh. 
SECRET.AlttA.T 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretdry. 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
was voted to the Chair. 
a. * 
4. Memorandum No. 18 
Ad hoc appointments and promotions in the Central Information 
Service. 
The Committee considered the memorandum on the subject. The 
Chairman informed the Members that f:ew representations on the 
subject have been received by the Secretariat from. certain indivi­
duals. After some discussion tp.e Committee deCided to hear the 
Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on the 
subject at its next meeting to be held on the Srd Septem~t, 19ll2. 
5. * • • 
6. '!'he Committee then adjourned at 11.50 A.M. to meet at a,oc)' 
P.M. ott Friday the Srd September, 1982. 
'tr. .• xvm 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
' ' 
• 'The <::ommitbae met at 11.00 A.M. on TuesJday1 the 14th Deeemlter, 
19R, ii'l Committee Room 'A', ground Floor, Parliament Hellle', 
, Atme.tte-, Mew I>elltl. 
lv.TEMBERs PREsl!:NT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chain'man. 
2. Shri Jfatid Kiehore Bhatt 
3. Shri G. C. Bhatla.charya 
----- .. -------------·--
n **Relates tQ :ma.ttu DOt included in this Report. 

66 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5·. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
11. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
12. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
* 
SECRETARIAT 
'' 
* 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Add.;tlional Secretary. 
Memorandum No. 31: 
* 
The Tutico'l'in Po1't Trust (Allotment of Residences) . Reg'ula. 
tions, 1979• [G.S.R. 103(E) oJ 197~]. 
Memorandum· No. 32: 
The Tuticorin Po1·t Trust ·Employees (Leave) Regtt.lations, 
1979 [G.S.R. 102 (E) of 1!179]. 
The Committee decided to take up the above two memoranda, 
along with the rules/regulations of the Cochin Port Trust on the 
same subject, for consideration during its visit to . Cochin on 24th 
December; 1932. 
3. Supplement to Memorandum No. 18: . ,. 
Ad hoc appointments and promotions in the Central Informa­
tum Services: 
·. ·The Committee took up the above me;norandum for consideration. 
After·some discussion, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for further clarifications/ 
elucidations. 
4. to 6. * * * * 
7. The Committee then considered its future programme of sittings 
and decided to meet on the lOth and Uth January, 1983·. 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 1.30 P.M. 
-------- ·- -. 
****;Relates t-o matter not included in this Report. 

68 
8. The Committee then considered its, future programme of sittings 
and decided to meet on the 27:th and 28th January, 19133, in the 
forenoon on both the days. 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27th January, 1983. 
XXV ~·· 
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
The Com:II:littee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th February, 
1983, in Committee Room 'N, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERs PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai dza 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Salve 
9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SEcRETARIAT 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Seni.Or LegiS'laVi:ve C01J'l..mi:tJtee OjJi.eer, 
2. Chairman and members of the Co:mmittee congratulated Shri 
Ram Niwas Mirdha, a member of the Committee on his appoinment 
as a member of the Council of Ministers. 
The Committee placed on record its appreciation of the services 
rendered by Shri K. Dyal, Chief I.;egislative Committee Officer to 
the Committee. The Committee oongratulated Shri B. R. Goel on 
his promotion as Chief E.xa·miner of Questions, who would continue 
to be associated with the· Committee. The Chairman introduced to 
the Committee Shri R. P. Mahajan, who had on hi's .. promotion as 
Senior Legislative Committee Officer, taken the place Of Shri Goel. 

69 
3. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) to (iif) * * * * 
(iv) Memorandum No. 39 regarding the Jhdian Posts and Tele­
graphs Accounts and Finance Sel'vice Telecommunication Wing 
Group 'B' Recruitment Rules, 1980: 
The Committee was of the view that Court's jurisdication could 
not be barred by Rules. If, however, it was the intention of Govern­
ment to bar the jurisdiction of Courts, a specific enactment would 
be neoossary. 
(v) Memorandum No. 40 regal'ding the Directorate of Vanaspati, 
.. V egetabJe Oils and Fats Staff Car Driver Recruitment Rules, 
1980 (G.S.R. No. 10 of 1981): 
The Committee rioted that the Ministry of Civil Supplies had 
agreed to make the composition of the Departmental Promotion 
Committee specific as mentioned in column 12 of the Schedule 
appended to the above cited rule3. The Committee directed that the 
Ministry be reminded to give the latest position in that regard. 
(vi) to (viii) * * * * 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the S:th February, 1983. 
XXVDI 
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 2nd April, 1983, 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New De}hi. 
L Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer · 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
****Relates t.o matter not included in, this· Report. 

70 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri Su'Shil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
. 10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
1~. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRE'l' ARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
S:hri R. P. Mah,ajan. Senior LegislatJive Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) Memorandum No. 43 regarding the Central Secretariat Clerical 
Service (Amendment) Rules, 1976 (G.S.R. 231 of 1976)-delay 
in implementation of the recommendations of the Committee: 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and after some 
discussion decided to hear the Secretary in the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (Department of Personnel and Admini'strative Reforms) with 
a view :to seeking clarifications/elucidations in the matter. 
(ii) to (vi) * * * * 
3. The Committee decided to hold its next series of meeting'si on 
the 18th and 19th April, 1983. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 P.M. to meet again at 
3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 18th April, 1983. 
XXIX 
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 18th April, 1983:, 
in Committee Room No. 'B', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
MEM:8ERs PREsENT 
1. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza-in the Chair 
2. Sliri T. Basheer 
****Relates to matters not ·included in this Report. 

71 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Dipen · Ghosh 
5. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
6. Shri G. Swamy N aik 
7. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
8. Shri Shanti· Tyagi 
WrrNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affcmrs (Deptt. of 
P:ersormel and Administrative Reforms) 
Shri U. C. Agarwal. Secretary 
Shri S. Krishnan, Joint Secretary 
Shri R. C. Gupta, Director •. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shr.i B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. P. Mah;ajan. Senior LegislatJive Committee Officer. 
2. In .the absence· of the Chairman, Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza was 
voted to the Chair. · 
3. Supplement to Memorandum No. 43 relating to the .Central Sec­
retariat Clerical Service (Amendment) Rules, 1976 ·(G.S.R. 231 
of 1976)-deJay in implementation of the recommendation of 
.. the Committee: 
The Committee took up for consideration the above memorandum 
and heard the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs (De­
partment of Personnel and Administrative Reforms) on the subject. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on the 19th April, 1983. 
v 
FIFTH MEE!I'ING . 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th June, 1983 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Atmexe, 
New Delhi. l. .. ·-- J1.. . 

n 
( 
d 
A 
a 
t 
71 
1. Dr, Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Amarprooad Chakraborty 
6. Shri Dlpen Ghosh 
7. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
8. Shri Ram. Naresh Kushawah.a 
9. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
10. Shri Ghanshyamb_hai Oza 
11. Shri Rafique Alam 
12. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
13. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, AddlitionaZ Secretary, 
Shri R. P. Maliajan. SeniOr LegisZatJi:rJ'e Cotnm.f:ttet Ot!tc:e'f. 
2. The C~mmittee considered and to.ok decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i)' Memorandum No. 1!83 regarding the Mfnfstry of Civil Supplies 
Recruitment Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. No. 1022 of 1980). 
The Committee noted that the M.inistr:t of Civil Supplies had. on · 
a. suggestion made by tbe Rajya Sabha Secretariat, agreed to make 
suitable. amendment to the above rules. 
(ii) Memorandum No. 8183 regarding the Directorate of Vanaspati, 
Vegetable Oils and Fats Staff Car Driver Recruitment Rules, 
1980 (G.S.R. No. 10 of 1981). 
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Civil SuppUes had, on 
a suggestion made by the Commi"ttee agreed to make suitable amend­
ment. in the above rules. · 
(iii) Memorandum No-. 9!83 r&garding th6 C«mtrlbutory :Pt'G\'ldent 
Fund Sixth Amendtnent Rules. (India), 1980 (G.s:a. 'lt&Z of 1980). 
( 

73 
(iv) Memorandum No. 10183 regarding the General Provident Fund 
(Central Services) Sixth Amendment Rules, 1980 (G.S.R. No. 
. 1101 of 1980). 
The Committee considered the above two memoranda together, 
and after some discussion decided to hear the Secretary, in the Minis­
try of Home Affairs (Deptt. of Personnel and Administratiw 
Reforms) in the matter with a view to seeking further clarifications/ 
elucidations in the matter. 
3, The Committee then adjourned at 11.55 A.M. 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.0'0 A.M, on Saturday, the 16th July, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor Parliament House 
Annex:e, New Delhi. 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chafrman 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. · Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
5. Shri G. C. Bhattaeharya 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
7. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
8. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha· 
9. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
10:. Shri Ghan.sbya:mbhai Oza 
11. Shri :Raflque Alam 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
S:toc:RETAMAT 
S!ui B. R. Goel, Chief E':ra.miner of Qttestions. 
Shri R. P. Ma~'lajan. Senior Leg:slative Committee Officer. 
R.,-e~Jentatives' of the Minist.nes 
ing 
lot-
79). 
rust 
port 
;able 
~rust 
r of 
ittee, 

:r 
74 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS) 
Shri S. Krishnan, Jai'nt Secretary 
Shri A. S. Mehta, Joint Secretary 
Shri S. R. Ahir, Deputy Secretary 
MmrSTR.'Y OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT o.F ExPENDITURE) 
Shri K. Lalit, Controller-General of Accounts. 
(i) Supplement to Memorandum No. 9i8ll relating to the Contribu­
tory Provide'nt Fund Sixth Amendment Rules (India) 1980 
(G.S.R. 1102 of 1980). 
(ii) Supplement to Memorandum No. 10!83 relating to the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services) Sixth Amendment Rules, 
1980, (G.S.R. 1101 of 1980). 
The ·committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs (Dep't. of Personnel and Administrative Reforms) and the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on the above two 
memoranda. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. '· 
3. * * * 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 18th July, 1983. 
· vn1 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 18th July, 1983, 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New 0€) lhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
--~- ... ---------~---------,----------
****Relate'S to matter not included in this Report. 
( 

11···.:··· ... L ..... 
,.,. 
l-· -l 
75 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shr:i: Nand Kishore Bhatt 
5. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
7. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
1(). Shri Rafique Alam 
11. Shri: Shanti Tyagi. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri: B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. P. Mahajan. Senior Leg;slatiive Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
Memoranda:-
(i) Memorandum No. 11183 regarding the Tuticorin Port Trust (Allot­
ment of Residences) Regulations, 1979; (G.S.R. No. 103 of 1979). 
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Shipping and Transport 
had, on a suggestion made by the Committee, agreed to make suitable 
amendment in the above rules. · 
(ii) Memorandum No. 12\83 regardi:n~ the Tuticorin Port Trust 
Employees (Leave) Re~Pilations, 1979, (G.S.R. 102 of 1979). 
The Committee rioted that the Ministry of Shipping and Transport 
had, on a suggestion made by the Committee, agreed to make suitable 
amendmentt in the above rules. 
(iii) Memorandum No. 13183 regarding the Tuticorin Port Trust 
Employees (Conduct) Regulation, 1979. 
The . Committee noted with satisfaction .that th:e Ministry of 
Shipping and Transport had,. on a suggestion made by the Committee, 
agreed to make the suitable amendment in the above rules. 
(iv) * * * 
3. The Corumittee then adjourned at 11.40 A.M. 
**"'*,Relates to matter not included in thi'S Report. 

l 
\ 
\ 
\ 
t 
l 
1 
(\) ~ 
76 
IX 
NINTH MEETING . 
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 24th 
1983, in Committee Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. · Shri Madan Bhatia . 
4. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
B. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
11. Dr. Rafi:q Zakaria 
. SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Queztt.ons. 
Sbri R. P. l~Jl:ahajan. Senior Lreg:slat1lve Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered the draft Fifty-four~h Report and 
adopted the same with some modifications. 
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to the House on 
the 26th August, 1983, anr\_ authorised th;:~ Chairman and, in his 
ab::-ence, Dr. Raiiq Zakaria or Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha to 
present the Report to the House. 
4. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme of 
sittings and decided to hold its next meetings on the 6th, 7th and 8th 
then on th~ 17th and 19th and also on the 23th and 29th September, 
1~~ . 
5. The Committee 'then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again at 
3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th September, 1983. 