 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
 
 
  
  REPORT NO. 
246 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
on 
Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes 
Rules, 2020  
(Presented on 24th March , 2021) 
 
(Presented on          March, 2020) 
 
 
 

  
  
C O N  T  E  N  T  S 
  
                                                                                                                                                    PAGES 
  
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE        (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION            (ii) 
3. REPORT         1 - 12  
4. SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  13-18 
5.  MINUTES         19-22 
 
 ANNEXURE I        23-42 
ANNEXURE II        43-46 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019--2021) 
1.   Shri Partap Singh Bajwa     Chairman 
2.   Shri Manas Ranjan Bhunia 
3.    Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
4.    Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
5.    Dr.  Amar Patnaik 
6.   Shri K. K. Ragesh 
7.    Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
8.    Shri Pradeep Tamta 
9.   Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
10.   Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
11.   Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar 
12.   Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
13.   Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
14.   Shri Tiruchi Siva 
15.    Vacant (due to sad demise of Shri Abhay Bharadwaj) 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
3. Shri Prem Singh, Additional Director 
4. Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Anju Bala Nayar, Committee Officer 
6. Shri Anup Sahu, Assistant Committee Officer 
 (i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
          I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized 
by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and Forty Sixth Report 
of the Committee. 
2.         The Committee examined the matters that came up while scrutinizing the  Banning of 
Unregulated Deposit Schemes Rules, 2020  and issues relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government. 
3.         The observation s and recommendations, which in the opinion of the Committee, 
should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of 
the Report. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on th e 
23rd   March, 2021 
  
  Partap Singh Bajwa 
 Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
  
  
New Delhi 
24th March , 2021 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
(ii)  

Report 
on 
The Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Rules, 2020 
  
Introduction 
India has, in  the recent past, witnessed a series of financial frauds in the 
form of ponzi schemes, chit fund scams and other such unregulated deposit 
schemes which have robbed the people of their hard -earned savings. 
Companies/institutions/individuals running such sch emes exploit the existing 
regulatory gaps and lack of strict administrative and legislative measures to 
dupe a large number of people. The most affected victims of these schemes 
have been the poor, gullible and financially illiterate people who fall prey t o 
such schemes easily. In 2016, the then Finance Minister had proposed to bring 
in a comprehensive Central legislation during his Union Budget speech to deal 
with the menace of such schemes. Subsequently, 'the Banning of Unregulated 
Deposit Scheme Ordinanc e, 2019’ was promulgated on 21st February, 2019 in 
order to deter the operators from running such illicit deposit schemes and to ban 
them. The Ordinance was then replaced by ‘the Banning of Unregulated Deposit 
Schemes Act, 2019’  (Annexure I), which received the assent of the President 
on the 31st July, 2019. The Act aims to protect investors/innocent people from 
fraudulent investment schemes. The Act covers existing gaps in legislation that 
had been exploited by various parties to siphon off large amount of money from 
small and innocent investors. Section 37 of the Act provides for Rules to be 
made by the Central Government for carrying out the provisions of the Act. In 
exercise of the powers conferred by Section 37 of the Act, the Central 
Government notifie d the  Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Rules, 
2020, (Annexure I I) which were published in the Gazette of India on the 
12th February, 2020. 
  
2.       The main objectives of the Rules are: - 
i. The information and other particulars to be taken into consideration 
before issuance of an order of provisional attachment, and the manner of 
attachment, under sub-section (3) of section 7; 
ii. The information to be shared with the Central Database under sub-section 
(2) of section 9; 
iii. The form, manner and the time within which, the intimation shall be 
given to the Central database under sub-section (1) of section 10; 

iv. The particulars contained in the application to be filed by the Competent 
Authority before the Designated Court for making the provisional 
attachment absolute under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
v. The procedure to be adopted by the Designated Court before issuing an 
order under sub-section (3) of section 15; 
vi. Rules under sub-section (1) of section 31 regarding the authorization for 
search and seizure; and 
vii. The manner of publication of retraction of advertisement under section 33 
of the Act. 
  
3.       Keeping in view the significance of the Rules in fighting the menace of 
illicit deposit schemes in the country, which have become a tool to loot hard 
earned mo ney of people,  especially the poor and gullible, these rules were 
taken up for detailed examination by the Committee.   A detailed questionnaire 
on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) for their comments/c larifications on the 11 th August, 2020. 
The Ministry furnished their comments/clarifications thereto on the 17th August, 
2020 . The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on the 
19th August, 2020 with the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Depart ment of 
Financial Services) along with other senior Officials from the Ministry, Minutes 
of which have been attached herewith.   Thereafter, the Ministry had on the 
31st August, 2020 sent detailed replies to queries/issues raised by Members 
during the said meeting of the Committee. A brief summary of the points raised 
by the Committee and the comments of the Ministry are elaborated in  the 
succeeding paragraphs along with the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 4.       At the outset the Committee  enquired about the reasons that led the 
Central Government to frame the Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes 
Rules, 2020. The Secretary  informed the Committee that, in the recent past, 
there were rising instances of people in various parts of the Countr y being 
defrauded by illicit deposit schemes  whereby the worst victims were the poor 
and financially illiterate, who had fallen victims to such lucrative inducements. 
He stated that many State Governments had their own piece of legislation on the 
subject in the past; but these were inadequate to address various issues and thus 
the Central Government enacted a comprehensive Central legislation i.e., the 
Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019 in order to make the 
unregulated deposit schemes illegal  ab initio , before the schemes could even 
take money and dupe people. Subsequently, the  Banning of Unregulated 
Deposit Schemes Rules, 2020 were framed and notified by the Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) on the12 th February, 2020 in exercise of the powers 

conferred by Section 37 of the Act. He further informed that the Act entrusts the 
primary responsibility of implementing the provisions of the legislation to the 
State Governments and the Rules further enabled the State Governments to do 
so effectively. He stated that the State Governments are required by the Act to 
appoint Competent Authorities for carrying out provisions of the Act, and to 
designate Courts to try offences under the Act and oversee repayment to 
depositors.   
5.       The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and 
observes that the Ministry’s objective of coming up with a special and 
comprehensive law to check illicit deposit schemes from duping people of 
their hard earned savings was long overdue  and is, therefore, a laudable 
step in the right direction. The Committee raised few concerns regarding 
the law impacting legitimate business transactions that arise in the normal 
course, which could be construed as illicit deposits under this  Act. The 
Ministry clarified that such deposits done in the normal course of 
business are exempted under the Act.   The Committee, however, felt that 
appropriate provisions must be provided in the Rules to allay the fears of 
those indulging in regulated and legitimate deposit schemes. The Act or the 
Rules may clearly provide for deposits that constitute legitimate business 
transactions and thus fall within deposits taken in “normal course of 
business” and the ones that will fall within the ambit of unregulated deposit 
schemes, and  therefore attract the provisions of this Act. The Committee 
further recommends that since the State Governments are important 
players in the execution of the Act, their experience and problems/issues 
faced by them in implementation of the Rules should be sought from time 
to time in order to strengthen the Act and the rules made thereunder. 
  
6.     The Committee then took up Rule 2 (d), which talks about ‘Competent 
Authority’. Rule 2 (d) states that  ―Competent Authority means an authority 
appointed by the appropriate Government under Section 7 of the Act. The 
Committee enquired whether such Competent Authority has been created and 
notified by the appropriate Government. The Ministry informed the Committee 
that “appropriate Government” has been defined in Section 2 (1) of the principal 
Act as the respective State / Union Territory (UT) Government and only in 
cases of UTs without legislature, the Central Government step in as the 
“Appropriate Government”. Hence, the Ministry submitte d that the Competent 
Authority has to be appointed by the respective State/UT Governments, in terms 
of Section 7 of the Act. The Ministry informed that to this end, the Department 
of Financial Services (DFS) has already written,  vide letters dated 28.03.20 19, 
25.08.2019 and 19.02.2020, to all the State/UT Governments to take necessary 
administrative action to appoint their respective Competent Authorities. It 
further informed that for UTs without legislature, whose administration comes 
under the domain of t he Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), DFS has 

written,vide letter dated 19.02.2020, to MHA to appoint the respective 
Competent Authorities. As per available information with the Ministry, the 
State Governments of Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur and Madhya Prade sh 
have notified their respective Competent Authorities. The Secretary, however, 
assured the Committee that the Ministry would continue to follow it up with the 
State Governments for full and complete implementation of the Rules. 
  
7.     The Committee not es with dismay, the fact that majority of the 
State/UT Governments have so far shown a lax and nonchalant attitude in 
the implementation of such crucial legislation. The tardy pace of 
implementation is disheartening. Competent Authority has a very 
significant and indispensable role in the implementation of Act, whose 
main functions include attachment of properties/assets of operators of 
illegal schemes, and subsequent realization of assets for repayment to 
depositors. The Committee recommends that the DFS s hould aggressively 
pursue the matter with the State/UT Governments and also  ask the 
Secretary, DFS to request the Union Minister of Finance, if necessary,   to 
use her good offices to impress upon the State/UT Governments their 
responsibilities under the Ac t and to notify their respective Competent 
Authorities as soon as possible. The Committee feels that in case an Act of 
Parliament confers a certain obligation or responsibility on the State 
Governments to implement the Act or requires them to frame subordi nate 
legislation to carry out the provisions of the Act, then the State 
Governments should adhere to the obligation or responsibility conferred on 
them so that the legislation may be implemented in full letter and spirit. 
However, the Committee notes that such obligations/responsibilities are not 
met in time. This delay in taking action on the part of State Governments 
sometimes ends up defeating the main purpose of the legislation enacted by 
the Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Min istry 
should submit a proposal to the Government  of India/Cabinet Secretariat 
for creating a Central mechanism/agency, to oversee the implementation of 
Central Acts by the State/UT Governments and make them accountable 
and answerable for any delay on their part in implementing or giving effect 
to Acts of Parliament, including framing of Subordinate Legislation 
thereunder.   
8.     The Committee also enquired about the qualifications of ‘Competent 
Authority’ to be appointed by the respective State/UT Governm ents. Section 
7(1) of the principal Act, states that the appropriate Government shall, by 
notification, appoint one or more officers not below the rank of Secretary to that 
Government, as the Competent Authority for the purposes of this Act. Further 
Section 7(2) states that the appropriate Government may, by notification, 
appoint such other officer or officers as it thinks fit, to assist the Competent 

Authority in discharging its functions under this Act. The Committee observed 
that given the technical natu re of the subject dealt by the Act and the Rules 
made thereunder, the Competent Authority should ideally possess some 
specialized domain knowledge on the subject. The Committee cited the example 
of the Railways Claims Tribunal in which there is one Judge a nd one Railway 
Officer, who is expert in technical knowledge in awarding the claims, and 
similarly, in the Juvenile Justice Board, there is one Judge and one 
psychologist.  The Secretary informed the Committee that the selection of a 
Competent Authority ha s been left to the wisdom of the State Government 
under the Act. He further stated that it would be up to them to decide who 
actually the Competent Authority is, and that the Central Government has  not 
really tried to tie the State Governments down by mand ating that they have to 
create a specialized body for that.  
9.     The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that it has not offered sufficient justification or rationale for not mandating 
an expert to be appointed as Competent Aut hority.  The Committee 
strongly feels that one has to have a proper understanding of the deposits, 
financial schemes, and must be able to recognize the money trail to be able 
to effectively discharge the role of a Competent Authority under the Act.   
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Act or the Rules may be 
suitably amended to incorporate provision providing for expertise, 
experience and domain knowledge in dealing with financial frauds/crimes, 
in order to be eligible for appointment as Competent Authority. 
  
10.       The Committee then took up Rule 2(e), which talks about Designated 
Courts to be constituted by the appropriate Government under Section 8 of the 
Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019.  The Committee enquired 
about the status of constitution of the Designated Courts to be constituted by the 
appropriate Government and the limit of their jurisdiction. The Ministry 
informed the Committee that Designated Courts have to be notified by the 
respective State/UT Governments, in terms  of Section 8 of the Act. This has to 
be done with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the respective High Court. 
He stated that DFS has already written to all the State/UT 
Governments, videLetters dated 28.03.2019, 25.08.2019 and 19.02.2020, to take 
necessary administrative action to notify their respective Designated Courts. For 
UTs without legislature, whose administration comes  within the domain of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), DFS has written to MHA,  vide letter dated 
19.02.2020, to notify the respective Designated Courts. The Ministry further 
informed that as per available information with DFS, the State Government of 
Karnataka has notified its Designated Courts and Madhya Pradesh has written 
to its Law Department for the consent of the Chi ef Justice of Madhya Pradesh 
High Court. DFS has sent a reminder request,  vide  letter dated 14.08.2020, to 

all the other States. The Committee also enquired that in cases where the crimes 
encompass more than one State, what will be the jurisdiction of the  Courts and 
how will disputes about jurisdiction be settled. The Committee enquired 
whether there can be a provision for a National level body to investigate and 
resolve the matter. The Secretary informed the Committee that under Section 30 
of the Act Cent ral Government can transfer the investigation of offences under 
the Act to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) under Section 5 of the 
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.  He informed that the Competent 
Authority has been empowered to refer t he matter to the Central Government 
for investigation by CBI wherever he/ she has reason to believe that the offence 
is related to a scheme in which the depositors/ deposit takers/ properties 
involved are located in more than one State or UT and the total value involved 
can affect the public interest. Moreover, in  cases of  multi-State schemes, the 
Supreme Court has also been empowered, under Section 20 of the Act, to 
transfer cases from one Designated Court to another. 
  
11.       The Committee expresses it s concern and displeasure over the fact 
that majority of the State/UT Governments have been so casual about 
implementation of such crucial legislation having a far reaching effect on 
public interest. The tardy pace of implementation is disheartening. The 
Committee recommends that DFS should pursue the matter with the 
State/UT Governments and nudge the concerned State/UT Governments to 
expedite the notification of Designated Courts and their jurisdiction under 
the Act. Further, the Committee observes that th ough there is a provision 
for referring cases to the CBI, however, referring such cases to CBI are not 
as easy in reality, as it sounds on paper. There may be cases in which the 
Competent Authority, which functions under the State Government, might 
not want to refer the case to the CBI for various political or administrative 
reasons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be a 
National level body/agency, which can investigate and follow up such 
financial frauds independently without any pres sure from the Central or 
State Governments. The composition and terms & conditions of service of 
officials manning such a body may be framed in such a way that they are 
insulated from any political or administrative pressures and they may 
carry out their mandate without any fear or favour.   
  
12.       The Committee then took up Rule 6, regarding the setting up of a 
Central Database on Deposit takers in India. Rule 6(1) states that the authority 
may require any Regulator or the Competent Authority or any o ther entity or 
person to submit to it, any information in its possession, relating to deposit 
takers in India. The Committee enquired whether the aforesaid information is 

being furnished by the concerned authorities and also about the penalties in case 
of non-compliance of this provision. The Ministry informed the Committee that 
a Central Database has to be set up by the Central Government. It further 
informed that Section 9 (1) of the Act provides that the Central Government 
may designate an authority, whe ther existing or to be constituted, which shall 
create, maintain and operate an online database for information on deposit 
takers operating in India. It further informed that the proposal whether to 
designate an existing authority as the Central Database (to avoid any duplication 
and leverage the existing information databases) or to constitute a new entity for 
the purpose, is under consideration of the Ministry and DFS has already 
written, vide l etter dated 07.08.2020, to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), t o 
elicit their views in this context. The Committee was also informed that the non-
compliance of this provision is punishable with fine up to Rs. 5 Lakhs, as 
provided in Section 26 of the Act. 
13.       The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that the creation of Central database of deposit takers under the Rules is of 
utmost importance and essential for the early detection of unregulated 
deposit schemes.  Given its significance, the Committee recommends that 
this provision should be effectively implemented without further delay. The 
Committee further recommends that DFS and the RBI should expedite the 
creation of such database and ensure that all deposit takers duly furnish 
the required information to facilitate the differentiation of genuine deposit 
schemes from the fraudulent ones. The Committee also recommends that 
once the Central Database is set up, the designated authority shall 
operationalize a portal accessible to the public, containing information 
relating to deposit takers without any further delay. 
  
14.     The Committee  observed that in many of the cases of illicit deposit 
scheme frauds that have come to light , the public is lured to invest in such 
schemes by   using some celebrities, especially actors, actresses, sports s tars,  
who endorse/promote such schemes and help them in attracting investments. 
The Committee enquired about what action can be taken against people who 
support / promote illegal schemes. The Secretary informed the Committee 
that Section 5 of the Act prov ides that no person shall induce another person to 
invest in, or become a member or participant of any Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme and the punishment prescribed for this under Section 23 is 
imprisonment from 1 to 5 years and a fine up to Rs. 10 lakhs. He in formed the 
Committee that these provisions have been kept in the Bill to specifically deter 
persons, including celebrities and brand ambassadors, from defrauding people 
by promoting such schemes, because otherwise they would also be liable for 
imprisonment and fine. 

15.     The Committee places its appreciation on record for incorporating 
such a salutary and much needed provision in the law. The Committee feels 
these days, celebrities have often become the go -to persons for various 
companies when it comes t o advertising and promoting their 
products/services. Celebrity endorsers play a crucial role in increasing 
awareness and visibility of a particular product/service  and thereby 
influencing customer choices in deciding on that particular product/service. 
Thus it goes without saying that customer confidence in celebrities 
subconsciously makes them select and eventually purchase the said 
products and services endorsed. Therefore, it was important to have a 
provision in law for such celebrities to ensure that t he claims made in their 
endorsements are not false, half -truth, misleading or unsubstantiated  in 
order to protect and safeguard the interests of public at large. The 
Committee though feels that since these celebrities with “deep pockets” 
charge huge sums o f money, often in lakhs and crores, in lieu of their 
endorsements, the fine under this Section needs to be imposed heavily so as 
to serve as a credible deterrence. The terms of endorsement contract and 
the nature and extent of the fraud in scheme may also be taken as relevant 
considerations while deciding on the exact amount of the fine to be 
imposed. Further, the Committee recommends that the concerned 
Celebrity may also be asked to come forth and publish a 
clarification/apology for endorsing any fraudulent scheme which has duped 
people. This provision will also ensure greater scrutiny and sense of 
responsibility on the part of celebrities while agreeing to endorse some 
product or service.  
   
16.       The Committee then took up Rule 11, regarding retraction of 
advertisement by owner of Print or other publications, who had previously 
published any offer, promotion or inducement of Unregulated Deposit Schemes. 
Rule 11 (1) states that the appropriate Government shall direct the owner of any 
newspaper or other publication of any nature, either in print or in electronic 
form, to publish a full and fair retraction, unequivocally withdrawing any offer, 
promotion or inducement made earlier in any adver tisement, statement or 
information to any person to become a member of any Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme. The Committee enquired whether any newspapers or publications have 
been asked to publish such retraction and if there is any penalty imposed on 
them in case they fail to publish a full and fair retraction. The Ministry informed 
the Committee that the specific details of directions issued in individual 
instances will be available with the respective Competent Authorities / State 
Governments. It further info rmed that the principal Act does not prescribe 
imprisonment / penalty on the newspapers for non -compliance, however, it is 
stated that no newspapers / publications will willfully ignore the directions of 

the Government which are provided by law, since such  willful disobedience 
may result in serious legal action being taken against them. The Ministry has 
further informed that  the damage to the reputation of newspapers/publications 
from having to publish retractions and the cost of using space for retraction will  
also serve as a great deterrent for advertising dubious schemes. 
  
17.     The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that any newspaper or other publication of any nature, either in print or 
electronic form, has the potential to provide wide dissemination, credence 
and publicity to a deposit scheme and hence it becomes crucial that only 
such schemes are advertised which are  prima facie   genuine and pass the 
test of due diligence. Thus, the Committee recommends that the Act/Rule s 
should be amended to provide appropriate penalty, civil if not criminal, to 
deter the newspapers and other publications from providing any form of 
endorsement to fraudulent deposit schemes. 
  
 18.    The Committee observed that the best and most effectiv e means to 
counter menaces like fraudulent and unsustainable unregulated deposit schemes 
is education and awareness about its illegality and the difficulty in regulating 
such deposit schemes. The Committee, therefore, enquired why there is no 
provision for  depositors’ education in the principal Act or rules made 
thereunder. The Ministry informed the Committee that depositors’ education 
and public awareness is an ongoing initiative and no legislative provision in the 
Act is required for the same. It further informed that RBI already has an online 
portal (https://sachet.rbi.org.in) through which the public is cautioned against 
fraudulent schemes/ entities and the public can also obtain information 
regarding entities that are allowed to accept deposits, lodge c omplaints and also 
share information regarding illegal acceptance of deposits by unscrupulous 
entities. It further informed that SEBI also has a dedicated investor website 
http://investor.sebi.gov.in, wherein relevant education/ awareness material and 
other useful information have been placed including do’s and don’ts of 
investing, for the benefit of the investors. 
  
19.     The Committee observes that  though there are provisions for 
educating the depositors, the awareness about them is arguably still not up 
to the desired level. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and 
institutions like RBI and SEBI should effectively publicize such provisions 
through various modes including advertisements in print and electronic 
media if necessary. Further the Committee feels that though no legislative 
provision on depositors' education scheme is mandatory   under the Act, it 

is highly desirable and, therefore, such a scheme can be incorporated in the 
Rules, which will go a long way in educating the public and protecting them 
from such illicit   deposit schemes. Further, the Committee recommends 
that the respective State Governments or Competent Authorities under the  
Act, should consider incorporating   an Unregulated Deposits Schemes 
Informants’ Award Scheme in the Rules itself, so as to encourage people to 
come forward and intimate the authorities about any unregulated deposit 
schemes being run to dupe innocent peopl e especially in the rural areas of 
the Country. The Committee further recommends that the RBI may be 
given a more pro active and substantial role under the Act in terms of 
regulation and supervision of unregulated deposits schemes as it has the 
requisite domain expertise, knowledge and resources to act as an effective 
check against such fraudulent schemes and hence can nip them in the bud 
itself. Further, the  Committee observes that given the  modus operandi  of 
such fraudulent schemes,  a complaint from the d epositor will come only 
when he has been defaulted in payment  and the operators of such schemes 
usually default after two or three years, when they have collected enough 
money in deposits. Thus, the Committee recommends that there should be 
provisions in the Act/Rules similar to that in the Co-operative Societies Act, 
1912 where the law requires all co -operative societies to register before 
starting operations. Similarly, all deposit schemes whether regulated or 
unregulated should only be allowed to functi on after complying with the 
mandatory registration and preliminary checks in place. 
20.     The Committee observed that the crux of this legislation, and the rules 
made thereunder, is to protect the unsuspecting millions of Indians, who could 
fall prey to the fraudulent deposit schemes.  It observed that the two lines in this 
legislation which are most important pertain to Section 5, which says that no 
promise that is false, deceptive or misleading should be made.   The Committee 
observed that it does not fi nd anything in the rules, which actually relate to the 
vital element of what is considered as false, what is deceptive and what is 
misleading. The Committee observed that there should be some kind of 
guidelines which clearly debar certain kinds of promises  being made, because 
lots of people get duped with the promise that their money would be doubled in 
a specified time. The Committee requested the Ministry to dwell into this issue 
and consider for providing guidelines in the Rules itself for guiding the St ate 
Governments. The Secretary informed the Committee that the  first Schedule in 
the Act clearly stipulates which are the regulated deposit schemes. He informed 
that anything which is beyond the ambit of the prescribed regulators and where 
somebody is tryi ng to offer all sorts of baits, would amount to an unregulated 
scheme and, therefore, immediately get covered under this Act.   He further 
assured the Committee that the suggestions made by the Hon’ble Members will 
be duly examined by the Ministry. He also informed that the DFS would consult 
other Departments concerned, particularly the Ministry of Law & Justice and 

would make whatever changes that  are required in the rules to make it more 
explicit.  He further informed the Committee that the Ministry would also 
circulate a set of guidelines or model rules for helping the State Governments. 
21.     The Committee is of the considered view that most of the deposit 
schemes that have duped depositors are those which have made 
unsustainable promises. Hence, the Mi nistry should lay down clear 
guidelines on what constitutes a deceptive scheme and there should be no 
ambiguity on it. This would enable   people to discern whether a scheme is 
 illicit or genuine. There are investment frauds involving unregulated 
deposits, wherein one party promises high returns on an investment with 
little to no risk at all. The early investors in such schemes are repaid by the 
scheme acquiring new investors, and so on. Once there are no longer 
enough people to secure a new round of invest ments the scheme collapses 
and the investors lose their money.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that more efforts should be made to bring more awareness 
and identify and stop these kinds of schemes  ab initio  i.e., from the very 
beginning. The Committe e feels that this is very crucial that the 
antecedents of the deposit taker or the authenticity of the deposit schemes 
are first established before the investors start depositing their hard -earned 
money into it. The Committee further recommends that the Mi nistry may 
provide some kind of guidelines, based on experience, including examples 
of promises have been found to be false, misleading and deceptive, so that a 
State Government before giving any kind of a deposit the sanctity of being 
a regulated deposit,  does take all this into account.  The Committee feels 
that this would go a long way in protecting the gullible and 
illiterate/financially illiterate investors. 
  
22.     The Committee then enquired whether any case of unregulated deposit 
schemes have been reported, after these rules have come into force and what is 
the status of these cases.  The Secretary stated that there are a large number of 
States that are yet to implement the complete provisions of the Rules. He stated 
that the implementation of Act i s still at the infancy stage.   However, he stated 
that the Department of Financial Services will henceforth try to nudge the State 
Governments to quickly implement the provisions of the Act. The Committee 
enquired whether the Government of India can issue directions to the States to 
implement the Act/Rules without further delay and within a specific time -frame 
so that a law made by the Central Government does not remain only on papers 
in the States. T he Secretary assured the Committee that the Ministry woul d 
write to the Chief Secretaries and that they will also request the Hon’ble 
Minister of Finance to write to the Chief Ministers of the States. 

23.     In conclusion, the Committee notes with concern the tardy 
implementation of the Rules and observes that steps should be taken to 
make the implementation of Rules more effective. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should strengthen its enforcement 
mechanisms so as to ensure that the objectives of the rules, which have a 
wide bearing on pub lic interest, are achieved in  letter and spirit. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should constitute a 
Committee/Group of Experts the Union Finance Ministry, headed by some 
senior bureaucrat or some renowned expert/economist, having sound 
knowledge and background in financial matters, to monitor the 
implementation of these Rules and report or make recommendations about 
the problems faced in implementation, if any. 
24.      The Committee is also of the considered view that this menace of 
duping people through fraudulent schemes is widely prevalent in certain 
States, for instance, the States of West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha 
and Jharkhand, where it has observed a pattern repeating itself. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Mini stry should pay special 
attention to such states to ensure that the provisions of the Act/Rules are 
implemented fully and effectively in such states in order to achieve the 
objectives of the Act. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry along wit h the RBI may consider introducing special financial 
literacy and awareness drives/workshops to educate the common people 
about  such fraudulent schemes so that they don’t fall prey to them in the 
first place. 
  
25.     The Committee is hopeful that the Mi nistry would carry out the 
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously under intimation to it. 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
1. The Committee notes the replies furnished by the Ministry and 
observes that the Ministry’s objective of coming up with a special 
and comprehensive law to check illicit deposit schemes from duping 
people of their hard earned savings was long overdue   and is, 
therefore, a laudable step in the right direction. The Committee 
raised few concerns regarding the law impacting legitimate business 
transactions that arise in the normal course, which could be 
construed as illicit deposits under this Act. The Ministry clarified 
that such deposits done in the normal course of business  are 
exempted under the Act.   The Co mmittee, however, felt that 
appropriate provisions must be provided in the Rules to allay the 
fears of those indulging in regulated and legitimate deposit schemes. 
The Act or the Rules may clearly provide for deposits that constitute 
legitimate business transactions and thus fall within deposits taken in 
“normal course of business” and the ones that will fall within the 
ambit of unregulated deposit schemes, and  therefore attract the 
provisions of this Act. The Committee further recommends that since 
the State Governments are important players in the execution of the 
Act, their experience and problems/issues faced by them in 
implementation of the Rules should be sought from time to time in 
order to strengthen the Act and the rules made thereunder. 
 
2. The Commit tee notes with dismay, the fact that majority of the 
State/UT Governments have so far shown a lax and nonchalant 
attitude in the implementation of such crucial legislation. The tardy 
pace of implementation is disheartening. Competent Authority has a 
very significant and indispensable role in the implementation of Act, 
whose main functions include attachment of properties/assets of 
operators of illegal schemes, and subsequent realization of assets for 
repayment to depositors. The Committee recommends that th e DFS 
should aggressively pursue the matter with the State/UT 
Governments and also  ask the Secretary, DFS to request the Union 
Minister of Finance, if necessary,   to use her good offices to impress 
upon the State/UT Governments their responsibilities under  the Act 
and to notify their respective Competent Authorities as soon as 
possible. The Committee feels that in case an Act of Parliament 
confers a certain obligation or responsibility on the State 
Governments to implement the Act or requires them to frame 
subordinate legislation to carry out the provisions of the Act, then the 
State Governments should adhere to the obligation or responsibility 

conferred on them so that the legislation may be implemented in full 
letter and spirit. However, the Committee note s that such 
obligations/responsibilities are not met in time. This delay in taking 
action on the part of State Governments sometimes ends up defeating 
the main purpose of the legislation enacted by the Parliament. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should submit a 
proposal to the Government of India/Cabinet Secretariat for creating 
a Central mechanism/agency, to oversee the implementation of 
Central Acts by the State/UT Governments and make them 
accountable and answerable for any delay o n their part in 
implementing or giving effect to Acts of Parliament, including 
framing of Subordinate Legislation thereunder. 
 
3. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that it has not offered sufficient justification or rationale f or not 
mandating an expert to be appointed as Competent Authority.   The 
Committee strongly feels that one has to have a proper 
understanding of the deposits, financial schemes, and must be able to 
recognize the money trail to be able to effectively dischar ge the role 
of a Competent Authority under the Act.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Act or the Rules may be suitably amended to 
incorporate provision providing for expertise, experience and 
domain knowledge in dealing with financial frauds/c rimes, in order 
to be eligible for appointment as Competent Authority. 
 
4. The Committee expresses its concern and displeasure over the fact 
that majority of the State/UT Governments have been so casual 
about implementation of such crucial legislation having a far 
reaching effect on public interest. The tardy pace of implementation 
is disheartening. The Committee recommends that DFS should 
pursue the matter with the State/UT Governments and nudge the 
concerned State/UT Governments to expedite the notification of 
Designated Courts and their jurisdiction under the Act. Further, the 
Committee observes that though there is a provision for referring 
cases to the CBI, however, referring such cases to CBI are not as easy 
in reality, as it sounds on paper. There may be  cases in which the 
Competent Authority, which functions under the State Government, 
might not want to refer the case to the CBI for various political or 
administrative reasons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
there should be a National level bod y/agency, which can investigate 
and follow up such financial frauds independently without any 

pressure from the Central or State Governments. The composition 
and terms & conditions of service of officials manning such a body 
may be framed in such a way tha t they are insulated from any 
political or administrative pressures and they may carry out their 
mandate without any fear or favour.   
 
5. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that the creation of Central database of deposit taker s under the 
Rules is of utmost importance and essential for the early detection of 
unregulated deposit schemes.  Given its significance, the Committee 
recommends that this provision should be effectively implemented 
without further delay. The Committee further recommends that DFS 
and the RBI should expedite the creation of such database and 
ensure that all deposit takers duly furnish the required information 
to facilitate the differentiation of genuine deposit schemes from the 
fraudulent ones. The Committee also recommends that once the 
Central Database is set up, the designated authority shall 
operationalize a portal accessible to the public, containing 
information relating to deposit takers without any further delay. 
 
 
6. The Committee places its appreciation on record for incorporating 
such a salutary and much needed provision in the law. The 
Committee feels these days, celebrities have often become the go -to 
persons for various companies when it comes to advertising and 
promoting their products/services. Celebrity endorsers play a crucial 
role in increasing awareness and visibility of a particular 
product/service  and thereby influencing customer choices in 
deciding on that particular product/service. Thus it goes without 
saying that customer confidence in celebrities subconsciously makes 
them select and eventually purchase the said products and services 
endorsed. Therefore, it was important to have a provision in law for 
such celebrities to ensure that the claims made in t heir 
endorsements are not false, half -truth, misleading or 
unsubstantiated in order to protect and safeguard the interests of 
public at large. The Committee though feels that since these 
celebrities with “deep pockets” charge huge sums of money, often in 
lakhs and crores, in lieu of their endorsements, the fine under this 
Section needs to be imposed heavily so as to serve as a credible 
deterrence. The terms of endorsement contract and the nature and 

extent of the fraud in scheme may also be taken as relevan t 
considerations while deciding on the exact amount of the fine to be 
imposed. Further, the Committee recommends that the concerned 
Celebrity may also be asked to come forth and publish a 
clarification/apology for endorsing any fraudulent scheme which has 
duped people. This provision will also ensure greater scrutiny and 
sense of responsibility on the part of celebrities while agreeing to 
endorse some product or service.  
 
7. The Committee observes from the replies furnished by the Ministry 
that any newspaper or other publication of any nature, either in 
print or electronic form, has the potential to provide wide 
dissemination, credence and publicity to a deposit scheme and hence 
it becomes crucial that only such schemes are advertised which 
are prima facie  genuine and pass the test of due diligence. Thus, the 
Committee recommends that the Act/Rules should be amended to 
provide appropriate penalty, civil if not criminal, to deter the 
newspapers and other publications from providing any form of 
endorsement to fraudulent deposit schemes. 
8. The Committee observes that  though there are provisions for 
educating the depositors, the awareness about them is arguably still 
not up to the desired level. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry and institutions like RBI and SEBI should effectively 
publicize such provisions thr ough various modes including 
advertisements in print and electronic media if necessary. Further 
the Committee feels that though no legislative provision on 
depositors' education scheme is mandatory   under the Act, it is 
highly desirable and, therefore, such a scheme can be incorporated in 
the Rules, which will go a long way in educating the public and 
protecting them from such illicit   deposit schemes. Further, the 
Committee recommends that the respective State Governments or 
Competent Authorities under the Act, should consider incorporating  
an Unregulated Deposits Schemes Informants’ Award Scheme in the 
Rules itself, so as to encourage people to come forward and intimate 
the authorities about any unregulated deposit schemes being run to 
dupe innocent peopl e especially in the rural areas of the Country. 
The Committee further recommends that the RBI may be given a 
more pro active and substantial role under the Act in terms of 
regulation and supervision of unregulated deposits schemes as it has 
the requisite domain expertise, knowledge and resources to act as an 
effective check against such fraudulent schemes and hence can nip 
them in the bud itself. Further, the  Committee observes that given 

the modus operandi of such fraudulent schemes, a complaint from the 
depositor will come only when he has been defaulted in payment  and 
the operators of such schemes usually default after two or three 
years, when they have collected enough money in deposits. Thus, the 
Committee recommends that there should be provisions in the 
Act/Rules similar to that in the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 
where the law requires all co -operative societies to register before 
starting operations. Similarly, all deposit schemes whether regulated 
or unregulated should only be allowed to functi on after complying 
with the mandatory registration and preliminary checks in place. 
 
9. The Committee is of the considered view that most of the deposit 
schemes that have duped depositors are those which have made 
unsustainable promises. Hence, the Ministry s hould lay down clear 
guidelines on what constitutes a deceptive scheme and there should 
be no ambiguity on it. This would enable  people to discern whether a 
scheme is  illicit or genuine. There are investment frauds involving 
unregulated deposits, wherein one party promises high returns on an 
investment with little to no risk at all. The early investors in such 
schemes are repaid by the scheme acquiring new investors, and so on. 
Once there are no longer enough people to secure a new round of 
investments the scheme collapses and the investors lose their money.   
The Committee, therefore, recommends that more efforts should be 
made to bring more awareness and identify and stop these kinds of 
schemes ab initio i.e., from the very beginning. The Committee feels 
that this is very crucial that the antecedents of the deposit taker or 
the authenticity of the deposit schemes are first established before the 
investors start depositing their hard -earned money into it. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry m ay provide some 
kind of guidelines, based on experience, including examples of 
promises have been found to be false, misleading and deceptive, so 
that a State Government before giving any kind of a deposit the 
sanctity of being a regulated deposit, does ta ke all this into account. 
 The Committee feels that this would go a long way in protecting the 
gullible and illiterate/financially illiterate investors. 
 
10. In conclusion, the Committee notes with concern the tardy 
implementation of the Rules and observes tha t steps should be taken 
to make the implementation of Rules more effective. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should strengthen its 

enforcement mechanisms so as to ensure that the objectives of the 
rules, which have a wide bearing on p ublic interest, are achieved 
in letter and spirit. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry should constitute a Committee/Group of Experts the Union 
Finance Ministry, headed by some senior bureaucrat or some 
renowned expert/economist, having soun d knowledge and 
background in financial matters, to monitor the implementation of 
these Rules and report or make recommendations about the 
problems faced in implementation, if any. 
 
11. The Committee is also of the considered view that this menace of 
duping pe ople through fraudulent schemes is widely prevalent in 
certain States, for instance, the States of West Bengal, Andhra 
Pradesh, Odisha and Jharkhand, where it has observed a pattern 
repeating itself. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should pay special attention to such states to ensure that the 
provisions of the Act/Rules are implemented fully and effectively in 
such states in order to achieve the objectives of the Act. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry along with the RBI 
may consider introducing special financial literacy and awareness 
drives/workshops to educate the common people about  such 
fraudulent schemes so that they don’t fall prey to them in the first 
place. 
 
12. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry would ca rry out the 
recommendations of the Committee expeditiously under intimation 
to it. 
 
 
 
*** 
 
   

THE BANNING OF UNREGULATED DEPOSIT
SCHEMES ACT, 2019
NO. 21 OF  2019
[31st  July, 2019.]
An Act to provide for a comprehensive mechanism to ban the unregulated deposit
schemes, other than deposits taken in the ordinary course of  business, and
to protect the interest of depositors and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of February, 2019.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ —(,u)04@0007@2003 —19
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ   40] ubZ fnYyh] cq/kokj] tqykbZ 31] 2019@Jko.k 9] 1941 ¼'kd½
No. 40]  NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JULY 31, 2019/SHRA V ANA 9, 1941 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—19
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 31st July, 2019/Shravana 9, 1941  (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
31st July, 2019, and is hereby published for general information:—

2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “appropriate Government” means in respect of matters relating to,—
(i) the Union territory without legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) the Union territory of Puducherry, the Government of that Union
territory;
(iii) the Union territory of Delhi, the Government of that Union
territory; and
(iv) the State, the State Government;
(2) “company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (20) of
section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(3) “Competent Authority” means an Authority appointed by the appropriate
Government under section 7;
(4) “deposit” means an amount of money received by way of an advance or
loan or in any other form, by any deposit taker with a promise to return whether after
a specified period or otherwise, either in cash or in kind or in the form of a specified
service, with or without any benefit in the form of interest, bonus, profit or in any
other form, but does not include—
(a) amounts received as loan from a scheduled bank or a co-operative
bank or any other banking company as defined in section 5 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949;
(b) amounts received as loan or financial assistance from the Public
Financial Institutions notified by the Central Government in consultation with
the Reserve Bank of India or any non-banking financial company as defined in
clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and is registered
with the Reserve Bank of India or any Regional Financial Institutions or
insurance companies;
(c) amounts received from the appropriate Government, or any amount
received from any other source whose repayment is guaranteed by the
appropriate Government, or any amount received from a statutory authority
constituted under an Act of Parliament or a State Legislature;
(d) amounts received from foreign Governments, foreign or international
banks, multilateral financial institutions, foreign Government owned
development financial institutions, foreign export credit collaborators, foreign
bodies corporate, foreign citizens, foreign authorities or person resident outside
India subject to the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
and the rules and regulations made thereunder;
(e) amounts received by way of contributions towards the capital by
partners of any partnership firm or a limited liability partnership;
(f) amounts received by an individual by way of loan from his relatives or
amounts received by any firm by way of loan from the relatives of any of its
partners;
(g) amounts received as credit by a buyer from a seller on the sale of any
property (whether movable or immovable);
(h) amounts received by an asset re-construction company which is
registered with the Reserve Bank of India under section 3 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002;
18 of 2013.
Definitions.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1934.
42 of 1999.
54 of 2002.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
(i) any deposit made under section 34 or an amount accepted by a political
party under section 29B of the Representation of the People Act, 1951;
(j) any periodic payment made by the members of the self-help groups
operating within such ceilings as may be prescribed by the State Government
or Union territory Government;
(k) any other amount collected for such purpose and within such ceilings
as may be prescribed by the State Government;
(l) an amount received in the course of, or for the purpose of, business
and bearing a genuine connection to such business including—
(i) payment, advance or part payment for the supply or hire of
goods or provision of services and is repayable in the event the goods or
services are not in fact sold, hired or otherwise provided;
(ii) advance received in connection with consideration of an
immovable property under an agreement or arrangement subject to the
condition that such advance is adjusted against such immovable property
as specified in terms of the agreement or arrangement;
(iii) security or dealership deposited for the performance of the
contract for supply of goods or provision of services; or
(iv) an advance under the long-term projects for supply of capital
goods except those specified in item (ii):
Provided that if the amounts received under items (i) to (iv) become
refundable, such amounts shall be deemed to be deposits on the expiry
of fifteen days from the date on which they become due for refund:
Provided further that where the said amounts become refundable,
due to the deposit taker not obtaining necessary permission or approval
under the law for the time being in force, wherever required, to deal in the
goods or properties or services for which money is taken, such amounts
shall be deemed to be deposits.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(i) in respect of a company, the expression “deposit” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it under the Companies
Act, 2013;
(ii) in respect of a non-banking financial company registered
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the expression “deposit”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( bb) of
section 45-I of the said Act;
(iii) the expressions “partner” and “firm” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them under the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932;
(iv) the expression “partner” in respect of a limited liability
partnership shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (q) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008;
(v) the expression “relative” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in the Companies Act, 2013;
(5) “depositor” means any person who makes a deposit under this Act;
(6) “deposit taker” means—
(i) any individual or group of individuals;
43 of 1951.
18 of 2013.
6 of 2009.
9 of 1932.
2 of 1934.
18 of 2013.

4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
(ii) a proprietorship concern;
(iii) a partnership firm (whether registered or not);
(iv) a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008;
(v) a company;
(vi) an association of persons;
(vii) a trust (being a private trust governed under the provisions of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or a public trust, whether registered or not);
(viii) a co-operative society or a multi-State co-operative society; or
(ix) any other arrangement of whatsoever nature, receiving or soliciting
deposits, but does not include—
(i) a Corporation incorporated under an Act of Parliament or a State
Legislature;
(ii) a banking company, a corresponding new bank, the State Bank
of India, a subsidiary bank, a regional rural bank, a co-operative bank or
a multi-State co-operative bank as defined in the Banking Regulation
Act,1949;
(7) “Designated Court” means a Designated Court constituted by the appropriate
Government under section 8;
(8) “insurer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 9) of
section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938;
(9) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(10) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu Undivided Family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a trust;
(v) a partnership firm;
(vi) a limited liability partnership;
(vii) an association of persons;
(viii) a co-operative society registered under any law for the time being
in force relating to co-operative societies; or
(ix) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses;
(11) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made by the Central Government
or, as the case may be, the State Government under this Act;
(12) “property” means any property or assets of every description, whether
corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and includes
deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets,
wherever located;
(13) “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (72) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(14) “Regulated Deposit Scheme” means the Schemes specified under
column (3) of the First Schedule;
6 of 2009.
2 of 1882.
10 of 1949.
4 of 1938.
18 of 2013.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
(15) “Regulator” means the Regulator specified in column (2) of the First
Schedule;
(16) “Schedule” means the Schedule  appended to this Act;
(17) “Unregulated Deposit Scheme” means a Scheme or an arrangement under
which deposits are accepted or solicited by any deposit taker by way of business and
which is not a Regulated Deposit Scheme, as specified under column (3) of the First
Schedule.
CHAPTER II
B
ANNING  OF U NREGULATED  D EPOSIT  S CHEMES
3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act,—
(a) the Unregulated Deposit Schemes shall be banned; and
(b) no deposit taker shall, directly or indirectly, promote, operate, issue any
advertisement soliciting participation or enrolment in or accept deposits in pursuance
of an Unregulated Deposit Scheme.
4. No deposit taker, while accepting deposits pursuant to a Regulated Deposit Scheme,
shall commit any fraudulent default in the repayment or return of deposit on maturity or in
rendering any specified service promised against such deposit.
5. No person by whatever name called shall knowingly make any statement, promise
or forecast which is false, deceptive or misleading in material facts or deliberately conceal
any material facts, to induce another person to invest in, or become a member or participant
of any Unregulated Deposit Scheme.
6. A prize chit or a money circulation scheme banned under the provisions of the Prize
Chits and Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, 1978 shall be deemed to be an
Unregulated Deposit Scheme under this Act.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES
7. (1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more officers
not below the rank of Secretary to that Government, as the Competent Authority for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such other officer or
officers as it thinks fit, to assist the Competent Authority in discharging its functions under
this Act.
(3) Where the Competent Authority or officers appointed under sub-section ( 2), for
the purposes of this section, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded
in writing), on the basis of such information and particulars as may be prescribed, that any
deposit taker is soliciting deposits in contravention of section 3, he may, by an order in
writing, provisionally attach the deposits held by the deposit taker and the money or other
property acquired either in the name of the deposit taker or in the name of any other person
on behalf of the deposit taker from the date of the order, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Competent Authority shall, for the purposes of sub-section ( 3), have the
same powers as vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while
conducting investigation or inquiry in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a reporting
entity and examining him on oath;
5 of 1908.
Banning of
Unregulated
Deposit
Schemes.
43 of 1978.
Fraudulent
default in
Regulated
Deposit
Schemes.
Wrongful
inducement in
relation to
Unregulated
Deposit
Schemes.
Certain
scheme to be
Unregulated
Deposit
Scheme.
Competent
Authority.

6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
(c) compelling the production of records;
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) The Competent Authority shall have power to summon any person whose
attendance he considers necessary whether to give evidence or to produce any records
during the course of any investigation or proceeding under this section.
(6) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend in person or through
authorised agents, as such officer may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon
any subject respecting which they are examined or make statements, and produce such
documents as may be required.
(7) Every proceeding under sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
(8) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, any officer
referred to in sub-section ( 2) may impound and retain in his custody for such period, as
he thinks fit, any records produced before him in any proceedings under this Act:
Provided that the officer or officers referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall not—
(a) impound any records without recording his reasons for so doing; or
(b) retain in his custody any such records for a period exceeding three months,
without obtaining the previous approval of the Competent Authority.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice
of the concerned High Court, by notification, constitute one or more Courts known as
the Designated Courts for such area or areas or such case or cases as may be specified
in such notification, which shall be presided over by a Judge not below the rank of a
District and Sessions Judge or Additional District and Sessions Judge.
(2) No Court other than the Designated Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of
any matter to which the provisions of this Act apply.
(3) When trying an offence under this Act, the Designated Court may also try an
offence, other than an offence under this Act, with which the accused may, under the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial.
CHAPTER IV
I
NFORMATION ON DEPOSIT TAKERS
9. (1) The Central Government may designate an authority, whether existing or to
be constituted, which shall create, maintain and operate an online database for information
on deposit takers operating in India.
(2) The authority designated under sub-section ( 1) may require any Regulator or
the Competent Authority to share such information on deposit takers, as may be
prescribed.
10. (1) Every deposit taker which commences or carries on its business as such on
or after the commencement of this Act shall intimate the authority referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 9 about its business in such form and manner and within such
time, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Competent Authority may, if it has reason to believe that the deposits are
being solicited or accepted pursuant to an Unregulated Deposit Scheme, direct any
deposit taker to furnish such statements, information or particulars, as it considers
necessary, relating to or connected with the deposits received by such deposit taker.
45 of 1860.
Designated
Court.
Information
of business by
deposit taker.
Central
database.
2 of 1974.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that—
(a) the requirement of intimation under sub-section (1) is applicable to deposit
takers accepting or soliciting deposits as defined in clause ( 4) of section 2; and
(b) the requirement of intimation under sub-section ( 1) applies to a company,
if the company accepts the deposits under Chapter V of the Companies Act, 2013.
11. ( 1) The Competent Authority shall share all information received under
section 29 with the Central Bureau of Investigation and with the authority which may be
designated by the Central Government under section 9.
 ( 2) The appropriate Government, any Regulator, income-tax authorities or any
other investigation agency, having any information or documents in respect of the offence
investigated under this Act by the police or the Central Bureau of Investigation, shall
share all such information or documents with the police or the Central Bureau of
Investigation.
(3) Where the principal officer of any banking company, a corresponding new
bank, the State Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a regional rural bank, a co-operative
bank or a multi-State co-operative bank has reason to believe that any client is a deposit
taker and is acting in contravention to the provisions of this Act, he shall forthwith
inform the same to the Competent Authority.
CHAPTER V
R
ESTITUTION TO DEPOSITORS
12. Save as otherwise provided in the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, any amount due to depositors from a deposit taker shall be paid in priority
over all other debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the
appropriate Government or the local authority.
13. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 or the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016, an order of provisional attachment passed by the Competent
Authority, shall have precedence and priority, to the extent of the claims of the depositors,
over any other attachment by any authority competent to attach property for repayment
of any debts, revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the appropriate
Government or the local authority.
(2) Where an order of provisional attachment has been passed by the Competent
Authority—
(a) such attachment shall continue until an order is passed under
sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 5) of section 15 by the Designated Court;
(b) all the attached money or property of the deposit taker and the persons
mentioned therein shall vest in the Competent Authority and shall remain so vested
till further order of the Designated Court.
(3) The Competent Authority shall open an account in a scheduled bank for the
purpose of crediting and dealing with the money realised under this Act, which shall not
be utilised except under the instructions of the Designated Court.
(4) The Competent Authority shall not dispose of or alienate the property or money
attached, except in accordance with the order of the Designated Court under
sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 5) of section 15.
Information
to be shared.
Priority of
depositors'
claim.
Precedence of
attachment.
18 of 2013.
54 of 2002.
31 of 2016.
54 of 2002.
31 of 2016.

8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the Competent Authority
may, if it thinks it expedient, order the immediate sale of perishable items or assets, and the
proceeds of the sale shall be utilised in the same manner as provided for other property.
14. (1) The Competent Authority shall, within a period of thirty days, which may
extend up to sixty days, for reasons to be recorded in writing, from the date of the order of
provisional attachment, file an application with such particulars as may be prescribed,
before the Designated Court for making the provisional attachment absolute, and for
permission to sell the property so attached by public auction or, if necessary, by private
sale.
(2) In case where the money or property has been attached on the permission granted
by a Designated Court in another State or Union territory, the application for confirmation
of such attachment shall be filed in that Court.
15. (1) Upon receipt of an application under section 14, the Designated Court shall
issue notice to—
(a) the deposit taker; and
(b) any person whose property is attached under section 14,
to show cause, within a period of thirty days from the date of issue of notice, as to why the
order of attachment should not be made absolute and the properties so attached be sold.
(2) The Designated Court shall also issue notice to all other persons represented to
it as having or being likely to claim any interest or title in the property, to appear on the same
date as persons referred to in sub-section ( 1) to raise objections, if they so desire, to the
attachment of the property.
(3) The Designated Court shall, after adopting such procedure as may be prescribed,
pass an order—
(a) making the provisional order of attachment absolute; or
(b) varying it by releasing a portion of the property from attachment; or
(c) cancelling the provisional order of attachment,
and in case of an order under clause (a) or clause (b), direct the Competent Authority to sell
the property so attached by public auction or, if necessary, by private sale and realise the
sale proceeds.
(4) The Designated Court shall not, in varying or cancelling the provisional order of
attachment, release any property from attachment, unless it is satisfied that—
(a) the deposit taker or the person referred to in sub-section (1) has interest in
such property; and
 (b) there shall remain an amount or property sufficient for repayment to the
depositors of such deposit taker.
(5) The Designated Court shall pass such order or issue such direction as may be
necessary for the equitable distribution among the depositors of the money attached or
realised out of the sale.
(6) The Designated Court shall endeavour to complete the proceedings under this
section within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of the
application referred to in sub-section (1).
16. (1) Where the Designated Court is satisfied that there is a reasonable cause for
believing that the deposit taker has transferred any property otherwise than in good
faith and not for commensurate consideration, it may, by notice, require any transferee of
such property, whether or not he received the property directly from the said deposit
Confirmation
of attachment
by Designated
Court.
Attachment
of property of
mala fide
transferees.
Application
for
confirmation
of attachment
and sale of
property.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
taker, to appear on a date to be specified in the notice and show cause why so much of
the transferee’s property as is equivalent to the proper value of the property transferred
should not be attached.
(2) Where the said transferee does not appear and show cause on the specified
date or where the Designated Court is satisfied that the transfer of the property to the
said transferee was not a bona fide transfer and not for commensurate consideration, it
shall order the attachment of so much of the said transferee’s property as in its opinion
is equivalent to the proper value of the property transferred.
17. (1) Any deposit taker or a person referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 15, or
transferee referred to in section 16 whose property is about to be attached or has been
provisionally attached under this Act, may, at any time before the confirmation of
attachment, apply to the Designated Court for permission to deposit the fair value of the
property in lieu of attachment.
(2) While allowing the deposit taker or person or transferee referred to in
sub-section ( 1) to make the deposit under sub-section ( 1), the Designated Court may
order such deposit taker or person or transferee to pay any sum towards costs as may be
applicable.
18. (1) The Designated Court shall exercise the following powers, namely:—
(a) power to approve the statement of dues of the deposit taker due from
various debtors;
(b) power to assess the value of the assets of the deposit taker and finalise
the list of the depositors and their respective dues;
(c) power to direct the Competent Authority to take possession of any assets
belonging to or in the control of the deposit taker and to sell, transfer or realise the
attached assets, either by public auction or by private sale as it deems fit depending
upon the nature of assets and credit the sale proceeds thereof to its bank account;
(d) power to approve the necessary expenditure to be incurred by the
Competent Authority for taking possession and realisation of the assets of the
deposit taker;
(e) power to pass an order for full payment to the depositors by the Competent
Authority or an order for proportionate payment to the depositors in the event, the
money so realised is not sufficient to meet the entire deposit liability;
 ( f) power to direct any person, who has made profit or averted loss by
indulging in any transaction or activity in contravention of the provisions of this
Act, to disgorge an amount equivalent to the wrongful gain made or loss averted
by such contravention; and
 (g) power to pass any other order which the Designated Court deems fit for
realisation of assets of the deposit taker and for repayment of the same to the
depositors of such deposit taker or on any other matter or issue incidental thereto.
(2) On the application of any person interested in any property attached and
vested in the Competent Authority under this Act and after giving such Competent
Authority an opportunity of being heard, make such order as the Designated Court
considers just and reasonable for—
(a) providing from such of the property attached and vested in the Competent
Authority as the applicant claims an interest in, such sums as may be reasonably
necessary for the maintenance of the applicant and of his family, and for expenses
connected with the defence of the applicant where criminal proceedings have been
initiated against him in the Designated Court under this Act; or
Payment in
lieu of
attachment.
Powers of
Designated
Court.

10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
(b) safeguarding, so far as may be practicable, the interest of any business
affected by the attachment.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “deposit
taker” includes the directors, promoters, managers or members of said establishment
or any other person whose property or assets have been attached under this Act.
19. Any person including the Competent Authority, if aggrieved by any final order
of the Designated Court under this Chapter, may appeal to the High Court, within a
period of sixty days from the date of such order:
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said
period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from preferring the appeal in time.
Explanation.—The expression “High Court” means the High Court of a State or
Union territory where the Designated Court is situated.
20. (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Supreme Court that there is a default
in any deposit scheme or deposit schemes of the nature referred to in section 30, the
Supreme Court may, by an order, direct that any particular case be transferred from one
Designated Court to another Designated Court.
(2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on an application filed by
the Competent Authority or any interested party, and every such application shall be
supported by an affidavit.
(3) Where an application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is
dismissed, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or
vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has
opposed the application such sum not exceeding fifty thousand rupees as it may consider
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS
21. (1) Any deposit taker who solicits deposits in contravention of section 3 shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but
which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than two lakh
rupees but which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(2) Any deposit taker who accepts deposits in contravention of section 3 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but
which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh
rupees but which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(3) Any deposit taker who accepts deposits in contravention of section 3 and
fraudulently defaults in repayment of such deposits or in rendering any specified service,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees but which may extend to twice the amount of aggregate funds collected from the
subscribers, members or participants in the Unregulated Deposit Scheme.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act,—
(i) the expression “fraudulently” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in section 25 of the Indian Penal Code;
(ii) where the terms of the Deposit Scheme are entirely impracticable or
unviable, the terms shall be relevant facts showing an intention to defraud.
Appeal to
High Court.
Power of
Supreme Court
to transfer
cases.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section 3.
45 of 1860.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11
22. Any deposit taker who contravenes the provisions of section 4 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine
which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five crore
rupees or three times the amount of profits made out of the fraudulent default referred to
in said section, whichever is higher, or with both.
23. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 5 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
24. Whoever having been previously convicted of an offence punishable under
this Chapter, except the offence under section 26, is subsequently convicted of an offence
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years
but which may extend to ten years and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh
rupees but which may extend to fifty crore rupees.
25. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a deposit taker
other than an individual, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the deposit taker for the conduct of its business, as
well as the deposit taker, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under
this Act has been committed by a deposit taker other than an individual, and it is proved
that the offence—
(a) has been committed with the consent or connivance of; or
(b) is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary,
promoter, partner, employee or other officer of the deposit taker,
such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
26. Whoever fails to give the intimation required under sub-section ( 1) of
section 10 or fails to furnish any such statements, information or particulars as required
under sub-section ( 2) of that section, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, no Designated Court shall
take cognizance of an offence punishable under that section except upon a complaint
made by the Regulator:
Provided that the provisions of section 4 and this section shall not apply in relation
to a deposit taker which is a company.
CHAPTER VII
I
NVESTIGATION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE
28. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
every offence punishable under this Act, except the offence under section 22 and
section 26, shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
29. The police officer shall, on recording information about the commission of an
offence under this Act, inform the same to the Competent Authority.
2 of 1974. Offences to be
cognizable and
non-bailable.
Competent
Authority to
be informed
of offences.
Cognizance of
offences.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section 10.
Offences by
deposit takers
other than
individuals.
Punishment
for repeat
offenders.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section 5.
Punishment
for
contravention
of section 4.

12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
30. (1) On receipt of information under section 29 or otherwise, if the Competent
Authority has reason to believe that the offence relates to a deposit scheme or deposit
schemes in which—
(a) the depositors, deposit takers or properties involved are located in more
than one State or Union territory in India or outside India; and
(b) the total value of the amount involved is of such magnitude as to significantly
affect the public interest,
the Competent Authority shall refer the matter to the Central Government for investigation
by the Central Bureau of Investigation.
(2) The reference made by the Competent Authority under sub-section ( 1) shall be
deemed to be with the consent of the State Government under section 6 of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946.
(3) On the receipt of the reference under sub-section (1), the Central Government may
transfer the investigation of the offence to the Central Bureau of Investigation under
section 5 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
31. (1) Whenever any police officer, not below the rank of an officer in-charge of a
police station, has reason to believe that anything necessary for the purpose of an
investigation into any offence under this Act may be found in any place within the limits of
the police station of which he is in-charge, or to which he is attached, such officer may, with
the written authorisation of an officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police, and
after recording in writing so far as possible, the thing for which the search is to be made and
subject to the rules made in this behalf, authorise any officer subordinate to him,—
(a) to enter and search any building, conveyance or place, between sunrise
and sunset, which he has reason to suspect is being used for purposes connected
with the promotion or conduct of any deposit taking scheme or arrangement in
contravention of the provisions of this Act;
(b) in case of resistance, to break open any door and remove any obstacle to
such entry, if necessary by force, with such assistance as he considers necessary, for
exercising the powers conferred by clause (a);
(c) to seize any record or property found as a result of the search in the said
building, conveyance or place, which are intended to be used, or reasonably suspected
to have been used, in connection with any such deposit taking scheme or arrangement
in contravention of the provisions of this Act; and
(d) to detain and search, and if he thinks proper, take into custody and produce
before any Designated Court any such person whom he has reason to believe to
have committed any offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that if such officer has reason to believe that the said written
authorisation cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment
of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may, without the said written
authorisation, enter and search such building, conveyance or place, at any time
between sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds in writing.
(2) Where it is not practicable to seize the record or property, the officer authorised
under sub-section ( 1), may make an order in writing to freeze such property, account,
deposits or valuable securities maintained by any deposit taker about which a complaint
has been made or credible information has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists
of their having been connected with the promotion or conduct of any deposit taking scheme
or arrangement in contravention of the provisions of this Act and it shall be binding on the
concerned bank or financial or market establishment to comply with the said order:
Investigation
of offences by
Central Bureau
of
Investigation.
Power to
enter, search
and seize
without
warrant.
25 of 1946.
25 of 1946.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
Provided that no bank or financial or market establishment shall freeze such account,
deposit or valuable securities, for a period beyond thirty days unless the same is authorised
by the order of the Designated Court:
Provided further that, if at any time, it becomes practicable to seize the frozen
property, the officer authorised under sub-section ( 1) may seize such property.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions,—
(i) “freezing of account” shall mean that no transaction, whether deposit or
withdrawal shall be allowed in the said account; and
(ii) “freezing of property” shall mean that no transfer, conversion, disposition
or movement of property shall be allowed.
(3) Where an officer takes down any information in writing or records grounds for
his belief or makes an order in writing under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), he shall,
within a time of seventy-two hours send a copy thereof to the Designated Court in a
sealed envelope and the owner or occupier of the building, conveyance or place shall,
on application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Designated
Court.
(4) All searches, seizures and arrests under this section shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
32. (1) The Designated Court may take cognizance of offences under this Act
without the accused being committed to it for trial.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in section 31, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall apply—
(a) to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this Act;
(b) to the proceedings under this Act and for the purposes of the said
provisions, the Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the
persons conducting the prosecution before the Designated Court, shall be deemed
to be Public Prosecutors.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. Where any newspaper or other publication of any nature, contains any
statement, information or advertisement promoting, soliciting deposits for, or inducing
any person to become a member of any Unregulated Deposit Scheme, the appropriate
Government may direct such newspaper or publication to publish a full and fair retraction,
free of cost, in the same manner and in the same position in such newspaper or publication
as may be prescribed.
34. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, including any law made by any State or Union territory.
35. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the appropriate
Government or the Competent Authority or any officer of the appropriate Government
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the
rules made thereunder.
37. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Act.
Application of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to
proceedings
before
Designated
Court.
Publication of
advertisement
of Unregulated
Deposit
Scheme.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the information and other particulars to be taken into consideration before
issuing an order, and the manner of attachment, under sub-section ( 3) of section 7;
(b) the information to be shared under sub-section ( 2) of section 9;
(c) the form and manner in which and the time within which the intimation shall
be given under sub-section ( 1) of section 10;
(d) the particulars contained in the application to be filed by the Competent
Authority before the Designated Court under sub-section ( 1) of section 14;
(e) the procedure to be adopted by the Designated Court before issuing an
order under sub-section ( 3) of section 15;
(f) rules under sub-section (1) of section 31;
(g) the manner of publication of advertisement under section 33; and
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
38. (1) The State Government or Union territory Government, as the case may be, in
consultation with the Central Government, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) ceiling for self-help groups under clause (j) of sub-section (4) of section 2;
(b) purpose and ceiling under clause ( k) of sub-section (4) of section 2;
(c) the manner of provisional attachment of property by the Competent Authority
under sub-section ( 3) of section 7;
(d) other matters under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 7;
(e) the rules relating to impounding and custody of records under
sub-section (8) of section 7; and
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
39. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session, or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
(2) Every rule made by a State Government or the Union territory Government, as the
case may be, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State
Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, where it consists of two
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
40. (
1) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if
it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification, add to, or as the case may be,
omit from the First Schedule, any scheme or arrangement, and on such addition, or omission,
such scheme or arrangement shall become, or cease to be, a Regulated Deposit Scheme, as
the case may be.
(2) A copy of every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be
after it has been issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Power of State
Government,
etc., to make
rules.
Laying of
rules.
Power to
amend First
Schedule.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
41. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to deposits taken in the ordinary
course of business.
42. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule shall be amended in the manner
specified therein.
43. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
44. (1) The Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Ordinance, 2019, is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
Act not to
apply certain
deposits.
Amendment
to certain
enactments.
Repeal and
saving.
Ord. 7 of
2019.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2 (15)]
REGULATED DEPOSIT SCHEMES
(1) The Regulator and Regulated Deposit Scheme refers to the regulators and
schemes and arrangements listed in the following Table, namely:—
TABLE
Sl. No. Regulator Regulated Deposit Scheme
(1) (2) (3)
1. The Securities and ( i) Any scheme or an arrangement [as defined under
Exchange Board section 11AA of the Securities and Exchange Board of
of India India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992)] launched, sponsored or
carried out by a Collective Investment Management
Company registered with the Securities and Exchange
Board of India under the Securities and Exchange Board
of India (Collective Investment Scheme) Regulations,
1999.
(ii) Any scheme or an arrangement registered with the
Securities and Exchange Board of India under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Alternative
Investment Funds) Regulations, 2012.
(iii) Any scheme or an arrangement, pursuant to which
funds are managed by a portfolio manager, registered
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Portfolio Managers) Regulations, 1993.
(iv) Any scheme or an arrangement regulated under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Share Based
Employee Benefits) Regulations, 2014 or providing for
employee benefits as permitted under the Companies
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
(v) Any other scheme or an arrangement registered
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992 (15 of 1992), or the regulations made thereunder.
(vi) Any amount received as contributions in the nature
of subscriptions to a mutual fund registered with
Securities and Exchange Board of India under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds)
Regulations, 1996.
2. The Reserve Bank of ( i) Any scheme under which deposits are accepted by
India Non-Banking Financial Companies as defined in clause
(f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
(2 of 1934) and registered with the Reserve Bank of
India; or any other scheme or an arrangement registered
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17
(ii) Any scheme or an arrangement under which funds
are accepted by individuals or entities engaged as
Business Correspondents and Facilitators by banks
subject to the guidelines and circulars issued by the
Reserve Bank of India from time to time.
(iii) Any scheme or an arrangement under which funds
are received by a system provider operating as an
authorised payment system under the Payment and
Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007).
(iv) Any other scheme or an arrangement regulated
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934),
or the guidelines or circulars of the Reserve Bank of
India.
3. The Insurance A contract of insurance pursuant to a certificate of
Regulatory and registration obtained in accordance with the Insurance
Development Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).
Authority of India
4. The State Government ( i) Any scheme or an arrangement made or offered by a
or Union territory co-operative society registered under the Co-operative
Government Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) or a society being a
society registered or deemed to be registered under
any law relating to co-operative societies for the time
being in force in any State or Union territory.
(ii) Any scheme or an arrangement commenced or
conducted as a chit business with the previous sanction
of the State Government in accordance with the
provisions of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (40 of 1982).
(iii) Any scheme or an arrangement regulated by any
enactment relating to money lending which is for the
time being in force in any State or Union territory.
(iv) Any scheme or an arrangement by a prize chit or
money circulation scheme under section 11 of the Prize
Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning)
Act, 1978 (43 of 1978).
5. The National Any scheme or an arrangement for acceptance of
Housing  Bank deposits registered under the National Housing Bank
Act, 1987 (53 of 1987).
6. The Pension Fund Any scheme or an  arrangement under the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013
Development (23  of  2013).
Authority
7. The Employees' Any scheme, Pension Scheme or Insurance Scheme
Provident Fund framed under the Employees' Provident Fund and
Organisation Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 ( 19 of 1952).
8. The Central Registrar, Any scheme or an arrangement for acceptance of
Multi-State Co- deposits from voting members by a Multi-State
operative Societies Co-operative Society registered under the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 (39 of 2002).
(1) (2) (3)

18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II—
9. The Ministry of ( i) Deposits accepted or permitted under the provisions
Corporate  Affairs, of Chapter V of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).
Government of India
(ii) Any scheme or an arrangement under which deposits
are accepted by a company declared as a Nidhi or a
Mutual Benefit Society under section 406 of the
Companies Act, 2013 (18  of  2013).
(2) The following shall also be treated as Regulated Deposit Schemes under this Act,
namely:—
(a) deposits accepted under any scheme or an arrangement registered with any
regulatory body in India constituted or established under a statute; and
(b) any other scheme as may be notified by the Central Government under this
Act.
(1) (2) (3)

SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 42)
AMENDMENTS  TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
AMENDMENT  TO THE R ESERVE  B ANK OF I NDIA
ACT, 1934
In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in section 45-I, in clause ( bb), after
Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation III.—The amounts accepted by a co-operative society from the
members or shareholders, by whatever name called, but excluding the amounts received
as share capital, shall be deemed to be deposits for the purposes of this clause, if such
members or shareholders are nominal or associate members, by whatever name called,
who do not have full voting rights in the meetings of such co-operative society.".
PART II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA ACT, 1992
In the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992,—
(i) in section 11, in sub-section (4), for clause (e), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(e) attach, for a period not exceeding ninety days, bank accounts or
other property of any intermediary or any person associated with the securities
market in any manner involved in violation of any of the provisions of this Act,
or the rules or the regulations made thereunder:
Provided that the Board shall, within ninety days of the said attachment,
obtain confirmation of the said attachment from the Special Court, established
under section 26A, having jurisdiction and on such confirmation, such attachment
shall continue during the pendency of the aforesaid proceedings and on
conclusion of the said proceedings, the provisions of section 28A shall apply:
Provided further that only property, bank account or accounts or any
transaction entered therein, so far as it relates to the proceeds actually involved
in violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules or the regulations
made thereunder shall be allowed to be attached.";
(ii) in section 28A, after Explanation 3, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
"Explanation 4.—The interest referred to in section 220 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 shall commence from the date the amount became payable by the
person.".
PART III
A
MENDMENT TO THE MULTI-STATE CO-OPERA TIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 2002
In the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, in section 67, in sub-section (1),—
(a) after the words "receive deposits", the words "from its voting members"
shall be inserted;
Amendment of
section 45-I of
Act 2 of 1934.
Amendment
of section 11
of Act 15 of
1992.
43 of 1961.
Amendment
of section 67
of Act 39 of
2002.

(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
"Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a
multi-State co-operative society shall not be entitled to receive deposits from
persons other than voting members.".
————
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
MGIPMRND—2273GI(S3)—31-07-2019.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [P ART II— SEC. 1]

854 GI/2020 (1) 
 
रजजस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99 
  
 
 
xxxGIDHxxx 
xxxGIDExxx 
असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (ii)  
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राजधकार  से प्रकाजित  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
 
 
जित्त मंत्रालय  
(जित्तीय सेिा जिभाग) 
अजधसूचना  
नई ददल् ली, 12 फरिरी , 2020 
 का.आ. 663(अ).—क ें द्रीय सरकार , अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम पाबंदी अजधजनयम , 2019 (2019 का  21) 
की धारा  37 द्वारा प्रदत्त िजियों का प्रयोग करते हुए , जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती है , अथाात् : --  
1. संजक्षप्त नाम और प्रारंभ—(1) इन जनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम अजिजनयजमत  जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम पाबंदी जनयम , 2020 है ।   
(2) ये जनयम , राजपत्र में उनक े  प्रकािन की तारीख को प्रिृत्त होंगे ।  
2. पररभाषाएं —(1) इन जनयमों में , जब तक संदभा से अन्यथा अपेजक्षत न हो ,--  
(क)  “अजधजनयम ” से अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम पाबंदी अजधजनयम , 2019 (2019 का  21) अजभप्रेत है ;  
(ख)  “आिेदन ” से अजधजनयम की धारा 14 क े  अधीन सक्षम प्राजधकारी द्वारा फाइल दकया गया कोई 
आिेदन अजभप्रेत है ;  
(ग)  “प्राजधकारी ” से अजधजनयम की धारा 9 क े अधीन अजभजहत कोई प्राजधकारी अजभप्रेत है ;  
सं.   604]           नई ददल्ली, बुधिार , फरिरी  12, 2020/माघ  23, 1941   
No. 604]          NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2020/MAGHA 23, 1941   
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-13022020-216125
CG-DL-E-13022020-216125

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
(घ)  “सक्षम प्राजधकारी ” से अजधजनयम की धारा 7 क े  अधीन समुजचत सरकार द्वारा जनयुि  कोई 
प्राजधकारी अजभप्रेत है ; और  
(ङ)  “अजभजहत न्यायालय ” से अजधजनयम की धारा 8 क े अधीन समुजचत सरकार द्वारा गरित कोई 
अजभजहत न्यायालय अजभप्रेत है । 
 (2) उन िब्दों और पदों क े , जो इसमें प्रयुि हैं और पररभाजषत नहीं है , ककतु अजधजनयम में पररभाजषत है , 
िही अथा होंगे, जो उनक े  उस अजधजनयम में है ।  
3. जिचार दकए जाने िाली सूचना और जिजिजियां —ऐसी सूचना और जिजिजियों में , जजन पर सक्षम प्राजधकारी , 
जनक्षेप लेने िाले की संपजत्त को अनजन्त म रूप से क ु क ा करने क े  जलए जिचार करेगा , जनम्नजलजखत सजममजलत होगा , 
अथाात् : --  
(क)  अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम  क े  संिधान या प्रचालन क े जिरुद्ध कोई ऐसी जिकायत दक क्या 
जिकायतकताा , उि अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप संपजत्त में जनक्षेपकताा है या नहीं ;  
(ख)  अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  संिधान या प्रिधान क े  संबंध में क ें द्रीय सरकार या दकन्हीं राज्य सरकारों 
या संघ राज्यक्षेत्र प्रिासनों या ऐसी सरकारों क े  प्रभार क े  अधीन दकसी जिजध प्रितान प्राजधकारी या 
अजभकरण या जनकाय से प्राप्त कोई सूचना ;  
(ग)  दकसी जिज्ञापन की सूचना , चा हे मुदद्रत हो या इलैक्राजनक मीजडया िाली या दोनों , जजसक े  अंतगात 
दकसी अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम जिजनधान करने िाला या उसका सदस्ट्य या भागीदार कोई अन्य 
व्यजि भी है ; और  
(घ)  कोई ऐसी अन्य सूचना , जो सक्षम प्राजधकारी क े  पास है दक जनक्षेप लेने िाले ने अजधजनयम क े  उपबंधों 
क े  उल्लंघन में जनक्षेपों की याचना की है या उन्हें स्ट्िीकार दकया है ।  
4. अनजन्तम क ुकी की रीजत और अनजन्तम रूप से क ुक ा संपजत्त का प्रिासन — (1) अनजन्तम क ु की क े आदेि की प्रजत की 
तामील संपजत्त क े स्ट्िामी या दकसी ऐसे व्यजि पर की जाएगी , जजसने संपजत्त पर काजबज होने का दािा दकया है या 
दकसी अन्य ऐसे व्यजि पर की जाएगी , जजसका उि संपजत्त में कोई जहत है ।  
(2) अनजन्तम क ु की का आदेि ऐसे क्षेत्र या अजधकाररता में , जजसमें जनक्षेप लेने िाला अिजस्ट्थत है , व्यापक रूप 
से पररचाजलत प्रमुख समाचार पत्र में (देिी और अंग्रेजी दोनों भाषाओं में) प्रकाजित दकया जाएगा ।  
(3) जहां सक्षम प्राजधकारी , उपजनयम (1) में जिजनर्ददि दकसी व्यजि को अनजन्तम क ु की क े आदेि की तामील 
करने में समथा नहीं होता है , िहां उपजनयम (2) क े  अधीन उपबंजधत रीजत में आदेि क े प्रकािन द्वारा आदेि की 
तामील समझी जाएगी ।  
(4) सक्षम प्राजधकारी , ऐसी स्ट्थािर संपजत्त क े सहजदृश्य स्ट्थान पर अनजन्तम क ु की क े आदेि को जचपकाकर 
स्ट्थािर संपजत्त का कब्जा लेगा ।  
(5) जहां क ु क ा की जाने िाली संपजत्त कोई जंगम संपजत्त है , िहां सक्षम प्राजधकारी ऐसी संपजत्त का िास्ट्तजिक 
कब्जा लेगा और उसे अपनी अजभरक्षा में या उसकी सहायता क े  जलए जनयुि दकसी अन्य अजधकारी की अजभरक्षा में 
प्रजतधाररत करेगा ।  
(6) सक्षम प्राजधकारी , अनजन्तम रूप से क ु क ा संपजत्त क े अजभलेख का अनुरक्षण करेगा , जजसमें सं पजत्त क े  प्रबंध से 
उपगत दकसी व्यय या उसकी लागत क े ब्यौरे और संपजत्त से प्राप्त दकसी आय क े ब्यौरे सजममजलत होंगे ।   

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  3 
(7) सक्षम प्राजधकारी , जनक्षेप लेने िाले की आजस्ट्तयों और दाजयत्िों का जनधाारण करेगा और ऐसे जनक्षेपकतााओं 
के , जजनसे जनक्षेप लेने िाने ने अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  अनुसरण में जनक्षेपों का संग्रहण दकया है , संपूणा अजभलेख 
को तैयार करेगा ।  
(8) सक्षम प्राजधकारी , उपजनयम (7) क े  अधीन जनक्षेप लेने िाले की आजस्ट्तयों और दाजयत्िों क े  जनधाारण क े 
प्रयोजनों क े  जलए मूल्यांकक की जनयुजि कर सक े गा ।  
(9) जहां कोई ऐसी संपजत्त , जजसका कब्जा जलया गया है , जिनश्वर प्रक ृ जत की है, िहां सक्षम प्राजधकारी 
जनक्षेपकतााओं क े  उत्तम जहत को ध्यान में रखते हुए उसका जिक्रय कर सक ेगा ।  
(10) सक्षम प्राजधकारी द्वारा , उपजनयम (9) क े  अधीन जिक्रय क े  ब्यौरे और आगमों को उपजनयम (6) में यथा 
जिजनर्ददि अजभलेख में पृथक ्  रूप से प्रजिि और अनुरजक्षत दकया जाएगा ।  
5. अजभलेखों का पररबद्धकरण और प्रजतधारण —(1) ऐसा व्यजि, जजसकी अजभरक्षा से अजधजनयम की धारा 7 की 
उपधारा (8) क े अधीन अजभ लेख पररबद्ध दकए गए हैं , सक्षम प्राजधकारी द्वारा प्राजधक ृ त दकसी अजधकारी की 
उपजस्ट्थजत में ऐसे स्ट्थान और समय पर, जो सक्षम प्राजधकारी इस जनजमत्त जनयत करे , उसकी प्रजतयां बना सक े गा या 
उससे उद्धरण ले सक ेगा ।  
(2) धारा 7 की उपधारा (2) क े  अधीन जनयुि अजधकारी , ऐसे अजभलेख को , सक्षम प्राजधकारी से अनुमोदन 
जलए जबना तीन मास तक की अिजध क े  जलए अपनी अजभरक्षा में रखेगा और यदद अजभलेख को उि अिजध क े  पश्चात् 
अिधाररत करना आिश्यक है तो सक्षम प्राजधकारी का अनुमोदन अपेजक्षत होगा ।  
(3) यदद कोई व्यजि , जजसकी अजभरक्षा से अजभलेख पररबद्ध  दकए गए हैं , अजभलेखों क े  पररबद्ध दकए जाने क े  
दकसी कारण को आक्षेजपत करता है तो िह सक्षम प्राजधकारी को  ऐसे आक्षेप क े  कारणों को बताते हुए एक आिेदन कर 
सक े गा और सक्षम प्राजधकारी , आिेदक को सुनिाई का अिसर ददए जाने क े  पश्चात् ऐसा आदेि पाररत कर सक ेगा , 
जैसा िह िीक समझे ।  
(4) अजधकारी पररबद्ध दकए गए अजभलेखों की सुरजक्षत अजभरक्षा सुजनजश्चत करेगा और उसकी अजभरक्षा 
प्रजतधाररत करेगा ।  
6. क ें द्रीय डाटाबेस —(1) प्राजधकारी , दकसी जिजनयामक या सक्षम प्राजधकारी या दकसी अन्य इकाई या व्यजि से , 
भारत में जनक्षेप लेने िा लों से संबंजधत उसक े  कब्जे में की सूचना प्रस्ट्तुत करने की अपेक्षा कर सक े गा ।  
(2) अजभजहत प्राजधकारी , जनक्षेप लेने िालों से संबंजधत सूचना अंतर्विि करते हुए , जनसाधारण क े पहुंच योग्य 
एक पोटाल का प्रचालन करेगा , जजसमें जनम्नजलजखत सजममजलत होगा , अथाात् : --  
(i)  भारत में प्रचालन करने िाले जनक्षेप लेने िालों की सूची , उनक े  प्रचालन का जिस्ट्तार और क्षेत्र ;  
(ii)  जनक्षेपों क े  संग्रहण क े  जलए दकसी जनक्षेप लेने िालों क े  जिरुद्ध तत्समय प्रिृत्त दकसी जिजध क े  अधीन की 
गई कोई कारािाई ; और  
(iii)  अजधजनयम क े अध्याय 5 क े अधीन जनक्षेपकतााओं को िापस दकए जाने संबंधी कायािाजहयों से संबंजधत 
निीनतम जानकारी ।  
7. प्रज्ञापना का प्ररूप और रीजत —(1) कारबार प्रारंभ करने िाला प्रत्येक जनक्षेप लेने िाला , कारबार क े प्रारंभ से तीस 
ददन की अिजध क े  भीतर जनयम 6 क े  उपजनयम (1) में जिजनर्ददि प्राजधकारी को इन जनयमों से उपाबद्ध प्ररूप में एक 
सूचना प्रस्ट्तुत करेगा ।  
(2) उि प्राजधकारी को प्रस्ट्तुत दकन्हीं जिजिजियों में दकसी पररितान की दिा में , जनक्षेप लेने िाला प ररितान की 
तारीख से तीस ददन की अिजध क े  भीतर ऐसे पररितान की सूचना प्राजधकारी को देगा ।  

4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
8. अनजन्तम क ुकी की पुजि क े  जलए आिेदन —सक्षम प्राजधकारी , जनम्नजलजखत जिजिजियों को समाजिि करते हुए पूणा 
अनजन्तम क ु की करने क े  जलए अजभजहत नयायालय क े  समक्ष आिेदन फा इल करेगा , अथाात् : --  
(क)  क ु क ा की गई संपजत्त, धनराजि या जनक्षेपों की पूरी सूची ;  
(ख)  स्ट्थािर संपजत्त की दिा में , संपजत्त का स्ट्िामी/क े  स्ट्िाजमयों, दकसी व्यजि, जो संपजत्त में काजबज होने 
का दािा करता है  और दकसी अन्य व्यजि, जजसका उि संपजत्त में कोई जहत है, का/क े  नाम और ब्यौरे ;  
(ग)  जनयम 4 क े  उपजनयम (6) में जिजनर्ददि अनजन्तम रूप से क ु क ा की गई संपजत्त और जनयम 4 क े  उपजनयम 
(8) में जिजनर्ददि मूल्यांकन ररपोटा , यदद कोई हो , का अजभलेख ;  
(घ)  जनक्षेपकतााओं की सूची , जजनसे जनक्षेप लेने िाले ने जनक्षेपों  का प्रजतग्रहण या संग्रहण दकया है ; और  
(ङ)  जनक्षेपकतााओं को देय िोध्यों की सूची , जजसक े  अंतगात ऐसी रकम भी है , जो जनक्षेप लेने िाले की क ु क ा 
संपजत्त क े  जिक्रय से िूसल की जा सक े गी ।  
9. अजभजहत न्यायालय द्वारा अंगीक ृ त की जाने िाली प्रदक्रया —(1) अजभजहत न्यायालय , अपनी स्ट्ियं की प्रदक्रया 
जिजनयजमत कर सक े गा और नैसर्वगक न्याय क े  जसद्धांतों और जसजिल प्रदक्रया संजहता , 1908 में अंतर्विि प्रदक्रया द्वारा 
मागादर्वित  होगा ।  
(2) अजभजहत न्यायालय ,--  
(क)  अजधजनयम की धारा 15 की उपधारा (1) या उपधारा (2) क े अधीन जारी कारण बताओ सूचना क े 
आक्षेपों पर जिचार करेगा ;  
(ख)  व्यजथत व्यजि और सक्षम प्राजधकारी या इन पक्षकारों का प्रजतजनजधत्ि करने िाले अजधििाओं की 
सुनिाई करेगा ; और  
(ग)  उसक े  समक्ष अजभलेख पर रखी गई सभी सुसंगत सामजग्रयों पर जिचार करेगा ।  
10. तलािी और अजभग्रहण का प्राजधकार —इस अजधजनयम क े अधीन दकसी अपराध में अन्िेषण क े प्रयोजन क े  जलए , 
पुजलस थाने का भारसाधक अ जधकारी जनम्नजलजखत की तलािी क े  जलए जलजखत प्राजधकार दे सक े गा , अथाात् : --  
(क)  कोई अजभलेख , चाहे भौजतक हो या इलैक्राजनक , जजसका अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  संिधान या 
प्रचालन क े  संबंध में उपयोग दकया जाता है , उपयोग दकया जाना आिजयत है या उपयोग दकए जाने 
का संदेह है ;  
(ख)  अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  संबंध में अनुरजक्षत कोई लेखा पुजस्ट्तका ;  
(ग)  अजिजनयजमत  जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े संिधान या प्रचालन क े संबंध में अर्वजत दकया गया या अर्वजत दकए जाने 
क े  जलए आिंदकत कोई जनक्षेप ;  
(घ)  दकसी अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  संिधान या प्रचालन क े  संबंध में अनुरजक्षत दकया गया या 
अनुरजक्षत दकए जाने क े  जलए आिंदकत कोई जनक्षेप ;  
(ङ)  दकसी संपजत्त, चाहे जंगम हो या स्ट्थािर , का अजभलेख जनक्षेप लेने िाले क े  नाम में या जनक्षेप लेने िाले 
की ओर से दकसी अन्य व्यजि क े  नाम में अर्वजत की गई हो , जजसक े  अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े  
संबंध में अजान दकए जाने की आिंका हो ;  
(च)  दकसी बैंक या जित्तीय या  बाजार स्ट्थापन क े  दकसी खाते का अजभलेख , जजसक े  अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप 
स्ट्कीम क े  संबंध में उपयोग दकए जाने की आिंका हो ; और  

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  5 
(छ)  कोई अन्य बात , जजसका अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम क े संबंध में उपयोग दकए जाने की आिंका हो ।  
11. जिज्ञापन का जनबंधन —(1) समुजचत सरकार , दकसी समाचार पत्र या दकसी भी प्रक ृ जत क े  अन्य प्रकािन क े  स्ट्िामी 
को , चाहे मुदद्रत हो या इलैक्राजनक , दकसी अजिजनयजमत जनक्षेप स्ट्कीम को , पूणा और उजचत िापस जलए जाने , उसक े  
दकसी प्रस्ट्ताि को सुस्ट्पि िापस जलए जाने , दकसी जिज्ञापन में पहले दकए गए संिधान या प्रलोभन को , उसका सदस्ट्य 
बनने क े  जलए दकसी व्यजि क े  जलए कथन या सूचना क े  प्रकािन का जनदेि  देगा ।  
(2) िापस जलया जाना , मूल जिज्ञापन, कथन या सूचना क े समान सुस्ट्पि होगा और ऐसे रूप जिधान और फौन्ट 
में होगा , जजसे दकसी पािक या प्राजप्तकताा का ध्यान तुरंत उस ओर आक ृि हो जाए ।  
(3) िापस जलया जाना , समुजचत सरकार क े  जनदेि की तारीख से दो ददन क े  भीतर जन:िुल्क प्रकाजित दकया 
जाएगा ।  
(4) यदद समुजचत सरकार का यह जिचार है दक प्रकाजित दकया गया िापस जलया जाना , समाचार पत्र या ऐसे 
अन्य प्रकािन क े  पािको का ध्यान पयााप्त रूप से आक ृ ि नहीं क र पा रहा है तो सरकार , िापस जलए जाने क े पुन: 
प्रकािन का जनदेि दे सक े गी ।   
 [फा . सं. 6/7/2019-बीओ. II]  
डॉ. मदनेि क ु मार जमश्र , संयुि सजचि  
प्ररूप  
(जनयम 7 देजखए)  
प्राजधकारी को प्रस्ट्तुत की जाने िाली जिजिजियां      
1. जनक्षेप लेने िाले का नाम  
2. जनक्षेप लेने िाले का रजजस्ट्रीक ृ त पता  
3. जनक्षेप लेने िाले की िाखाओं का पता (यदद कोई हो)  
4. लागू जिजध क े  अधीन रजजस्ट्रीकरण/जनगमन की जिजिि पहचान सं . 
5. जनक्षेप लेने िाला प्राजधकारी  
6. जनक्षेप लेने िाले क े  प्रबंध क े जलए उत्तरदायी व्यजियों का नाम और पता (सीईओ  और 
जनदेिक/भागीदार , स्ट्ित्िधारी/बोडा) : 
7. जनक्षेप लेने िाले का स्ट्थायी खाता संख्या  
 
मैं सत्यजनष्ठा से प्रजतज्ञान करता हं दक इस प्ररूप में दी गई जानकारी मेरे सिोतम ज्ञान और जिश्वास में सही है और 
उसमें कोई बात जछपाई नहीं गई है ।  
 
तारीख : .............. ..................... 
स्ट्थान : ...................................                        प्राजधक ृ त हस्ट्ताक्षरकताा 
 
 
 

6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Financial Services)  
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 12th February, 2020 
 S.O. 663 (E).— In exercise of the powers conferred by section 37 of the Banning of Unregulated 
Deposit Schemes Act, 2019 (21 of 2019), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely: - 
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) These rules may be called the Banni ng of Unregulated Deposit 
Schemes Rules, 2020. 
(2) These rules shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
2. Definitions.– (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
a) ―Act‖ means the Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019 (21 of 2019);  
b) ―application‖ means an application filed by the Competent Authority under section 14 of the Act;  
c) ―authority‖ means the authority designated under section 9 of the Act; 
d) ―Competent Authority‖ means an authority appointed by the appropriate Government under 
section 7 of the Act; and 
e) ―Designated Court‖ means a Designated Court constituted by the appropriate Government under 
section 8 of the Act.  
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Act shall have the 
meanings assigned to them in the Act. 
3. Information and particulars to be considered. – The information and particulars which the 
Competent Authority shall consider for provisionally attaching the p roperty of the deposit taker shall 
include, namely:– 
(a) any complaint against the promotion or operation of an Unregulated Deposit Scheme, whether the 
complainant is a depositor in the said Unregulated Deposit Scheme or not;  
(b) any information received from the Central Government, or any State Governments or Union 
territory Administrations, or any law enforcement authority or agency or body under the charge of 
such Governments or Administrations, regarding the promotion or operation of an Unregulated 
Deposit Scheme; 
(c) information of any advertisement, whether in print or electronic media or both, inducing another 
person to invest in, or become a member or participant of any Unregulated Deposit Scheme; and  
(d) any other information that the Competent Authority has, that a deposit taker is soliciting or 
accepting deposits in contravention of the provisions of the Act.    
4. Manner of provisional attachment and administration of provisionally attached property. – (1) A 
copy of the order of provisional attachment shall be served  on the owner of the property, or any person 
who claims to be in possession of the property or any other person who has an interest in the said 
property. 
(2) The order of provisional attachment shall be published in a leading newspaper (both in vernacular 
and in English) having wide circulation in the area or jurisdiction in which the deposit taker is located. 
(3) Where the Competent Authority is not able to serve the order of provisional attachment to a person 
specified in sub-rule (1), then such person sh all be deemed to be served the order by the publication of 
the order in the manner provided under sub-rule (2). 
(4) The Competent Authority shall take possession of the immoveable property by affixing the order of 
provisional attachment at a conspicuous place of such immoveable property. 
(5) Where the property to be attached is a moveable property, the Competent Authority shall take 
actual physical possession of such property and retain it in his custody or the custody of any other 
officer appointed to assist him. 
 

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  7 
(6) The Competent Authority shall maintain a record of the property provisionally attached which shall 
include details of any expenditure incurred or any costs of management of the property and of any 
income received from the property. 
(7) The Competent Authority shall assess the assets and the liabilities of the deposit taker and prepare a 
complete record of depositors from whom the deposit taker has collected deposits pursuant to an 
Unregulated Deposit Scheme. 
(8) The Competent Authority may appo int a valuer for the purposes of assessing the assets and 
liabilities of the deposit taker under sub-rule (7). 
(9) Where any property of which possession has been taken is of a perishable nature, the Competent 
Authority may sell the same keeping in mind the best interest of the depositors. 
(10) The details and proceeds of the sale under sub -rule (9) shall be entered separately by the 
Competent Authority and maintained in the record as specified in sub -rule (6). 
5. Impounding and retention of records. – (1) The person from whose custody records are impounded 
under sub-section (8) of section 7 of the Act may make copies thereof, or take extracts therefrom, in the 
presence of an officer authorised by the Competent Authority, at such place and time as the Competent 
Authority may appoint in this behalf. 
(2) The officer appointed under sub -section (2) of section 7 shall retain such records in his custody 
without taking approval from the Competent Authority for a period upto three months, and if the 
records are necessary to be retained beyond the said period, approval of the Competent Authority shall 
be required. 
(3) If the person from whose custody records are impounded objects for any reason to the records being 
impounded, he may make an application to the Competent Au thority stating therein the reasons for 
such objection and requesting for the return of the records, and the Competent Authority may, after 
giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as he thinks fit.  
(4) The officer shall ensure the safe custody of the records impounded and retained in his custody.  
6. Central Database. – (1) The authority may require any Regulator or the Competent Authority or any 
other entity or person to submit to it any information in its possession relating to deposit takers in India. 
(2) The designated authority shall operate a portal accessible to the public, containing information 
relating to deposit takers, which shall include the following, namely:– 
(i) list of deposit takers operating in India, the extent and areas of their operation; 
(ii) any action taken under any law for the time being in force against any deposit taker for 
collection of deposits; and 
(iii)  updates regarding proceedings for restitution of depositors under Chapter V of the Act.  
7. Form and manner of intim ation.– (1) Every deposit taker commencing business shall submit an 
intimation in the Form annexed to these rules to the authority specified in sub -rule (1) of rule 6, within 
a period of thirty days from the commencement of the business. 
(2) In case of any  change in any particulars submitted to the said authority, the deposit taker shall 
intimate the authority of such change within a period of thirty days from the date of the change. 
8. Application for confirmation of provisional attachment. – The Competent Aut hority shall file an 
application before the Designated Court for making the provisional attachment absolute, containing the 
following particulars, namely:– 
(a) a complete list of the property, money or deposits attached; 
(b) in case of immoveable property, the nam e or names and particulars of the owner of the property, 
any person who claims to be in possession of the property, and any other person who has an 
interest in the said property; 
(c) the record of the provisionally attached property specified in sub -rule (6) o f rule 4 and the 
valuation report, if any, specified in sub-rule (8) of rule 4; 
(d) a list of the depositors from whom the deposit taker has accepted or collected deposits; and  

8  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
(e) a list of dues owed to depositors including amounts that may be realised from sale of any attached 
property of the deposit taker. 
9. Procedure to be adopted by Designated Court. – (1) The Designated Court may regulate its own 
procedure and shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and the procedure contained in the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
(2) The Designated Court shall,– 
(a) consider the objections to the show cause notice issued under sub -section (1) or sub -section 
(2) of section 15 of the Act;  
(b) hear the aggrieved person and the Competent Authority or advocates representing t hese 
parties; and  
(c) take into account all relevant materials placed on record before it.  
10. Authorisation for search and seizure. – For the purpose of an investigation into any offence under the 
Act, the officer -in-charge of a police station may, with the written authorisation, search for the 
following, namely:– 
(a) any record, whether physical or electronic, which is used, intended to be used, or suspected to 
be used, in connection with the promotion or operation of an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; 
(b) any books of account maintained in connection with an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; 
(c) any deposits acquired or suspected to be acquired in connection with the promotion or 
operation of an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; 
(d) any valuable securities maintained or suspected to be mai ntained in connection with the 
promotion or operation of an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; 
(e) record of any property, whether movable or immovable, acquired either in the name of the 
deposit taker or in the name of any other person on behalf of the deposit taker , which is 
suspected to be acquired in connection with an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; 
(f) record of any account with a bank or financial or market establishment, which is suspected to 
be used in connection with an Unregulated Deposit Scheme; and 
(g) any other thin g which is suspected to be used in connection with an Unregulated Deposit 
Scheme.   
11. Retraction of advertisement. – (1) The appropriate Government shall direct the owner of any 
newspaper or other publication of any nature either in print or in electronic for m, to publish a full and 
fair retraction, unequivocally withdrawing any offer, promotion or inducement made earlier in any 
advertisement, statement or information to any person to become a member of any Unregulated 
Deposit Scheme. 
(2) The retraction shall be as prominent as the original advertisement, statement or information and be 
in such a format and font that immediately catches the attention of any reader or recipient. 
(3) The retraction shall be published free of cost within two days from the date of the direction of the 
appropriate Government. 
(4) Where the appropriate Government is of the view that the retraction published has not sufficiently 
engaged the attention of the readers of the newspaper or such other publication, that Government may 
direct re-publication of the retraction. 
 
[F.No.6/7/2019-BO.II] 
Dr. MADNESH KUMAR MISHRA,  Jt. Secy. 
 
 
 
 

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  9 
FORM 
(See rule 7) 
INTIMATION TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE AUTHORITY 
1. Name of deposit taker. 
2. Registered address of the deposit taker. 
3. Address of branches of the deposit taker (if any). 
4. Unique Identification No. of Registration / Incorporation under applicable law.  
5. Authority to carry on deposit taking. 
6. Name and address of persons responsible for the management of the deposit taker (CEO and Directors/ 
Partners, Proprietors / Board). 
7. PAN number of the deposit taker.  
 
 
I solemnly affirm to the best of my knowledge and belief, that the information given in this Form is correct, and 
that nothing material has been concealed therefrom. 
 
 
 
Date:         Authorised Signatory 
Place: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 