, 
• 
.. 
Com. 1·59 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITIEE 
ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT 
(Present ed on the 2oth DeceDlber , 1983) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
:-\£W DELHI 
D~, •98$Ac<&kanaa, 1905 (Sakal 
0 
I 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(1983-84) 
CHAIRMAN 
I. Or Bhni l\lnhnv r 
M!MBF.IlS 
2. Shr1 Banamah Babu 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shrt 1'\ d K1shor" Bhatt 
5. Shri C C. Bhallncharya 
6. Shrl Amarprosad Chakraborty 
7. Shri O•pcn Ghosh 
8. Shri B. D. Khobragnde 
9. Shrl Ram Nnrcsh KushaWllha 
JO. Shri G. Swamy Nalk 
11. Shri Ghanshynmbh01i 01.n 
12. Shrl Rallqu~ Alnm 
13. Shri Son~osh Kumar Sahu 
H. Shrl Shanti Tyogi 
15. Or Raflq Zakaria 
SF.CRETARtA'[ 
Shrirnati K. K. Chopra , Additional Secretary 
Shrl B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions 
Shn R. N. Bhardwaj , Senior Legislative Committee Offic,..r. 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I. the Chairman or the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
"' its behaU, present Lhis Fifty-sixth Report. The Committee consider­
ed and adopted the Report at tts meeting held on the 16th December, ~ 1983. 
1.!! Obsen'llllons or the Committee ar sing out of examination of 
the Indian Forest Service (Appointment ~ Promotion) Amendment 
Regulations, 1977 (G.S.R. 584 or 1978) which in the opinion of the 
Committee should be brought to the notice of Lhe House, together 
with the recommendations of the Committee, thereon are contained in the succeedlng paragraphs. 
n 
INDIAN FOREST SERVICE (APPOINTMENT BY PROMOTION) 
AMENDMENT REGULATIONS, 1977 (G.S.R. 584- OF 19?8) . 
• 2.1 The Depnrtmenl of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, 
Ministry of Home Airnlrs, vide G.S.R. 584. published in the Gazette 
of India, Part-n of Moyl 6. 1978 amandecl the Indian Forest Serv:ce 
(Appointment by Promotion) Regulations. 1966. The amendment is as follows:-
• • • • 
"2. In Regulation 5 o! the Indian Forest Service (Appolntm~nt 
by Promotion) Regulations, 1966, the following Explana­
tion m shall be added namely:-
Explanation UI Service in po:;t (s) included in the State 
Forest Service would also include service rendered in 
ex-cadre posts connected w:ith forestry whether under 
the Government, or ln-
1 

2 
(I) a compuny, association or body of individuals whether 
incorporated or not, which 1s wholly Or substantially 
owned or controlled by Gove111ment, a municipal or a 
local body, and 
(li) an international organ!l;ation. an autonomous body not 
controlled by Government or a private body. 
Provided that the State Government certified that the officer 
concerned would hnve continued to hold a post included 
in lh<' Sta~e Go\·e:-nment Senr ces but for his deputntton 
to such ex-cadre post" 
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUI\f 
According to Rule 4 of the Indian Forc..i Service (Recruit­
ment) Rules, 1966 the field of setec:tton to •he Se.rv;ce both 
for nttial recr.utmcnt and ubsequent recruitment by pro­
motion in the State Forest S!!rvice as defined in Rule 2 (g) 
or the said rules. The original proviso (ii) to sub-regula­
lion (2) oC Regulation 5 or lnd1an Fore.~t Service (Appoint­
ment by Promotion) Regulations, 1966 restricted the field 
o{ promotion to the Serv1ce further than was envisaged 
in Rule 4 of 1 he Recruitment Rules, by stating that such 
sl.'rvtcc ho< to he "in a pn!<l Of Assistant Conservator of 
Forests or or any other post declared equivalent thereto 
by the Slnte Government witb prior concun-ence of the 
Ccntl•oJ Govem~nt", 
The above restriction was removed consequent upon the 
judgement or Cnlcutt.n High Court in Civil Rule No. 
3103 (W) of 1971 t•idn this Department Notification No. 
160!9/1/75-AIS(!V) dated the 16th July, 1977 published 
in the Gazette or India!, Part II Section 3 .,;ub-section (i) 
dated the 24th Julv, 1976 as G.S.R. 1064, dated the 6th 
July. 1976 by subs.tituling the following words for the 
old restrictive clau~e referred to above namely:-
"[n post (s) included in the Slate Forest Service'' The res­
trictive part being ab-mitio void the said Regulat;on.~ 
were amended from the date or their promulgation, 
namelv, the' 1st July, 1966. Immediatelv lrlter the issue 
of the nmt'!ldment the G1noenunent ·of Tamil Nadu 
sour;:hl clnrification whether a substantive member of 
the State Forest Service with eight years of service 

... 
a 2 
would be clti:ible for consideration for promotion to the 
lndlQJl r'ores\ Service ~ven though a par\ oi tbe service 
m1ght have been rendered in Tamil Nadu Fo.rest Cor­
porutlon. Stmilar problems may arise where S\aie 
Forest s~rvicc ollicers r<;ndered a part of their servtce 
m ex-cadre posts whether under the State Gove.rnment 
or other bodies. ~ it was not the intentiOn of the 
Central Government to debar such officers from being 
considered for inclusion of their names in the Select 
List of State Forest Service Officers for promotion to 
tbe Indian Forest Service, it has lieen decided by the 
Central Governmen: to clarifv the intention by adding 
an ·ExpiQJlation' under sub-regwalion (2) of Regulation 
5 of the Indian Forest Service (Appointment by Promo­
tion) Regulations. 1966. As the earlier amendment was 
given restroopcctive effect, •his amendment which is aD 
extension or earliertamcndment shall also be given re­
trospective effect." 
2.2 The amending regulations were scrutinised. It was found 
that the explnnntory memorandum does not contain the usual certi­
ficate th~\ inler('Sl or nobody was prejudiciously affected by retros­
pective npplication of the amending provisions. 
2.3 The Mjnistry or Home Affairs, Department o( Personnel were 
asl<ed on th<' 22nd July, 1978, to clarify whether interest~ of any of 
the existing mcumbents would be prejudicially affected by the 
retrospective operation of the amending Regulation. The Ministry 
sent their comments in their O.M. dnled the 23rd January. 1979 ex­
plaining thr position as follows:-
•• ns •lreadv •tatcd •n fhe explanatory memorandum 
attached to this Depru-tmcot's notification No. !6021/2/77-
AlS (IV) dated 19th April, 1978, published as G.S.R. 584 
in th" Gazette of India. dated 6th :May, 1978 in part II 
Section (3), sub-section (i) the IFS (Appointment by 
Promotion) Regulations were amended further to remove 
certain miSgivings regard:ng the exact scope and impliea­
tion of th<' phrase "Post~ inclu<led in the SFS''. in,erted 
by an amendment to the Indian Forest Service (Appoint­
ment hy Promotion) Regulation. 1966 ride Notification 
No 160I!l/I/75-AIS (IV) dated 6th July. 1976. Pr'or to 
the Amendment or 1976, only such S~ate Foresl ~rvice 
officers who w-ere holding po>ts of Ao;ds\ant Con>ervator 
of Forests or other posts declared equh<~lent thereto by 

• 
r 
l.he State Governments willl tne prior concurrence Of tht> 
CentNl Go\armm:nt wen.! eligible for appointment by 
promotion to the lndian Forest Service. The validi-ty of 
Lhls prov!ston was challenged by Extra A>sistant COnser­
vator of Forests of the West Bengal Juntor Servtce Jn the 
Calcutta High Court. The High Court upheld !.heir c:on­
tenUon. With the said allltlndment of the Regulations, the 
Extra Assistant Cons~rvator of for«?sl<;, of the Junior State 
Forest Sel'Vlc:c holding posts Jn a scale lower than that of 
Assistant Conservator of, Forests became eligJble for con­
sideration for appointment by promotion to the Indian 
Forest Ser.-ice along\vlth the Members oi the Senior Forest 
Service . Thus, 1976 Amendm~nt made in pursuance of 
the decision or the Calcutta High Court >s not likely to 
ad,·crsely all'ect the mtcrests of the Members of the Indian 
Forest Service 
As stated earlier, the Go\·crnmcnt of Tamil Nadu ~-pressed 
;orne doubts regarding seope and implic;~tions of the 1976 
Amendment. ln this conneclio11 it moy be mentioned that 
It Js not unusual that the State Government allow the 
members of the State Forest Serv,ce to go on deputation 
to ex-cndre posts connected with Forestry even 1n a 
company, association or body or Individuals, whether in­
corporntccl or not, which is wholly or substantially owned 
or controlled by the Government, (he Municipal o:r a local 
body and nn lntcrnationnl Organisation an autonomous 
body not conlrolll.ld by Governmen or a private body. 
Duling their temporory absence from lhe State Forest 
Service such officcra hold liens of posts in and continue to 
be memQcrs or the Stutc Forest Service. In the citm>:m­
stances. they nrc entitled to count service in ex-cadre 
post towards completing the minimum sel'\-ice p•·escribed 
for eJig!btlity for consideration or the Members of the 
State For<>st Service for appointment by promotion to the 
Indian Forest Sen·lce lt is to make this poSition more 
expUcit and to ensure that the various State Governments 
adopt n uniform nppronch In the matter that an explana­
Uon has been added below Regulation 5 o( the IF'S 
(Appointment by Promotion) Re~Jntions. 1966 1n April. 
1978. A~ the amendment of 1976. consequent to which an 
·Explanation' has been added in 1978, was given retros­
pective effect. Thus there was no alternative but to gi>-e 
the latter amendment aLso the retro<pectivc etfPCt and 
the question of this amendment aff'eetmp; adverse!; · the 

ini.Clrest o{ any memb<:r of the Jndian Forest Serv1ces doE$ 
no~ arise.'' 
2.4 The Comm!Uct: at tl.s meeting held on the 11th April, 1979 
considered the comments o! the Ministry. The Committee could not 
understund the logic of the mcm~rs o! the State Forest Services 
being allowed to go on deputation to a private body and their lien 
being held in their parent l;ei"Vlce. The Comm.:ttee, therefore, de­
cided to hear the Sceretary In the Department or P!ll'Sonnel. 
2.5 The Committee at its meeting held on the 26th July, 1979 
heard the representatives or the Department of Personnel. The 
Secretary Informed the Committee that when the Indian Forest 
Service was constituted. the intent on was that nl1 the Gazetted 
Officers of the SUite Forest Services who had completed a certain 
per od of time would be cltgible for appointment. In one SUite, West 
Bengal, howe-.·er there w<>re two Forest Servi~ne a direct!) 
recruited Senior State Forest Service nnd the other Junior State 
Forest Service recruitment to which was ronde by promotion irom 
a lower level; both were ifo!zctled. In the rules, for the tnitial con· 
slitution of the Service, the Department of Personnel provided that 
officers of both Services would be eligible for consideration for subse­
quent promotion to lhe Indian Forest Service In the normal procedure 
o[ promotion. 'rhe regulations, however. prescribed that it should 
be [rom those who h:ad h~ld posts of Assistanl Conservator of Forests 
for R pe1·lod or 8 y'ears. '!'hot was a little more restrictive in nature 
tnon the original rules for the constitution o£ the service. One of the 
members or th~ ,funior ~·orest Se~'VIce challenged the restrictive 
promot>on regulatiOn In the! C~lculla High CctUrt and the Calcutta 
High Court struck down lhe promotion regulations to the extent, 
they restricted the ('ligibility to only persons who were Assistant 
Consc•rvators or Forest~ And they stated tha~ the entire portion of 
the regulation was void ab mitio. In order to fill up that lacuna, in 
!976, the Department or Personnel had to amend the regulations 
with retrospective elfect from 1006, from the time the original regu­
lations came Into force . "When amending the regulations. we said 
that thev •hould hold posts in the State Forest Serlice'' . One of 
the State Governments pointed out to the Department of Personnel 
that lht' amendment us lt stOOd could not be interpreted as debarring 
officers who were not holding posts directly in the State Forest 
Service but who were holding an equivalent post on deputation to 
vanous State public enterprises. Forest Corporatiom and the like. 
The nmb•gultv 1\"DS ~~mined ond It was accepted that the in1erpre­
t:\Uon was po ;sible. It was not Government's ln~tion •h3t person;, 
nn dl'nutatinn to vnr1ous corporations or the others. although the) 

tl 
were members of tb~ Stale Jl'ot·~t Service, lhat period o! their 
service should be excluded for uetennlnation of their eligibility for 
promotion. lt was in that cont.eA"t that in 1978, an explanatory memo­
randum was added to the regulations to clarify the position. Since 
it was a clariiy;ng amendment whtch was made in 1976, retrospec­
tively, !t was nu.'<:ssary 1o mention that the clar1fication wauld also 
apply from 1966. 
The Secretary was asked what was the nature of the private 
bodies he hnd mentioned and whether the officers wbo were sent 
to private bodies still continu'!d to mamtain their lien in their 
parent department. The Se<:retary replied that in the All India 
Services. theu~ had been very rare instances of officers being de­
puted to private bodies. It was, therefore, a sort of all-embracing 
explanation so as to cover all possible cases and not -;;xcluding per· 
sons in the State Forest Service merely on some technical grounds. 
The Secretary was again asked "But h~re is a complete!)· private 
body and the question is once a person joins a private body. whether 
he still continues to be n Government servant? That seems to us 
to be very incon~istent. How can he hold a li~n in the parent 
department when he join~ a completely private body? Before 
making this amendment, dld you .eek any fUrther clarification from 
the Tamil Nadu Government whiclt raised this question? Whether 
from the Tamil Nndu Covernmcnl's For.:sl ~rvice anybody bad 
actually been fiCnt on deputation to a private bo<;ly; if. ~o. what the 
nature of that private boc:ly wns; whd the nature of the lien c;~f that 
office was? Did you make the~e queries or did you just Issue the 
notification expecting the likelihood or on offi~r beinq l:leputed to 
a private body? What is the position?" The representative of the 
Ministry told thot such instances w~re very rare. There had been 
one or two instanc!'S of that kind in the Indian Administrative Ser­
vice also and the JFS Cadre Rules were more or less the same as 
the TAS Rules. He furthe• added "lf at an Government takes over 
a unit be!or~ It I• brought under the Industries, Development and 
Regulations Act, 1931 and if somebody rrnm these servic'.!S has to 
go and work th!'re during the interregnum to protect the interests 
of lh!' Government, then somebody is sent there even though that 
unit continues to be a private body Such s:tuations might arise 
and to cover su~h sit·.Jations a ~imilar provi~ion ha.s been incorpo­
rated in the TFS (Cadre) Rule$, 1966." 
The Secretary odder! that some or the ~1emorials (or the late 
Prime Mini~ter, etc. were purely private bodies. Certain Govern­
ment servanl~ worked in th~ bO<Iies on deputation. 'They were 
on deputation and having their lien. The terms of deputation 
were settl ed in each individual ca~e. 

7 
The representatives during the cour:;e oi their evidence inform­
ed the Committee that they would subnUt a note to the Committee 
giving the background of the practice of loaning of services of officers 
of the All lnd1a S<•rvkes to prtvRtc bodies along with the number 
of such <>fficers sent on deputation to pnvatc bodies. 
2.6 The Department of Personnel t"ide their O.M. dated the lsi 
May, 1980 stated ns follows:-
....... in a he~rlng before the Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation of R~jya Sabha attended by the Secretary and 
the Joint Secretary (s) or this Department on the 26th 
July, 1979, the Committee desired to have the iollowing 
information:-
(i) The background relating to the incorporation of !be pro­
vision of rule 6 relating to deputation of cadre officers, 
of the Tndlan Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 
1954 nnd the fndian Forest Sen.-ice (Cadre) Rules, l96ff, 
more specifically the provisions of rule 6 (2} (ii) relat­
ing to deputation of cadre officers to private bodies 
under the r·~pective cadre rules of TAS'IPSjiFS. 
(!i) How many lASjJPSjlFS officers are on deputation to 
private bouies under the provisions of rule 6 of the 
respective cadro rules as on todl!,y viz. the 26th July, 
J979?1' 
2. A~ l'l!gord• (i) nbove, the tAS (Cadre) Rules were notified 
ror the first time ln September, 1954. Rule 6 of 1hc Cadre 
Rul~s deals With the deputation of the cadre officers. 
OrigiMlly, the rule provid~s as follows:-
"A Cadre officer may, with !be concurrence of !be State 
Government or the Stale Gcvernmenls concern'!!! and 
the Centoal Govcmment, be deputed for service under 
th'! Central Government or another State Government , 
3. In 1958, the M.inistry of Finance amended Fundamental 
Rules II and 110 to the cffccl that a Government servant 
could be deputed to ~crvicc on posts undoer autonomous 
corporations w1thout obtaining prior consent of the Govern­
ment servant and without any claim for extra remunera­
tion. These rules were further amended by which !be 
words 'a body incorporated. owned or controlled by tho:! 
Gowmmcnt' were substituted by the words 'a body in­
corporated or not, which is wbolly or substantially owned 

ll 
or controlled by Gowrnment' Fundamer1tal Rules 11 
and 110 read as under:-
"F.R. 11. Unless 10 an)' case It be otherwise distinctly pro­
vided, the whole time of a Government servant is at 
lhe disposal of the Government v.itich pays him and 
he may be employed lll any manner requ'rcd by pro­
per authorll\' w,thout clatm for additlonal remuneration. 
whethC'l' the services required of him. are such as would 
ordi.nllry be remunerated (rom the Consolidated Fund 
of Government of India, from a loc .1 fund or {rom the 
funds of a body mcorporatcd or not. which is wholly 
or substantially owned or contrOlled by the Govern-
ment.'' 
"F.R. I ~0 (a) No Government ~c.rvant may be transferr~ 
to forci1Jn scl'\'lCC agnmst his will 
Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply to the trans­
fer of a C.ovcrnment servant to the servi<l'! of a bodY 
Incorporated or not, which lS wholly or substant\ally 
owned or controlled by \he Government 
(b) Tr.tnsfcr to ioreign s•rvicc oulside tndia may be sanc­
tioned by the Central Government ~ubjcct to any restric­
Uon which II may deem fit t<> tmpQsc by general or 
special order.~ 
Rule 6 or the lASilPS cadre Rules was also amended, under 
Notillcation No. 2\\9160-IAStl) and (11) d1lted2 -2.-1961 
to provide for the deputation of members of !AS to bodies, 
incorporo.ted or not , wholly or substantially owned· or 
controlled by Goverruncnt. 
4. It is not the normal practice (or a Government s~t to 
be deputed to serve in a private undertaking. There is a 
general pro\·\sion that Government employees can be 
deputed to 'foreign service· the term 'foreign service' 
having been d'!fined under F.R. 9 (7) to mean:-
~Service In which a Government servanl. received his sub­
~tanth·e pay with the sanction of Government from 
an)· source other lhan the Consotidat~ Fund of India." 
FR. I II provides thnL :1 transfer to foreign <r.n-ice is not 
admissible unless (I) the duttes to be performed after 
the transt•:r are such os should for public reasons. be 
rendered by Government sentanl , nnd (ii) the Go,-em­
ment servant t•ansferred holds at the ume of trAASfer a 
• 

post paid from the Consolidated Fund or holds a lien 
on such a post had hi'S lien not been suspended. 
Under this F.R. there i~ a Government o£ India decision which 
reads as follows:-
"lf m any case a proposal ts made tha\ a Go\·ernment S'<r· 
vant should be lent to a private undertaking, it is 
necessarv that the principles of this rule should be 
applied most rigorously. one generally the loan of Gov­
ernment officer to a prh-ate undertaking should be 
regarded as a \'cry exceptional case requiring special 
justlflcal.lon.'' 
Thus m exceptional circumstances. a Government servant 
may be deputed to serve in a private undertaking. The 
question whether Rule 6 of C-adre Rules should be 
amended to provide for deputation to a private body was 
considered in detaiL It was felt that since deputation 
under 11 private undertaking would not be a normal 
!eaturc, fl would not be necessary to make such an en­
abling provisions in Cadre Rules. Instructions were 
Issued to the State Governments under tett~r No. 6163' 62-
AIS (l) dated 2nd March. 1963. making it obligatory on 
the part of the State Governments lo obtain the concur­
rence of lhc Gov,rnment of Lndia in the case of deputa­
tion of 11 cadre officer to foreign service. It was fell that 
the general defln,ltion of 'Foreign Service' would covet 
d~putation under a private undertaing as well. 
5. This was designed to ensure that if an lAS Officer is 
required lo be deputed fo• tempcrary service with a 
private bodylconcern, it may be under th~ rules with the 
specific nporoval of the Government oi India and his 
terms and conditions of deputation will be subject to the 
prior approval of the Go'-emment of India. lt was felt 
that til.-! terms of deputation will have to be fixed with 
due regard on onl' hand to the nature of responsibilities 
d.lschnrgcd by him and the salary and allowances of his 
parallel colleagues in the private sector and on the otho>.r 
the need Cor malntaining a reasonable proportion to what 
the officer and his colleagues of equal standing get 
und-:r Government 
h. There were also ccrta.n types of deputations £or wbicb there 
was no provision In the Cadre Rules at that time. Such 

·-
10 
deputations were to (i) international bodies; (ti) auto­
nomous bodies not COttt•olled by the Government; and 
(iii) municipal corporation and local bodies. 
In 1964, the question of amending rule 6 of the cadre Rules, 
further to regulate the deputations falling under the 
above categories was examined. The Ministrv of Law 
advised ~at municipal corporation constituted under 
Statutes are not bodies substantially owned or contTolled 
by the Government although und'?r the Statutes, Gov­
ernment have reserved powers to appoint certain officers 
like Comrnl•<ioners, Deputy Commissioners etc. Th2 L01w 
l\lin 'stry abo felt that such appointments would be on de­
putation on foreign service and this should be done 
only with t h~ consent of the officer unless the rule was 
amended. On further con~ideralion. it was decided that 
the officer's consent should not be necessary for deputa­
tion to local bodies becau.~c local bodies on various levels 
are a part of our administrative fabric. It was also felt 
lhot proposed amendment to rule 6 should cover deputa­
tion of cadre officers to private bodies also which, as 
alre~dy stated. would be exc~ptional in nQture. In con­
sultation with the State Government, Tul.e 6 of the Cadre 
Rule was amended under Notification No. ~Jl6l64-AJS(l) 
dated the 6th &-pfember. ll'ti5. '!'he amended rule 6 of 
Lhc cadre n1le!< was a~ ronows:-
"6. Depurati on of cudrc officcrc;--
(1) A cadre nfl\cer may with the concurrence of the State 
Govl'rnm"nt or lh£' State Governments concerned and 
the Centrnl Government be deputed for service under the 
Ct•ntrni Government or another Stat" Government 
or under a company, M~ocintion or body of individuals, 
whether incorporatl'cl or not, which i• wholly or substan­
tially owned or controlled by the Governmc.nt . 
(!.!) A c:tdrc officer mny al•n he deputed for senice under:-
(i) a :\funicipal Corpnrntlon or a Local Body. by the State 
c;.,,•ernmcnt en whose cadr-'.l he i< borne. or by the 
Ccntrnl Government with the roncurrence of th~ Stnte 
Government on who~e cadre he is borne. as tb."' ease 
may be: and 
(ii) an intemational orE:anisation. :>n autonomous body 
not ~ontrolled by the Go\·ernment , or a prh•ate body. 
by the Crntral Covcrnm~nt in c ·n<U:tation with the 
State Covemmen~ on who<e cndre be is !x>me: 

I I 
Provided that no cadre officer shall be deputed to any 
orgamsation or body- o( the lj-pc referred t.o in it•m 
(il) of this sub-rule except with his consen:." 
Even under the ampllficd rules, as quoted above, it was 
obligatory on the pnrt of lh.<? State Governments to ob­
lain the pnor concurrence oi Cenual Go,·ernment for 
dcputmg their cadre officers to public enterpnses under 
thctr control. In 1968. it was felt that th~e powers could 
be delegated to the State Governments. In CO!ll.-ultation 
wtth the State GovC"T'nCnts, the rule v.-as further amend­
ed under Notification No. 6 69 63-AIS{l) dated 21st May, 
1969. In this NotificatiOn a further protection was made 
to the effect that no cadre offie"?r shall be deputed to a 
post carrying a prescribed p:.y pay scale the ma..-dmum 
of which Is less tllan the bn,ic P"Y which he would have 
drawn in the c:.dr~ but for deputation. The amended 
rule as tt stunds today "6. Deputation oj cad.-e officers: 
(I) A mdrc otllcer may, with the concurrence of the State 
Govemm~nl or the State Governments concerned and 
I he Central Go\•ernment, be d<!puted (or service under 
the Central Government or another State Government or 
und~r n company, association or body of individuals, 
whether lncorporalecl or not, which is wholly or substan­
tially owned or controlled by the Central Gov ernment 
or by r•nolher State Governmcnl. 
{2) A cadre oClkcr may "lso be de>puwd for service under:-
{i) a company, association or body o{ individuals, whether 
incorporated or nnt. which is wholly or substantially 
owned or controlled by a State Government, a Muni­
cipal Corporation or a Locn Body. by the State Gov­
ernment on who~e cad•e he is bome; and 
(i!) an internat·onal organisation, nn autonomous body, 
not controlk'<l by the Government, or a private body, 
by • the ~ntral Go\·emment In consultation with the 
Stat(' Government on whos~ cadre he is borne: 
Provide-d that no cadre office• shall be deputed to anv or~­
nlsation or body of the type referred to in ite~ (ti), 
except with his consent: 
Provided further that "" cadre officer shall be deputed 
under sub-rule (I) Clr S'Ub-rule (2) to a post carrying 
a prescribed pay which i• less than or a pay scale, the 

12. 
maximum of which is less than, the basic Pl'Y he would 
have drawn in the cadre post but for his deputation." 
7. On the analogy of this amendment rule 6 of the Indian 
Police Servi<:P- (Cadre) Rules, 195~ and the Indian 
Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966 relating to deputa. 
lion of officers of these services was also amended. 
8. As regard it.crn (ii) of part I above no lAS or IPS Oflicer 
remainL"<i on deputation to a pri,·ate body as on 26-7-79 
under rule 6 of the lAS and IPS (Cadre) Rules. As for 
offieers of the Indian Forest Service. no officer borne on 
Assarn.:'.feghalaya, Bihar, Gujarat, ffaryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Kcrala, Madhya Pradesh. i\laharashtra, Orissa, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Sikkim and Union Territories remained on d~ 
putotion to any privat.c body as on 26-7-1979. Replies and 
furthe1· clarifications from the Go,·emmcmts of Andhra 
Prnd'!Sh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka. :Manipur-Tri­
purn and Nagaland are still awaited. They are being re­
minded to furnish the mforrnation asked for. On. receipt 
of thelrffi rephes, comph~l,. Information will be furnished.~ 
2.7 At Its mce\lng IJ.cid on the 21st May, 1980, the Committee 
considered the matter in lighl ()( lhe jnformation. given by ~he De­
partment of Pe~onnel and decided to nwait in{ormation trom the 
remaining Stptcs to have a complete picture in th~ matter. 
2.8 The Department Of .Personnel vide jts OM. dated the 2nd 
June, 1980, gave the following added lnfonnatioQ.:-
" ... that information has <ince been rece~ved In respect ot 
Himachal Pradesh and Kamataka Cadres of the Indian 
Forest Service. There State Governments have inti­
mated that no Indian Forest Servjce Officer of their 
Cadres was on deputation to private bodies as on the 
26th July, 1979. 
The replies and further c:larifications from the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura and Nagaland are 
still awaited. On rece1pt of the replies, the information 
with regard to Andhra Pradesh, and Nagaland Cadri!S 
and the JmRt Cadre of M:anipur-Tripu."'ll of the Indian 
Forest Service will also be furnished to the Rajya Sabha 
Secretariat." 

• 
• 
13 
2 9 The Dcpnlt!Uent of Personnel V!Ck the'r O.M. dated the 
27th October, 1980 staled·-
" 
. 
Govermncn\s o{ Manipur and Tripura have intimated 
that ;~o Indian Forest Service Officer was deputed to 
private bodies. 
2. Reply from the Gov~rnment oi Nagaland is still awaited. 
Clarofleauons !rom the Government of Andhra Pradesh 
are also nwru•ed. A funher communication will be sent 
a' soon as the requesite information is received from the 
State Government." 
2.10 The .M.n:stry vid., the'r O.M. dated the 23rd October, 1981 
r·~rthcr mformcd:-
•· no IFS officer of the Nagallllld cadre was on deputatton 
to a private body as on 26-7-1979. 
2 The complete information 1s still awaited !rom the Gov­
ernment or And.hra Pradesh and will oe furnished as 
soon a~ ~eived In this Department." 
2.11 The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 5th June, 1982 
fmally Informed:-
" . The Government of Andhrn Pradesh have intimatecl 
that as on 26-7-1979 the following officers of the S\ate 
Cad1·c of fh<' Indian Forest SeTVice were on deputa~on t.o 
tl1e organisafions me.,tloned against their names 
which are private bodies undeT rule 6(2}(ii) of the I.F.S. 
(Cadre) Rules, 1966:-
1. :"\llrl 0, H. IAf<llhJnip!\lhi 
2 ~hri (' S:lt'\'f•l~ Rlltl 
S• Shri S R.tth.lh An 
4f 9ui T. C K.rsa ... · Rao • 
~ ~" P CbandiQ(kbara R:w 
6. Sbri .\ II. Mo.ni 
Stari R:w.:1l01~ Paprr \fill,- Limite-d, 
Kurnnol. 
\I.'S G<>d.\\,·an· r1~ l.imit<d, H)'k"'· 
bad . 
\ 1'. PApa ~fills. !Ujolnmmdry 
>\, P~ RA)"Oll'l f.iQUtrd., H':-dcr:::a.b:~cl. 
s.,vur Paper Milh. 
~"'"""" Li.,;f<d, Sn:undernl»d. 
2. The Government of Andhra Pradesh and the Andhra 
Pradesh Industrial Development CoTpOmt.ion. which is 
fully owned by the State Government, or both, l!ave 
financial Interests In these private bodies in the form of 
inves tment in thl'ir share capitol. Nominees of the State 

2.7 A 
consider 
partmen 
remainh 
2.8 'I 
June, 19 
Tho 
1 l 
Govermnent or ol thl' Corporation or of both are on the 
Boards or the Directors of these private bodies. Further, 
m 5 nut of these 6 pnvnte bodies, institu'ions such as th~ 
Industrial Development Bank of India, Industrial Credit 
and Investment Corporation of India. Industrial Finance 
Corporation (l[ lnd1a, Life Insurance Corpor~tion of 
lnd1a and nat•onallsed banks are either represented on 
the Boards of Directot> or have equity participation " 
2.12 At its mcc:hng held on the 14th December, 1982, the Com­
mittee considered the above and del:ided to bear the Secretary, 
Department of PcNOnnel and Atlministrative Reforms for seeking 
clarificat•ons;eJucJdahons in the matter. 
2.13 The Committee heard the Secretary, Department or Per­
sonnel and Administrative Reforms at its meeting held on the 
27th Jant•ary 1983 
The Secretary informed the Committee that enabling provis.lons 
had been made in the Indian Forest Service. in the !ndian Admin· 
i~trativc S..rvlce as well as to the Indian Police Servtce. The 
officers of these s~rvlces could be deputed to private bodies. tn 
the Department of ForClsL in Andhrn Pradesh. six officers had been 
deputed in the Joint Sector compnnies of Andhra Government and 
the prlvnt<' promoter~ where the Andbra Pradesh Government 
had flnnncial interests, and had equity parti~ipation. The Statt 
Government thought Lhol the interest of public as well llS th~ 
Govornm<>nt would bP ~erved if some responsible Government 
officer was there in the company. 
ln (lndhrn Pradesh, by sending these officers, they made ~ure 
that the affairs were managed well. Of course, the State Govern· 
ment's representatives were also on the Board of Directors. 
As on that particular date. the 26th July, 1979, for which 
iu(ormalion was asked for, except for Andhra Pradesh, no othex 
State Government told the Centr:~l Govexnment that people had 
been deputed. 
On being asked that in Mahacasblra the Joint Sector Companies 
on 50 : 50 basis, by wn:cb one could understand the control was 
there. lf there was 20 or 25 per cent participation. there was no 
control by the State, the representatives replied that 50 per cen 
was the public contribution, and in the 50 per cent equity they h 
25 : 25. The prov1s1on was thrre-FR rn. They had deputed ont 
officer to th~ Rnyalnscema Paper M•lls. On the Board of Direc!olf, 

• 
• 
• • 
• 
H> 
one IAS Ol!!cer vras the Chairman. Then there were representa­
tives of the APIDC the IDBI and then there were two or three 
others_ When asked what were the CO'Ilditions of service the 
Secretary replied that the terms of deputation were determined 
wltb the con~urr.,ncc of the Government of India. 
Asked what was the reason fo: sending Government officers to 
a company, whether it was because there were complaints of mis­
management, or whether there was any case of misappropriation 
or anything of that kind, or whether it was done at the request of 
the Management? The representat,ve replied that he contacted the 
Ch:ef Secretary Government of Andhra Pradesh and gather that 
that wa.< done !n 8 normal course. Wherever there was State parti­
lip.1tlon they made the condition that on official of the State Gov­
ernment would also be there. 
The Secreary further stated that those forest officers, were sent 
to tho.<e places tccause they were forest based industries. While 
sending ' dc)3'UtOl•On ihe concur.ence of the Government of India 
was required which wa~ not obtained. 
2.14 The Comm1llee lhen dec:•ded to bear the Chief Secretary. 
Government of Andhra Pradesh in the matter. 
2.15 The Principnl Secretary, Forest and Rllral Development 
Oepnttment. Government of Andhrn Pradesh. appeared before the 
Committee nt its meeting held on the 29th September. 1983. 
At the outset lhe Chaitman invited the attention o1 the Prin­
cipal Secretary to the QQvcrnment of Andhra Pradesh to a deci­
sion U.ken under F. R. 111 which reads as und.<~r:-
' "Tf ln nny case a proposal is made that a Government ser-
vant should be lent to a private undertaking, it is neces­
sary that the principl~ of this rule (F. R. 111) should 
b~ applied most rigorously, and generally the loan of 
Government officer to a privnte undertaking should be 
regarded as n very except;onal ~e requiring special jus­
tification.'-
The Principal Secretary, in reply stated that under the Cadre 
Rules and all;o under the regulations governing the Cadre, there 
was a sp:c!fic provision "that officers may be deputed to private 
bodit>S. So far as l know, there is no such condition that it should 
be only in exceptional circumstances." 
1427 RS-2. 

IG 
He sought to justify the deputing of officers of the Indian Forest 
Service to privnte bodies. H2 said that doing so was ln the interest 
of Govt. of Andhrn Pradesh and il :1lso protected tbe forests whose 
produce was the primary rnw material for those industries. 1t 
would also ensure that the forest produce was exploited in a plan­
ned manner as there wa.• perhapS no other agency which could give 
the expertise required for managing the forests. 
The Chairman , however, insisted that Government of India 
decision taken under the F. R clearly laid that if in any case a 
proposal was made that a Government servant should be loaned 
to a private undertaking, it was necessary that the principles or 
this rule should be applied most rigorously and generally the loan 
of Govemmcnt Officer to a pr"·atc underU!k.ing should be regarded 
as a very S!)«!Cial CIIS'!, requiring special jusHfication . 
The Principal Secretary in reply said that "to the extent that 
prior concurrence of the Government of India is taken, the Gov­
ernment of India no doubt wlll •oke into account tbe provisions of 
F.R. and the Government dec:sion taken there under." He however 
admitted that in such cases from 1979 to 1983, prior concurrence 
of the Govt. of Tndla could not b<:: obtained and to that extent he 
agreed that I~ was a lapse on their pa<l. Asked about the number 
of such cases, he staled that from 1979 to 1983 in ~i:t" cases advance 
c permission had not been obtained He gJso admitted that e..x-po~t..facto 
p sanction In these ca.~es had been sought after the Committee took 
t up lhe maller. 
During the couro;e of oral ~vidence the Principal Secretary fur-
J nlshed to the Cnmmit!t:c U1e iollowlng documents: 
(1) Statement showing the particular of officers on 
tion til various organisations and the details 
(AnMxure-I). 
deput.a­
thereof 
(ii) Particular of I. F. S. Officers who stand deputed to 
private bodies as al present (Annexure- II). 
(iii) Particular• of l. F S Officers who were deputed to 
prl vate bodies. earlier. but who ba,·e since reverted from 
such deputahon (Annexun;..ill) . 
2.16 The Committee then decided to hear the Secretary Depart­
ment ot Personnel and Administrative Reforms !or further clari· 
fications!elucidaUons In the matter . 

• 
• 
l • 
2.17 lJI the meantime, the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh, vide his D 0 letter, dated 23-9-83 (received in this Sectt 
on 3-1~), olso !umish!Xl the following information on the 
subject:-
"2. The Stale Gov~rnment have been deputing 1. F S 
Officers to some of the wood based industries in the 
Slate from hrne to time as provided in Rules 6 (2) of 
lndl8n Forest Sen-ice (Cadre) Rules, 1966. The circum­
stances In whtch the obove depul.'ltions have been order­
!Xl by the Government arc briefly outlined as under:-
(1) Besides two well established paper industries namely, 
Andhra Pradesh Paper Mills. R:ljahmundry and Sirpur 
Paper Industry, Kagaznas:ar, 6 more wood-based in­
dustries have been esta bl,ished in this State between 
the period 1976-./1980 which are as follows: 
(i) Sri RayoJascema Paper Mills Ltd., Kurnool. 
(ii) Mls Godavary Plywoods Ltd., Hyderabad, 
(hi) Bhadrachalam Paper Boards Ltd. 
(iv} Andhra Pradesh Rayons Ltd., Hyderabacl 
(v) Novnpan Ltd., Secundrabad. 
(vi) Hyderubad Plywoods Ltd. 
ThC!1ic industries depend on the forest produce agreed to 
be supplied by the Forest Departm~nt for their raw 
material. 
(2) The dcputatiot' would help to safeguard the int~ 
rests of the Government whlch have mad~ investment 
in some of these institutions. 
('3) lt would also help tbe Forest Department to ensure 
that the forflt produce committed to the industries by 
the Government is extracted from the forest scienti­
fically accord.ing to the silvicullura! practices. 
(4) TI1erc Is no other source to pro\'ide eom~tent men to 
the Industries to look after the management of raw 
materiaL~ to wood-based lndu,stries. In some cases, the 
induslri"S have employed retired r. F. S. and State 
Service Officers. 

HI 
3. The State Govemm~nt continues to be the only source for 
providing competent forest officers to the industries 
Even the State owned forest Development Corporation in 
which the Government of India has also invested in 
share capital largely depend upon the Government for 
their m:1n power requirement. Only reeent1y, they have 
made n beginning to recruit personnel directly !or man­
n:ng some of the field level posts. Even then it may take 
5 to 8 years for them to build up a cadre of their ow!\. 
In vtew of the State Ownership of the Corporation and 
to ensure better co-ordination between the Corporation 
and the ~partment. cH!putation of senior forest officers 
from the Go,·ernment is cons:dered essentiaL The continu­
ed deputation of forest officers to these institutions has 
become indispensable ir. the conte~"t of the foUowing 
developments:-
(!) With the Cast deplcding forest resources from the 
natural forests, the industries have now to seek other 
sources of supply not only to ensure sustained supply 
to take care of their ex.isting capacities. but also to go 
in Cor eXl)ansion which is essential for every growing 
industry. In this connection, the For~st Department 
is persundlnrr the industries to take to raising th~ir 
own plantnUons. ~ Raya1aseema Paper Mills has 
takctl up n "Farm Forestty" scheme with loan assistance 
!rom NABARD on ptiv.ate land.~. Formulation, imple­
mentation and monitoring of ruch a project would 
certainly requlre guidance from competent forest offi­
cer nnd that is the re:1son that the State Government 
have continued the deputation of a Cons~rvator of 
Forests to this Company. In further. similar schem<' 
are likely to be taken up by the other Companies also. 
(U) B!!Sides thc~c wood based industries. certain other ins­
titutions like Tirumala Tirupathi Devasihanams require 
fuel wood to a larl(e ex~ent and Singareni Collieries 
Company Limited would require certain types of timber 
as props etc. in their collieries. They have also plans to 
take up social forestry programmes in a big way. With­
out the assistance of experien~ foresi officer. they 
would not be able to take up such schemes. 

, 
' 
1 
• r 
hi 
4. Under the c~rcumstances, it is felt that there is need to 
continue this prncltce of deputing experienced forest offi· 
cers to samE.' of th<.> Instit utions in the State which need 
them. 
2.18 The Conurultec at its meeting held on the lOth October, 
1983. heard the representatives of the Department of Personnel 
and Administrative Reforms in the matter. During the course of 
the oral e'-idenc:e lhe Secretary informed the Committee that 
w.e .J, June 1983. the entire management of lhe Indian Forest 
Strvice bad been pas,ed on to the Ministry of Agriculture. 
2 19 The Committee after some discu.ss10n decided to hear the 
Secretary, :'vhmslry of Agnculture for seeking clarifications 
elucidations in the matter. 
2.20 rn the me;mhme, the Prmcipal Secretary (Forests and Rum\ 
Development Dep:~rtment) t•ide his letter dated 7th October, 1983, 
iorwnrded tht> followtng h1rther information: 
"Kindly recall to the evidence given by me before toe Com­
miU<Jc on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha on 
29-9-1983 When I explamcd the details of the LF.S. 
OJliccrs deputed to the wood based industries, the Com­
mittee wanted to know the details of the cases referred 
to th~ Government of Tndia. In this connection, I am 
to pomt out that the Slate Government had obtained the 
approval of the Government of India tor such deputation~ 
u pto 1977. However. some of the connected records on 
theSe cases have been destroyed duo:! to efllux of time. 
But copie~ of the ltJiters of the Stat.e Government and 
letters of Govl of India in which proposals '~\'ere sent 
to Governm<!nl of lndia and concurrence obtained trom 
them in respect of following officers nre enclosed fnr 
ready reference 
(Vide Annexure; III. TV V. VI. VU & VITI) 
l. Sri S. Raghavan. TFS 
2. Sri A. H. Moosvi. IF'S 
3. Sri Ch Laxmfpatbl, IF'S 
• 
Th Government have again furnished proposals to the Gov­
"mment nf £ndia for I heir approval as desired by them in respect 
nr II th .. offi"l'r< '''hO n:lw• been deputed to the wood based indus-

:w 
tries and repatriated during the previous years and also in respect 
01 the officers v:ho are still on deputa lion. A copy of lhis Govern­
ment'~ letter together with the particulars of the officers sent to 
Government of 1 ndiu nrc enclosed ·• 
(Vide Anne>.-ures ill to VTll) 
2.21 On t!'le basis of the discussions held in above meeting the 
Sccret:\ry. Ministry of Agriculture was requested to appear before 
the Committee at 3.00 P.:\1. on the 21st October 1983 to give 
certain dariflcalions!elucidalion~ in the matter. The ~finis try was 
also ~(erred "" the 12th October. 1983 to furnish their comments' 
tnformal.lon on some points, as under.-
"The ·.mdersigned IS directed t<> state lhat lhe Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation ts Scrutinising the above men­
tioned regulations The Comm·ttee heard the SecreU!ry 
Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms, 
Government of India and also the Principal Secretary to 
the Andhru Prade<h Government in this regard. It is 
understood that the operation of service is being trans­
ferred to thr Ministry of Agriculture by the Department 
o! Personnel ond Administrative Reforms. 
ln the snid Rcgulntions Explanation ill bas been added to 
Regulation 5 of the said Regulations, stating that the 
service in the posts included in the State Forest Service 
would also include service rendered in ex-cadre posts 
connected with Corcsiry whelher under the Government, 
or in inter alia a private body. Tfie Committee would 
like to scok certain clarificat 1ons, from the Secretary, 
Ministry of Am-iculture in this regard . 
• • • 
It may also be clarified whether the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh hns obtained prior!C.t·J)<)s1-facto permission from the 
Ministry for putting any of the officers of the Indian Forest Service 
to serve •n any private body connected with forestry In that state; 
if ~o. the details with regard to the Personnel at present serving 
in privati' bodies may kindly be supplied well in advance." 
2.:!2 The :'11inistry of Agriculture vide their 0 M. dated the 20th 
October, 1983, while confirming the appearance of the Secretary. 
Agriculture before the Committee furnished the following lnform~­
tion:--
ond to confirm that Shri S. P. ~fukherjee Secretarv 
(Agriculture & Cooperation). \\ill appear before the 

• 
• ' 
21 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation at 3.00 P.M. on 
Friday, lhe 21st October, 1983, as desired. 
2, As regards para 4 of lhe 0. M. rcrerred lo above necessary 
information has already been furnished by the Govern­
ment of And bra Pradesh tride D. 0. tetter liro. 41581jFor. 
0 /82, dated 7-10-83 . It would be observed from D 0. 
letter No. 4l58ljFor. Uf82-3 dated 6-3-83• from Shri K. 
Subramanyam, Prmcipal Forest Secretary, Govt. of 
Andhra Pradesh. addressed to Shri U. C. Agarwal, Sec­
retary , Department of Personnel and .'\drninJstratlve 
Reforms, that the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh have , .from 
time to lime, deputed 18 IF'S of!kers of their cadre to pri­
vate bodies (Paper Mills) under rule 6 (2) (ii) of the IFS 
(C1dre) Rules. 1966. Out of these cases, ex-post-facto 
approval of the Government of India had been conveyed 
by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in 
the !olo!Wing cases:-
- - - ----
~hrl v.s. s ... ry 
•· Shrl D.V ll11o 
~ Shri lll-.,..jan 
Pri\'ate 
bo<iyiQ 
.. hlch 
do·pul<d 
, Sirpur 
t"Bh 
A.P. 
P•pu 
~tnh 
·<f~ 
-
Period Perjod Sa.ncdan irttcor :-.tu. & or d.eputa. ror which datt. 
lion. approval 
w...-s given 
8·9·7~ 8.9·75 •lS-Gs/75· 
3 ' ·'" 76 7"9·78 A de 
lj'-l l •7!i 
~'9'75 •·9·75 -do-
•g-~ · 77 3•·8·78 
l5·3'70 
1?·8 77 
& 
f(t l fto n 
3·•·So 
6·g·;6 
4 ' ll 8o 
'"'31•/•~ln Al.Sdt. 
02•9 71 
m,.6!, 4!n 
AISd1 . 
•6·7 · 77 
•'l<nGI••In ,us dl. 
•6·7•77 
'j t I ;6 .S' IJ •j't) J-aM6/1.f.i'i; 
u';· 6 ·78 -4 IJ·n .AIS dt. 
,,~s.n 
------File No. 1-63/75-AIS dealing With cases (1) and (2) above 
Is available File No. 120261141771AJS dealing With cases 
(3) to (6) above is not readily traceable now. The in-
• (Vtde Annexure IV) . 

22. 
!ormauon given m respect a! theoe four cases is based 
on the records furrusbed by the G<lvt. o! Andbra Pradesh 
3. According to the tnformation contained tn the Government 
of Andhra PnldC$h letter dated 6-3-83 {addressed to the 
Deptt o! Personnel and Admimstrati\·e Reform,;) men· 
uoned abo''C. the Collov.·mg IF'S officer~ or the State Ca~ 
stood deputed to prlVII~ bodies during 1983:-
(il Shrl P L. Maraddy A. P. Paper Mills 
(ill Shri LaJahmlpa.thy Shl'ft" Rayal3yaseenu P3per Mills 
(uil Shrl C .N . Rao A .P. R:tyons L~d 
{lv) Shrl P B Vok:lt Reddy 
(v) Shrl K R:tj:tp1lf.h:tr Redd) T T Oevasthanam 
4 1t IS conflnned that In none of the cue mentioned above 
(E:'I:ccpt In respect of Sh. l.Dkshmipathy for the period 
upto 5-4..001 thl& Deptl. hllll accorded any permission to 
thu Government of Andhra Pr~desh for cleputAlion or 
It'S cadre officer tQ prlvalo bodies In !net In none of 
these CMes, the Stole Govttnmcnt appronched thls De­
partment for such permission r•ven on ·~posl-flll'to 
bas~ excl'pt that tn the case of Shn L<lkshmlpatity, as 
mcntionl'd abo\l•, the St.te Government :1ppears to hnvl' 
obtatn,•d ll"rmwl\ln Initially upto :.-l-80. But even in 
the cnsc of Shr1 Lnbhmlpathy, no pennlss:lon was sought 
or gln•.n for h s extended dl'putatlon beyond ~4-80. 
5 It may, howcv~r. he mt>nUoned that the Go\-ernment of 
Andhra Pradl'Sh, t'ldt• their lctkr d~tcd ~3-83 add!'l'ssed 
to 5«-t~tary ~artment of Personnel and Administr:l· 
ti\'e Reforms nppears to ba\'a requested for n.pos!-jactD 
approval In 11.U the cases of deputation of IFS Cadre ofll­
ccrs to private bodies. No sep:t...,.te reterenre has been 
made to this Department In thls matter· 
2. 23 The Secretary, Dep3rtment of Agriculture :md Cooperation 
r.ppean:d before the Co.-rJIUttee on the 21st Oc-:cober, 1983. 
:! 24 At the outset, the Secretary Informed :he Committe~ thM 
besides Andhra Pnldesh, the Karnataka Go\'C."lUllellt also had deput­
ed In 1979 one of thetr I F S . Officers to a private o:ganl~ation 

and the Central Government refused 10 i:l\"e the approval. Giving 
lh·~ rea'IOn:; Cor refusal, the Secretary bnelly stated:-
"t'irst of all, may I m:~ke one point cleo.r! It ls not as if these 
deputations to pn•-atc organlsaUons have been made only 
tn the State of Andhra Pradesh. We have been able to 
lrace a lllc which lhov.'l that the Kam11taka Govemmcnt 
Also hnd deputed one of the!r IF'S officers to a prwnte 
organisation and they sought our appro,-al fo:- that, and 
that approval wns refused by us That was as early as 
1970. But apart from this , .n, have not been able 10 
lay our bands on &n) other fi~ 10 know whether apart 
from Andbro Prade$h and Ka..-nataka any lFS officer 
from any othtt State has been sent to a private or~­
tlon.' 
In :\ndhrn Pradi'Sh C'Uc.' also he stated : 
'Smcc M s SJrpur Paper Mills I!Ild Andhra Pl'lld•'Sh Paper 
.\lilts aro Prlvnte Limned concerns, deputation or rFS 
onlccrs to these bodies ,,rc governed by rule 6(2) of the 
WS Cadr,. Rules Acc:ordlnJJiy, S Shri \'. S. Sastry and 
D. V Rno could be deputed to these bodies only by th<• 
Ct•ntrol Go•·~rnmcnt in t•onsultatlon with th~ St.:lte Go•·· 
ernment It \ViiS, therefore. necessary for th<· State 
Gov,·rnmcnt tu rcf,•r lhe•r case, to the Government of 
Cndia for prior appro,'nl for their dCJT.IIlllJon. However, 
(IS the otnc~rt have not been allowed any :tdditionnl re­
muneration or special pay beyond the•r grad~ pay; I om 
directed to convey th~ I!Z·po,~-jacto approvnl. . " o:nd 
SO Oil. 
1'nis ],.Iter i.! d.,IC(I 13th November, 1975. Here we had 
made lt clear that the Central Go,·emment's penrussion 
was necessary ." 
The ~retnry further &Uted that there was no confUSion bet­
Wet'n his dcpnrtment ond tbe Department o! Personnel & Adnrnfs.. 
trnUve Retorms. So far os lbe management of -~ IFS c.-adre In the 
nrious States was concerned, 11 Ia~· entirely and squ:trely with the 
Department of Agr!culturt- For instance, tht> Xamataka Govern­
ment referred their case 10 the 1>!-partment o! Personnel & Adminis­
trative Reforms That Department noted on the 6le k"F'R (~ 
receipt) may please be sent to the Departn!ent of --\gricultnre as 
they are concerned In thl! mat+.er " 

Then, the Secretary pomted out that in aU, 18 IFS Offieers of 
Andhra Pradesh had been gent on deputation to priva~e bodies since 
1009 but not m a single cll!e, prior perausslon o! the Central Govern­
mmt ·wns obtamcd E:r-p<J¥t.;Jacto appro,•al was >OUght in six cases. 
I.n two <-ntes, ex-post facto appro\'al was gJven for the entire period. 
In four cases, er.post faCio npp:·oval was gwen for the period for 
which they had ask~'() for, but those oiiirecs ~ntinued 1.1) b(! on 
deputatlon wathout nny turtbu extension of :approval That two 
cases were cov~red by u-pon facto appro•-al for the full period and 
lour C1ISCS only for a ~ penod In the remaining I!! cases, no 
e.r-post fa.cto appro\111 was sought . The Andbra Pradesh Go\-em­
ment on th" 6th March. 1933 sent 11 letter to the Department of 
Pt:rsonncl enclOSing a list of ollker. stating ~You gi\"1' us a-post 
facto approval'' The Andhra Pradesh' Government did not even 
have th~ courtesy to 5end a copy of the l<•ttcr to the ~partment 
of Acnculture lie nlso $Ultcd that the Centnal Gover.wnent were 
askans the Sutc Go,-,rnment for explanation The Department of 
t\grtculture sent IIIl oftlcl'r to Andhr11 Pr.Jda." to get a C"J'Y of the 
letter The)" GOt the b!ltcr on tbf! 19th O:tooo, 1933 whereas the 
~pnrtmrnt of Pcnonnel came to know those cll:.-t!S on ~1983 
He assured thnt In futllrc, no such thing w®ld talcC place wtthout 
tht• C•ntrnl Gov~rnment's DpprO\-nl. Tho Central Government 
wert• not giving nny •'.r-post fn•1o opproval Tho last was given 
in 1077. 
'f'hol Sccrl'!ury JurlhL•r ~tutt.'<l that once an IFS Officer was allo~ 
t~d fn a parllcu)ar Stole, )t, WM under the odminiatratlve control 
of that Stnlt• Gov~mment ·.mli!SS the mntler involved dlsc•pltnnry 
ncion or dl~mfssnl, For day-to-day adrrunlstratlon, he wns under 
thL• control of the S\Jitc Govcmm~nt. Thll~ WllS applleable to lAS 
or IPS olso. 
The Stocrctary nlso Informed that WJtn the appro\'Bl of the Minis­
ter of Agriculture , the Department of Agriculture had rut intenhon 
to issue an order that m future , it no request .. .-as made by the Sette 
Government for prior approval of the Central Government, the 
Central Go,·ernment ...,.ould not gh-c r.r-pon f.u:o approval in these 
t-ases. The Central Go\emment would also issue a warning to the 
officers who ,_ere sent on deputation to pnvate organisations that 
the should confum whether :M Central Government's approval "'-as 
tnken In those cases. If prior ~pproval was not taken, there could 
be a break m the1r sen·ace He added that under the circumstances 
no offic:er would lbre to go on deputalon He also informed that 
• 
' 

• 
) 
• 
under the c:~drc rules, ll1e consent or the officer was to he taken 
before he was scm on deputation to o }lrJvaJe organisatit>n. 
1hc Se<:rctaty felt that such cases s'hould have been constdered 
more c:J()l;cl)' and perhaps prior approval V."llS goven in a routine 
munncr before 1977 After 1977, the Department of Agnculturc 
bad three caJ>es, one In 19'i9, another Ill 1981), and the third :.n 1983 
but all the CllkS, were reJected. ln 1913, the Dep;;rtment got a 
requ"St from the Government of Oriuu for the deputo~tion of one 
c.llker to Mes$rs Sewa Paper Mllls a.'ld the case w:>.< rc)eetcd after 
carei'Ul eonSidOT'OUOn 
Ttw Sccrctuy slllted that 10 f.tr a \he dey.u.auon o[ olll.cers to 
!ordgn surv1cc lncl ng private bodlet was con~mcd, the supreme 
p.mdplt• that v.-as krpt In vii!W In the Govctumrnt v."DS whether 
anr pub! c purpose would bv ~eel by the deputation of thllt oll!cer 
which would not havt' been served If that oftl.ccr bad not been SQill 
~nd LOrno other people had been &ent, SeCondly, tlu· Deplll'UIKlnt 
b olanccd th~ ndv:m!Agc:: nnd disadvantAges by scndmg a wnlor ollil'cr 
to n prlVloll' orgnniJatlon mnd whether the plus pomt.s, thltt Ia, the 
udvtlntag•'S that wottld be made by the induction of that ofllcer to 
11 prlvat~ org~nl atlon would be more or l<'ss that the loss whtch 
the \.owmment Do:pnrtmcnt would aulter by the lnd•cr.tion of thnt 
olllc,•r Tlw tlnrd point that was t:oken mto account WitS wn~1hcr 
"lth the dcputaluln or that omcer to lhlll pl'lvate orgnnl'lohon. tho 
]mvate orgontsnhon would h~ve undue :tdvantage ov .. r oth•rs wltlch 
wo:ruld be t{J lbt• do.•trlment of the Government deparlml!lll or to 
other orgunl!<nUna, Tho.•t• points were UJ.kr.,n into consideratinn 
In rt'gnrrl to the cronlllct lwtwcPn thc FRs and the c~dre rule 6 wn:1 
concerned, the Sccr!'tnry felt that thc c:•dre rules dld not say In 
s~ctflc tPrm~ tlt.'l approve] ahould be given In a routine mnnner 
or ll should be gfven as 11 matter o! course. Cadre rule was silent 
on that point But the ruloes pro'idc thllt the Central Gove!'!Unent 
would take o deculon after consulting the State G<.vernments 
because th~ officer who '1'1-'llS bcmg deputed was worlang under the 
control of the Stale Go\·crrunent and while making a judgeroPTJt, 
thP. Cl'nli'Ill Government would keep in \iew those principles. 'l1le 
pnnnples which the Govemmt>nt of Indla took into account in 
applying l'und:tmcnml rules to their own offi~rs were a!)Plicablc 
to the All Tndift Service of!kers. Jt could not be S3id that " principle 
which "''" ,-aJ.Id for Ccn: ral Go\·1~l·runent officers •-:auld not bt' valid 
for All India Service Officers Bec:ause the cadre rule is silent, it 
could not be presumed that the Central Government could pve ;he 
permission as n matter o! routine a:1d would completely O\"Cl'look 

the princ•ple; being followed in the FR. This would not be 
warranted. Th('re \\"85 nothing m the cadre rule the Secretary 
added. whtch would prevent the Central Go•..,rnment in exercising 
th~ <·nteria "h1th \\-ere indicated In the fundamental rules in 
allowing nn All lnd~;~ Scn1te officer to go to a private bod)-. The 
detiloton o{ the Central Government which had been lnwcated below 
.t'R 111, not only could but should be applied and should be kept 
tn \"lCW while Inking a dec s1on whether an officer would be sent 
on dcputat.on to n prh•ate bodv or not. 
There Is a pot~t al dangt>r tf officen of the Forest Department 
bcmg sent on deputation m-en on n temporary basis to prl•-ate 
orgnmsatlons who had the r mterests tn the explo,tatlon of the 
fore ts not only bccau.o;e their loyalty would be di\1dcd but also 
bcca~ the subordlmte officlals who came In contact would know 
that the nOict>r after some hme would come back as theJr tr..lperior 
anrl lhl'r<•fore they would be undulv fa\"OUrlng him. That is the 
r<!ason thot of bte. th,. Department or Agriculture had been r<"jectlng 
surh cases He ogreed with the Ccmmittce that the whole question 
shollld be re\~CWt!d very de<'ply Ho ho,\C\'t'r, added that C!\·cn 
lf lht• provl• on WBI nr\ !Jiken way at least strict guidelines should 
be Issued to tim St te Go,·emmrnt nnd the other Mmlstr:es. As n 
mutkr or ennscrvu• • ~ll:l developing forest ,.-e~hh m :he C'Ountry, 
Gowrnmelll h •d launchctl o vcr'' mnsslve progr:unm~ of social 
fore~try. S111cc our countrv w vet') much ~hort o[ ind~ts:tria\ 
wood. It wu~ l~'~lble for the ln~ustrtcs to raise their own raw· 
material" 1>~· tukln11 somt• !.md on lease nnd investmg on waste land 
whrre nn agricuhut11l cro1> wu grown. The industries could h11ve 
joint vo.:tlhlrt'll wltlt the Forest Corporations for developing fol"l'Sts 
lu ccrlnin orca., wh~rc nothing Will grown. The Secretary expressed 
Ius conecrn thut forestry o..t a scienc~ had not been recognised in 
the univen;iticJ m the SJme manner os engineering and agriculture 
Til<'re wcrl' agricultural graduates but not forestry ~uates_ All 
the Forcstrr experts were confined only to the Government 
Departments, Forest Departmenta and Forests Corporations. lt 
the Government cxpe<-te<l that the private people also should c.-eate 
forests for their usc as lndutsrlal row-materials, t: would be n~­
sary that som" expertise from the Forest Departments, the 
Fore.,t Research In~t tutc at Dehradun should be made available 
to th~m on temporory basiS but onJ,. far d~-elopin~ and planning 
of forests and not for exploit.~tton of forests. P.Jblic inte.!l!ts would 
be more <CI'\'ed •' some retired o~ even senior o~ middle !e,·el officers 
\wrr allo\\'ed I n t' re 1!:1~ re:asonable e~-iit"on.' of seM.'ice 
,.~r~ he o •her.:~ m bu !dint• up the own cad=e of eo..yer:s so ~hat 

\ 
) 
' 
. 
27 
the need for them to depend on Gollernment Departments would 
not an~. It wru. lelt that perhaps br the next one or two years, there 
mtght b,. n~d for the pnvate md .... -t:ry to have e.·perts !rom tllo 
Government Departments to prepare them:.""-!lves for plantatiOn 
work, for growmg mdustri.:ll forests. Under the ctrcumstnnccs, the 
Secreturv told that the Government wau!d have a little hes>tataon .. 
ln taking away the prov on altogether as advised by the Commlltee 
but at the Slllllc time ttnmn guidelines be J.SSUed 3S to the dttum ­
stances In w bleb those deputatlons rbould be allowed. The 
deputations hould he allov.-ro ocly for p!antaUon work and not fur 
exploitation pu~. 
The Secretary tnf rmed the Committee that that p:trtlcular 
provl on was ncluded n the All lnd.:a !kl"\of«s on the 6th Septem­
ber, 1965 wbere:r, th Indian ~·orest Scmce came mto being In 1066 
ThJ coni<!Xt w more w1th n!f~nce to the lAS and IPS than 
IFS He ~!so stated th t tl-c State Govcrnmmt.s were duty-bou~d 
not to rend an~ bod~ to n prh tc orgnrusat10:1 unless they had got 
th~> Ccntr I Govt>rnm nt's pprovlll l~pectl\·e of nny guldeltnl'S 
avnllnbh 10 tl e:'l. The gu .. e' :~es should rot take away their duty 
to re!rr the r Cl' to the Cwtrnl Govcrnme.."lt, TI1e Ccntrlll 
Gov(!!nment dlcl not ,·ont to guid" them and every 
rJIM• th•• deputnllon of olHroMI to ptl\'lllc organ s.1llon 
thould ''" sent to lhe Cetr11J Governm••nt for nppro\•nl It \'."as 
lh!! privilege oC (:(,ntrnl Go\•crnment to ee whether public interest 
wns •·•·rvr.cl or not The dnng~r tn Lcsumg the guulellnc.• wns lhnt 
lhl' gutcloo) me might be mtcrpreted In any manner lhev ltko•d 
2 25 Tit~ Committt-e b ~urprbed to note that the impugned 
provl~lon nn' indurlrd in the ,\lllndia ~ires on thr fitb Scplrm· 
IM!r, 1965 nnd in thr h11Han f'o~t S.,..-ice Ru~ in 1966 "hen it 
Wll' <'On\litutrd Seither or the ~"" in 1he Department of 
Ptoro.onntl and \dminl<lnothe ~fofln5 3nd the Ministry of ~C'IIl­
tnre cnuld l'llli<:laeroril) tnlil!bteo the Committ,ee obont the circnm­
't:lnre<> onder which the imput!Ded provi,'on wa, indttded in the 
Mf"ice Role>. Tht Commitltoe find., tlr.rt attOrdin!!. to the ~tal"\ , 
Depnrt111,e11r or l'er<onntl and Administnth·t Rdorms the need to 
indnde the impoened pro.-i,ion in the ~ w.~S to s:lfe!!u3'rd the 
financial intere-t, of tbe Gonmm~l "hicb were ~ed in the 
private orgnni~tion~ whe""'-~ attording to the Secreia.ry. Ministrv of 
AI!Ticullurt' trit'd to juclih it on J!l"Otmd< of r>ubf;c intereo;t.. The<t 
statements nf lht' two top exerotives iu the Go..-emment are some­
wb:!f lnron.<kfml. .• 

I 
t 
l 
r 
2.2.6 ·a be (omuuth:c regnb tu note that there i> con{u.ion in 
regard to the "pphcuttou ol the rull-:. botb iu the Central and the 
!>lute Go>crnmcnL\ J he ·\griculnue ~c.n:tal} bad told the Com· 
mittl-e that thuuj!.h the cadre rule. did not :.a~ in '~ terms that 
apptu\ •I ~laould lu: gh·en in 11 ruutine IDil.Dner or that it should be 
ghcn 11!> 11 =ncr ul coo~, )tl the dcchlon of tbc Cenlnll Go•~ra· 
ment wh•ch bad b.-en andicnted helow F.lt U 1, nut only could but 
ali<> ~old be 11pplicd •tnd L<pt ia 'iew wbile w.ine a dttlsmn 
"hcthcr :m uflicc:r ~ould be sent on d<plll:tlion to a prinlc body or 
uot. lbi- 'bo"' thlll an olliccr cuold be ~nt to prhatc bod~ in a 
HIJ nq:ptional case n:qairfnl: l!JK'(wl ju..tifintinn. Tbe Priudjllll 
Secrdary n! foro'$! nnd ftu1111 Dmtlopme.llt Oepartm<!DI, GoH!mmcnt 
o[ ,\ndhra l'l'lldc:.ll iJ:nurcd the ~JUirt'mtnt of FR. 111, l'l'3d Hith 
th<• "tid cl,td,ion. \\hen hk utttntion ... , in•it<-d b) tbc ChaimtllJl 
In th~ ('cntral (;o,emmtnt drdsi .. n, •iL ,-
' II in Utt} n..e a proposal t. made that a GoHmmcur :;en ant 
>hnuld he lent tu • prl\lale undertllkinr, it is ncetSSotry 
that th1: printiplt':< of thi, 'I'Uie 'huuld ~ applied lll<'-1 
ri~uruu•l.!. on~ gcncrall} th~ IO:ln uf Go•emmtnt offirtr 
In 11 pri. ate undertaking 'hould h~ ~:trdw as a •ery 
<'xc~plinnttl ca.., "''tu•rinr 5f)<>cinl ju,tificntlon", ht only 
blut~d that ~und~r th~ cadre n1ll!<i, pflicr" ma) be dcpul<'tl 
In priutl•• hcHlic•. So fnr, n' I knuw, there i~ no such 
coudllino thor it •huuld be unh in <J<c~pilonJll circum· 
•lnnct·•· .. Oh,•iQu1ly .... had •hown hi!! il:'fiOI1ltlCe or the 
\11ld Ctnlrnl Go•tmmcnl dtci-.lon. 
2 2·, Tht• St.'Cretary, Agriculture Informed the Commmee that 
with Ill~ npproval of the Mmlster ot Agrlcul \ire, Ius dep.~rtment 
would I5Stt<' an order thnt In future. IC not requen WIIS m;vle by lhe 
St.1tc (:overnment for pr or noprovat of the Central Govemm .. nt, 
lh~ Central Government would DOt gh:e e-Jl0$t facto approval In 
th~c ca<~!S. The Ccntrnl Govemmmt would also issue a warning to 
!he officers sent on deputation to private ~nisations that they 
~ould get confirmed whether the Central Government's approval 
was token jn those ~cs. It prior approm was not taken. there 
could be a break in their sen.i~ The Committee a~ with the 
Said \lew of the ~cercfar,. ,\l!ticnlture ~linislty. 'Ihe Committee 
wonders ns to what would happen to those who ue already on depu­
tation with the private orpnlsatiO!t$ and the whom no prior app~ 
val of th., CtutrRI Go..-ernment W11S ltken . • 
2 28 The Ctnnmitl~ <lron~:l~· (ffi~ that e:ristenee of such a 
pro,isioo a!Jowin~ deputation of IF'; officers to r.riTate 0Jl!3Di<;atio1111 

' 
• 
• 
in tbc S.:niCt> Rules Oi"'D.' up tbe po"lbilli) lbat tbe otlker.. "bo 
are deputed l<t such urgnni'<llion' ma, be gh en tempting uficrs 
oi uujll•1ihcd and di•JifOJI<Irlionate ptr!..' and lmletm. by the pri•a(c 
OIJ:anis;uions 'Kith • •il"'K lo b:a>inj! undue wh~ from >ncb 
oRiccrs, by moklng US<! of their <ervlce links mth tbe parent 
department. 
2.29 lbe ('curunillr f note, that lhtn.' j, oo ptoa1 pro>Woo io 
lhe rule' for olhe<n nho fail lo dlo.char,:e tbcir te>poll.•ibilit~ in 
th•s n1!ard and al<o the offic,.- '~<ho an lilo;e.ly lu fall ill the b;md.' 
o{ prnal• · <'nlrcpn:nt'IIO In •ubson- e lhtir prhllte intcr ffi rntbtt 
tbnn the l(Kl:Jl pul"J)<>Se abn..d ol. 
2.30 The CGmmlttee rould not get a Atisbctory :reply 1o the 
quenlon as to who would write th Confidentwl Reports of such 
Go\'cmmm• officers on d putatlon The officers deputed to pnwte 
Ol"£1niS3tlon DT4t 5Ub)oct to tbt control of the Cha•rmliiJ and Bolll"CC 
of OlrC>Ctora or the respccti\·c concerns This r3ise;s the! question 
whether tl~ con!ldentlul rt"pprts would be wnlt~ by their 
i.lpcrlors In the pri\'Dtc organisation, und It so, whether it would 
not ln\'OI\'c 11 I<TYicc ono0111ly! Thi1 was howe,-cr , not clarllk'Cl 
b~ tiny of th~ witnesses. The momcml, these officen< arc dcp u t.ed 
In nm•nl~ e>rgPnl~ •Ions tl~y bccorna \'lrtually rudderless with 
no o\•ldt·nt dls~lpllnary •'Ontrol ovcr them . The Comm.Htce does 
0011 agn·•• wllh tit<• Scc:rctar>, Dcpnrlmcnt of Admmi5tratl\ ,. R•'­
lnrms when llo st tcs ''the c•fficc.>r who supcr"ige thc.-lr work hnve 
II) do (hnn· to wrtll· thetr confidential reports) ." Elsborat10g th<l 
pomt , tlw Secr<'tnry sto!t·cl. " • . ,Ob\'laut<ly i( samebody is wor king 
In n compnny Ilk•• this thc.>y must have lhc. r own arrnngorncmts 
ns to wl•o \\.11 supcr"ire thl' work nnd write the confid,•nlla l 
report&. t,rnlc.$$ Dn officer works undt ·r the GoYcmment n Gove rn­
mcllt officer CApno; wri te th,. conJldrnt nl report." The expla nat,on 
Qf the Secr~t srv, Dep3Ttment of Pcl'l'onnel raises the quesuon 
whether lht confidential reports o! officers would 1;., written bv 
tbetr super ior,; m lhe private orgliilisation to which they ha..-c.> been 
d"put.ed and If that IS. so It would lead to • rerious anom~·. 1"ne 
o!'lccrs clep\llcd to a pn\'ate Qr~n lsatlon would not be under any 
disclpltnary ~ntrol o f Go,•ernm~:. A pr · .. :ne,:ndh1dual writing the 
con!ldenual report of a Go\ emlDUlt servant does not appeal to the 
Committee . ~des I that is the case the oi!ice.'·s so depu~ can 
well be lured 1o do anything. This is a ml.'tter of g'N'a~ concern 
t"' tbc Commltt<'f' 
2.31 The C'oiiUII!Ueto nor~ a ~ntW confusioo wilh rel!,ard 
to tile d~finili<m of tb~ renn 'forei110 <el'Tiee' used in fhe Rule oamely 

l 
l 
,. 
-
30 
"''ben the pay is rt~eh-cd from a l>Ource other than the Consolidated 
Fuud of lnclja'', This deputation to a printe organisation has ~.u 
placed on au equal footiug with public undertakiugs aDd intematioual 
organis:llions 1u the Comllliuec\ opinion, a publk ~tonmder1al.iDg 
and au intematioaal otgani'illtioo lil.,e the l :S cannot be cqmued •ilh 
private orgauisatioa., '11-he~ lodi:m Adminl-tr.lthe and Indian fo~ 
Stnice Ollieel"!; can be deputed uodu the ruk:!<. 
232 The Commit1cc note, that the Sccrt'tary, Agriculture lllinbtry 
i.' nwurc or ~>eakne•><>c.' of !be pro• i'irm' ur the nrle-; und he h:t-' 
Jtiu-n nn ~~.,,urnnce to the Comntillcc lhnr he would like In fJ!I them 
rt-rllllcd. The Committee CuUy ngl't'<'S \\ilh the Sccrdary Agriculhu·,, 
w ben the lat~r 'toted '"There h a potcntinl d.lll~er iu officCI"!; of tjn, 
f'ore~t P~purtn\CIIt being M'DI un d~potali<>n HeD on :\ ll'ltlpoi'IU) 
hn,;, to prhule OI'J!!lni~ioru. "hn lul1c their intcre't' in the c'pklita· 
lion of the fo~-oot nnl~ b~US« rhdr 1<>\:llh "ill ~ di•id~l l•ut 
ako IK·clln~ the 'uoordinalc ol!kiat., 10ith ,.hom the~ come Into 
('()ntnct "ill l.now that tlli, ollicu aft~r ~""' time "•II come bad.; as 
their wPtrior and therefore the' "ill be unduh fn>Otmll1! him. Tb.1t 
i:o. ""~ · or 131!' "e h.'J>e been rtjtctin~ thO.<' '"''""'-~ The Commilt~ 
note-. the a"urnnc~ j!htn h> the c;«rctaf\, ,\wkultorc thot the l'hok 
IJne-.lion "ould be rcYic"cd ><n tlccpl>. 
2 33 ·nrc Commiurr olt"'""' that in nonr or the 18 ca~ rcftrrl-d 
h~ the Andhrn PrndKh Go.crnmcnt tn the C'cnr~l GM<'rnm,·nl 
no prior npproval wn~ token. ln 'omc ra''"'· ~~·J'<'-t·facrn ~prmwal 
"n' taken nnd in 12 t'~<. thl' C'rntr:rl (;nwmm~nt 11n< nnt 
npprnnch,<'d '" llfl. In thi, <.ltuntlon, the C'nmmittte <1rnn!'h ~nm· 
ntend• that the impugned pro\"i<ion 'hnulrl not h .. k"nt in tb .. <;em~ 
RuiK n< t~ are rhBnct"; or the role belnll mi'U'ed. The Slatr Go•· 
emmenr tlo not bother to gel the nppnhal of the C'<"nh-:tl C'..<>r<'mment 
mn~murh •• thev did nnt rare. to ~d ., <'OJI'-' n£ thco ltllcr dftfed Sth 
~1Rr<'h , 1983. t'ndoro;ed In lht' Dcpnrtmtot n£ Per10nnel and AdminJs. 
trath·<' Rdonn.< endosin~ the li<t o£ nm ... ,... £nr wh<>m e..'C-post-facto 
tlpproval Wll5 >nn~ht , to the .\gt'lrulltl re :\lirai<try who are conccm~ 
"ith the <uhjecl matter The Committee tak<'< <mous """' of the 
pur£unctory manner in which th<' nrl.s nrc applied and recommend, 
Cor tt.t' dclt'tion of the impuJmed pro"l<ion nom the rules. wilbout 
del~<y 
N~w Dt?lhi; 
Dec~m~r 16, 1983. 
BRAI MAHAVlR 
Chairman 
Commiuee on Subord'""'e Leo•s!atitm 
• 

' 
• 
' 
' 
•• \NN'EXURE I 
(Vuk p:1rn :us o! the Report) 
Starf'num• 1h.ou: ::g ""' p<1Tlic1.1Lzr• of Offu:P.'r: on depu:..rtlo to oe­
notu organimftollS and the details lbnt:of 
I Shn ll4yalasceffi4 P~r M1U. Unu:cd Kumool 
Nam,., of thr o c<-r tDOrk II" 
Sri Ch Lnkshm Patb IFS 
from 1>-1·1977 to date 
19'1-' Rs. tt lal:hs 
Tot..l &h:orr Cllpll41 
AP!DC'R invotmt!nt 
Co.pruuoot••J'II itt\t$lmt nt 
tShri ·r. G V~W~nth~ Gupt 
llnd l~io!<SJ 
?ubi!~ r~u .. 
/laortl of Dn.·o rors 
(rl Sr1 K .l~ynbh~rroth Ro'<id} I f' S --CJ.arrman 
1111 s,.. vtltn Ah mn nh ('hf,tty 
91!\ OQ 
:n.t oo 
30'!00 
3.00.011 
915.00 
(thJ So t: Kumi•1'3!0Wumt Ro~dy, I A S APIDC Nommee 
1~11 Sr1 lila' P Murthy APIOC 
(\,) Sn Gnngar.un ,\garw:U, lOBI 
(Vll) Sn T L. Knplldra tPnvnr •!) 
(Y!J) Sri R. L Prlibhu, !DB! 
(IX} Sn T C Vl's:lntn Gup:a M D 

i 
• 
' p 
r 
d 
Nome of the ofjiceT \OOTking: 
Sn C. Sarvelhama R.ao, I.F .S , wtth eifect from 16-6-19 to 
9J80. Dat.e of Incorporation 
Jfeona of Fll14!1Qt. 
l'otal Share capttal 
APIDC's lll\~ 
Co-Promoters lnv1!5tme:ll 
Sri N. Vcnkalllh 
Sri M. Veeramju & Associates 
Publlc Issue. 
Boord of Dtrecton 
ll-10.1973 
(I) Sn K. S. R Murthy, 1 F .S ChaiTmG!! 
44.00 
11.40 
1100 
2160 
4400 
(tl) Sri T, V Sublul Rao I f' S APlOC 
1111) Sri K Depiknn 1FCI 
(lv) Sri KrL\hna '-lurth) IDBI 
(v) S1l K Mllhatle\'3 RAD \PIOC 
(vl) Sn R K. Choud3ry Prl\'11\l.' 
(.-it) Sri U. Venlmtah ){ 0 
fvhiJ Smt N J l.nlllha Pr•\••~<· 
Nom.· of tilt C1ffi<W u·OTkinll 
:;ri S. Rnghavan, I F S tTem :!8-7-70 to 2 80 
Sn S M. Madaruddm, I F .S !rom 12-6-80 to 25-12-80 
Sri P L Mnr"<<y, 1.l-' S from 1!>-12-31 lo da!P 
./)ah• or ii!COTpOral ion :!9..0.1964 
\fe<tn.a oj Fm<lnct: 
Stat.e Go\'<'rnment 30CO 
APIDC 
Others. 
BoaTd of Dtrecwrs. 
(il Sn Goluthand Bangur-Ch.oirr.'.411 
(h) Sri Purushot~ Bangur 

33 
(til) Sn S:ll'cekrishna Somani 
(1\') Sn Pannalal Pittic 
(\') Sri Debt Prasad Goenka 
(Vi) Sri B. Pratap Reddy, I.A S. A.P. Govt. 
(vh) Sri Shra•'llll Kumar, I A S A.P Go,'i. 
(vUI) Sri I:. K R Gonela 
(lx) S!i V, R Himn.ath 
(>c) Srt R 'li 1\bhcshwar, M D 
4 A. P. R4y«l116 Um!tcd, II yde!'abc:d.. 
I Sri T C K v Rao, 1 F S. from 1~1-79 to 3-4-lW 
:t. Srt c Stuvotham;, Rao, 1.:r.s. from 1-9-80 to 31-3-82 
3 Srt C N Rao 1 F.S from 27-3-82 uptodate 
01Uc Of nrorporatlml · 
Mra116 of Finan~ 
Toto~! Shnro capital 
Al'lDC' mvrstmcnt 
Co-promoters Investment 
1Shri 0 R lladn and Groapl 
M/S, Ballnrpur lnd11strles 
Ltd (BIL'l') 
Puhl•c hllll! 
• 
Board l).r4!ctors: 
(I) Sn L. M Thupnr-Ciaaa"'aon 
(Ill Srt Sun:nder Latl 
1~1975 
R.s. Ill IIJk]u 
10-~J.OO 
117.70 
~28.011 
52430 
1070.00 
(till Sra J>; Jnyabharnth Reddr, l.A.S.-APIDC nomme<> 
(lv) Slu'i T V. Subba Rao-APIDC Nominee 
(v) Sn P. K Batra 
(vi} Sn D M, Trl,'edt 
(\'li) Sri D. S D.mc 
(vt ) Sri N Gmga Ra!n-IDBI 
(tx) Sn Sn N Subrabamanyam. IC!C 
(x) Sra G R lfeda, V C. & MD o! A .P Rayons 
5. S,~, Paper l>hl!a: Incorporated as a public Ltd. Ccmpany 
Sri P Chandrassckh:tra Rao, I .F S . irom 1&-&-'18 to 2-4-80 
• 

' J 
f 
( 
1' 
r 
34 
Sri B. Bhoomn Rajan, 1 F S from 3-5-80 to '2-1-82 
Sri P. B. Venkata R~dy, I. F. S. from 3-5-82 to date • 
.Means of Jo'inance: 
(I) Stale Go•-emment 
(h) GuJ&I"llt Gocnur;ent 
(il) L.I.C 
(lv) Ottc<•r Insurance Comparoes 
(v) Oth~r Institutions 
(\~) Nollon:lllsed Bank 
(v I) lndlv!duab/Bodies 
Board of Otrutora 
13i% 
O.M~ 
12.107~ 
755% 
q6!)50 
916% 
49 41 ·~ 
01 Sr T N R Rno, I A .S (Govt Representatln~) 
(h) Pnnce Mukhn~arn Jbn (P) 
Uii) St1 K Gop.-.la Ruo (P) 
(tv I S Ar vtnd Narol!: 1rn L.•l Bh111 (P) 
1 vl Sro l'nnnnl. I llanslllll Pmi (P) 
(\· ) Sri N~.vnb Kh slm Nowot Jung (P) 
(vii) Smt Sycrd Naill Btii:Tllml !P) 
f\•Jli) "irt R IIJlm Kt..m •r Pnddar !P) 
( lx) Sri 1\ Srm v :unurUty (P) 
lX 1 Srt M •ddi "iud••Mih nD!ll (PI 
(lltJ Sr N Nar t5lmham (PJ 
f1 Nai'O[•un /, uuwd Srt'll td.-rabod. 
Slui A H Muosv1 I t' S from l>-9-~6 to 4-1!-30. 
Date uf lnt'orpornhon 
Tol.al har<' cap tal 
APIDC'• In\ •:Sli'MTII 
Ce>-promotcrs tnvesunent 
(Shrt G V. Krtshn:> Rtdd, &i P~rty) . 
Publtt' L~e • 
Rs. '" loki~ 
!90.00 
:!8.50 
68.40 
"3.10 
190.00 

• 
f 
I 
, 
Board oj Directon: 
(I) St• G. \' Krishna Reddv---<\1. P. and Chalrm4n 
(11) Sr K R•macbandra Reddy-Wbole-llme Dtteetor 
(II ) Sr J N Godbole--Pnvate 
(h') Sri N Godboi(!-Pnvatc 
(') S R \' K M S'Jt)•oma Pmate 
( ~ 1) l:i ~ Oonun Prl\'11 :e 
(\ ) Dr I C R.lJ-PanG.it 
( ) Sr t,; I Krlshr. Rcdd• -Private 
(IX) Dr S. K Nal.h, tDB! 
(x) Sti D Sun::-dra Redd), API DC 

A."\:O"EXURE II 
(Vide para 2.15 o! the Report) 
PROFORM.UI 
-
~ 
1 1.r .s. 0/flt:Cr: who at4nd depuu:d 10 Pril,at<l Bod!a cu a: present 
,r.aml!' el' g:pd. Dt~OD tAlC "l"' ~Doc Par Sale oF Pay a:t>.lly Reo.,o•/ RemaN< 
.a~ (Private wlolcl> wblch cl poot pty ut..;kl dt;a,..,. by II>< jiHtillc;allon lor i( ••• 
body) to .d>ldt ~cd ciq>wu- b<lcl by lbc to d>< pott on;c,. d."!>.nl!>~ the 
d<pu!<d lieD c.fi::n' 1ft h<lJ 1ft tb< whlk on a/11..-.. 1o the 
~ 
Ill< prinl< pnv&te badt d"'Ptltltbn ptiY.lt(! OOt.Jy 
body 
-unucd 
- -(1) (1) (3) !t} ul (6) (7) (G) (91 (to) 
I Sri I~J .. M~tr<'Itlf, A.P. l'Apu MD.b rs-u-81 
~ 
OonwrniQr S.me ~ .. Same a<a.lo... Ac the requat 
11·8 J\ojAittr.u•AYY ol t'Offtb in tbc Orp.:ut· In tht' llrrqMrt.- or tbe m ,n..,.(f':• 
mmt mtnt m.-nc ,,:, t 
be! tr.r prot«> 
'~1)1\ of 
Jl'orcttt. 
• Sd CJ1 J.ahhmiJ~•thl, 
Uti 
M!• Sra: R..yab.-
a«ro.s P~&JN!I' .MUb. 
K=oool 
"'~·77 ~ ... .a. Do. Do. l)o. Do. 
3 Sri O.N', RM. 
lf~ 
A.l'. ka.)'OI'\1 l.'td. >7')~;, •J6.3o8j l)o. Uo. I}• Do. 
• 
!'in l'.ft \'t"Jtkat Rttldy, 
Jf.S 
Mf• 'tirpur 
i"•r<r ~tiJb, 
~""'"P·· 
5·~· ••·s-83 Do llo, fh, l)o. 
~ S.t K Roj«\hlu Jt<>l.ty 1'T,D<vuwam S!•I2.S0 ., ... -~~, Do. !>.>. l)o. Oo.. 
liS 
- --~ 
• 1.'1 i111 c uais.utd. 
!:i 

t1 •.; 
Q.~'tl ..... __ _ 
J 
,. .. ""'"m 
vw ~'"'" •· oo otltoc .Rq.on 
PROI'OII...,A-1 
,._, tf IFS «f'JttN ...... omr l.lf'IIJ 1t ~ .-, IMM hi .do &..• ...,.., tt. 
j,,.,.,..,. 

39 
0 -
d d ! d~ lS 
~t .: 
Jj aU tJ 
s ~ ~ ... tit 58 1-
~ 
'I! 
t t~ .v .iJ ~ ~ " ~ ' 
;;, ! 
'" -.. . B B ss 9 9 - ?.; r.., 
~ 
~ 
'" 
~ ... N ~ ~ 
~ 
~ l ~ .t Ji,. :. --... 
~ 
i 
a:: 
~ l 
~ c • .... 
~ = 
c!! d ]. 1 .li-e <., 
4 -:-
.::j • .: .:o.e < -~ .-.- ""- "'"-
,; 
i 
<'! o· ~ 
• • " "" " " 2 • " 1 
~-
i ~ 
• § • ~ :; "2 .l ~ 
- ... ::;: 
"' 
..: t " ~ .. 
~ 
• ..: "' "· :r: '- - -':?10 j ~, .i < ,.. ... 
-I" _,_ -- ·e!e -jz 
-- :te ;::: r:: ,_ "-- <1.- "'- ., _ 
~ .. "' ., !0 - .. - -

... 
0 
" 
~ '; ;;, 
.8 
• 
i . 
~ 
.. I • G ~~ Vl:: 8 
·.:: _.., ., 
0 
~ .. 1 e • • 
"' ... • 
1 
~ 
"' j I ~ 
I ft 
~ ;;; ~ 
c..S,., "' :: 
~J) 
~£ ·-·e. v.-
l -
"'-
!:' ~ ::: 

( 
ANNEXURE IV 
(Vidt- para 2.!!1) of the Report) 
Cop~ ol. Hyderabad, 
6th March, 19il3 
K Subramanyllln, lAS 
Prlnclp31 Secretary to Government, 
Jo"orcsta nnd Rural Development Department. 
D 0 U:ur No -11581 Fqr.li, 8:!-83 
Ot'ar Sri Agarw I 
Sub 1 F S (CIIdrt') Rulo-Deputat•on of I.F.S Officers to 
private bodies-Partlcul:u·-Regardlng. 
R~f 1 From the Government of India's Jetter No. 16015 2 82.­
AIS (TV) dt 13-2-82. 
~ Yours D 0 Letter No. 16015 2 83-AJS (fV) dt. 17·2-83 
to the Chief Secretary to Go .. emment Andhrn 
l'rndesb. 
1 nm to forwud lwrewtth the particulnrs of IF'S O!lirors who Wt!lt! 
dtputcd to pr•vnt< bodl~ cnrllcr and who ha"e ft'\"erted from such 
teput:ltlon, In lh•· prescrlb<.'d proforma, nnd nlso :he pnrllculars of the 
JFS LJt) r<!J"S who ore now under deputation to private bod•~ In tht• 
pr<!J~Crlbcd proform3 nd request th01 t post fttclo approval of Govern· 
m<!llt of ln•hu >woy llt" obtnincd and communJ('!Ited to this St:l!e Gov· 
ernmcnt at nn enrly date 
1 am nlso to 1tnto lh:lt the approwl of the Govt'mrncnt of Indio 
wl!J be obt:llnco::l 111 future In case of deputauon of officers for private 
bodle; as required under lFS (Cadrt'! Rules. 
-The Information requored In your D.O. Letter Second Is furnished 
herewith to the o:tent 11\"&llable Immediately. 
Jtem I. The deputation of officers 15 being done at the rpquest of 
the management of the private bod1es (paper mills) and also to safe. 
guard the Interest of the Department In the leased areas. 
Item II: The deputation of the o11kers is be:ng done as per tho. 
landa:rd !elms and coodluons (copy enclosed). In ~'lew of urgency 

only, the Central Go,·ernment c<>uld not be c<>nsulted before deputa­
tion of the officers. 
Item IJI: The head of the Departmt!llt who:nevcr v1S1!.s the lll'1SIS, 
IS rcv1ewlng the work of the officer v.ith the management and thcr1!by 
ofcguardlng the tnterest of the Go-vernment and cnsu::mg the 1.1ood 
<'Onduct of tM officer on dcpul<ltion. 
1111m lV L V The Chatnnan of thr pnvate bod) will wnte th: 
" ual Confldl!llll I Report after as~c~mg the work of the officer on 
deput:ltlon which ,..ill be revtcwed by the head of the Department .... 
Cb1d Conscrvato of Forests who will ensure frur and obJcdive 
<"<lrrhng of th• 1r Confldcnttal Rt-porls 
Srt U, C. Aco~rwal, 
Sccrdnry to Government of lndi.• 
l>eJlilrlmr·nl of Pcrsonn••l &: A. R 
Nt•w Delhi 
\'our:; stnetrely, 
Sd-
(K SUBRAMANYt\M) 
t:<•PY In tht• Ch"'f Con.~rvator of For<!, IS, Andhra Pradesh. Hyrlcr:lbad 
TRUE COP\' 

I 
. 
• 
\ 
, 
.. 
(V•de para 2.20 of the Report) 
Copy of:- H ydenbad, 
Dated 24th June 1m 
GOVEHNMENT OF ANDRA PRADESH 
~ OH.E.."TS AND RURAL DEVELOP:!.1El'o"T DEPARTMENT 
Ll!ttcr No.. 1543 For 11 77-1 
From 
To 
E V Rim J!eddy 
So~•m to Go1 t 
rhr. Under So ... relar) to Govi. of Jnd•a, 
M n slty of Agriculture & Irrigation 
l>ep:ortmo nt of Agrlt'ulturo• 
No•11' O~lhl 
Sub I ~ S A .I' Cadr~-D•:puuouon of I F S Ufliccrs 
•\pprov.ol of C:ov•·rnment of lndta-Ord,•rs-Ri>qu•-slt-d 
H<"g .. rdtng 
Rd Frooo llw G 1'1 of lndon Deptt o! .\grol l.r Xo 
I 637~AIS d• JJ.:J-7:; 
~ Tht> Co1•t Lr No 110 For II ;;.2, dt H-2-7i 
ln conlmUill n ol thts Govr.rnmPn~ letter second cned, I om 
<liro-c!c'd to talo• lh81 th1< Government have depotcd the foUoWlllg 
I F .S Officers lo work with the privnte companic; mentioned 
"Cilllli! tht-1.1" naml'S r 1ppl eatlon of t~ Go1·emr::.-nt of India's 
:lpptO\',) 
• I Sri A H .•.OOSVl, 1 ~ :::.. Dy C F -Deputed I') :\1 s Xolo· 
p3n Ind1a Ltd Sec-.mdcrabad for a period a! 3 years to work 
3S a full time Di~tor ( Tecluuc:..l) of the Company 
43 

H 
2 Sn Ch. Lakabm1patbl, I.F.S. C.F -Deputed to Sree 
Rayalasceroa Paper Mills Ltd., Kumool for a period of 3 
years to work as the Chief {)ffic(o:- or Fo::est Operntlons of 
th~ Paper Mills. , 
The deputation of officers Is go\-emo:d by th., slllnd.ard t.enns ruu1 
C'ondlllons applicable w deputatiOn of A.l.S. Officer-s and copies or 
tbf' G 0 Ms . No toG. F&R.D . (For- II) Dept. dt. 4-!}.7tl and G 0 
Rt. No 338, F& R. D (For II ) Dept. d t 30-3-o issued in this regard 
~rc t>nclosro. The officers \\111 be patd thCJr grade pay 111 the llllpc:-­
:om,. scalo ,aenlor time scale of I F.S admlslfb!e to thc:n In odd ­
tlon Shrl A . H . Moos\i, I F S who has been deputed toMs No•-opan 
lnd:~ Ltd. wtll be pa~ 11 spttlal pay or Rs 200 - per- month Tho 
otl••r terms and condlt ons of dt'puto~ton L"C standard terms and 1 
l'OOdJtfons approved for A I S Officers bv the Co\"1 of Inda from 
limo• to time . 
As th~ G0\"1 of lnd.:a could not be appro3cltl-d for the p or 
np!Jrowol lor th• deputation or the offi«rs to the -•bovc lnSUtutJons 
due t•• cldgencJl"S or adm ~W~trottvc wor-k I om to reque t you kind.!} 
!o communtcntc Uu: po:t JllCio ltpprovnl of the GO\>-t. of Ind1.~ Cor 
thc dcputmlon of th~ above two ollie• .n along "ith Utat of Sn B 
l.lhoomnr:tjnm, l.f S. nr~ required und••r rule 6(2) (Ill of thl' 1 F S 
(Cndr~) Rul~ 1966 
TRUE COPY 
Yours wthfulh· , 
Sd-
for Secretary to GovL 
Sci. 
SECTIO:-< OFFICER 

' 
CoJ>y of; 
(l' de pru-a 2..20 ot the Report) 
No \. 12026 H 77 ... -\IS. 
Government of India 
linlstry of Agncultlln! & Irrigation 
(l><opartm nt of Agric'l11tlll't!) 
Ne Oellu, dated 26th July 1977 
To y 
The &'ere till) to Go~ of A P 
Forests & Rural Oevt'lnpment l)epartm.."Dt 
H ydel'tl bad 
Sub Deputation of S Sr• Ch. I o:!hbmtpatby, l.F.S, and 
A. H MOOS\ I l.F S to pnval•• Paper Mtlls In Andhra 
l'rndesh 
With rclt·t·••nct• to your letter No. 154J;For. 11177-1, dat~'<l U-0-77 
nn tht• ••bO\'o• clled subjl'< t I ~m dlrt.-etl'd to convey the r.r po.tt {CI('t<> 
•'J.'f'rov:.l ot c;""'· of India under Rut., 1)(2) (U) of r.F.S. (Cadre) 
Hult••. 1066 tn S Shrl Ch l.ak81unlpathy I F.S and A H. MOOIIV! 
I ~·.s h••m1: d•·puted to Sru,. Rayalasecmu Paper Mills Ltd., Ku ..... 
nool •lll!l M s No\'opan India Ltd, Secunderabad ~tiv,.h· on th•' 
~ lndkah•d lt•no• for~ period of three y~:.rs each 
Yours faithfully 
54-
(U .S PtTh"DEI 
Under Secretary to the Go'ot of IndJa. 
TRUE: COPl' 
45 
Sd.­
Section Officer. 

I 
• 
l 
, 
(Vtde para 2.20 of the Report) 
Copy oJ·-
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
~'ORESTS A.:'<D RURAl.. DEVELOPML'U DEPARTME:\'T 
Lcller No. 2875fF'ar 11/77-1 
Frrm 
Dated· 1-9-197i 
fo 
Sh, 
Sri S S J 11yn Rllo 
Dcputv &-crebn> to G vt 
Jo'orcsts nd R r I D •clopment Department, 
11 P H ydera!xul 
Th., Und~r Scc"'tary to G0\'1 of India, 
Min stry or \llnculture and Irrlgatton. 
Orpnrtmcnt o{ Agl'leulturc, 
N•·w Dcllol 
Sub·-1 FS.-A P. Cndre-Ocputnlron nf Sri S. Raghnvon, 
WS Con5<!n'nlor of ~·orests to work in M is A.P. Paper 
Mtlls, Rajohmundry-Regarding, 
lkt ·-t'rom lhe Go\'l. ol lndtn D~pt, of Agn Lr. No t-631 
7S-AlS doted 13-11-1975. 
I am dtrectcd to Invite attent on to the reference cited and to 
tate that this ~mment had to "'ithdraw \he servires of Sri 
D V Thto I Jo'.S, from deputahon tD M s A P Paper Mills on 
d trallvc grounds and bad to depute So S. Ragbavan, IFS 
Conservator of Fo~ s m ~s plate to the Paper Mills at Rajahmun· 
dr~ ond "ho o ned on 12-a:;; F.X The offi:cet is go,·emed by th<' 
Standard terms and ~ondiuons applieable to de!T.ltaticms of AIS 
officers and a ~v of G.O Rl No. 1180 Forests and Rl,lr31 Develop­
ment Department, dated 2-9-<i issued m this regard is encl<>,ed. 
4i 
• 

As Col.'crnrnent of India t'OUld not be app:oached for the•r pnor 
approval lor the deputaUon of the officer I :tm to request you kindly 
be commumcatcd the pofi-facto opprO\·a! 1.'[ Government of India 
for the d<'putnUon of Sn S Ragbavan lFS lO MD A.P Paper 
Mills, for n period of one year fro:m 12-6-Ti (mcludlng Joining 
time) fi$ rcqutred undt'r rule 6(2) (u) of the IFS (Cadre} Rules, 
1966 
To 
Yours fnilhfull~. 
Sd 
lor Ot-put} S..ocrelilrv to Covl 
Thu Chtef Comr.v tor of For~t: A P Hydt!rab~d 
TRUE COPY 
• • 
Sdi­
SECTI0!-0 OFnc~;R 

• 
\:-;~T.Xt."RE \'T1J 
( V de para 2.20 of the Report\ 
Cop of 
ra 
'io A 12 ~ H 17-AlS 
(i emment of lnd1n 
M tr Agriculture & lrti![ation 
(De n Agrlt-.llture) 
N " Dclh d:ated t~ 22nd Scy:.cmber 
Th Secretary to c Go• t. of A P 
f onsts & Rurol Development Dcp:~rtment 
lJ}dernbnd. 
Sub -!Jeputatlon of Shn S Rnchnvllll IF'S lA PI to the 1\ P 
Pnprr Mills Rajahmun!lry 
Wlll1 "''' once to your lctt.:r .No 2875 !'or II 77-1 dnted 1·9-1977 
on lho nbova r~t1•d subject I am d.rccted tn convey the e.r-post-Jn•·PI 
•pproval of tln Government 11f lndln under Rule fl(2) Iii) of IF'S 
CCndrc) Rul<-s 1006 to th • depulnt.cn o• Shr S. &ghavan, fFS (A.P.) 
to the A P l'llpor Mills, RnJahmundry for a period or I y~nr rrom 
12-l\.1977 (fcrC'lOOn) on the standard tenru and t'Ondihon of d<,:putn­
llon which w~rc cnlfcr appllcnble to Shr1 D V, Ran. fFS (A.P) whll•• 
IJil d< pulatlon to the A.P M•1ls Rajahmundry 
Yours faithfully, 
!d-
(U S. PANDE) 
Und"r Secretary to the Go\'1 of India 
TRUE COPY 
49 
Sd­
SECTION OFFICER. 
t' c .. • 

• 
• 
' 
MINUTES OF THE m;E'IL"G OF THE COIDIITITES 
ON SUBORDh.,.ATE LEGISLATION 
XXXV1 
TillltTY-SIXTH MEETING 
Th., Commt•tce met at 900 A.M on Wed:wsday. the 11th Apr I, 
11179 n lhe 1\l c N • at Port Blair. 
Motm:lls P11J:UNTs 
I ShN N nwngh:l PI'IISOld Nan~n the Clurir 
2 <;h U P.at a Bose 
3 Shrt B r C a ra Deb Burman 
4 l'rof N M K m I 
5 Sh •• 1m na 
li Shn Jngd 
7. Shr Ahmud Bossa n Monda! 
8 Sh••mnh Rojlndcr Kaur 
'I Shrl V. C Kesn\'11 Roo 
10 Shrt N geshwnr Prns d Shah! 
I I Shri S K Vaishampayen 
12, Shrt ,\lcxnndcr WnrJra 
St:cRI~-'ltiAT 
Shr1 B 'R. GO<' I Senle>r Legbda UV<" Commillee Officer. 
' 
2 In the- absence of 111,, Chalrmnn, Shri :iarasmgha Prasad Nando 
wn• \'Otcd to the Chair 
3. The Commltlcc ronsJdered and took decl$ions nn the following 
M••morenda :-
• • • • 
(II) Memorandum No 81 regarding the fndunl Fore$t Service 
(APJ>Oinfmna by PromotJOn) Amendment Re!j'J!ationa. 
1977. 
The Commtttt'C wa~ not sati-r.ed with •he Comments ofi'Pred by 
lbt• MID.:.Sf\ o( Home Affairs (Oef»r:.ment of Personnel) in tbls 
... •Re\ati'S tn matter not included in the Report. 
.. 
.. .. • 

•• 
• 
52 
u:gard I . Co nmltlec ~auld no: understand how the members of 
the S ate I• c.• Sen aces were llllowed to go on deputation on n 
•u.tonomoLLS ll'Jd~ not controlled b~ Go,ernmenl or a prtute body 
'ld th t tl ey " ro llo'lloed to hold Lien on ~;t; In tbe~r parert 
ScrVJro The Comm ttee d ed to hesr the ~larv tn the Depart-
~nt r Pc el m t re:!ard 
• • • • 
The Commit lhcn adjo mcd at 1(! ~ A.M to meet t 3 00 PM 
on 17 Aprt • 1979 at Ne .. Dellu 
..P.e13lc3 to matter not tncluded in the Report. 

• 
MINU'fES OF TilE MEETING OF THE COIDDTIEE 
ON SUBOROfi'\ATE LEGISLATION 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETL'JG 
I'he Comm tl!'e me\ at IJ 00 A M on Thurstb.y the :!6th Jul) 
g79 
S~ \'iawa~~&lha Menon -Clio nna 
2 Shrlm3 Pral ma Bo;e 
3 Prof N M Knmbl 
I Shn Lakshmana Mohapatro 
5 Shrl Dhan ll\\11! MaJhl 
tl Shrt Yo •cndra Mtkw-.tno 
7 Shro Jngdl h Ptes.ld M lhu 
II Shrt S A Khaja Mohlck-en 
!I Shrl 1\hm.td HOS!Itlin Mondo! 
HI Shr1 N rulntthn PrO!Slld Nllnd.l 
11 Shrim ttl R4jinde K3u. 
1'' Shr! Y C K~Mva Rno 
13 Shn Alcxnnd~r W.trJrl 
H<"prr.~t'!:ln!t r• tl!<" M o.orry oj lll>me .llfatrs (0<" .arrmenr of 
Pa~ on ! an td'IIIIIUtTarn-e Reform8) 
Shn Mahesh~~oar Prasad, Secret:.ry 
Shn T \' Raltlilnan, Jolnt Secreta!) 
Shri 0 C M h-a Deputv Set-N"ta~ 
Shnmall K K. Chopra Chief E.xamtner of Q::estion 
Shri B R Gael Si!mo; Leg <lati,•e Committee Offic r 
• 
~ 
• 

54 
Mcmora11du No 81 repard :1 tl~ Cn.i.an Fore.-r SPrcf<e (Appoinl­
ml'nt bu Promouon) Amrndmrnt Repulotion.s 1971 (GSR 584 of 1973 
2 The Comm11tet> hesrd th~ ev1denre of the repr~ntallves o 
the Department of Personnel and Admlnistrative Refonns on the 
•mendment IIUidc to ~ lndum Fores~ Senace (,\ppolnlment b 
Promohon) Amendment Regulahons. 19~'i. 
A verbatim record o! the cvicW!ce was kept. 
The reprtlentatl• es during the course of evidence told the Com­
mittee tlUlt a note g•vtng the genesis of the j:rov•sions Cor scndln 
offiC('rS of the All India Sen; ces alongwtth the number of hutanccs 
\\he e such oftlcers wt-re sent on deputation to prh·atc bodies will 
be furnl•h'<l to I~ Commlltet' Th Committee rle!t!rretl Its deds on 
till the nolc \\8S recch·ed from the Department of Personnel . 
• • • • 
4 The Comrrhtc,. d<octdl'd to hoH Its n~.~~ m• c~ ngs on the ~rd 
and ~th August, 1979 
Tlw Comm•llec then nrljourncd at II 50 !\.M. to meet agnln ut 
3.00 P M on Fnday, I~ 3rd Aug11 t, 1979 
••••Relates to nwtter not lnduded in this Report. 

I.VIJJ 
FIFTY-EIGHTH ~tEETTNG 
The Commiltl'e met at 3 00 r.:.s em Wednesday. the 21st lltay l!lSO 
MEMEO\s PRI:stm 
I. Shr N rutngha Prns:ld Nanda-Cha rmcn 
2. Shrlmatl Prat m 1 Bose 
3 Shn Ibrnh m Kal:ullya 
4 Sh'11 J d h Pru:ld Mathur 
5 ShrhruU IU tnder K ur 
u Shri S K Va shampayc:n 
5£Cll£T AII.IAT 
Shrl Sud rshnn Agnrwal Add tlonat Secretary 
Shrunkll K K Chopra, Chief Examiner or Questions 
Shrl B R r.oel, Senior l...cgblatlvc Cnmm11tec Offi~er 
:.!. '111r· Committee took up rurth cr c:onsiderallon of the followm 
M~mornnda· 
• • • • 
(iii) Mt:mwrnndtnr• No. 105 regurd&nQ rl•e lndrar1 F'orc t Scrt•tc•• 
(ApJ>OI!Ilmenr l»t PrOmotron) .-lm~>ndm.-nr Regulatroru 197"7 
(G.S.R. 584 of 19781 
ThP. Commlltce c:on<idcrcd the reply of the Departm•·nr of Per­
sonnel and cl•'elded o awlt tnformadon from the rematning StotM 
to hrwe a C:Omt>lete ptc:ture In the m.•tter. 
Th.-. Committee then adjourned nt 410 P.~>. :o m.-et agatn at 
11 00 A.M. on Thui'Seb~. the 2.."nd ~f:w. 1930. 
••••Relates to mstter not nclnded to thi" Report. 
55 

, 
XYIJl 
EIGHT ... :::-;n. :II:&ETING 
The Cbmmitloo met t 11 00 u: on Tuesdav. the 14th December 
1982, In Comm t~ Room 'A" Ground Floor Parli;:unent House 
Anne:oce :-.:ew Dclh 
MI:Ml CIS Plu:sJ;:n 
I Dr Bhntl\1 :>VJr--ch4inna 
2. Shr Nand K bore Bhatt 
3. Shri G C BhAttacharya 
4 Shrl AmnrprOl':ld Cha"nborty 
5. Shrl D pen Ghosh 
6 Shri B 0 Khobrng~~de 
7. Shri G. Sw11my Nnfk 
8 Shri Ghnn.~hynmbhai Ou 
9 Shrt Shri Santolh Kumnr S.thu 
I U. Shrl NIJ. Tompok Smgh 
II Shri Shnntl Tyngi 
12. Ot·. Rn!lq Znka.rta 
S~IITAJUAT 
Shrhnnlt K K. Chopra Additional Sen-e'"'IJ 
4. SVPPLI:MF:NT TO .\!F.MORANDUM r.·o. 105 Col 1979) 
lnr!·ora f'or~sr S~rt>ICl' (.tpponalrnen• by Promot:on) Anumdment 
llegufat ous, 1977 (C.S R. 587 of 1978) 
Th" Committee took up the above mernor:mdum Cor consideration. 
After some discussion, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary 
ML~ tn of Home Air• rs for seek.ng turtbcr clarifications elucida­
n< In t!Jc mat•cr 
• Tl c Commattee then considered Its future pl'Ogr.lmme of 
t n n d dee dcd to mec! on the 10th and 11th January, 1983 
&. The Comn.lttee then adJOUrned ~: 1.30 p.m 
•• • Relates •o matter not in~Juded ''1 thiS Repo" 
57 

; 
xxm· 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27th January, 
1983, in Committee Room No. 63, Fir:;t Floor, Parliament House, 
':'<ew Delhi. 
I. Dr. Bha1 Mahavir-Cho.inll4n 
2. Shri Nand Klshore Bhatt 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4 Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy Nalk 
9. Sht'l !>antosh Kumar Sahu 
· LO. Shri N g. 'rompok Singh 
11. Shri Shant! Tyag i 
12. Dr. Ra6q Zakaria 
• • 
(li) Repre$ento.lives of tile Mmwtry of Home Affairs (Department of 
Personnel o.nd Admini.slrativc Reforms) 
Shri U. C. Agarwal. Secretary 
Sh,ri D. C. Misra, Dire(!tor 
Shn P. N Kohli, Under Secretary. 
SECREl'ARIAT 
Shrt 13. R Gael. Ch•ef E:.:11miner of Questions. 
• ••• Kelatcs to mallcr not inrluefed in this Report. 
59 

; 
, 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 27th January, 
1983, in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
MKM11l:RS Plt&sm-'T 
1. Dr. Bh:~i Mnhavir-ChaiT1114n 
2. Shn Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shrl G. C Bhatt:lcharya 
4. Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
8. Shrl G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Santoslt Kumar Sahu 
10. Shr1 Ng. Tompok Singh 
11. Shri Sh~nti Tyngi 
12. Dr. Raflq Zakaria 
• • • • 
l'•l Representatives of the Min.iStTY of Home Affairs (Depa.rtment of 
Per$o~tnel and Administrative Reforms) 
Shri U. C. Agarwal. Secretary 
Sh.ri D. C. M•sra, Director 
Shri P, N Kohli. Under Secretary. 
Shn B. R. Gocl. Ch1ej Examiner of Questions. 
• ••Relate$ to matter not included in this Report. 
59 

1 
60 
3. SECOND SUPPLEMENT TO MEMORANDUM NO. 105 OF 1979 
India>< f'orcr.r Str~ic•• (Appointment by Promat<on) Amendment 
Regulations. 1977 
The Commattec took up the abo\-e memorandum for consit.lemiion 
and heard the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affatrs (De­
partment o( Personnel and Administrative Reforms) on t!1e subject 
A verbahm record of the evidence was kept. 
The Committee, after some discussion, directed 1e Secretariat to 
refer the matter to the Chaef Secretary. Government of .\ndhra 
Pradesh and invtll' him for ural evidPnce before the Commit'.ee after 
obtaining his commcn ts in the matter . 
f. The Committee then constdered its future programme of sitting,; 
and decided to hold it.' next ser;es oi meetings on the 7th Bnd 8th 
February, 1983. 
5. The Commattec then adjourned ~~ 12.45 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M on the 28th January, 1983 

• XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEEl'lNG 
The Comma ec met at 11.00 A.M. on Th~y. the 29th September, 
1983 In Comm1acc Room 'A', Ground Floor. Parliament House 
Annr.xe New DeJh, 
Dr Bhru .'dahavir-Chamnar. 
~ Shrt Banamali Babu 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shr1 Rnm N arcsh Kushawaha 
li. Sbri C Swamy Nnik 
7 Shri Chonshyambhai Oza 
8. Shrl Santosh Kumar Sahu 
9. Shr, Shant! Tyal(i 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B H. Goel, Chic£ Examiner ol Questions 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committe~ 
Officer 
WITNESS 
(i) R~>prrsemat a of t/1e Forest and Rurol Development Department, 
r.ot•ernment of Andhra Pro.d.esh 
Sh.ri K Subramanyam, Principal Secretary 
• • • • 
2. ~~~morandu•n No. 30/83 regarding Ind1al1 Foresr Serv•ce 
(AppOintmrn, by Promotion) Amendment Regulations, 19'17 
The Committee took 'ilp the abo,·e memorandum for consideration 
and heard the representat \'e of the Government or Andhra Pradesh. 
on the subject. 
• •••Relat•!S to molter no1 included in this ReporL 
61 

62 
A ve•·batim record of the evid~nce was kept. 
The Committee also decided to hear the Secretary, Department of 
Personnel and Administrative Refo.rms for seeking further clar•flca­
tions in the matter. 
• • • • 
-l. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. to meet again at 
3.00 p.M. on the lOth October, 1983 
• • • •Relates to matter not included to this Report. 

' 
xv u 
s~;VENTEENTR MEETING 
'111<' Committee met at 3.00 PM. on Monday, the lOth October, 
1963, in C'.crnmitto-~ Room 'A', Ground Floor. Parliament Hou•c 
Ann<'Xc, New 0<-lhi, 
·' I Or. Bhar Mahavrr-Cillurman 
Z. Shrl Banamah B;~hu 
:1 Shrr Madan Bhutw 
4. Shn G. C Bhati.Hcha.rya 
5. Shri Arnarprosatl Cha.kmburty 
6. Slm Dip<'n Gho~h 
7 Sllri B. 0. Klwhragade 
ll. Shri Rom N'on•sh Kushnwnha 
9. Shrr (;, Swllrny ~uri< 
JO. Sl\ri nhorr.<hyamuhni Oza 
II Shri St<ntosh K1Hn<1r Sahu 
SFUU>TAIUIIT 
Shri B. H. Gocl. ChteJ E.,·ammer of Qt•estiorn;. 
Shri R. N. Bh,rrdwnj, Sen;"' /,~gi.,latrve Committee OjJirer 
WJTSFSSFS 
Rrp7ese>H<l!ivl's of tire Mtni.:try oj Home Affairs (Department of 
Prr,,omrcl and Adutirti •·frat11·~ Reforms) 
(i) Shri U. C. Agarwal, Secretary 
(ri) Shri D. C. Misra, Jornt Secretary (S) 
(iir) Shri I' N, Kohli, Undtt Secretary 
• • 
•• 'Rein!('$ to m1tl••r n<>t rnclnded in t.hi,; Report 
~. 
' 
• 

3. Mem.orat•dum No. 30/83 (Supplement) regarding Ind.a11 Pore$~. 
Servtce (Appointment lrtJ Promotion) Amen.dmen' Regulat;on.f, 
1977 
The Committee took up the above memorandum ior consideration 
and took lhe oral evidence of the representative of lhe Minis~ry 
o( Hom'-' Affair:. (Departm~nt of Personnel and Administrative Re­
forms) , on the subject . 
A verbatim ~rd of the evidence was kept. 
The Cornm<ttee also decided to hear the oral evidence o[ t.tu. 
Scc.retary, Ministry of Agriculture , lor seeking further clarifications, 
in the matter . 
4. The Commitk't: then. adJou.med a~ 4.13 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M . on the II th October, 191!3. 

1 
, 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
J 
The Committee met at 3.00 I'..M . on Friday the 21st October, 196J, 
In Committee Room 'A'. Ground Floor, Parliament Hou59 Annexe, 
New Delhi. •l 
I. Dr. Bhai Mahanr-Chairman 
2. Sh.n Madan Bhatia 
3. Shr; G. C. Bhattacharya 
4 Shrl Am<~epros:ad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B 0. Khobragad~ 
6 Shn Ram Nnresh Kushawnha 
7 Shrl G Swnmy !'f;uk 
8 Shri Ghanshyambhal Or.a 
9. Shri ShanlJ Tyagi 
St:eR F.TI\Rl AT 
S lu·i B. R. Goe l, Chief t:.raminer of Qtte.~hon.,, 
Shrl R. N Bh~rdwaJ, Stmior Lf'gi<!ative Committee Offw~r. 
W JTN J::SS&s 
R.~prcsentotit•c,< of the l\1uustry Of Agri<"ultllr£> (Department of Agri-
cultttr<· and Co0p1•ration) 
Shri S. P. Mukerj•, Secretary 
Shri S~mar Smqh, Joint Secretary 
Shri M V. Kesavan. Deputy Secretary. 
2 SECOxn SCIPPl.EMf:.VT TO MEMORANDUJf KO. :lO 83 
lnd1an F'ore•r Serl>lcc (,lppomtrr•("nt 1:>!' PromotiG?t) Amendu."nt 
R~gulahons. 1977 
Tite Comm.tlee took up the above Memorandum for t-onsideration 
and hrJrd the oral evidence of the reprc,entat"'l!S of the Ministry or 
A~r•culture (O.•ptt or Agr culture and Cooperation) on the subJect. 
6S 

€6 
A verbatirn n-cord ol !be evidence was kept, 
3. The Comrnilt.-e considered it.• future programme of scitlings . 
.After some dfscus;ion the Committee decided to meet on the 31st 
October and the ht Nnvembc.r, 198.'!. 
4 The Cornmrltee th~n adJourn~d at -t:~o P.M. to meet a1,tain at ·H.OO A.M. on S.lturday, the 22nd October, 1983 . . . 
GMGIPMRND-RS l- 1427 RS (1128)-14-3-13-1---45(). 
} 
I 
" 