 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 REPORT NO.  
206  
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTH REPORT 
 
Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on     3rd     May , 2013) 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT ON THE GAS CYLINDER RULES, 2004  
 
 
4. SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
 
5. ANNEXURE 
  
6. *MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 

 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RA JYA SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
3. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
4. Shri P. Kannan 
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
6. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
7. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
9. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi  
11. Shri Shantaram Naik 
12. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
13. *Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
14. *Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
15. *Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
   
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director  
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  9 th  May, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Sixth Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 2004 and issues relating to them al ong with the comments received from 
the concerned Governments. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the 
2
nd  May, 2013 
 
 
 
 
MAYA SINGH 
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
May 3, 2013 

Report on the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004  
 
The Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 (Annexure-I)  were framed in exercise of powers 
conferred by Sections 5 and 7 of the Explosives Act , 1884. These Rules were framed in 
supersession of the Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981 for en suring safety in possession, filling, 
transportation and use of industrial gases. The eig hties and nineties witnessed massive 
expansion in the gas and related industries trigger ed by economic liberalization and 
globalization, use of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) , introduction of Compressed 
Natural Gas (CNG) and entry of new technologies nec essitated the framing of new Gas 
Cylinder Rules, 2004. 
 
2. The scope of the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 was wi dened to cover the application 
of the gas cylinder as automotive fuel storage tank s, cylinders made of materials other 
than metals paving way for entry of latest technolo gy in the field of cylinder 
manufacturing, CNG fueling stations and cylinders e xceeding water capacity of 1000 
litres for specific industrial applications. 
 
3. The Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 outline provisions with regard to filling, 
possession, import and transport of cylinders; valv e specifications for different types of 
cylinders viz. industrial gas cylinders, medical ga s cylinders, domestic and other 
cylinders; safety relief devices; marking on cylind ers; marking on valves; identification 
of colours; labeling of cylinders; restriction on delivery or dispatch of cylinders; repairing 
of seamless gas cylinders during use; repairing of welded or brazed cylinders; prohibition 
of employment of children and intoxicated persons; prohibition of smoking, fires, lights 
and dangerous substances; general precautions, etc. The Rules also provide guidelines for 
examination and testing of cylinders.  
 
4. The Rules were taken up for examination by the C ommittee on Subordinate 
Legislation, Rajya Sabha and a questionnaire on the  subject was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Indu strial Policy & Promotion) for 

their comments/clarifications on the 23 rd  February, 2006. The Ministry furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the 29 th  May, 2006 (Annexure-II) . During the course of its 
examination, the Committee held one internal meetin g on the 26 th  August, 2008 and also 
had the oral evidence of the representatives of the  Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
(Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion) on th e 19 th  May, 2011. The Committee 
also undertook two study visits on the Rules to Bangalore and Srinagar on 21 st  June, 2011 
and 29 th  June, 2012 respectively. The important points/issu es raised by the Committee, 
the comments/clarifications furnished by the Minist ry and the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee are e laborated in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
 
5. Rule 2 (iii) defines “Chief Controller” as the Chief Controller of Explosives, 
Government of India and Rule 2 (vii)  defines “Controller” as including the Joint Chief 
Controller of Explosives, the Deputy Chief Controll er of Explosives, the Controller of 
Explosives and the Deputy Controller of Explosives.  The Committee enquired about the 
method of appointment of the above-mentioned author ities; whether they are appointed 
for a specific period and what their service conditions are.  
 
The Ministry replied that as per recruitment rules,  Deputy Controller of 
Explosives (95% of total strength) are appointed by  direct recruitment through Union 
Public Service Commission (UPSC) and 5% by promotio n of Departmental Senior 
Technical Assistants. All other authorities from Co ntroller of Explosive to Chief 
Controller of Explosives are appointed by promotion  from the feeder grade. In case of 
non-availability of eligible officers for promotion , there are provisions in the recruitment 
rules for appointing these authorities on deputatio n (including short- term contract). In 
case of promotion and direct recruitment, there is no specific period of appointment. 
They are generally appointed till their age of supe rannuation. In case of deputation, the 
tenure is normally for 3 years. These posts belong to Group A Gazetted General Central 
Service (non-ministerial) and the service condition s are those applicable to Group A 
Services of Government of India. The Committee noted the replies furnished by the 
Ministry.     

 
6. Rule 2 (xxvii)  defines: “Inspecting authority” means a person having 
qualifications and wide experience in the field of design, manufacture and testing of gas 
cylinders and recognized by the Chief Controller as  authority for inspection and 
certification of gas cylinder”.   
 
The Committee pointed out that the definition of ‘i nspecting authority’ does not 
appear to be specific and suggested that the rank/level of the inspecting officer along with 
the qualifications and experience required for such  authority should be specified in the 
Rule itself.  
 
The Ministry replied that the definition has been c arried forward from Gas 
Cylinders Rules, 1981. The cylinders manufactured i ndigenously are covered under 
mandatory certification under BIS Certification Mar ks Scheme. In the case of cylinders 
of foreign origin, the same are manufactured under the certification of Inspection 
Agencies like Lloyd’s Register, Bureau Veritas, etc. with international accreditation only. 
As such laying down of qualification and experience is not considered necessary.   
 
The Committee does not agree with the argument of t he Ministry that laying 
down of qualification and experience for the inspec ting authority is not necessary. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that certain m inimum eligibility criteria 
like educational qualifications and experience shou ld be prescribed for the 
inspecting authority in the Rules itself.  
 
7. Rule 24(2)  states “Dissolved acetylene cylinders, which have been dam aged by 
fire shall be condemned and destroyed by an experienced and competent person”.   
 
The Committee pointed out that the words “experienc ed and competent person” 
are vague and suggested that the experience require d of such a person for the purpose of 
the Rules should be specified in the Rules itself.   
 

The Ministry replied that it is considered that com petency cannot be judged by 
qualification and experience alone. The word ‘compe tent’ is having a much wider 
meaning. Precautions against safety are not exhaust ive. Only persons conversant with 
hazards involved in the handling of dissolved acety lene cylinder and also capable of 
handling a situation arising out of accidental expl osion of cylinder during condemnation 
can be allowed to undertake such job.  
 
The Committee does not agree with the argument of t he Ministry that 
competence cannot be judged by qualification and ex perience alone. While this may 
be true to some extent, it is not a valid excuse fo r not specifying the experience 
required for the purpose and not making the Rules m ore specific. The Committee 
reiterates its stand that vague words should not be  used while framing rules so as to 
avoid any misinterpretation and misuse. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends 
that the Rules should be made more specific by prescribing the experience required. 
 
8.  Rule 48 (1) states; “An applicant for a new licence in Form ‘G’, for a CNG 
dispensing station shall apply to the District Magi strate with two copies of site plan 
showing the location of the premises proposed to be  licenced under these rules for a 
certificate to the effect that there is no objection to the applicant’s receiving a licence  for 
a CNG dispensing station at the site proposed, and the District Magistrate, if satisfied, 
shall grant no objection certificate to the applica nt who shall forward it to the Chief 
Controller or Controller  with his application”. 
 
 The Committee pointed out that the words ‘if satisfied’ give discretionary powers 
to the District Magistrate and suggested that the p arameters governing the issue of a ‘No 
Objection Certificate’ by the District Magistrate t o the applicant for issue of a new 
licence should be specified in the Rule itself.  
 
The Ministry replied that CNG fuelling station is a  hazardous installation with a 
potential to affect the neighbourhood in the case o f a fire and explosion. As the District 

Magistrate is responsible for law and order and pub lic safety, he is required to look 
beyond legal physical possession of the premises, c ompliance of national/state highway 
regulations and issues concerning traffic, etc. The  presence of slums, thickly populated 
neighbourhood, important defence establishments, is sues relating to safety of public and 
emergency preparedness, etc. are also required to b e taken into consideration. District 
Magistrate is responsible for the preparation of of f-site emergency plan as per Rule 14 of 
Manufacture, Storage & Import of Hazardous Chemical s Rules, 1989. Hence, it is 
considered that it may neither be practical nor be advisable to lay down parameters 
governing the issues of No Objection Certificate by  the District Magistrate. The 
Committee noted the replies of the Ministry.  
 
9.  Rule 48(4)  states, “If the District Magistrate, either on a reference being made to 
him or otherwise, intimates to the chief Controller  or Controller that any licence which 
has been applied for, should not, in his opinion, g ranted, such licence shall not be issued 
without the sanction of the Central Government.”   
 
The Committee suggested that  the word ‘be’ may be inserted after the words 
“should not, in his opinion” in line ‘3’ of sub-rule (4).  
 
The Ministry replied that it is agreed that the wor d ‘be’ may be inserted after the 
words ‘should not in his opinion’ in line 3 of sub-rule (4).  
 
The Committee, however, notes that though the Ministry has agreed to insert 
the words ‘be’ after the words “should not, in his opinion” in line 3 of sub-rule (4), 
the Ministry has not carried out this amendment til l date. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should amen d the Rule without further 
delay. 
 
10. Rule 53(3) states “If the Chief Controller or Controller, after scrut iny of the plan 
showing the proposed alteration and after making su ch enquiries as he deems fit, is 

satisfied that the proposed alteration may be carri ed out, he shall return to the licensee 
one copy of the plan signed by him and conveying hi s sanction subject to such condition 
or conditions as may be specified”   
 
The Committee pointed out that the words ‘after mak ing such enquiries as he 
deems fit’ empower the Chief Controller or the Cont roller, as the case may be, with wide 
discretionary powers. The Committee therefore sugge sted that requirements for allowing 
proposed alterations in the licensed premises that should govern the decision of the chief 
Controller or the Controller may be specified in the Rule itself.  
 
The Ministry in their reply stated that the area su rrounding a cylinder 
filling/storage premises may undergo a lot of chang es from the date of grant of licence 
and the date on which request for alternations/addi tions are proposed. 
Compressed/liquefied cylinders storage or a filling  plant is a potential hazard to the 
neighbouring areas. As such, it is necessary to asc ertain the developmental activities of 
the surrounding area with respect to density of pop ulation, commerce and trade, etc and 
also the past safety record, quality and safety man agement system of the firm. A 
provision, therefore, in the rules is considered ne cessary in the larger interest of the 
public safety. Such a provision is already in exist ence in Petroleum Rules, 2002, 
Explosives Rules, 1983 and Static and Mobile Pressu re Vessels (Unfired) Rules, 1981. 
The Committee noted the replies of the Ministry . 
 
11. Rule 56 states, “The Chief Controller or Controller refusing to gra nt, amend, 
renew or transfer a licence, shall communicate the reasons thereof to the applicant”.  The 
Committee suggested that the words  “thereof’ may be substituted by the word ‘therefor’ .  
 
The Ministry replied that the word ‘thereof’ is con sidered grammatically correct 
but submitted that suitable amendment, if any, will  be made after due consultation with 
the Ministry of Law.  
 

While the Ministry has agreed to substitute the wor ds “thereof” with 
“therefor” after due consultation with the Ministry  of Law, the Committee notes 
that the Ministry has not done so till date. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should accordingly amend the Rules expeditiously.  
 
12. Rule 57(3)  states, “The Chief Controller or Controller or the Central 
Government suspending or canceling a licence under sub-rule (1) shall communicate the 
reasons thereof to the applicant except when the li cence is suspended under sub-rule 
(2)”. 
 
 The Committee suggested that the words 'thereof' may be substituted by the word 
'therefor'. The Committee also enquired about the j ustification for not communicating the 
reasons for cancellation of a licence in case it ha s been suspended under sub-rule (2) of 
Rule 57.   
 
The Ministry replied that the word 'thereof' is con sidered grammatically correct. 
However, suitable amendment, if any, will be made a fter due consultation with the 
Ministry of Law. The Ministry also stated that the justification for not communicating the 
reasons for cancellation under sub-rule (2) of Rule 57 has been laid down in sub-rule 2(a) 
and (b) of Rule 57, which provide that "(a) before suspending or canceling a licence 
under this rule, the holder of the licence shall be  given an opportunity of being heard. (b) 
the maximum period of suspension shall not exceed t hree months". In the case of action 
originated from any Police/Intelligence inputs, Rul es shall provide enough safeguards 
against sharing confidential/secret information with the public.  
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry agreed in thi s case also to substitute  
the words 'thereof' by the word 'therefor' after du e consultation with the Ministry 
of Law. However necessary amendments have not been carried out by the Ministry 
so far. The Committee therefore recommends that the  rule should be amended 
accordingly. The Committee is satisfied with the ju stification given by the Ministry 
for not communicating the reasons for cancellation or suspension of a licence. 

 
13. Rule 59(2) and 70(2) & 3-Appeal  
Rule 59(2) states, “Every appeal shall be in writing and shall be acco mpanied by a copy 
of the Order appealed against and shall be presente d within sixty days of the Order 
passed. ”  
 
Rule 70(2) & 70(3) states,  “(2) Where the occupier or owner objects to an order  made 
under sub-rule (1), he may appeal to the Chief Cont roller within the time specified in the 
order for compliance with it.  
(3) Every appeal preferred under sub-rule (2) shall  be in writing and shall be 
accompanies by a copy of the order appealed against  and shall be made within a period 
of thirty days from the date of the order appealed against.” 
  
The Committee pointed out that the above Rules do n ot provide for disposal of 
appeals. The Committee suggested that a time period  should be specified within which 
the appeals should be processed and a final decisio n conveyed by the Central 
Government or the Chief Controller, as the case may  be, to the applicant for quick and 
timely disposal of cases.  
 
The Ministry replied that the above Rules are repro duction of old Gas Cylinder 
Rules, 1981, which do not provide time period for d isposal of appeals. The Ministry 
stated that however, if it is desirable to specify a time period for disposal of such appeals 
by the Central Government or Chief Controller of Ex plosives, as the case may be, such 
provision may be incorporated.  
 
While the Ministry has agreed that the time period for disposal of appeals 
may be specified, the Committee notes that the Mini stry has not carried out the 
necessary amendments in the Rules till date. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should amend the Rules immediately.  
 
14.   Rule 60-Procedure on death or disability of licensee 

"If a licensee dies or becomes insolvent or mentall y incapable or is otherwise disabled, 
the persons carrying on the business or legal heir of such licensee shall not be liable to 
any penalty or confiscation under the Act or these rules for exercising the powers granted 
to the licensee during such time as may reasonably be required  to allow him to make an 
application for a new licence or transfer of the existing licence in his own name" 
 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorize the exercise of any power 
under this rule by any person after the expiry of the period of the licence. 
 
 The Committee pointed out that the words "such tim e as may reasonably be 
required" appear to be vague and enquired whether G overnment have any objection in 
specifying the time period.  
 
The Ministry replied that during the revision of th e Rules, the thrust was on 
making the rules user friendly. Stipulating a time period for submission of application by 
the legal heir will make the rule inflexible. A legal heir, who is already in a state of shock 
by the death or disability of licensee, may not sub mit application immediately till such 
time he comes into the grip of rules and regulation s. Further, in case of any dispute on 
legal inheritance, the matter has to be settled by court of law, which is normally time 
consuming. The Committee noted the replies of the Ministry.  
 
15.    Rule 65-Licence fee and other than licence fee "(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification in the official Gazette, revise the  fees as specified in Schedule V from time 
to time.  
(2) All fees payable under these ruels shall be pai d through crossed demand draft drawn 
on any Bank in favour of the Chief Controller of Ex plosives or Controller of Explosives 
of Department of Explosives payable at respective places as the case may be". 
 
              The Committee pointed out that the he ading of Rule 65 is not clear and 
suggested that it would be more appropriate if the word "fee” is added after the words 
"licence fee and" in the heading.  

 
The Ministry agreed that it would be appropriate if  word 'fee' is added after the 
words 'licence fee and'.  
 
The Committee notes that the Ministry agreed that t he words 'fee' be added 
after the words 'licence fee and', but necessary am endments have not been carried 
out by the Ministry. The Committee therefore recomm ends that the rule should be 
amended accordingly. 
 
16.   Rule 66-Power to exempt – “If the Chief Controller is satisfied that in respe ct of 
any cylinder or any mode of conveyance, any of the requirements of these rules may be 
safely suspended or modified, he may, by written or der, authorize such suspension or 
modification for such period and under such conditi on as he may think fit and such order 
may be revoked at any time.”  
 
        The Committee pointed out that the Rule giv es wide discretionary powers to exempt 
which are likely to be misused.  
 
         The Ministry replied that the above Rule h as been carried forward from Gas 
Cylinders Rules, 1981. Whether it is approval, gran t, suspension, cancellation or 
exemption under the above Rule, justification shall  be recorded in writing for such 
approval, grant, suspension, cancellation or exempt ion, etc. The above provision is to 
make the Rule more flexible so that any of the prov isions under the Rules does not come 
in the way of development of the industry as some of the Rules may become redundant or 
inadequate to address to the changing industrial sc enario due to continuous technological 
development. In the light of Right of Information A ct, 2005, the apprehension of misuse 
of power may not be relevant.  
 
             The Committee does not accept the stand of the Mini stry that in the light of 
Right to Information Act, 2005, the apprehension of  misuse of power may not be 
relevant. The Committee felt that adequate safeguar ds should be provided against 

misuse of the power to exempt. The Committee, there fore, recommends that there 
should be a provision in the Rule for recording of reasons for making exemption to 
obviate misuse of the power of exemption. 
 
17. The Committee considered the matter during its meeting on the 26 
th  August, 2008 
and decided to have the oral evidence of the repres entatives of the Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry (Department of Industrial Policy & Promo tion) for further elucidations on the 
subject. Accordingly, the Committee heard the Secre tary, Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry (Department of Industrial Policy & Promoti on) on the 19 th  May, 2011. The 
Committee also decided to have a discussion with th e representatives of the major oil 
companies who are involved in the implementation of  the Rules for further elucidations 
on the subject. Accordingly, the Committee held dis cussions with the representatives of 
Indian Oil Corporation, Hindustan Petroleum Corpora tion Limited (HPCL), Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL), Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) and 
Petroleum Explosives Safety Organization (PESO) alo ng with the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas and the Ministry of Commerce & Indust ry (Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion) at Bangalore on the 21 st  June, 2011 and with Indian Oil 
Corporation, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limite d (HPCL), Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL) along with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and 
the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion) at 
Srinagar on the 29 th  June, 2012.  Study notes on the said discussions a re placed at 
Annexure-III and Annexure-IV .  Certain issues which come up during the discussi ons 
are outlined in the following paras. 
Conformity to Indian standards 
 
18.  The Committee notes that  as per the Gas Cylinder Rules 2004, the LPG 
Cylinders, Valves and Regulators of Indian Origin w ere required to conform to the 
relevant Indian Standards under a licence to use BI S Standard mark on these 
products. The Committee, however, notes that for LP G cylinders, Valve and 
Regulators of external origin (i.e. manufactured in  foreign countries), Gas Cylinder 
Rules 2004 prescribe conformity to standards other than Indian Standards, which is 
outside the preview of BIS. The Committee also note s that there are many other 

similar products, like tyres and cement being produ ced in companies abroad, but 
when imported to India, all such products have to m eet the relevant Indian 
standards under a licence from BIS. As such, the Co mmittee recommends that all 
the products covered under Gas Cylinder Rules, when  imported to India should be 
as per Indian Standards, irrespective of whether th ey were produced in India or 
abroad. 
Safety Instructions 
 
19. The Committee notes that safety instructions for ha ndling gas cylinders are 
written mainly in English and Hindi. The Committee,  therefore, suggests that safety 
instructions should also be printed in regional lan guages so that more people can 
benefit from the safety instructions. 
 
Training on safety norms  
20. The Committee feels that there should be safety nor ms for storage at 
distributor level and that these should be strictly  adhered to. Drivers/Cleaners 
should be properly trained to handle emergency.  
 
Small Cylinders 
 
21. The Committee notes that small cylinders available in the market posed 
threat to the safety of consumers. The Committee wa s informed that no licences 
were issued for small cylinders by the Ministry.  T he Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the rules should be amended, if nee d be, to tackle this problem. 
The Committee feels that this is happening at a ver y large level and cannot be done 
at the small distributor level. The Committee feels  that it needs immediate action 
from the Ministry and urges the Ministry to take re sponsibility to devise a 
mechanism to tackle this problem in consultation wi th the oil companies. The 
Committee also noted that filling of these small cy linders is being done at local level 
from LPG cylinders supplied by oil companies. So th e oil companies also owe 
responsibility to devise mechanism to check this ma lpractice. The Committee 
recommends that the Bureau of Indian Standards which is responsible for providing 
standards should devise/prescribe appropriate stand ards/guidelines to regularize 

the sale of small cylinders so that safety is not c ompromised. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the rules should be amended accordingly.  
 
22. The Committee was informed that amendment to th e Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 is 
under consideration by the Ministry. The Committee hopes that the Committee’s 
recommendations and observations outlined in the pr eceding paras will be considered by 
the Ministry at the time of carrying out the amendment to the Rules.  
 
 
 
 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
 
Rule 2 (xxvii) 
 
23.  The Committee does not agree with the argument of the Ministry that laying 
down of qualification and experience for the inspec ting authority is not necessary. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that certain m inimum eligibility criteria 
like educational qualifications and experience shou ld be prescribed for the 
inspecting authority in the Rules itself.  
 
Rule 24(2) 
 
24.  The Committee does not agree with the argument of the Ministry that 
competence cannot be judged by qualification and ex perience alone. While this may 
be true to some extent, it is not a valid excuse fo r not specifying the experience 
required for the purpose and not making the Rules m ore specific. The Committee 
reiterates its stand that vague words should not be  used while framing rules so as to 
avoid any misinterpretation and misuse. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends 
that the Rules should be made more specific by prescribing the experience required. 
 
Rule 48(4) 
 

25.  The Committee, however, notes that though the Mini stry has agreed to insert 
the words ‘be’ after the words “should not, in his opinion” in line 3 of sub-rule (4), 
the Ministry has not carried out this amendment til l date. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should amen d the Rule without further 
delay . 
 
Rule 56 
 
26.  While the Ministry has agreed to substitute the wo rds “thereof” with 
“therefor” after due consultation with the Ministry  of Law, the Committee notes 
that the Ministry has not done so till date. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry should accordingly amend the Rules expeditiously.  
 
Rule 57(3) 
 
27.  The Committee notes that the Ministry agreed in th is case also to substitute  
the words 'thereof' by the word 'therefor' after du e consultation with the Ministry 
of Law. However necessary amendments have not been carried out by the Ministry 
so far. The Committee therefore recommends that the  rule should be amended 
accordingly. The Committee is satisfied with the ju stification given by the Ministry 
for not communicating the reasons for cancellation or suspension of a licence. 
 
Rule 59(2) and 70(2) & 3-Appeal 
 
28.  While the Ministry has agreed that the time period  for disposal of appeals 
may be specified, the Committee notes that the Mini stry has not carried out the 
necessary amendments in the Rules till date. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should amend the Rules immediately.  
 
Rule 65 
 
29.  The Committee notes that the Ministry agreed that the words 'fee' be added 
after the words 'licence fee and', but necessary am endments have not been carried 

out by the Ministry. The Committee therefore recomm ends that the rule should be 
amended accordingly. 
 
Rule 66-Power to exempt 
 
30.      The Committee does not accept the stand of the  Ministry that in the light of 
Right to Information Act, 2005, the apprehension of  misuse of power may not be 
relevant. The Committee felt that adequate safeguar ds should be provided against 
misuse of the power to exempt. The Committee, there fore, recommends that there 
should be a provision in the Rule for recording of reasons for making exemption to 
obviate misuse of the power of exemption. 
 
 
 
Conformity to Indian standards 
 
31. The Committee notes that  as per the Gas Cylinder Rules 2004, the LPG 
Cylinders, Valves and Regulators of Indian Origin w ere required to conform to the 
relevant Indian Standards under a licence to use BI S Standard mark on these 
products. The Committee, however, notes that for LP G cylinders, Valve and 
Regulators of external origin (i.e. manufactured in  foreign countries), Gas Cylinder 
Rules 2004 prescribe conformity to standards other than Indian Standards, which is 
outside the preview of BIS. The Committee also note s that there are many other 
similar products, like tyres and cement being produ ced in companies abroad, but 
when imported to India, all such products have to m eet the relevant Indian 
standards under a licence from BIS. As such, the Co mmittee recommends that all 
the products covered under Gas Cylinder Rules, when  imported to India should be 
as per Indian Standards, irrespective of whether th ey were produced in India or 
abroad. 
 
Safety Instructions 
 
32. The Committee notes that safety instructions for ha ndling gas cylinders are 
written mainly in English and Hindi. The Committee,  therefore, suggests that safety 

instructions should also be printed in regional lan guages so that more people can 
benefit from the safety instructions. 
 
Training on safety norms 
 
33. The Committee feels that there should be safety nor ms for storage at 
distributor level and that these should be strictly  adhered to. Drivers/Cleaners 
should be properly trained to handle emergency.  
 
Small Cylinders 
 
34. The Committee notes that small cylinders available in the market posed 
threat to the safety of consumers. The Committee wa s informed that no licences 
were issued for small cylinders by the Ministry.  T he Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the rules should be amended, if nee d be, to tackle this problem. 
The Committee feels that this is happening at a ver y large level and cannot be done 
at the small distributor level. The Committee feels  that it needs immediate action 
from the Ministry and urges the Ministry to take re sponsibility to devise a 
mechanism to tackle this problem in consultation wi th the oil companies. The 
Committee also noted that filling of these small cy linders is being done at local level 
from LPG cylinders supplied by oil companies. So th e oil companies also owe 
responsibility to devise mechanism to check this ma lpractice. The Committee 
recommends that the Bureau of Indian Standards which is responsible for providing 
standards should devise/prescribe appropriate stand ards/guidelines to regularize 
the sale of small cylinders so that safety is not c ompromised. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that the rules should be amended accordingly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
 XXVII  
 
Twenty Seventh Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 02.15 pm on the 02 nd  May, 2013 in Room Number 126-C, 
Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The foll owing Members of the Committee 
were present in the meeting:- 
 
Members Present 
 
1. Smt. Maya Singh    Chairperson 
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda  
3. Shri P. Kannan 
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
5. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
8. Shri Ahmad Saeed Mahilabadi 
9. Shri Shantaram Naik 
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
11. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
12. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1.    Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
       2.    Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
       3.  Shri R.S. Rawat, Deputy Director 
       4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Deputy Director   
 5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2.  The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Com mittee and thereafter 
the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration one-by-one. 
 
(i) Two Hundred and Fourth Report on the Statutory Orde rs laid on the Table of 
the Rajya Sabha during the 227 
th  Session. 
 
(ii) Two Hundred and Fifth Report on the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment 
and Promotion of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010;  
 
(iii) Two Hundred and Sixth Report on the Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004; and 
 

(iv) Two Hundred and Seventh Report on Motor Spirit and High Speed Diesel 
(Regulation of Supply and Distribution and Preventi on of Malpractices) 
Order, 2005 and the Electrical Wires, Cables, Appli ances and Protection 
Devices and Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2003. 
 
3.  The Committee adopted these Reports with some a mendments suggested 
by the Members.   
 
4.  The Committee while discussing the draft Two Hu ndred and Fourth 
Report on the Statutory Orders laid on the Table of  the Rajya Sabha during the 227 
th  
Session was of the opinion that its repeated recomm endation for timely laying of the 
subordinate legislation framed under different Acts  before the House, have not 
evoked the desired promptness in the Ministries/Dep artments. However, the 
Committee has noted some improvement in this regard . While 33.5% notifications 
were delayed during 226 th  Session, it came down to 26.25% during 227 th  Session. It 
was, therefore, decided to continue the exercise of  summoning the Secretaries of the 
concerned Ministries before the Committee to explain such delays.  
 
5.  While discussing the reasons of delay in laying  of notifications by 
Ministries/Departments the Committee noticed that i n most of the cases reasons 
citied/forwarded by the Ministry/Department has bee n the late receipt of printed 
copies of notifications from Government of India Pr ess. To understand the problem 
and for its solution the Committee decided to summo n the Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development and administrative Ministry of Go vernment of India Press 
responsible for printing Government of India Notifications. 
  
6.  The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in  her absence Shri Vijay 
Jawaharlal Darda and in his absence Dr. K.P. Ramali ngam to present the Reports to 
the House on 03 
rd  December, 2013. 
 
 7.  The Chairperson thanked the Members present an d meeting was 
concluded at 2.40 pm. 
    