 
 
 
 
intrgg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 1st Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
SECOND REPORT  
 
 
                                       
               
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
MARCH, 2025/ PHALGUNA, 1946 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2024-25) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
02 

 
 
 
 
SCR NO.  246 
 
 
SECOND REPORT   STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25)  
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA    
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 1st Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the 
Ministry of Railways’] 
   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.03.2025  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2025               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
MARCH, 2025/PHALGUNA, 1946 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
i 
 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................ (ii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (iv) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REP ORT……………………………………………………………………
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government……………………………………………………... 
 
11 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
40 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration …………………………………………… 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited ……………………………….. 
 
42 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 I.    Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on 
07.03.2025 
43 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.  Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)…………………. 
 
 
45 
 
 

 
 
ii 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25)@ 
 
   Dr. C.M.Ramesh   - Chairperson 
 
                MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
  
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23. Shri Narhari Amin 
24. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
25. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
28. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
29. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 841 dated 26.09.2024. 

 
 
iii 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Md. Aftab Alam   - Director 
2. Smt. Savdha Kalia   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Rudresh Singh Yadav  - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
 
iv 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION   
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2024-25), having been authorized by the 
Committee, present this Second Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘’Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Railways”. 
 
2. The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2024.  The 
Report contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Railways furnished Action Taken 
Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 11.02.2025. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting held on 
07.03.2025.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH  
       07 March, 2025________ Chairperson  
       16 Phalguna , 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways  
  

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations 
/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First Report (18thLok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Railways'.  
 
2. The First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2024. 
It contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all 
recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
        Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14     
        
 
                                          Total: 14 
(ii) Observations / recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies:- 
 
         NIL                    
                                  Total: 00 
         
(iii) Observations / recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
 
 NIL                               
         Total: 00 
 
 (iv) Observations / recommendations in respect of which final replies are still awaited:-  
 
           NIL                    
                                  Total: 00 

 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of 
the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The Committee desire 
that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to them at the earliest but not later than three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations / 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee note that the net revenue of Indian Railways have been 
negligible for the year 2022–23 and 2023–24. Further, the budget estimate of Net Revenue for 
the year 2024–25 has been kept at Rs. 2800 crores.  The Committee observe that the main reason 
behind this situation is low revenues from the passenger segment. The budget estimates for 
passenger revenues for the year 2024–25 have been kept at Rs. 80,000 crores against freight 
revenue estimate of Rs. 1,80,000 crores.  The Committee feel that to increase net revenues of 
Indian Railways, it is of prime importance to increase its earnings from the passenger segment. 
The Committee are aware that Indian Railways are the main means of transport for crores of 
poor people in the country and they have to incur losses on pricing fares below cost in wake of 
Social Service Obligations. However, the Committee feel that Indian Railways need to make a 
comprehensive review of its passenger fares in different trains and classes. Committee feel that 
'General class' travel must remain affordable  for the masses but at the same time the Committee 
urge Indian Railways to review its revenues with regard to AC classes by aligning it with costs 
incurred to reduce losses in passenger segment. The Committee also urge Indian Railways to 
conduct a comprehensive review of its operating expenses for passenger trains and to rationalise 
these costs to ensure affordability of its ticket prices." 
 
6. In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 

 
 
3 
 
 "Increasing the Net Revenue is always a priority for Railways. It involves maximizing 
traffic receipts along with expenditure control measures. To maximize traffic receipts, steps 
taken by Railways are given below:- 
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of available 
accommodation various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of Vande Bharat 
and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on-board capacity, introduction and rationalisation of 
Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, periodical review of reservation quota wherever required, 
extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as VIKALP have also been 
undertaken. Railways have also taken various measures to increase freight and Non fare revenue 
such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  
Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the Goods Shed Rating Dashboard,   introduction of 
e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning & Non Fare Revenue contracts,  special focus on e-
Commerce and FMCG,  Inclusion of certain popular ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, 
lithium ion batteries, battery powered vehicles etc.) in the Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued 
for Liberalised Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow directionetc. 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly undertaken in Railways in order to ensure 
savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims at better 
manpower management, electrification of railway track, introducing Head on generation rakes, 
rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart 
from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. 
As a result of these steps, Net Revenue, which was negative during 2021-22 improved to ₹3,260 
crore in 2023-24. 
Regarding Hon’ble Committee’s suggestion of comprehensive review of its passenger fares the 
following is submitted: 
Indian Railways continuously strive to improve passenger traffic and passenger earnings over its 
network.  
 W.e.f. 01.01.2020, passenger fares were rationalized, the details of the same are as under: 
 No increase in passenger fare of Suburban upto 80 km. 
 No increase in season tickets (both suburban & Non-Suburban). 
 01 paisa per kilometre increased in ordinary non-AC classes in Non-Suburban. 

 
 
4 
 
 02 paisa per kilometre increased in Mail/Express Non AC classes in Non Suburban. 
 04 paisa per kilometre increased in AC classes in Non-suburban. 
Further to the above, the passenger fares over the suburban section were rationalized w.e.f. 
05.05.2022 wherein;  
 Single journey basic fare of AC EMU was rationalized by reducing it by around 50%. 
 Single journey basic fare of First class has been reduced by around 41% to 49%. 
 Analysing the figures of FY2023-24, for appreciation of Standing Committee, Indian Railway is 
not able to recover the cost of service in Suburban (~70% cost is subsidised), Non-AC travel 
(~61% cost is subsidised). In case of AC travel Indian Railway is able to gain only marginally 
(~3.5% surplus over cost)." 
7.  The Committee observe that the Ministry of Railways have taken several initiatives 
to maximize traffic receipts, including the introduction of premium trains like Vande 
Bharat and Amrit Bharat, rationalization of flexi-fare schemes, and expansion of freight 
and non-fare revenue through policies such as the Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal and e-
Auction for commercial contracts. Besides, expenditure control measures like 
electrification of railway tracks, efficient manpower management, and rigorous monthly 
monitoring have contributed to improving net revenue from negative in 2021-22 to          
Rs. 3260 crores in 2023-24. However, despite fare rationalization efforts in 2020 and 2022, 
which included marginal increases in non-AC and AC class fares and significant reductions 
in AC EMU and First Class suburban fares, Indian Railways continues to heavily subsidize 
passenger services. Suburban services recover only ~30% of costs, non-AC travel recovers 
~39%, and AC travel generates only a marginal surplus (~3.5%). The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Indian Railways should adopt a comprehensive, multi-pronged 
strategy to enhance net revenue while ensuring affordability for low-income passengers. 
This includes implementing dynamic pricing models for AC classes and premium trains, 
regularly reviewing flexi-fare schemes based on demand, and expanding non-fare revenue 
through initiatives like e-Auction policies, advertising, and commercial utilization of 
railway assets. The Committee also feel that in order to balance social obligations, Indian 
Railways should continue targeted subsidies for suburban and non-AC travel. However, 

 
 
5 
 
operational efficiency must be improved through accelerated electrification and energy-
efficient technologies. Further, a comprehensive fare review should be undertaken from 
time to time to align AC class fares with costs and ensure gradual, affordable adjustments 
for non-AC classes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that the annual plan for the year 2024–25 has been kept at Rs. 2,65,200 
crores, which is the highest ever. The increased Capex in recent years has been mainly due to 
increase in Gross Budgetary Support from the Government. Gross budgetary Support which was 
Rs. 1,17,508 crores in 2021-22 has increased to 2,52,200 crores in BE 2024-25.  The 
contribution of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) in Capex has been reduced in recent years and 
for the year 2024–25, EBR(BE) has been kept at Rs. 10,000 crores. The Committee are aware 
that market borrowing for capital expenditure increases financial liabilities as it entails debt 
servicing from its revenues. Due to this reason Indian Railways have rationalised EBR(IF) and 
EBR(Bonds). However the Committee are of the opinion that the modernisation of Indian 
Railway infrastructure demands huge capital investment. The Committee feel that there is ample 
scope of improvement in Indian Railways' infrastructure and there is need to significantly 
increase its planned expenditure.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to find ways to 
increase Private Sector participation in creation of Railway infrastructure." 
  
9. In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
"Hon’ble Committee has observed that IR’s infrastructure demands huge Capital investment and 
there is need to increase planned expenditure.  In this regard, it is submitted that IR’s annual 
Capital Budget has been growing over the years.  From ₹ 58,718.92 crore in 2014-15 (out of 
which GBS was ₹ 32328 crores), the Capex for 2024-25 in Budget Estimate has been fixed at 
Rs.265200 cr (with GBS of ₹ 252200 crore) in Budget Estimates, which is a phenomenal 
growth.  With the increased investment under Capital segment of the Budget, the focus of the 
Government has been put on infrastructure development, network expansion, creation of 
terminal facilities, safety and removal of traffic bottleneck.  With this infusion of massive 
investment, the Railways have been able to fast track project execution.  Network capacity 
augmentation projects are getting completed and easing traffic movement. 

 
 
6 
 
Various steps being taken by Railways for effective and speedy implementation of rail projects 
include: 
I. Prioritisation of projects. 
II. Substantial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects. 
III. Delegation of powers at field level. 
IV. Close monitoring of projects at various levels and, 
V. Regular follow-up with State Governments and concerned authorities for 
expeditious land acquisition, forest and wildlife clearances and for resolving 
other issues pertaining to projects. 
Committee has also suggested to increase private Sector Participation in Railway Infrastructure.  
In this regard, it is submitted that there are various sources of financing in Indian Railways viz 
Gross Budgetary Support (Capital, Safety Fund and RRSK), Internal Resource Generation 
(Depreciation Reserve Fund, Development Fund, Capital Fund) and Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR-Partnership etc).  PPP is an Extra Budgetary Resource.   
Ministry of Railways (MoR) has formulated a Participative Policy, 2012 to encourage the 
investment in developing rail connectivity by associating strategic partners and other investors. 
The policy defines five Public Private Partnership models viz. Non-Government Railway 
(NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer Funded, Build Operate Transfer (BOT) and BOT-annuity 
models. State Governments/Local bodies/PSUs may also participate as stakeholder for the 
development of new lines/gauge conversion project under the participative policy of MoR. So 
far, 17 projects of Rs. 16,434 crore have been completed through PPP model. 8 projects of Rs. 
16,614 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity and port connectivity 
projects.  Five Public Private Partnership (PPP) models of Participative Policy of MoR, namely 
Non- Government Railway (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer Funded model, Built-Operate 
Transfer (BOT) and BOT Annuity models have been formulated to attract private investment in 
Rail connectivity Projects.  MoR has also set up two locomotive factories (one electric and one 
diesel) in Joint Venture with private players. 
The year-wise Targets vis-à-vis Achievements under PPP has been as under: - 
        Figures in Crores 
SN EBR (PPP) FY- 2022-23 FY- 2023-24 FY- 2024-25 

 
 
7 
 
A.  Targets 14700.00 17000.00 10000.00 
B. Achievements  11086.03 16625.36 8732.24 
(upto  Dec. 2024) 
 
The allocations for EBR (PPP) on annual basis are decided in consultation with stakeholders 
based on the estimates provided by Other Ministries/States/PSUs and Private players which 
varies on the basis of business activity in the given time period. Railway’s Participative Policy is 
open to interested parties to incentivize their investments." 
10. The Committee appreciate the fact that Capex of Indian Railways has risen from₹ 
58,718.92 crore in 2014-15 (out of which GBS was ₹ 32328 crores), to Rs.265200 cr (with 
GBS of ₹ 252200 crore) in Budget Estimates for 2024-25 thereby supporting the expansion 
and modernization of Indian railways.The Ministry have stated that they have formulated 
a Participative Policy, 2012 to encourage the investment in developing rail connectivity by 
associating strategic partners and other investors. The policy defines five Public Private 
Partnership models viz. Non-Government Railway (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer 
Funded, Build Operate Transfer (BOT) and BOT-annuity models.So far, 17 projects of Rs. 
16,434 crore have been completed through PPP model. The Committee feel that Railways 
need to be more ambitious with regard to private sector participation in Railway 
Infrastructure and set higher PPP targets to reduce their dependence on Government for 
budgetary support. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee note that there are 8800 Railway Stations across Indian Railways' 
network. For provision of amenities, Railway Stations are categorised based on earnings and 
outward passengers handled.  Over the years Indian Railways have undertaken 
modernisation/upgradation of stations under different schemes, such as ‘the Model Station 
Scheme’, ‘Modern Station Scheme’, ‘Adarsh Station Scheme’. At present, stations are being 
upgraded under the ‘Amrit Bharat Station Scheme’, launched in the year 2022. Committee note 
that Amrit Bharat Scheme envisages development of railway stations on a continuous basis with 
long-term approach. The scheme includes provision for better amenities like lifts, escalators, free 

 
 
8 
 
Wi-Fi, improved waiting halls, toilets, and better passenger information systems etc.  The 
Committee appreciate that the scheme provides for special facilities for Divyangjan. Further, the 
Committee are aware that 1337 stations have been identified for upgradation/modernisation 
under this scheme across Indian Railways. The Committee urge the ministry to increase pace of 
work at these stations and also take up other stations especially in backward areas for betterment 
of basic amenities like toilets, provision of drinking water, waiting rooms etc. The Committee 
also urge the ministry to look for private sector participation for Station redevelopment to reduce 
dependence on budgetary support and internal resources for Station Redevelopment works." 
Reply of the Government 
12. In their action-taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
 "Ministry of Railways has accelerated the redevelopment of major stations across the 
country and has initiated ‘Amrit Bharat Station Scheme’.  So far, 1337 stations have been 
identified for development across the country including backward areas under this scheme.  
Presently, work is in progress at 1198 Railway Stations under this scheme to provide modern 
amenities.  Other Railway Stations are at different stages of tendering and planning. 
Ministry of Railways is exploring all the options of PPP mode for station development.  
Presently, a proposal for redevelopment of Vijayawada Railway station has been submitted to 
PPPAC for appraisal." 
13. The Committee observe that Indian Railways operate over 8800 stations, with 1337 
identified for modernization under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, of which work is in 
progress at 1198 stations and the remainder are in various stages of tendering and 
planning. The scheme focuses on providing modern amenities such as lifts, escalators, free 
Wi-Fi, improved waiting halls, toilets, and better passenger information systems, with 
special attention to facilities for Divyangian, promoting inclusivity. The Committee in their 
1st Report (18th Lok Sabha) had emphasized the need to prioritize stations in backward 
areas for basic amenities like toilets, drinking water, and waiting rooms to ensure equitable 
development. They urged the Ministry of Railways to explore Public-Private Partnership 
(PPP) models to reduce reliance on budgetary support. The Committee also took note of a 
proposal for the redevelopment of Vijayawada Railway Station to the PPP Appraisal 
Committee (PPPAC) as a positive step. While appreciating the progress so far made by the 
Ministry of Railways, the Committee urge that the Ministry of Railways expedite the 

 
 
9 
 
modernization of 1,337 stations identified under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, 
ensuring completion within a set time frame through regular monitoring. The Committee 
also feel that the scope of the Amrit Bharat Stations Scheme needs to be expanded to 
include more stations, particularly in backward and rural areas. The Committee urge that 
the Ministry of Railways should actively explore and incentivize Public-Private Partnership 
(PPP) models for station redevelopment in order to reduce reliance on budgetary support. 
The Committee would like to be kept informed about the progress made in the 
redevelopment of Vijayawada Railway Station. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are aware that most of the earnings of Indian Railways comes from its freight 
loading activities. In 2023-24, Indian Railways earned revenue of Rs. 1,68,293 Cr from freight 
traffic and target to achieve Rs. 1,80,000 Cr during 2024-25. The Committee note that the 
percentage share of Indian Railways in freight traffic in the country is 26%. Freight carried by 
Indian Railways is touching new milestones every year. However, the average speed of freight 
trains during the year 2013-24 was only 25.14 km/h.  The Committee further feel that creation of 
Dedicated Freight Corridors is of prime importance to increase the speed of freight trains, 
thereby increasing freight loading as well as earnings of Indian Railways. The Committee are 
aware that Indian Railways have taken up the construction of two dedicated freight corridors viz. 
the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor, from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 km), and the Western 
Dedicated Freight Corridor from JNPT (Mumbai) to Dadri (1506 km). The work on EDFC has 
been completed and 102 Km section remaining on WDFC from Vaitarna to JNPT is expected to 
be completed by December, 2025.  The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite work on new 
DFCs across the country to increase Railways' revenues by increasing share of freight loading 
via train." 
Reply of the Government 
15. Ministry of Railways has taken up construction of two   Dedicated   Freight   Corridors 
(DFCs)  viz.  Eastern   Dedicated   Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 
Km) and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal 
(JNPT) to Dadri (1506 Km). Out of total 2843 Km, 2741 Route Kilometers (96.4%) has been 

 
 
10 
 
commissioned and operational, which carried 83,343 freight trains during F.Y. 2024-25 (April to 
November). 
 
     Further, Ministry of Railways have got prepared the  Survey/Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
on the following potential routes of DFCs and the same are under consideration:- 
(i) East - Coast Corridor - From Kharagpur to Vijayawada 
 
(ii) East-West corridor: 
(a) From Palghar –Bhusawal-Nagpur-  Kharagpur- Dankuni 
 (b)   From Rajkharsawan- Kalipahari - Andal 
 
(iii) North-South Sub-corridor – From    Vijayawada –Nagpur- Itarsi 
     None of the above DFCs corridor has been sanctioned yet. The decision regarding sanctioning 
of any Dedicated Freight Corridor depends on many factors including traffic volume, techno-
economic feasibility and financial viability. 
16. The Ministry have stated that DPR for potential dedicated freight corridors viz East 
- Coast Corridor, East-West corridor & North-South Sub-corridor have been prepared. 
The Ministry have further stated that none of these DFC corridors have been sanctioned 
yet and decision regarding sanctioning of any Dedicated Freight Corridor depends on 
many factors including traffic volume, techno-economic feasibility and financial viability. 
The Committee during its meetings with the representatives of Ministry have observed that 
operational portions of existing Dedicated freight corridors have substantially reduced 
congestion on the traditional rail network and has increased efficiency in freight transport 
through rail. The Committee are of the opinion that Ministry should fast track its studies 
regarding traffic volume, techno-economic feasibility and financial viability to ensure that 
work is initiated on new DFCs without further delay. The committee also urge that the 
work on the remaining portion of the WDFC be completed within the time frame decided 
without further extension of date. 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
Indian Railways which is the fourth-largest rail network in the world is lifeline of Indian 
economy. It also plays a vital role in national integration by bringing different geographies and 
cultures together across the country. Indian Railways have come far ahead from its modest 
beginnings during the colonial era. Over the years, Indian Railways have reached remotest parts 
of the country, bringing social and economic development in these parts.  Indian Railways have 
created milestones in carrying passenger and freight traffic and are continuously modernizing 
their network and assimilating the latest technologies to give a comfortable and safe journey to 
crores of passengers every day. Budget 2024–25 aims to remove traffic bottlenecks, enhance 
safety and improve customer amenities. The demand for grants for the year 2024–25 of the 
Ministry of Railways were tabled in the House on 24.07.2024. The Committee undertook a 
detailed scrutiny of Demands for grants (2024-25) pertaining to Ministry of Railways. The 
recommendations of the Committee have been summarised in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Noted. 
 
    
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee note that the net revenue of Indian Railways have been negligible for the year 
2022–23 and 2023–24. Further, the budget estimate of Net Revenue for the year 2024–25 has 
been kept at Rs. 2800 crores.  The Committee observe that the main reason behind this situation 
is low revenues from the passenger segment. The budget estimates for passenger revenues for the 
year 2024–25 have been kept at Rs. 80,000 crores against freight revenue estimate of Rs. 
1,80,000 crores.  The Committee feel that to increase net revenues of Indian Railways, it is of 
prime importance to increase its earnings from the passenger segment. The Committee are aware 

 
 
12 
 
that Indian Railways are the main means of transport for crores of poor people in the country and 
they have to incur losses on pricing fares below cost in wake of Social Service Obligations. 
However, the Committee feel that Indian Railways need to make a comprehensive review of its 
passenger fares in different trains and classes. Committee feel that 'General class' travel must 
remain affordable  for the masses but at the same time the Committee urge Indian Railways to 
review its revenues with regard to AC classes by aligning it with costs incurred to reduce losses 
in passenger segment. The Committee also urge Indian Railways to conduct a comprehensive 
review of its operating expenses for passenger trains and to rationalise these costs to ensure 
affordability of its ticket prices. 
Reply of the Government 
Increasing the Net Revenue is always a priority for Railways. It involves maximizing traffic 
receipts along with expenditure control measures. To maximize traffic receipts, steps taken by 
Railways are given below:- 
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of available 
accommodation various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of Vande Bharat 
and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on-board capacity, introduction and  rationalisation of 
Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, periodical review of reservation quota wherever required, 
extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as VIKALP have also been 
undertaken. Railways have also taken various measures to increase freight and Non fare revenue 
such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  
Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the Goods Shed Rating Dashboard,   introduction of 
e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning & Non Fare Revenue contracts,  special focus on e-
Commerce and FMCG,  Inclusion of certain popular ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, 
lithium ion batteries, battery powered vehicles etc.) in the Red Tariff,  revised guidelines issued 
for Liberalised Automatic Freight Rebate scheme for traffic loaded in empty flow directionetc. 
To control expenditure, measures are being regularly undertaken in Railways in order to ensure 
savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims at better 
manpower management, electrification of railway track, introducing Head on generation rakes, 
rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart 
from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. 

 
 
13 
 
As a result of these steps, Net Revenue, which was negative during 2021-22 improved to ₹3,260 
crore in 2023-24. 
Regarding Hon’ble Committee’s suggestion of comprehensive review of its passenger fares the 
following is submitted: 
Indian Railways continuously strive to improve passenger traffic and passenger earnings over its 
network.  
 W.e.f. 01.01.2020, passenger fares were rationalized, the details of the same are as under: 
 No increase in passenger fare of Suburban upto 80 km. 
 No increase in season tickets (both suburban & Non-Suburban). 
 01 paisa per kilometre increased in ordinary non-AC classes in Non-Suburban. 
 02 paisa per kilometre increased in Mail/Express Non AC classes in Non Suburban. 
 04 paisa per kilometre increased in AC classes in Non-suburban. 
Further to the above, the passenger fares over the suburban section were rationalized w.e.f. 
05.05.2022 wherein;  
 Single journey basic fare of AC EMU was rationalized by reducing it by around 50%. 
 Single journey basic fare of First class has been reduced by around 41% to 49%. 
 Analysing the figures of FY2023-24, for appreciation of Standing Committee, Indian Railway is 
not able to recover the cost of service in Suburban (~70% cost is subsidised), Non-AC travel 
(~61% cost is subsidised). In case of AC travel Indian Railway is able to gain only marginally 
(~3.5% surplus over cost). 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 The Committee observe that the annual plan for the year 2024–25 has been kept at Rs. 
2,65,200 crores, which is the highest ever. The increased Capex in recent years has been mainly 

 
 
14 
 
due to increase in Gross Budgetary Support from the Government. Gross budgetary Support 
which was Rs. 1,17,508 crores in 2021-22 has increased to 2,52,200 crores in BE 2024-25.  The 
contribution of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) in Capex has been reduced in recent years and 
for the year 2024–25, EBR(BE) has been kept at Rs. 10,000 crores. The Committee are aware 
that market borrowing for capital expenditure increases financial liabilities as it entails debt 
servicing from its revenues. Due to this reason Indian Railways have rationalised EBR(IF) and 
EBR(Bonds). However the Committee are of the opinion that the modernisation of Indian 
Railway infrastructure demands huge capital investment. The Committee feel that there is ample 
scope of improvement in Indian Railways' infrastructure and there is need to significantly 
increase its planned expenditure.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to find ways to 
increase Private Sector participation in creation of Railway infrastructure.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Committee has observed that IR’s infrastructure demands huge Capital investment and 
there is need to increase planned expenditure.  In this regard, it is submitted that IR’s annual 
Capital Budget has been growing over the years.  From ₹ 58,718.92 crore in 2014-15 (out of 
which GBS was ₹ 32328 crores), the Capex for 2024-25 in Budget Estimate has been fixed at 
Rs.265200 cr (with GBS of ₹ 252200 crore) in Budget Estimates, which is a phenomenal 
growth.  With the increased investment under Capital segment of the Budget, the focus of the 
Government has been put on infrastructure development, network expansion, creation of 
terminal facilities, safety and removal of traffic bottleneck.  With this infusion of massive 
investment, the Railways have been able to fast track project execution.  Network capacity 
augmentation projects are getting completed and easing traffic movement. 
 
Various steps being taken by Railways for effective and speedy implementation of rail projects 
include: 
(i) Prioritisation of projects. 
(ii) Substantial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects. 
(iii) Delegation of powers at field level. 
(iv) Close monitoring of projects at various levels and, 

 
 
15 
 
(v) Regular follow-up with State Governments and concerned authorities for expeditious land 
acquisition, forest and wildlife clearances and for resolving other issues pertaining to projects. 
Committee has also suggested to increase private Sector Participation in Railway Infrastructure.  
In this regard, it is submitted that there are various sources of financing in Indian Railways viz 
Gross Budgetary Support (Capital, Safety Fund and RRSK), Internal Resource Generation 
(Depreciation Reserve Fund, Development Fund, Capital Fund) and Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR-Partnership etc).  PPP is an Extra Budgetary Resource.   
Ministry of Railways (MoR) has formulated a Participative Policy, 2012 to encourage the 
investment in developing rail connectivity by associating strategic partners and other investors. 
The policy defines five Public Private Partnership models viz. Non-Government Railway 
(NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer Funded, Build Operate Transfer (BOT) and BOT-annuity 
models. State Governments/Local bodies/PSUs may also participate as stakeholder for the 
development of new lines/gauge conversion project under the participative policy of MoR. So 
far, 17 projects of Rs. 16,434 crore have been completed through PPP model. 8 projects of Rs. 
16,614 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity and port connectivity 
projects.  Five Public Private Partnership (PPP) models of Participative Policy of MoR, namely 
Non- Government Railway (NGR), Joint Venture (JV), Customer Funded model, Built-Operate 
Transfer (BOT) and BOT Annuity models have been formulated to attract private investment in 
Rail connectivity Projects.  MoR has also set up two locomotive factories (one electric and one 
diesel) in Joint Venture with private players. 
The year-wise Targets vis-à-vis Achievements under PPP has been as under: - 
        Figures in Crores 
SN EBR (PPP) FY- 2022-23 FY- 2023-24 FY- 2024-25 
A.  Targets 14700.00 17000.00 10000.00 
B. Achievements  11086.03 16625.36 8732.24 
(upto  Dec. 2024) 
 
The allocations for EBR (PPP) on annual basis are decided in consultation with stakeholders 
based on the estimates provided by Other Ministries/States/PSUs and Private players which 
varies on the basis of business activity in the given time period. Railway’s Participative Policy is 
open to interested parties to incentivize their investments. 

 
 
16 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
The Committee observe that the Internal Resource component of the Indian Railways' capital 
expenditure is quite limited. Internal resource component of Capex was Rs. 3401 crores during 
2022-23 and 2943 crores during 2023-24. The Budget estimate for Internal Resource component 
for 2024-25 has been kept at 3000 cr. Committee note that there is scope to increase Internal 
Resource through non-fare revenue.  As per vision 2030 document of Indian Railways, it aims to 
increase the non fare revenue from 3.4% to 20% of total revenue in line with advanced railways 
systems around the world. Indian Railways had non-fare revenue of Rs. 537.34 crores during 
2023-24. There is urgent need to focus on improving non-fare revenue to supplement Capex 
through Internal Resources. The Committee urge the Railways to seek assistance from external 
agencies, if necessary, to enhance revenue by fully utilising the extensive advertising space and 
substantial land holdings at their disposal. The Committee also urge the Railways to further 
augment their Internal Resources by vigorously promoting development/leasing of commercial 
complexes in and around Railway Stations to tap the high footfall of travellers. Further, 
Railways ought to explore additional innovative methods for increasing revenue by gaining 
insights into advanced railway systems globally 
Reply of the Government 
Internal resource of IR is a function of earnings under various segments i.e. Passenger, Goods, 
Other Coaching, Sundry and its operational expenditure. Indian Railways need huge capital 
investment and capex requirement is mainly met from Budgetary resources as internal resource 
generated is insufficient for its capital requirement. Though total traffic receipts have increased 
from Rs. 2,40,136.67 cr. in 2022-23 to Rs. 2,55,366.31 cr. in 2023-24, surplus generated has not 
been adequate considering that IR’s committed operational expenditure (staff cost, fuel, lease, 
store etc.) is substantial (86% of total costs). 
 

 
 
17 
 
To increase the internal resources, Railways are making efforts to increase the earnings along 
with efforts to control expenditure. To increase the traffic earnings, Railways have taken various 
measures such as given below: 
 
To enhance passenger revenue with a view to ensuring optimum utilisation of available 
accommodation, various initiatives like running of special trains, introduction of Vande Bharat 
and Amrit Bharat trains, augmentation of on-board capacity, introduction and  rationalisation of 
Flexi-fare scheme in premium trains, extension of Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme 
known as VIKALP have also been undertaken etc. Railways have also taken various measures to 
increase freight and Non fare revenue such as  introduction of Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal 
Policy featuring liberalized provisions,  Wagon Investment Schemes,  the launch of the Goods 
Shed Rating Dashboard,   introduction of e-Auction Policy for Commercial Earning & Non Fare 
Revenue contracts,  special focus on e-Commerce and FMCG,  Inclusion of certain popular 
ecommerce commodities (e.g. cosmetics, lithium ion batteries, battery powered vehicles etc.) in 
the Red Tariff. 
 
Regarding the Hon’ble Committee suggestion for enhancing Non-fare revenue, it is submitted 
that IR continuously endeavours to generate non fare revenue. 
 
Railways’ Sundry Revenue (Non-fare revenue)is steadily increasing year on year and increased 
to  Rs.9652.44 cr. in 2023-24 from  Rs.5938.60 cr. in 2020-21 i.e. an increase of 62.5%. 
Revenue from Land lease has increased to Rs. 1331 cr. in 2023-24 which was Rs. 863 cr. in 
2021-22. Receipts from catering department have increased to Rs. 1424 cr. in 2023-24 against 
Rs. 334 cr. in 2021-22. Similarly, revenue from Advertisement and Publicity stood at Rs. 537.34 
cr. against Rs. 168 cr. in 2021-22. 
 
Railways have placed special thrust to increase Sundry revenue (Non-fare revenue).In this 
direction, along with station redevelopment, Indian Railways has undertaken commercial 
development of built-up area, air space and vacant land (station estate) to support infrastructure 
growth of Railways.The development of surplus land/station estates must be consistent with the 
approved master plan of station redevelopment. 

 
 
18 
 
 
The other initiatives have also been undertaken to enhance sundry earnings as given below: 
 
 Station Seva and Suvidha at Amrit Bharat Stations Anubandh:  
This initiative, One Station- One Service Provider, could be a key contributor to increasing NFR 
through enhanced services and infrastructure utilization. 
 Yatri Seva Anubandh (YSA) - One train - One Service Provider: To provide seamless 
service to the passengers. This eliminates fragmented contracts and enhances earnings. 
 Rail Display Network (RDN): To disseminate railway information and generate revenue 
through digital advertising across the railway network. 
 Gaming and Recreation Zones: The proposed gaming and recreation zones, in 
collaboration with RailTel, could yield higher revenues. 
 Branding of Summer and Winter Special Trains:  
Seasonal branding and partnerships can provide new revenue opportunities through advertising 
and sponsorship deals. 
 
Moreover, to enhance revenue by fully utilising the extensive advertisement space, the existing 
policies of NINFRIS (New and Innovative Non-Fare Revenue Ideas Scheme), ATMs, and the 
other policies are suitably being modified and onboarded with the e-auction policy and to align 
with the Out of home(OOH) market conditions. 
 
By implementing these initiatives, Indian Railways may significantly enhance its sundry 
earnings and increase its share to Railways total receipts. 
 
Along with the above, this ministry is also taking efforts to control expenditure in order to 
ensure savings in the operating expenditure. Expenditure management on Railways aims at 
better manpower management, electrification of railway track, introducing HOG rakes, 
rationalizing repair and maintenance of rolling stock, efficient utilization of assets etc. Apart 
from this, rigorous monitoring of expenditure on monthly basis is done to control expenditure. 

 
 
19 
 
 
As a result of these steps, Railways have generated a Net Revenue of Rs.3,260 crore in 2023-24. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Indian Railways have created new milestones with regard to new lines/gauge 
conversions/Doubling projects in recent years. Indian Railways have also electrified 97% of their 
broad-gauge network. The Budget estimates for New Lines, Gauge Conversion and Doubling for 
the year 2024-25 stand at Rs. 40,102.75 Cr, Rs. 4719.5 Cr and Rs. 29312.19 Cr respectively. 
However, one of the primary factors contributing to delays in numerous projects is issues 
associated with land acquisition. The Committee, during its study visit also, concluded that land 
acquisition is a significant factor contributing to delays in completion of railway infrastructure 
projects. It is pertinent that Railways should consider potential policy modifications to accelerate 
the land acquisition process. Additionally, there should be consistent engagement with state 
governments at the highest levels to address land related issues and guarantee timely acquisition 
of land. Indian Railways may also enlist the assistance of local Members of Parliament to 
facilitate coordination with state governments for efficient and timely land acquisition. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways have a number of projects where considerable investments have been made but 
returns are not forthcoming due to land acquisition problems. Therefore, it has been decided that 
the commencement of physical work for New Line projects shall be taken up only after 
completion of land acquisition. However, General Managers of Zonal Railways have been 
empowered to invite tenders if they are certain of the possibility of land acquisition in a 
reasonable time frame. General Managers of Zonal Railways have also been empowered to 
review further investment in projects where State support is not forthcoming and the projects 
have remained in limbo for long period. Railway is continuously following up with the State 
Governments to take necessary steps in this regard to expedite execution work of New Lines. 
Pace of execution of project is dependent on expeditious land acquisition. Railway acquires the 
land through State Government. State Government assesses the compensation amount and the 
same is advised to Railways. On receipt of demand from State Government, Railway deposits 
compensation amount with concerned District Land acquisition Authority. 

 
 
20 
 
Letters are sent to State Governments on regular basis seeking personal intervention in resolution 
of issues pertaining to acquisition of land by the State Governments and deposition of state’s 
share in Cost Sharing Railway projects. 
To ensure that projects are completed in time without cost overrun, lot of monitoring is  done in 
Railways at various levels (field level, divisional level, zonal level and Board level) and regular 
meetings are held with the officials of State Government and concerned authorities to resolve the 
pending issues that are obstructing the progress of projects. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
The Committee note that Indian Railways have eliminated all unmanned level crossings, which 
were a huge safety hazard. The Committee further note that there are 17,053 manned level 
crossings across Indian Railways. Ministry of Railways is actively working to enhance safety 
and mobility through Road over Bridges & Road Under Bridges. One of the major reasons for 
delay in ROBs/RUBs related projects was cost sharing/land acquisition by State Governments. 
The Committee appreciate that Railways have brought new policy wherein old sanctioned works 
stalled due to no response from state governments on cost-sharing can be taken up at 100% 
Railway cost. The Committee feel that this step could go a long way into ensuring timely 
completion of pending projects. The Committee are happy to note that BE for ROBs/RUBs for 
2024-25 has been kept at Rs. 9874.69 crore which shows a significant increase from 2023-24 
when it was 6097.39 crores(actual). The Committee further observed that Indian Railways have 
not met their targets for completion of ROBs/RUBs during any of the last 3 years. In the year 
2023-24 against the target of construction of 1100 ROBs/RUBs the actual achievement was 
1078. The Committee would urge the ministry to work on the measures it has initiated to achieve 
its targets related to ROBs/RUBs in coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
There are 17,083 manned Level Crossing on the broad gauge network of Indian Railways. 
Sanctioning and execution of works of Road over Bridge (ROB)/Road under Bridge (RUB) in 
lieu of Level crossings (LCs) is a continuous and dynamic process of Indian Railway. Such 
works are prioritized and taken up on the basis of its impact on safety in train operations, 
mobility of trains & impact for road users and feasibility etc. 

 
 
21 
 
Generally construction of ROB/RUB is used to be difficult due to various reasons enumerated as 
under: 
 Land acquisition requirements & Rehabilitation & resettlement to be done by State Govt.  
 Coordination issues 
 Conventional methods of execution  
 Allocation of requisite funds by State Government as required. 
 
Following steps are being taken to address these challenges: 
 Cost of land acquisition involving private land, R&R and utility 
shifting: For ROB/RUBs sanctioned on 100 % cost of Railway, the cost 
of land acquisition involving private land, R&R and utility shifting shall 
be charged to the project and kept in the estimate at the time of sanction 
and shall be borne by railways 
 Periodic meeting of Railway & State Government officials to resolve 
various issues related to ROB/RUB works. 
 Standardization of drawings: Standardization of drawings for various 
superstructures (Spans) to save time of design.  A compendium for 
Standardization for Super Structure of ROBs drawings have been 
launched on 02.06.2022 for different combination of spans, loading, 
carriage way width, skew angles which is a repository of 218 numbers of 
detailed design/drawings. It consists of 30 RDSO standard designs along 
with 188 drawings of other approved drawings for superstructure, which 
can be directly adopted for road over bridge across railway lines for 
expeditious planning and execution of ROBs by Zonal Railways, 
NHAI/MoRTH and State Govt. This will avoid time taken for doing and 
approving new designs of superstructure. It is hoped that Zonal railways, 
NHAI/MoRTH, State Governments, etc. will get benefitted from the 
Compendium for expeditious execution of ROB Projects. 

 
 
22 
 
 Use of pre-cast construction and heavy machineries:Precast RCC 
boxes are being used for the fast pace construction of RUB/ LHS. High 
capacity cranes are also being used in the placement of boxes under the 
track. In box pushing/ pulling method of construction, hydraulic 
jacks/mechanical winch are being used for fast pace construction. 
Similarly, use of high capacity cranes for girder launching and use of 
sacrificial shuttering while casting deck slabs of ROB are being done to 
expedite the progress of ROB works. 
During maintenance of these structures particularly in LHS modern method of PU/ epoxy 
grouting etc. is also being used to make these structures more sustainable. 
Further, to encourage the fast pace construction, innovative design and use of precast 
construction has been permitted. 
 
 Innovative designs:   
Guidelines are issued to Zonal Railways for use in planning and execution of grade separator 
works to ensure all weather LHS/RUB& pedestrian friendly ROBs. 
1. RUBs/Subways with combination of openings with different heights and 
differential road levels. 
2. ROB with SUBWAY/RAMP. 
 
Completion & commissioning of ROB/RUB works depend on various factors like cooperation of  
State Governments in consent for closure of LC,  fixing of approach alignment, approval of 
General Arrangement Drawing (GAD), land acquisition, removal of encroachment, shifting of 
infringing utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities,  law and order situation in the 
area of project / work sites,  number of working months in a year for particular project / work 
sites  due to climatic conditions etc.  All these factors affect the completion time of the projects / 
works. 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee observe that Indian Railways is actively pursuing various new initiatives aimed 
at transforming the railway sector in India. These initiatives prioritise the enhancement of 
passenger amenities, the safety of travelers, and the economic advancement of the nation. Indian 
Railways have launched the Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat non-AC trains, which offer modern 
facilities to passengers. Additionally, plans are underway to introduce Vande Bharat sleeper 
trains and Vande Metro trains, which are expected to significantly improve the passenger 
experience. A key initiative includes the development of corridors for (i) Energy, Minerals, and 
Cement; (ii) Port connectivity; and (iii) High Traffic Density, all identified under the PM Gati 
Shakti Mission to facilitate multi-modal connectivity. The Committee appreciate that major part 
of the Gross Budgetary Support is directed towards implementation of these three Economic 
Railway Corridors and Government is committed towards assured Budgetary support for projects 
under these Corridors. The Committee believe that the establishment of these corridors will have 
a positive multiplier effect on the Indian economy. Furthermore, the Committee are of the 
opinion that these corridors will enhance the share of Indian Railways in freight transport, 
thereby generating increased revenue for the organisation while simultaneously reducing the 
carbon footprint. The Committee urge the Ministry to prioritise the development of these 
corridors by drawing specific phases and timelines for timely execution and completion of each 
corridor. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Railway   projects   are   surveyed/sanctioned/executed   Zonal Railway-wise and  not  
 State/area-wise/district-wise  as  the  projects  may span across State boundaries. Furthermore, 
Railway infrastructure projects are taken up on the basis of remunerativeness, last mile 
connectivity, operational requirements, missing links and alternate routes, augmentation of  
 congested/saturated   lines,   socio-economic   considerations   etc. depending upon liabilities of 
ongoing projects, overall availability of funds and competing demands. 
For seamless movement of people, goods and services and enhanced logistics efficiency, 
presently, 624 no. of surveys (New Lines, Gauge Conversion and Doubling) having a total length 
of about 49,520 km including the projects situated in energy, mineral and cement corridors; high 

 
 
24 
 
traffic density corridors & port connectivity corridors have been taken up on Indian Railways 
under the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan (NMP) by providing connectivity to industrial 
clusters, agricultural zones, ports, mines, power plants, remote areas, tourist and cultural places, 
etc. 
  The completion of any Railway project depends on various factors like quick land 
acquisition by State Government, forest clearance by officials of forest department, deposition of 
cost share by State Government in cost sharing projects, priority of projects, shifting of 
infringing  utilities,  statutory  clearances  from  various  authorities, geological  and  
topographical  conditions  of  area,  law  and  ordersituation in the area of project(s) site, number 
of working months  in  a year for particular project site due to climatic conditions etc. 
  
Various steps taken by the Government for speedy approval and implementation of Railway 
projects include (i) setting up of Gati Shakti units (ii) prioritisation of projects (iii) substantial 
increase in allocation of funds on priority projects (iv) delegation of powers at field level (v) 
close  monitoring  of  progress  of project at various levels, and (vi) regular follow up with State 
Governments and concerned authorities for expeditious land acquisition, forestry and Wildlife 
clearances and for resolving other issues pertaining to projects. This has led to substantial 
increase in rate of commissioning since 2014. 
  
Railways are environment friendly and energy-efficient mode of transportation, yielding 
substantially lower CO2 emissions. As per NITI Aayog report, the CO2 emissions from 
movement of freight by rail transport are about 90% less than the road transport.  
  
Indian Railways (IR) has taken various initiatives to achieve Net Zero Carbon emissions. To 
achieve this goal, the Railways has implemented various measures to reduce its greenhouse gas 
emissions, including the use of electric traction, promotion of energy efficiency, promotion of 
renewable energy sources like solar and wind power and use of energy efficient technologies like 
completely switching over to production of three phase electric locomotives, EMU, MEMU, 
Vande Bharat etc. with regenerative features, use of head on generation (HOG) technology, use 
of LED lights in buildings & coaches, use of Star rated appliances and afforestation. 
  

 
 
25 
 
The quantum of reduction in Carbon emission is an ongoing process as efforts of Carbon 
emission reduction vis-à-vis the quantum of Carbon emission with traction & non-traction 
energy requirement and ongoing process. 
Indian Railways is committed to playing a pivotal role in realizing the vision of Viksit Bharat by 
2047. With a comprehensive portfolio of projects planned through a program and corridor-based 
approach, Railways aims to be a key player in the nation’s transport ecosystem.  
 
Indian Railways has identified three key economic corridors comprising 434 projects (Energy, 
Mineral and Cement Corridors consisting of 192 projects, High Traffic Density Routes 
comprising  200 projects, Rail Sagar Corridors comprising  42 projects) with total cost outlay of 
INR 11.17 Lakh Crore proposed to be completed by 2033-34.  
These three corridors are a key infrastructure initiative for Railways in catering to additional 
cargo loading of 1300 MTPA by FY 2030-31. With increased rail modal share of 35% by 2030-
31, it is estimated that there will be reduction of oil import bill to the tune of INR 1.28 lakh Crore 
per annum and Carbon emission reduction of 43 MT per annum. 
 
As on 01.01.2025, all 434 corridor projects have been mapped on PM GatiShakti portal. Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) of 169 projects have been prepared, out of which, 70 projects covering 
track length 6,294 Km & costing INR 1.14 Lakh Crore have been sanctioned and 99 projects 
with track length of 11,307 Km and estimated cost of INR. 2.39 Lakh Crore are under different 
stages of appraisal/ inter-ministerial consultation. 
 
A prioritization framework encompassing critical parameters has also been established for 
streamlining project sanctioning in phases and accordingly, project commissioning by 2033-34. 
 
Given the long gestation periods for these projects, Indian Railways is also focusing on key 
initiatives in project planning, standardization, digitization, and monitoring to accelerate the 
execution and completion of these critical corridor projects. 
Ministry of Railways has taken up construction of two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFC) viz. 
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and Western 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri 

 
 
26 
 
(1506 Km) for higher transport output in the country with reduced transit time and cost. The 
EDFC links the mineral rich industrial parts of Eastern India like Jharkahand and Chhattisgarh 
with the Northern hinterland of the country like Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and Punjab which 
has significantly reduce overall travel time and logistic cost of transportation of minerals like 
Coal & Steel etc. and WDFC will cater to port traffic of western coast.  
Further 17 projects of rail connectivity and port connectivity under Participative Policy of Rs. 
16,434 crore have been completed through various models of PPP and 8 such projects of Rs. 
16,614 crore are under implementation including coal connectivity and port connectivity 
projects. The details of Coal Connectivity and Port connectivity projects are as under:- 
(A)  Coal connectivity Projects (Joint Venture Projects):- 
(i) Kharasia-Dharamjaigarh–Ghargoda-Donga Mahua, (NL) and Dharmjaygarh–
Korba(Urga) Project (CERL) 
[Length:(122Km+63Km); Cost:Rs.3600 +1686.22 Cr.] 
 
(ii) Gevra Road-Pendra Road (NL) Project (CEWRL) 
[Length:135 Km; Cost:Rs.4970.11 Cr.] 
 
(iii)Shivpur-Kathautia Project (JCRL) 
[Length:49 Km; Cost:Rs.1799 Cr.] 
 
(B) Port Connectivity Projects (Non Government Railway Project):- 
(i) Roha – Dighi Project  
[Length:36.3 Km; Cost: Rs.1593.78 Cr.] 
 
(ii) Subaranrekha Port connectivity Project 
[Length:37 Km; Cost: Rs.707 Cr.] 
 
(iii)Vizhinjam Port/Southern Railway Project 

 
 
27 
 
[Length:10.7 Km; Cost: Rs.1060.123 Cr.] 
 
# These three projects are fully private funded. 
   
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee observe that Indian Railways have implemented/are planning several 
technological advancements in passenger rolling stock, including the Vande Bharat Chair Car 
trains, Vande Bharat Sleeper trains, Namo Bharat Rapid Rail, and Amrit Bharat Train, among 
others. One of the most important initiatives being taken up by Indian railways with regard to 
Rolling Stock is replacement of ICF coaches with LHB coaches. Indian Railways are producing 
only LHB coaches from April 2018 onwards. The Committee further note that Indian Railways 
are continuously increasing their production capacity in LHB coaches. The Budget allocation for 
Rolling Stock for 2024-25 has been kept at Rs. 54113.78 Cr which is an increase of Rs 156 Cr 
over actual expenditure during 2023-24. The Committee urge the Ministry to increase the pace of 
replacement of ICF coaches with LHB coaches as LHB coaches provide improved safety and 
comfort.  Further ICF coaches can be turned into NMG coaches for carrying automobiles and 
other goods. The Committee further note that Indian railways have not met their targets for 
production of coaches during 2023-24. The Committee urge the Railways to take urgent steps to 
increase production capacity of coaches in their Production Units. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Railway has increased the pace of replacement of ICF coaches with LHB coaches. 
IR plans to replace all ICF rakes with LHB coaches in next 5 years. 
  
Further, conversion of ICF coaches to NMG coaches is being executed at Indian Railway 
Workshops. Till now, approx. 4200 ICF coaches have been converted into NMG. 
 
During 2023-24, the production of LHB coaches was higher than the target, i.e. 4977 LHB 
coaches were produced against the target of 4934 coaches. However, the production of DPRS 
(Distributed Power Rolling Stock) coaches was less than the target due to supply chain issues 
with the propulsion system.  

 
 
28 
 
  
Furthermore, Indian Railways is committed to continuously increasing its production capacity as 
per traffic requirements. 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that safety is the first priority of Indian Railways. Indian Railways 
are taking various measures to improve safety in rail operations. Signaling plays a very vital role 
in safety. Advanced Signaling System has been provided at 6605 stations, covering 99.4% of 
total broad-gauge railway stations. The Budget Estimate for the plan head Signal and Telecom 
for the year 2024-25 has been kept at Rs. 4647.28 Cr which is an increase of Rs. 896 Cr over 
actual expenditure during 2023-24. The Committee urge the Railways to install latest signaling 
technology at the remaining stations on broad gauge and stations on other gauges.  The 
Committee are aware that Indian Railways’ RDSO, in association with Indian vendors, has 
developed Kavach Automatic Train Protection System, which will greatly improve safety in 
Indian Rail operations. However, the Committee are concerned with the slow progress of its 
expansion. Kavach has so far been deployed on 1465 route km of the South Central Railway and 
80 route km on North Central Railway.  The Committee are also aware that tender have been 
invited for Delhi-Chennai, Mumbai- Chennai and other important corridors. The Committee feel 
that there is  urgent need to speed up Kavach related works and ensure faster penetration of 
Kavach across Indian Railway Network. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. Advance Signalling System is being provided progressively on all BG stations. Provision 
of Advance Signalling System for remaining stations on Broad Gauge is approved and 
works are in progress. Stations on other gauges are being provided with advance 
signalling system along with Gauge conversion. Advance Signalling System includes- 
(i) Panel/Route Relay/Electronic Interlocking with centralized operation of 
points & signals– 6612 stations. 
(ii) Complete Track Circuiting of stations – 6620 stations  
(iii) Interlocking of Level Crossing gates – 11082 nos. 

 
 
29 
 
(iv) Block Proving by Axle Counter (BPAC) – 6108 block section. 
 
2. Kavach: 
(i) Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety 
certification of highest order (SIL-4).Kavach specification version 4.0 was 
approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024 and planned for large scale deployment over 
Indian Railways.  
(ii) Kavach has been deployed on 1465 Rkm on South Central Railway and 83 Rkm 
on North Central Railway. Contracts are awarded and works are in progress on 
3000 RKm on Delhi-Howrah & Delhi-Mumbai routes.  
(iii) Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
a) Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
b) Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
c) Installation of telecom towers throughout the section. 
d) Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
e) Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian Railways.  
 
(iv) Progress of Key items comprising Kavach system on Indian Railways upto Nov’ 
2024 is as under: - 
SN. Items Progress 
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 5133 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 540 Nos. 
iii Provision of Kavach at Stations 523 Nos. 

 
 
30 
 
iv Provision of Kavach in Loco 707 Locos 
v Installation of Track side equipment 3434Rkm 
 
(v) Next phase of Kavach implementation is planned as under: -  
(a) Bids for track side Works of Kavach for approximately 15000 RKm have 
been invited. With this, all High Density Network (HDN) routes and 
Identified sections of Indian Railways are covered. 
(b) Contracts for equipping Kavach in 10,000 Locomotives have been 
finalized. 69 number of loco sheds have been prepared for equipping 
locomotives with Kavach. 
(vi) In addition to above following steps are being taken to speed up Kavach 
implementation: 
(a) Currently, 3 OEMs are approved for supply of Kavach System. To increase capacity 
and scale of implementation, trials and approval of more OEMs are at different 
stages. 
(b) Specialized training programme on Kavach are being conducted at centralized 
training institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By 
now more than 9000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on 
Kavach technology. Courses have been designed in collaboration with IRISET. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
The Committee note that there are 8800 Railway Stations across Indian Railways' network. For 
provision of amenities, Railway Stations are categorised based on earnings and outward 
passengers handled.  Over the years Indian Railways have undertaken 
modernisation/upgradation of stations under different schemes, such as ‘the Model Station 
Scheme’, ‘Modern Station Scheme’, ‘Adarsh Station Scheme’. At present, stations are being 
upgraded under the ‘Amrit Bharat Station Scheme’, launched in the year 2022. Committee note 

 
 
31 
 
that Amrit Bharat Scheme envisages development of railway stations on a continuous basis with 
long-term approach. The scheme includes provision for better amenities like lifts, escalators, free 
Wi-Fi, improved waiting halls, toilets, and better passenger information systems etc.  The 
Committee appreciate that the scheme provides for special facilities for Divyangjan. Further, the 
Committee are aware that 1337 stations have been identified for upgradation/modernisation 
under this scheme across Indian Railways. The Committee urge the ministry to increase pace of 
work at these stations and also take up other stations especially in backward areas for betterment 
of basic amenities like toilets, provision of drinking water, waiting rooms etc. The Committee 
also urge the ministry to look for private sector participation for Station redevelopment to reduce 
dependence on budgetary support and internal resources for Station Redevelopment works. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has accelerated the redevelopment of major stations across the country and 
has initiated ‘Amrit Bharat Station Scheme’.  So far, 1337 stations have been identified for 
development across the country including backward areas under this scheme.  Presently, work is 
in progress at 1198 Railway Stations under this scheme to provide modern amenities.  Other 
Railway Stations are at different stages of tendering and planning. 
 
Ministry of Railways is exploring all the options of PPP mode for station development.  
Presently, a proposal for redevelopment of Vijayawada Railway station has been submitted to 
PPPAC for appraisal. 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
The Committee are aware that most of the earnings of Indian Railways comes from its freight 
loading activities. In 2023-24, Indian Railways earned revenue of Rs. 1,68,293 Cr from freight 
traffic and target to achieve Rs. 1,80,000 Cr during 2024-25. The Committee note that the 
percentage share of Indian Railways in freight traffic in the country is 26%. Freight carried by 
Indian Railways is touching new milestones every year. However, the average speed of freight 
trains during the year 2013-24 was only 25.14 km/h.  The Committee further feel that creation of 

 
 
32 
 
Dedicated Freight Corridors is of prime importance to increase the speed of freight trains, 
thereby increasing freight loading as well as earnings of Indian Railways. The Committee are 
aware that Indian Railways have taken up the construction of two dedicated freight corridors viz. 
the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor, from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 km), and the Western 
Dedicated Freight Corridor from JNPT (Mumbai) to Dadri (1506 km). The work on EDFC has 
been completed and 102 Km section remaining on WDFC from Vaitarna to JNPT is expected to 
be completed by December, 2025.  The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite work on new 
DFCs across the country to increase Railways' revenues by increasing share of freight loading 
via train. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has taken up construction of two   Dedicated   Freight   Corridors (DFCs)  
viz.  Eastern   Dedicated   Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and 
the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) 
to Dadri (1506 Km). Out of total 2843 Km, 2741 Route Kilometers (96.4%) has been 
commissioned and operational, which carried 83,343 freight trains during F.Y. 2024-25 (April to 
November). 
 
     Further, Ministry of Railways have got prepared the  Survey/Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
on the following potential routes of DFCs and the same are under consideration:- 
(i) East - Coast Corridor - From Kharagpur to Vijayawada 
 
(ii) East-West corridor: 
(a) From Palghar –Bhusawal-Nagpur-  Kharagpur- Dankuni 
 (b)   From Rajkharsawan- Kalipahari - Andal 
 
(iii) North-South Sub-corridor – From    Vijayawada –Nagpur- Itarsi 
     None of the above DFCs corridor has been sanctioned yet. The decision regarding sanctioning 
of any Dedicated Freight Corridor depends on many factors including traffic volume, techno-
economic feasibility and financial viability. 
 
 

 
 
33 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see recommendation Para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
The Committee are aware that Indian Railways has to take into account larger social and 
national interests in formulating its policies. The Committee note that Indian Railways undertake 
certain uneconomic operations in passenger services to provide affordable transport facilities to 
various sections of society. Indian Railways also operate certain uneconomic lines for strategic 
reasons. The losses incurred on these account fall under Social Service Obligation. Net social 
service obligation for the year 2022-23 stood at Rs. 40,190 crores. Major components of social 
service obligations are pricing of fares below cost, losses on parcel, luggage, postal and catering 
services, losses on suburban services etc. The Committee are of opinion that that to limit these 
losses Indian Railways must undertake comprehensive review of these losses. Further losses on 
categories like catering services must be eliminated on priority basis. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to  endeavour to provide quality food at competitive prices and simultaneously aim to 
reduce Social Service Obligations on account of catering services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways is committed to offer affordable transportation solution to the poorest section of 
the society and therefore, the passenger fares have traditionally been kept at low level 
particularly for second class ordinary and suburban passengers which constitute about 75-80% of 
the total passenger traffic. 
Indian Railways is life line of nation and contributes a lot to National Economy. It continues to 
incur losses every year by performing a variety of un-remunerative services, which imposes a 
heavy burden on Indian Railways’ finances.  
Tariff fixation is one of the important functions of Railways which not only determines 
affordability for customers but also its competitiveness in comparison to other modes of 
transport. Evaluation of tariff is a continuous and ongoing process. 
Review of Parcel business is done on regular basis.  This includes identifying potential areas of 
improvement as well as new areas where parcel business can be expanded and made competitive 
vis-a-vis road transport.  Some steps taken in this regard include introduction of e-auction in 

 
 
34 
 
parcel leasing, introduction of concept of online booking of VPs through Virtual Aggregator 
Platform, strengthening of Parcel Management System through installation of PMS at all parcel 
offices etc. 
  
It is the continuous endeavour of Indian Railways to make available adequate catering facilities 
for travelling passengers in trains and at stations. The objective is to ensure that the customer, i.e. 
the passenger, remains the focus of catering services. Given the fact that catering is, first & 
foremost, a passenger service/amenity and, then, a profit centre, continuous efforts are made to 
provide good quality and hygienic food to passengers at the notified tariff. Due emphasis is also 
placed to ensure availability of quality food for the not-so-affluent classes of passengers by 
providing affordable economy meals, standard meals, economy combo-meals, etc.  
  
The following measures have been taken to improve quality of food : 
 Supply of meals from designated Base Kitchens.  
 Commissioning of modern Base Kitchens at identified locations.  
 Installation of CCTV Cameras in Base Kitchens for better monitoring of food 
preparation. 
 Shortlisting and use of popular and branded raw materials, like cooking oil, atta, rice, 
pulses, masala items, paneer, dairy products etc. for food production. 
 Deployment of Food Safety Supervisors at Base Kitchens to monitor food safety and 
hygienic practices. 
 Deployment of on-board IRCTC supervisors on trains.  
 Introduction of QR codes on food packets, enabling display of details like name of 
kitchen, date of packaging etc. 
 Regular deep cleaning and periodical pest control in Base Kitchens and Pantry Cars. 

 
 
35 
 
 In order to ensure compliance with Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from designated Food Safety Officers of each 
catering unit has been made mandatory. 
 Regular and surprise inspections by Railway/ IRCTC officials. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
The Committee note that the Research Design & Standards Organization (RDSO) under the 
Ministry of Railways is a Research & Development wing of Indian Railways responsible for the 
development and absorption of new technology for the use of Indian Railways. RDSO also 
collaborates with renowned institutions like IITs, IISc, CSIR, DRDO, and international 
universities/institutions like Japan Railways, etc. However, the Committee observe that budget 
estimates for Railway Research for year 2024-25 has been kept at only Rs. 72.01 Cr. Further it is 
additionally concerning that the Railways have been unable to utilize the limited allocated funds 
for research during the past two years. Against Revised Estimates of 107 Cr in 2022-23 and 
66.52 Cr in 2023-24, the actual expenditure was Rs. 39.12 Cr and Rs. 28.34 Cr respectively. The 
Committee feel that Research & Development is a prudent investment in the long term for 
modernisation of Indian Railways. The Committee would urge the ministry to take urgent steps 
to increase the scope of its Research & Development activities to ensure the modernisation and 
assimilation of latest technologies in Indian Railways. 
 
Reply of the Government 
RDSO continues to work towards development and absorption of new technologies for the use 
on Indian Railways as advised by the Committee.  
It is submitted that in addition to the allocation under Plan Head 18, several research projects 
undertaken by RDSO under collaboration with scientific and technological institutions derive 
funding through appropriate sanction available in Zonal Railways under various other Plan 
Heads. In several such cases, RDSO is closely involved in the development of specifications, 
protocol development and proof of concept trials. RDSO remains aggressively involved through 
Technology Readiness Levels-3 to Technology Readiness Levels-6, requiring close coordination 
with contract awarding authorities in Zonal Railways. Some projects such as Kavach, Vande 

 
 
36 
 
Bharat Train sets, Wheel Impact Load Devices and Hot axle Hot wheel devices, dedicated test 
track for Rolling Stock being developed under RDSO's stewardship are some key examples 
where the sanctions were provided to Zonal Railways in other Plan Heads, while specifications 
development, Offer/ Vendor appraisal and Prototype validation were conducted by RDSO. 
Further, for this purpose, other types of Revenue expenditure, including that on manpower 
involved in R&D activities in RDSO, are also made by Railways. For FY 2021-22, 2022-23 and 
2023-24, total Revenue expenditures for RDSO were Rs. 368.59 Crore, 393.15 Crore and 417.29 
Crore respectively. 
 
With this perspective, Ministry of Railways expresses its unflinching resolve towards the 
development and assimilation of cost-effective railway technologies for improved safety, speed 
and throughput. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
The Committee note that Indian Railways have set a target of making themselves Net Zero 
Carbon Emitter by 2030. Committee have been made aware of various initiatives being taken by 
Indian Railways towards turning Indian Railways into 'Green Railways'. The measures include 
electrification of railway lines, sourcing of energy requirements through renewable sources, 
water conservation, waste management etc.  Indian Railways have also commissioned 241 MW 
solar power capacity & 103.4 MW wind-based power plants. Further Indian Railways are 
planning to run 35 hydrogen trains. The Committee further note that Indian Railways are also 
extensively using regenerative propulsion technology and adopting energy efficiency measures. 
Indian Railways are providing water recycling plants at major consumption centre locations like 
Production Units, Workshops, and Stations etc. Indian Railways are also carrying out 
afforestation on vacant land which will also help safeguard Railway land from encroachments. 
The Committee appreciate these steps and would recommend the Ministry to continue with these 
policies which would help to turn Indian Railways into truly Green Railways. The Committee 
further urge the Ministry to incorporate 'Green Budgeting' methodologies into its financial 
allocations. 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
Sovereign Green Bond Framework established by the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA)/ 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) to ensure that financial resources are allocated to environmentally 
sustainable projects contributing to India's climate goals. A ‘green project’ classification is based 
on the following principles: 
 Encourages energy efficiency in resource utilization 
 Reduces carbon emissions and greenhouse gases 
 Promotes climate resilience and/or adaptation 
 Values and improves natural ecosystems and biodiversity especially in 
accordance with SDG principles. 
Government of India use the proceeds raised from Sovereign Green Bonds (SGrB) to finance 
and/or refinance expenditure (in parts or whole) for eligible green projects falling under ‘Eligible 
Categories’ and Indian Railways falls under the Clean Transportation category with the 
environmental objective of Climate Change Mitigation. Projects qualify under this category if 
they: 
 Promote public transportation including its electrification and transport safety. 
 Subsidies to adopt clean fuels like electric vehicles including building charging 
infrastructure. 
Three projects of Indian Railways have already secured funding under Sovereign Green Bonds. 
These projects are: 
SN Name of the 
Project 
Brief details of the Project Budget Allocation Fund 
Utilized in 
FY 2023-
24 
RE 
2023-24 
BE 2024-
25 
11 Production of 
energy efficient 
three phase electric 
locos 
Replacement of diesel locos with energy 
efficient and more powerful electric locos 
which help in reducing carbon emissions 
9929 12000 9929 

 
 
38 
 
22 Dum Dum Airport 
(Jai Hind) - New 
Garia (Kavi 
Subhas) via 
Rajerhat –  
Construction of 
Metro Railway (32 
Km) 
Dum Dum Airport-New Garia via 
Rajarhat" metro project in Kolkata will 
connect New Garia (Kavi Subhash) with 
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose 
International Airport through 32.2km 
route. The corridor runs along by EM 
bypass. The project will feature 23 
stations. 9.79 km stretch commissioned. It 
has passenger interface with suburban 
railway station and metro at Kavi 
Subhash station. This line will reduce 
travel time, improving urban connectivity 
and alleviating road traffic congestion. 
1700 1791.39 1700 
33 Joka - Binoy Badal 
Dinesh Bagh via 
Majerhat –  
Construction of 
Metro 
Railway (16.72 
Km) including 
material 
modification for 
extension from 
Joka-Diamond 
Park (Phase-I) 
The metro project has 12 stations (8 
elevated and 4 underground). Total length 
of the project is 13.935 km. The corridor 
runs along the busy Diamond Harbour 
Road from JOKA till Khiddirpore. 7.75 
km stretch commissioned. It has 
passenger interface with suburban railway 
station at Majerhat and with metro at Park 
Street and Esplanade station. This line 
will reduce travel time, improving urban 
connectivity and alleviating road traffic 
congestion. 
850 1208.61 850 
  
The success and sustainability of green projects is measured using the following Metrics: 
1.     Number of people who use new ecological public transport 
2.     Number of new electric locomotives manufactured / Kilometers of rail lines commissioned 
3.     Annual GHG emissions avoided in tons of CO2 emission 
4.     Air Quality improvement (PPM) 

 
 
39 
 
5.     Employment generated – number of jobs created/supported 
6.     Number of MSMEs supported 
7.     Number of people with access to sustainable public transport systems 
  
Thus under the Green Budgeting Methodologies following are already being done: 
1. Sovereign Green Bond Framework established by the Department of Economic Affairs 
(DEA)/Ministry of Finance (MoF)  
2.   Economic assessment of projects by various parameter 
3. Expenditure Tracking for Green Goals  
4. Publishing of impact report by DEA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
40 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH
       07 March, 2025________ Chairperson
        16 Phalguna , 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways

 
 
43 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
 
 
The Committee met on Friday, the 7th March, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri T.R. Baalu 
4. Shri Khagen Murmu 
5. Shri Sudama Prasad 
6. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
7. Dr. Bhola Singh 
8. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
9. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Md. Aftab Alam   -  Director  
2. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 

 
 
44 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following 
draft Reports :-  
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their 1st Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Railways'.  
(ii) *****   *****  *****  ***** . 
 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any 
modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
4. *****   *****  *****  ***** . 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
   
-------- 
* Note related to the Report  

 
 
45 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 1ST REPORT 
(18TH LOK SABHA) ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
RAILWAYS" 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations - 14 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
Government –  
Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5 6,7, 8,9 ,10, 11,12 ,13, 14 
 
14 
 Percentage of total   100% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No.  NIL 
 
    NIL 
 Percentage of total        0% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –  
Para No.  NIL  
 
 
     00 
 Percentage of total       0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -      
Para No.  NIL  
 
     NIL 
 Percentage of total      0% 
 
 