1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RAIL TUNNELS 
AND BRIDGES INCLUDING ROAD OVER BRIDGES/ROAD 
UNDER BRIDGES 
 
      
  
       
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
4 

2 
 
S.C.R. No. 248 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF RAIL TUNNELS AND 
BRIDGES INCLUDING ROAD OVER BRIDGES/ROAD UNDER 
BRIDGES 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2025 
     
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2025/ SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA)  

3 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee 4 
List of abbreviations 6 
Introduction 8 
REPORT  
PART I  
I Introductory 
 
9 
II Railway Bridges 11 
III Railway Tunnels 23 
IV Level Crossings ( LC), Road Over Bridges ( ROBs), Road Under Bridges 
(RUBs) 
28 
V Technological innovations and capacity building 45 
 PART II  
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 49 
 ANNEXURES  
I Policy letters dated 02.03.2023 & 19.08.2024 60 
II State-wise and Railway-wise data of existing ROB/ RUB and ongoing 
works 
68 
             APPENDIXES  
I Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways (2024-25) 
held on 28.11.2024.  
72 
II Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways (2024-25) 
held on 25.06.2025 
75 
III Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways (2024-25) 
held on 07.08.2025 
78 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25)@ 
   Dr. C.M. Ramesh   - Chairperson 
               MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T. R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
9. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
10. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
11. Shri Khagen Murmu 
12. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
13. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
14. Shri Sudama Prasad 
15. Shri M K Raghavan 
16. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
17. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
18. Dr. Bhola Singh 
19. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
20. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
21. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
23. Shri Narhari Amin 
24. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
25. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
28. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
29. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
………………………………………………………………………………………… 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 26.09.2024 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 841 dated 26.09.2024.  

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  - Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Sharan Yadav - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
BG  - Broad Gauge 
BLT   - Ballast Less Track 
BMS  - Bridge Management System 
CR  - Central Railway 
CRN  - Condition Rating Number 
CRS  - Commission of Railway Safety 
ECOR  - East Coast Railway 
ECR  - East Central Railway 
ER  - Eastern Railway 
FOB  - Foot Over Bridge 
GAD  - General Arrangement Drawing 
GM  - General Manager 
GSV  - Gati Shakti Vishwavidyala 
HSFG  - High Strength Friction Grip 
IMD   - India Meteorological Department 
IRICEN - Indian Railways Institute of Civil Engineering  
LC  - Level Crossing 
LHS  - Limited Height Subway 
MBT  - Main Boundary Thrust 
MG  - Meter Gauge  
MLC  - Manned Level Crossing 
MoRTH - Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
NCR  - North Central Railway 
NER  - North Eastern Railway 
NFR  - North Frontier Railway 
NG   - Narrow Gauge 
NH  - National Highways 
NHAI   - National Highways Authority of India 
NITM   - New Australian tunneling Method 
NR  - Northern Railway 
NWR  - North Western Railway 
ORN  - Overall Rating Number 
RAT  - Railway Affecting Tanks 
RAW  - Railway Affecting Works 
RDSO   - Research Designs and Standards Organization 
ROB  - Road Over Bridge 
RORV  - Remote Operated Robotic Vehicles 
RUB  - Road Under Bridge 
R&R  - Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
SCR  - South Central Railway 
SECR  - South East Central Railway 
SER  - South Eastern Railway 

7 
 
SR  - Southern Railway 
SWR  - South Western Railway 
TBM  - Tunnel Boaring Machine 
TuMS  - Tunnel Management System 
UMLC  - Unmanned Level Crossing 
USBRL  - Udhampur–Srinagar–Baramula Rail Link 
WCR  - West Central Railway 
WR  - Western Railway 
ZBTI   - Zonal Bridge Training Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Railways (2024-25) having been authorised by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on the subject 
‘Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road Over Bridges/Road 
Under Bridges’. 
2.  The representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) briefed the Committee 
on the subject at their sitting held on 28.11.2024. Further, the Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on 25.06.2025.  
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 07.08.2025. The 
minutes of the sittings are given in the appendix to the Report.  
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence and placing before the Committee all the 
requisite material and information sought for in connection with the examination o f the subject. 
They would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold font in Part II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
     07 August, 2025 Chairperson 
     16 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
REPORT 
 
PART-I 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 The Indian Railways, one of the world’s largest rail network under a single 
management which serves as the lifeline of the nation’s transportation infrastructure. 
Integral to this vast network are railway bridges and tunnels , which facilitate 
uninterrupted rail op erations across rivers, valleys  and mountainous terrains  
including the strategic needs of the country. Indian Railways manages an impressive 
inventory of over 1.68 lakh bridges which are further classified on the basis of their 
span and i mportance into important, major  and minor categories. These structures 
are meticulously inspected and maintained through a well -defined monitoring 
system, utilizing modern technologies such as drone surveys, 3D riverbed scanning 
and underwater inspections to ensure their operational integrity and public safety. 
1.2 In addition to bridges, railway tunnels  play a vital role in maintaining 
connectivity across difficult and mountainous regions, particularly in the Himalayan 
belt. Indian Railways currently operates over 577 tunnels, with total tunnel lengths 
exceeding 304 kilometers. The construction and maintenance of these tunnels 
require advanced engineering expertise due to complex geological cond itions, 
seismic vulnerabilities  and logistical challenges. Safety and structural stability 
remain paramount, with periodic inspections ensuring operational readiness. 
1.3 Complementing this intricate network of rail bridges and tunnels are Road 
Over Bridges (ROBs)  and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) . With increasing 
urbanization and traffic density  over the years now , Level C rossings pose  a 
significant risks to both rail and road users. Recognizing these challenges, the Indian 

10 
 
Railways, in collaboration with the State G overnments, NHAI  and other local 
authorities, have prioritized the construction of ROBs and RUBs to enhance traffic 
mobility and safety. As of 01.04.2025, there are over 19,403 ROBs and RUBs  
operational across the country.  The Indian Railways proactively undertook efforts 
to eliminate unmanned level crossings on Broad Gauge routes , achieving this goal 
by 31st January, 2019.  
1.4 This report presents a consolidated overview of the status, inspection practices 
and construction activities concerning  railway bridges, tunnels, ROBs  and RUBs 
within Indian Railways. It highlights key statist ics, infrastructural challenges  and 
policy initiatives aime d at improving safety, mobility  and operational efficiency. 
Additionally, it outlines strategic initiatives for strengthening infrastructure 
development priorities and formulating forward-looking strategies to support a safer, 
more efficient and modernized rail transportation system for the nation. 
  

11 
 
II. RAILWAY BRIDGES 
Statistical Overview 
2.1 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Railways that as on 
01.04.2025, there are a total of 1,68,845 Railway Bridges in Indian Railways 
network. The Bridges have been classified into 3 types based on their placement on 
the waterway:- 
(i) Important Bridges: 
Bridges with their linear waterway of 300 meters or more or a total waterway 
of 1000 s quare meters or more and those b ridges classified as important 
bridges by the Principal Chief Engineer/Chief Bridge Engineer. 
(ii) Major Bridges: 
Bridges with total linear water way of 18 meters or more or which have a clear 
opening of 12 linear meters or more in any one span are classified as major 
bridges. 
(iii) Minor Bridges: 
Bridges which do not fall in the above classification are classified as Minor 
Bridges. 
2.2 The zone wise categorization of the important, major and minor bridges is 
reported to be as under: 
BRIDGES STATISTICS AS ON 01.04.2025 
S. No. Rly IMP Major Minor Total 
1. CR 72 849 9392 10313 
2. ER 31 534 5154 5719 

12 
 
3. ECR 47 1029 7565 8641 
4. ECOR 40 958 12613 13611 
5. NR 66 1578 20179 21823 
6. NCR 31 473 6761 7265 
7. NER 26 440 4513 4979 
8. NFR 36 1238 6879 8153 
9. NWR 38 422 7109 7569 
10. SR 48 1099 16547 17694 
11. SCR 46 1475 16957 18478 
12. SER 20 612 7961 8593 
13. SECR 27 488 5532 6047 
14. SWR 32 787 9563 10382 
15. WR 76 1159 9911 11146 
16. WCR 120 674 7638 8432 
 
Grand Total 756 13815 154274 168845 
 
%age 0.45% 8.18% 91.37% 100.00% 
 
 
Inspection and monitoring of bridges 
2.3 To a specific query, t he Ministry of Railways have informed that there is an 
established system of inspection and monitoring of Railway bridges on the Indian 
Railway network All the bridges are inspected twice in a year, once before the onset 
of monsoon and thereafter when the monsoon recedes by the designated officials. In 
addition, certain bridges are also inspected more frequently depending upon their 
condition. Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of Railway bridges is a 
continuous process and is undertaken , whenever so warranted by their phys ical 
condition as ascertained during these inspections. If corrective/remedial measures 
are expected to take a long duration due to the complexity of the site situation, etc., 
suitable safety measures like imposing speed restrictions and keeping such bridg e 
under close watch are , taken till the bridge is 

13 
 
repaired/strengthened/rehabilitated/rebuilt. Various modern technologies like Drone 
Survey, 3D Scanning of River Beds and Water Level Monitoring have been adopted 
and are installed for the regular monitoring of the bridges as per site requirement. 
2.4 The Committee have been informed that the Condition Rating Number (CRN) 
is allotted to each of the bridge components, based on its condition at the time of 
inspection, using the following scale :- 
Condition Rating 
Number (CRN) 
Condition of bridge component 
1 This warrants immediate 
rebuilding/rehabilitation 
2 Rebuilding/rehabilitation on a programmed 
basis 
3 Condition requiring Major/special repairs 
4 Condition requiring routine maintenance 
5 Sound condition 
6 Not applicable 
0 Not inspected 
 
Based on CRN of various components, Overall Rating Number (ORN) is 
derived. Every bridge is assigned Unique Rating Number (1 to 5) based on physical 
condition at the time of inspection. Lower the Overall Rating Number (ORN), more 
attention is required to the bridge. Rating No. 1 means b ridge to be rehabilitated 
immediately. 
2.5 To a query by the Committee, t he Ministry have furnish ed the following 
details of Railway Bridges assigned overall Rating-1 in bridge inspection during last 
three years along with current status of maintenance/rehabilitation: 
 

14 
 
Year Nos. of Bridge  Rehabilitation done 
2022-23 1(BG - Bridge no 1159 UP of 
ECoR) 
1(BG - Bridge no 1159 UP of 
ECoR) 
2023-24 0 0 
2024-25 3(NG -Bridge No 32 & 800 NR and  
BG - Bridge No 100 DN of WR) 
1 (BG - Bridge no 100 DN of 
WR) 
2025-26 2 (NG - Bridge No 32 & 800 NR) 1 (NG - Bridge No 800 NR) 
 
2.6 When asked, whether the Indian Railways had any mechanism for continuous 
monitoring of the condition of the bridges on the rail network, t he Ministry have 
informed that a Bridge Management System (BMS), a web-based IT application has 
been developed to facilitate 24x7 availability of information such as bridge 
drawings/design details, inspection details, photographs etc. for meaningful 
analysis, assessment of progressive deterioration and capacity to carry increased 
loads. Technical details & drawing of bridges has been uploaded on BMS. All bridge 
inspections details are recorded in BMS (Online). Compliance of the inspection is 
being monitored  through the system. Based on periodic reports from BMS, 
management can take decision and priority for bridge rehabilitation works.    
2.7 The Committee was further informed that i n order to upgrade inspection 
techniques of Rail Bridges by Indian Railways, t he following n ew and modern 
technologies are stated to have been introduced: 
(i) Continuous water level measurement and monitoring system. 
(ii) Inspection of bridges using Drones. 
(iii) 3D scanning of riverbeds. 

15 
 
(iv) Continuous scour monitoring system near the pier/abutment in 
progress. 
(v) Underwater inspection by deploying Remote Operated Robotic 
Vehicles (RORV) in progress. 
(vi) Instrumentation of Bridges. 
2.8 When enquired about the technologies used by Indian Railways for real-time 
monitoring of the structural health of bridges and tunnels, the Ministry informed as 
follows: 
Real time monitoring of the following bridges are being done with the help of 
sensors for monitoring of strain, tilt, wind speed, temperature & other important 
parameters to access the condition of the bridge/validation of design. 
(i) At Anji Bridge, first cable stayed bridge with main cable stayed span 
of 473.25meter.  
(ii) At Chenab Bridge in NR , first steel arch bridge having height of 359 
meter. 
(iii) At Bogibeel Bridge in NFR, longest Rail cum Road bridge in India. 
2.9 The committee desired to know whether any coordination mechanism had 
been devised with other agencies for assessing the impact of weather any water flow 
on the bridges of the Indian Railways, the Ministry replies in affirmative and have 
stated that: 
Monitoring/maintenance of railway bridges is done by coordination w ith 
IMD, Ministry of Jal Shakti and local authorities as follows: 
• Joint inspection of Railway Affecting Works/Railway Affecting Tanks 
(RAW/RAT) is done annually with the local authority.  

16 
 
• Regular dissemination of warnings by IMD to Divisional HQ control (for 
rain fall:  https://webgis.imd.gov.in/webgis_DRMS/DRMS.html) 
• Regular Visit to NDEM & NRSC Website for Flood Forecast  
https://ndem.nrsc.gov.in/#/cwc7day 
• Regular Visit to CWC Website for Level of River  
https://ffs.india-water.gov.in/#/ 
• Manning of control centre. 
• Deputing regular patrolling of track/vulnerable stretches, deployment of 
stationary watchmen etc. 
 
2.10 Elaborating further on the monetary mechanism d uring the oral evidence on 
25.06.2025, the representative of Ministry deposed as under: 
“राज्य सरकार  के  द्वारा कह ीं से पान  छोडा तो नह ीं जा रहा  है, इस हेतु आपक े  सींज्ञान में लाना 
चाहींगा कक  वर्ष 2014-15 में भोपाल में जब फ्लड आया था, तो दो गाकडयाीं एक  किज पर  कगर  
गई थ ीं। उससे ररलेटेड  सबसे ज्यादा खतरा  ऐसे फ्लड से रहता  है। अत: हम लोग बहुत 
मॉकनटररींग करक े  रखते  हैं कक  पान  ककस  तरह  से छोडा जा रहा  है, ककस  तरह  से बढ़ रहा  है 
और  डाउन स्ट् र  म में ककतने  घींटे में पान  आ जाएगा, उसका  पूरा  ब्यौरा रखना  पडता है। हमारे  
कर ब  450 किजेज ऑनलाइन मॉकनटररींग के  द्वारा जुडे हैं। कवकभन्न नकदयोीं में पान  ककस  कहसाब 
से चल रहा  है, उसे हम देखते हैं। यह प्रोस जर हम फॉलो कर  रहे  हैं।” 
Repairing/Strengthening/Rehabilitation/Rebuilding of Bridges 
2.11 The Ministry have informed that o n the basis conditional assessment during 
the inspection the bridges are proposed for Repairing/Strengthening/ 
Rehabilitation/Rebuilding of bridges, which are sanctioned under Plan head -32 in 
annual works program. After sanction of bridge work, several activities are involved 
in bridge rehabilitation work such as preparation and finalization of General 
Arrangement Drawing (GAD), preparation and sanction of detailed estimate, land 
acquisition in some cases, obtaining Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) sanction, 

17 
 
finalization of tenders, execution of work etc.  With regard to Planhead-32, the 
Ministry submitted that from 2004 -2005 to 2013 -2014, 11680 bridges were 
rehabilitated with expenditure of 3918 C r and from 2014 -2015 to 2023 -24, 11918 
bridges were rehabilitated with expenditure of 8254.45 Cr. In year 2024 -25 (up to 
Oct’24) 1327 bridges were rehabilitated with expenditure of 1233 Cr . 
 
Guidelines governing the Constructions and maintenance of rail bridges 
2.12 When asked about the  key regulations and guidelines governing the 
construction and maintenance of rail bridges, the Ministry have submitted as under: 
Designs are done as per provisions of various codes of IRS, BIS, IRC etc. duly 
considering safety, serviceability/maintainability and design life. The main 
factors taken into account during the design phase of rail bridges are: 
1.  Detailed geo-technical investigations to ascertain the type and quality of 
ground strata for founding the bridge. 
2. Selection of type of foundation on the basis of geotechnical investigation 
report. 
3. Hydrological study and calculation for estimation of discharge. 
4. Design of waterway and fixing of span arrangements.  
5. Calculation of Loads & Forces (such as Dead load, Live load, impact load, 
forces due to eccentricity and curvature, seismic forces etc.) as per IRS 
Bridge Rules. 
6. River training works / Protection works. 

18 
 
Railway Steel bridges are designed based on expected annual railway traffic 
and a specified design life in years, type of structure and materials used (e.g., 
steel, reinforced cement concrete, prestressed concrete, composite sections, 
etc.), durability considerations. 
2.13 The Ministry have provide d the details of bridges identified for 
repair/rehabilitation and number of bridge s rehabilitated in last three years (upto 
May, 2025) clearly indicating an upward trend in the number of bridges rehabilitated 
since 2022-23as under: 
 
2.14 In response to a query regarding the number of railway bridges in India with 
speed restrictions, that need rebuilding  and the status/progress of work on these 
bridges, the Ministry have provided the following information: Out of a total of 41 
bridges with speed restriction. 
• 39 bridges have been sanctioned for rebuilding  


19 
 
➢ Work completed :-2 bridges 
➢ Work is in progress :-26 bridges 
➢ Detailed drawing/Scheme under preparation/approval:-11 bridges 
• Sanctionpending:- 2 bridges 
2.15 While elaborating further d uring evidence dated 25.06.2025, the 
representative of Ministry deposed as under: 
“एक  प्रश्न यह था कक  हमारे  पास ऐसे ककतने  पुल हैं, कजसमें कक  हमने स्प ड ररस्टस्ट्क्शन लगाए 
हैं। ऐसे 41 किजेज हैं, कजनमें हमने स्प ड ररस्टस्ट्क्शन लगाए हैं, उसमें से दो में कायष  पूरा  हो चुका  
है और  26 किजेज, कजन पर  काम  चल रहा  है, उसक े  सींबींध में मैं आपक े  सींज्ञान में लाना चाहता 
हीं कक  दो किजेज इनमें से ऑलरेड  और  एडवाींस स्ट्ेज में हैं और  जो सभ  14 किजेज हैं, उनको  
वर्ष 2025-26 में पूरा  कर  कलया जाएगा। वर्ष 2026-27 में आठ किजेज रहेंगे और  वर्ष 2027-
2028 में चार  रहेंगे। चूींकक यह लींब  प्रकिया है, इन सभ  को  वर्ष 2027-2028 में पूरा  कर  कदया 
जाएगा। इसक े  अलावा, जो शेर् हैं, वह टेंडर क  प्रकिया में हैं और  नवम्बर 2025 तक  हम 
इनक  टेंडर क  प्रकिया भ  पूर  कर  देंगे। उसक े  बाद वह भ  एग्ज क्यूशन के  मोड में आ 
जाए ीं गे।” 
2.16 To a specific query on mechanism to repair sub -structure of bridge under 
water, the Ministry have stated as under: 
Underwater inspection of sub-structure is got done by engaging third party 
agencies for the bridges which are perennially under water. RORV (Remote 
operated robotic vehicle) and special equipment are used for the purpose. 
Specialized agencies are engaged for undertaking under water repairs by using 
special grouts for filling the minor cavity, sometimes repairs are being done 
by creating d ry condition by creating cofferdams. Repair works have been 
undertaken in 98 nos. of bridges in last 5 years. 

20 
 
2.17 Regarding sanction/approval of the Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) for 
the construction of new railway bridges and the rehabilitation or repair of 
important/major railways bridges, the Ministry have stated as under: 
According to the Railway opening rules,  
• Commissioning of new important/major bridges requires approval/ 
sanction of Commissioner of Railway Safety.  
• No approval of CRS is required for repairs to existing bridges.  
CRS sanction was accorded on 26-11-2024 for Pamban Bridge &no bridges 
are commissioned without the mandatory approval of CRS. 
2.18 The Committee desire d to know whether the Indian Railways had any 
mechanism to assess the long term environmental impact on its tunnel and bridges, 
the Ministry have stated that the following steps are being taken to mitigate the 
environmental impact of constructing new railway tunnels/bridges: 
I. Elevated alignment is preferred for preserving the ecology and protection 
of wild life protection. 
II. Steel being a recyclable material is preferred in making large span bridges. 
These bridges are having lesser weight and have additional advantage of 
transferring reduced seismic load to sub -structure. This further reducing 
the size and material requirement in construction. 
III. Steel bridges which are having lesser weight are preferred over concrete 
bridges for larger spans to mitigate environmental impact. 
IV. Forest clearance is taken for the project and required afforestation are 
done. 
V. Underpass/Overpass are constructed for safe passage of Wild Life Animal. 

21 
 
VI. Construction of Amrit Sarovar by using excavated earth in formation work 
leading to water conservation. 
2.19 When asked about the challenges faced during the construction phase of the 
tunnel and bridge, t he Ministry have stated that Railways is facing following 
technical issues during construction of rail tunnels and bridges in geologically 
sensitive terrains such as Himalayas section as under: 
“In Himalayas region, the railway alignment traverses through young 
Himalayas, which are tectonically active, geographically remote locations and 
dotted with many thrusts and fau lts. Main Boundary Thrust (MBT) /Reasi 
Thrust, Muree thrust, and Panjal  Thrust are the major thrust zones which the 
alignment crosses. Lot of technical, geological, geographical and logistical 
challenges were faced during construction of long tunnels, mega bridges and 
Station Yards. These issues were aptly tackled in professional manner with the 
advice of various national & international experts. 
Some of the challenges faced during construction of tunnels and bridges such 
as heavy squeezing/swelling of tunnel profile and heaving of tunnel invert, 
tunnel collapses and cavity formations, complex geology and presence of 
localized shear zones, tunneling through Main Boundary Thrust -MBT, huge 
ingress of water requiring continuous heavy dewatering arrangements, 
presence of Methane gas in tunnel, inaccessible & remote location of tunnel 
portals required construction of extensive network of approach roads, extensive 
slope stabilization works etc.” 
2.20 The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Indian Railways 
for disaster management in Tunnels and Bridges, the Committee were informed that 
the following measures are adopted by Indian Railways to ensure the safety of 
tunnels and bridges during natural disasters like floods, earthquakes, or landslides : 

22 
 
Earthquake: Design provisions are made to takes care of seismic load while 
designing the Tunnel /Bridges as per the stage to resist the earthquake. 
However, after earthquake of specifies intensity the Bridges are being 
inspected by designated official. 
Flood and Land slide:  Water way of the Railway bridges are designed for 
maximum design discharge, which is calculated duly considering the entire 
catchment area drained by each bridge and considering the most severe flood. 
Tunnels are designed taking care of drainage aspect by provision of 
waterproofing membrane of suitable thickness, concrete lining, provision of 
side perforated pipes, provision of central/side drains with gradient as per 
Guidelines for Design and Construction of Tunnels (RDSO/2012/GE:G-0017. 
2.21 The Committee were informed that the following measures are also taken for 
safeguarding the tunnel and bridges : 
(i) Watchmen are deployed during monsoon at specified location to 
ensure safety. 
(ii) Monsoon patrolling are deployed during monsoon in specified 
section. 
(iii) Automatic water level monitor provided at identified bridges. 
(iv) Sounding of pier manually/by Scour level monitoring system. 
(v) Dynamic Rock fall barrier are provided at identified locations. 
(vi) Extension of the Portal of the tunnel. 
(vii) Shotcreting of the unstable slope 
(viii) Provision of lining in old lined tunnel 
  

23 
 
III. RAILWAY TUNNELS 
3.1 In moder n day transportation infrastructure development, tunnels play an 
important role in expansion of the rail network especially in mountainous terrain and 
even in dense urban areas.  In this backdrop, the Committee were keen to know about 
the tunnel network of the Indian Railways.  
Statistical Overview  
3.2 When asked to provide the details of railway tunnels, the Ministry of Railways 
informed that a s on 01.04.2025, the details of commissioned tunnels i n Indian 
Railways are as under: 
Gauge No. of Tunnels Length of Tunnels(in  km) 
BG 454 294.49 
MG 18 1.36 
NG 105 8.66 
 
It includes the tunnels of Sangaldan -Katra section of USBRL which was 
inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 6th June 2025. 
Inspection and monitoring of rail runnels 
3.3 The Committee desired to know whether similar to maintenance of bridges, 
the Indian Railways had any mechanism for inspection of its tunnels, to this the 
Committee were informed that :-   
There is established system of inspection and monitoring of Railway tunnels 
on Indian Railways. All the tunnels are inspected twice in a year, once before 
the onset of monsoon and another after the monsoon by the designated 

24 
 
officials. Repair/strengthening/rehabilitation/rebuilding of Railway Tunnels 
is undertaken whenever so warranted by their physical condition as 
ascertained during these inspections. On the basis conditional assessment 
during the inspectio n the t unnels are proposed for s trengthening of tunnels, 
which are sanctioned under Plan head-32 in annual works program. 
3.4 The Committee were keen to know whether the Indian Railways had 
developed any application for the continuous monitoring of its tunnel, t he Ministry 
have informed that the Tunnel Management System (TuMS) has been developed in 
year 2024-25. Feeding of tunnel data of Indian Railway in TuMS is completed and 
validation of data is in progress.  
Construction and maintenance of rail tunnels 
 
3.5 As the Indian Railways is giving importance to increasing rail connectivity in 
the Himalayan States including in the North East States where tunnels play an 
important role in seamless connectivity, the Committee desired to know whether the 
Indian Railways had any regulations and guidelines governing the construction and 
maintenance of rail tunnels. The Ministry in their reply have submitted as under: 
“Tunnel design is done by Competent Consultants as per good international 
practices. Indian Railways had issued the Guidelines for Design and 
Construction of Tunnels (RDSO/2012/GE: G -0017- 2012), which provides 
comprehensive instructions for various aspects of tunnel design and 
construction. This guideline covers the key components/factors to be 
considered during design phase of rail tunnel. Some key factors are listed as 
follows: 
1. Detailed geotechnical investigation and geological mapping. 

25 
 
2. Tunnel lay-out and rescue concept/evacuation facilities. 
3. Adopting suitable cross section of tunnel, as per the envelope required as 
stipulated in IR-Schedule of dimension and to suit the tunnel construction 
method. 
4. Alignment, gradient, curvature, and other geometric parameters to suit the 
prescribed term of reference of alignment design. 
5. Drainage arrangements. 
6. Tunnel overburden, quality, in -situ stress conditions, and strength of 
rocks. 
7. Ground water and weak geological zones like thrust, faults, fold and 
discontinuities. 
8. Seismic load, eventual water pressure etc. 
9. Fire-protection facilities. 
10. Electromechanical equipment. 
11. Tunnel ventilation system.” 
Escape/service tunnel 
3.6 The Committee then asked about the policy for the provision of 
Escape/service tunnels, the representative of Ministry of Railways during the 
meeting held on 28.11.24 informed as under:- 
“…….we follow the international guidelines now. If the length of a tunnel is 
more than three kilometres, we call it a long tunnel. In long tunnels, it is 

26 
 
mandatory to have an escape tunnel. The old tunnels have not been provided 
any such arrangement……” 
3.7 When asked about the major railway tunnels that do not have escape/service 
tunnel, as well as  the policy of Railways regarding such  tunnels, the Ministry 
submitted the following response:- 
Escape tunnels with adits/lateral exits are provided for tunnels more than 3 
km length. Details of tunnels more than 3 km without escape tunnel are as 
under: 
SN Railway Tunnel 
No. 
Section Length of 
Tunnel 
(KM) 
Remarks 
1 NFR 9* Lumding-Badarpur 3.25 Both Passenger & 
goods traffic  
2 SCR 57A Ubulavaripalli- 
Krishnapatnam 
6.63 Only for goods 
traffic 
* The planning for Tunnel no. 9 was done prior to adoption of policy for mandatory 
provision of escape tunnel/service tunnel for tunnels longer than 3 km length. 
3.8 The Committee desired further elaboration on the policy regarding the 
provision of escape tunnel s, the Ministry stated that an escape tunnel is generally 
constructed as an emergency exit for longer tunnels to facilitate the evacuation of 
the passengers. The new line between Obulavaripalle and Krishnapatnam was 
constructed for the transportation of goods between Krishnapatnam Port to the 
hinterland. Since there is no passenger traffic on this section ,as it is a  dedicated 
goods line, an escape tunnel was not provided.  

27 
 
3.9 When asked if the Indian Railways was contemplating on the provision of the 
escape tunnel being used by road commuters/users for better economy and furthering 
the utilization of escape tunnels, the Ministry informed : 
“I just wanted to mention that this was examined. A team from the Railway 
Board, RDSO and NHAI has been formed……a team has been formed 
between NHAI, RDSO and Railway Board. That is studying this. They will 
design a tunnel which can be used both for road as well as railway.” 
  

28 
 
IV. LEVEL CROSSINGS (LC), ROAD OVER BRIDGES (RUBs), ROAD 
UNDER BRIDGES (RUBs) 
 
Statistical Overview 
4.1 In response to a query regarding elimination of level crossings, t he Ministry 
have informed that all Unmanned Level Crossings (UMLCs) on running lines of 
Broad Gauge network of Indian Railway have been eliminated by 31.01.2019. As 
on 01.04.2025, details of Level Crossings (LCs), Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and 
Road Under Bridges (RUBs) are as under: - 
SN   Item Nos. 
1 Level Crossings (LCs) on Broad 
gauge 
16,349 
2 Road over Bridge (ROB) 4,658 
3 Road under Bridge (RUB) 14,745 
4 Total ROB/RUB 19,403* 
*This includes 503 nos. ROBs constructed on NH by MoRTH/NHAI. 
4.2 When enquired about the Railway plans to eliminate 513 unmanned level 
crossings on meter gauge and narrow gauge, t he Ministry  have informed that 
presently, there are 441 Nos. Unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Meter Gauge 
(MG) and Narrow Gauge (NG) sections over Indian Railway, which has been 
planned to be eliminated during the Gauge conversion of these sections.  
4.3 While briefing the Committee on 28.11.2024, t he Ministry provided 
comparative data on the elimination of Unmanned and Manned Level Crossings, as 
well as the construction of Road Over/Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs), for the periods 
2004–2014, 2014–2024 and 2024–2025 (up to October, 2024), as under : 

29 
 
 
4.4 The above graph illustrates the progress of road safety works undertaken by 
the Ministry over three time periods—2004–2014, 2014–2024, and 2024–2025 (up 
to October, 2024). A significant increase is observed in the elimination of Manned 
Level Crossings (MLC s) and the construction of Road Over/Under Bridges 
(ROBs/RUBs) during 2014 –2024 compared to the previous decade, indicating a 
focused push toward enhancing safety infrastructure. All UMLCs on running lines 
of Broad Gauge network of Indian railways have bee n eliminated by 31.01.2019  
reflecting the successful completion of this objective by 2019. The figures for 2024–
2025 (up to October, 2024) show continued progress in MLC elimination and 
ROB/RUB construction, suggesting ongoing efforts toward comprehensive rail-road 
safety improvement. 
Construction and maintenance of ROBs/RUBs and elimination of LCs 
4.5 The Ministry of Railways in a written submission informed as follows:  


30 
 
“In order to improve safety in train operation and increase mobility, it is 
envisaged to eliminate LC on Indian Railway system in accelerated manner. 
With the development pace of country, there is a need to amend railways 
policy towards provision of road cr ossing even at locations where no level 
crossing exists, which in -turn will contribute towards improved safety in 
operations of trains& mobility of trains, ease of living and increasing 
economic activities in the country. In India level crossing locations have been 
noticed as major crossing points of rail/road accidents and hindrances to 
smooth movement of Rail Traffic. These not only pose risk of accidents but 
also create inconvenience for passengers by slowing down traffic. At level 
crossings, priority is given to railway traffic and hence when a railway crosses 
the junction of a road and rail, the road traffic is halted for particular time 
duration. Many accidents have occurred in the past due to negligent and hasty 
behavior of road commuters and drivers on these level crossings. Safety of 
road users is of paramount concern and is give n due importance by the 
Government. Hence, for safe and smooth operation of vehicular traffic at such 
level crossings, it is necessary to construct road over bridges (ROBs) and road 
under bridges (RUBs).” 
Policy initiatives  
4.6 The Ministry of Railways have informed that the work relating to elimination 
of MLCs is now taken up in ‘Mission Mode’ in the overall interest of safety of both 
rail and road users. It will also help improve operations & achieve higher average 
speed of trains. The State Governments/Road Owning Authorities generally allocate 
limited funds for road crossing works. This leads to abnormal delays in sanction and 
completion of these  works. The aim of Ministry of R ailways is to accelerate road 
crossing works. Therefore , policy letters dated 02.03.2023 & 19.08.2024 

31 
 
(Annexure-I) have been issued to remove bottlenecks  in sanctioning and 
progressing of these works at an accelerated pace. It is detailedasfollowing:- 
Sanction and Execution of Road crossing works in lieu of Level crossings: 
(i) For all LCs: 100% cost of work is being borne by Railways, except on 
National Highways (NH) and where State Government/Road Owning 
Authority/Local Authority wants to take -up the works at its cost. 
Rebuilding/replacement of existing ROBs/RUBs/public Foot Over 
Bridges (FOBs) on condition basis may be sanctioned at Railways cost. 
Priority of LC elimination shall be based on impact on safety in train 
operations, mobility of trains and impact for road users/public. 
(ii) For ROB/RUBs sanctioned on 100% cost of Railway, the cost of land 
involving private land, R&R and utility shifting is being borne by 
railways for new works. 
(iii) For ROB/RUBs sanctioned on 100% cost of State Government/Road 
Owning Authority, the cost of land acquisition, R&R and utility shifting 
is being be borne by State Government/Road Owning Authority/Local 
Authority. 
(iv) Sanction and execution of road crossings works in lieu of LCs are taken 
upby Railways at its own cost [except LCs on National Highway 
Corridors and  LCs where State Government/Road Owning 
Authority/Local Authority want to take up the works at their own cost]. 
These works are taken up in phases depending on priority, feasibility 
and availability of funds. 

32 
 
(v) Level Crossings are potential safety hazard for Road and Rail users. As 
a matter of policy, no new Level Crossings will be provided on existing 
lines.  
Policy for Replacement of Level Crossings on National Highways 
(NHs)by ROBs/RUBs: 
Further Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Ministry of 
Railways and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH)/National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) on 10.11.2014 to eliminate all level 
crossings on National Highway Corridors on single entity basis by 
MoRTH/NHAI by construction of ROBs/RUBs in lieu of level crossings on 
NH at their own cost has been signed . The Salient features of MOU are as 
under : 
(i) MORTH/NHAI will replace all level crossings on NH Corridors by  
ROBs/RUBs in next five years subject to availability of funds. 
(ii) MORTH/NHAI shall construct complete ROB/RUB (including railway 
bridge portion) on National Highways i .e. NH Corridors (NHDP & 
non-NHDP) in the country at their own cost on single entity basis. The 
existing ROBs , if  any, will be upgraded as and when required by 
MORTH/NHAI. 
(iii) MORTH/NHAI shall do the instrumentation in the railway super -
structure across railway bridge portion. MORTH/NHAI shall not levy 
Supervision Charges, Departmental Charges, Maintenance Charges and 
Land Lease Charge where railway track crosses National Highways in 
case of New Railway Line/Gauge Conversion. 

33 
 
(iv) MORTH/NHAI shall construct a Subway to facilitate movement of 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic across the railway track to facilitate 
closure of level crossing by Railways. Construction of Subway within 
Railway Portion  should be done under the supervision of Railways 
without any supervision  charges. If subway is not possible, then 
suitable FOB with ramp should  be provided wherever subway/FOB 
with ramp is not feasible at site, then in all such cases suitable footpath 
of appropriate width along with staircase should be provided on ROB. 
Wherever footpath on ROB is provided then in all such cases, height of 
kerb of ROB should be increased, so that in case of road accidents, 
chances of mounting of road vehicles on  kerb and falling on railway 
track could be avoided. 
(v) Ministry of Railway will not levy Supervision Charges, Departmental  
Charges, Maintenance Charge s and Land Lease Charge for 
ROBs/RUBs being constructed by NHAI or NH - wing of State PWD 
on NH Corridors. 
(vi) Ministry of Railways has developed a web-based programme for online 
submission for getting expeditious approval of various drawings related 
to ROBs/RUBs within 60 days. This programme includes all the RDSO 
standard span drawings, check list to be followed for preparation of 
GAD and standard MoU. Nominated officer of MORTH/NHAI or NH-
wing of  PWD shall fill up details of ROB/RUB proposed to be 
constructed on this web-based programme for expeditious approval of 
General arrangement Drawing (GAD) by Railways. To avoid unusual 
occurrence during launching of railway spans, Railway will supervise 

34 
 
and facilitate launching of girders across railway bridge portion without 
any supervision charges. 
4.7 When asked about the policy of construction of ROBs/RUBs in lieu of Level 
Crossings on new lines, the Ministry have stated as under :-  
“As per extant policy no new level crossings are being provided on existing 
line or new line project as level crossings are potential safety hazard for both 
rail and road users.” 
4.8 In response to a query r egarding progress made in enhancing the online 
approval system used by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) 
and the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) for granting approvals of 
General Arrangement Drawings (GAD) related to the const ruction of ROBs and 
RUBs, the Ministry have stated as under : 
“A web based online approval system as IR -Rail Road Crossing GAD “IR -
Rail Road Crossing GAD Approval System” 
(https://ircep.gov.in/RCApproval/) is being used by NHAI/MORTH/State 
agencies for all cases of GAD approval. 
Total time allowed for complete process of GAD approval has been recently 
reduced from 70 days to 50 days. Also, other features in application like 
revalidation of GAD & approval of structural drawings have also been added 
in consultation with NHAI/MoRTH f or improved coordination/better 
monitoring.  
For further improvement to streamline the process, railway is conducting 
meetings with MoRTH/NHAI on regular basis. Last meeting at Ministry level 
was held on 04.06.25.” 

35 
 
4.9 When enquired about the current status of construction of ROBs on National 
Highways and the steps being taken by the Railways for early construction of ROBs 
on National Highways, the Ministry have stated as under : 
“All LCs on NH corridors are to be replaced by ROBs/RUBs by Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways (MORTH)/ National Highways Authority of 
India (NHAI) at their cost as per the MoU signed between Ministry of Railway 
& MoRTH/ NHAI dt. 10.11.2014. As on 01.04.2025, there are total 359 nos. 
LCs on NH which are yet to be eliminated. Presently, work for construction 
of ROB/ RUB at 93 Nos. LCs on NH is being executed by MoRTH/ NHAI.A 
web based online approval system as IR -Rail Road Crossing GAD “IR -Rail 
Road Cro ssing GAD Approval System” ( https://ircep.gov.in/RCApproval/) 
has been developed for monitoring of GAD approval presently being used by 
NHAI/MORTH/State agencies. Also , other features in application like 
revalidation of GAD & approval of structural drawings have also been added 
in consultation with NHAI/MoRTH for improved coordination/ better 
monitoring.” 
4.10 In reply to a query regarding details separately for construction and 
maintenance of ROBs/RUBs, State-wise and Zone -wise, the Ministry of Railways 
have furnished State-wise and Railway Zone wise data of existing ROB/ RUB and 
ongoing works  in Annexure-II. 
4.11 In response to a query regarding State-wise details of total number of level 
crossings on National Highways , along with the number of  level crossings 
eliminated in last 5 years through the  construction of ROBs/RUBs , NHAI have 
furnish the information as follows : 
 

36 
 
Sr. 
No. 
State Total No 
of Level 
Crossings 
on NH 
No. of Level Crossings eliminated in last Five Years 
(Year-wise) 
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 (Till 
Date) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 4 0 3 0 0 0 1 
2 Assam 18 0 0 0 0 1 0 
3 Bihar 11 0 0 0 4 0 0 
4 Chhattisgarh 5 0 0 2 0 2 0 
5 Gujarat 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6 Haryana 4 0 2 0 1 0 2 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 
7 1 0 0 0 0 0 
8 Jammu and 
Kashmir  
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9 Jharkhand 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 Karnataka 18 0 0 2 2 2 0 
11 Kerala 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 
12 Madhya Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 Maharashtra 13 0 0 2 2 5 0 
14 Odisha 10 0 0 0 0 0 1 
15 Punjab 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 
16 Rajasthan 4 1 0 0 0 1 2 
17 Tamil Nadu 7 0 1 0 1 1 1 
18 Telangana 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Uttar Pradesh 28 1 3 2 8 2 2 
20 Uttarakhand 4 0 1 1 0 1 1 
21 West Bengal 11 0 0 0 3 1 0 
 
4.12 When enquired about the existing policy framework for maintenance of non-
railway portion of ROBs and RUBs constructed on National Highways by NHAI 
and issues faced by NHAI in timely maintenance of these portions by the concerned 
authorities, NHAI have submitted as under: 
“The non-railway portion of ROBs and RUBs are being maintained as part of 
NH network by NHAI through various Concessionaires / Contractors as per 

37 
 
the terms and conditions of their respective Concession/Contract Agreements. 
The maintenance practices follow the standards and specifications set forth in 
IRC Codes / SOP for maintenance of National Highways and issues (if any) 
are dealt accordingly as per provisions of CA and relevant Codal provisions.” 
4.13 NHAI have also informed that the following innovative construction 
technologies, materials, and design solutions are being adopted by NHAI for 
construction of ROBs and RUBs to expedite project timelines and improve structural 
longevity : 
“The Railway Portion of ROBs and RUBs are mostly designed as per the 
standard designs finalised by Research Design and Standards Organization 
(RDSO). Recently, NHAI, in consultation with RDSO, have standardised 
Came-back Type Truss Girder for certain length s which have superior 
structural durability as compared to some earlier structure types.” 
4.14 During the oral evidence on 25.06.2025, the representative of Ministry 
deposed regarding the coordination between the Ministry and MoRTH/ NHAI as 
follows: 
“हम एनएचएआई  के साथ  मॉननटर िंग क ते हैं। हमा ा  पू ा  एक ऑनलाइन  नसस्टम 
बना  हुआ है, इस प  मे े स्त  प  भी औ  सेक्र े ट ी एमओआ टीएच के स्त  प  भी 
एक निस्तृत चचाा  हुई है। हमने  बुलेट प्वाइिंट में भी नलखा  है। इसमें पहले 70 निन  लगते 
थे, लेनकन  अब यह काम  50 निन  में हो जाता  है। इस प्रनक्रया को पू ा  ऑनलाइन  बना  
निया  गया  है। इस प्रनक्रया में थोडा  औ  सुधा  क ने  की जरू त  है, इसक े नलए हम 
औ  सेक्र े ट ी एमओआ टीएच काम  क   हे हैं, नजससे जीएडी अप्रूिल जल्दी से जल्दी 
हो सक े ।” 
4.15 With regard to the role of State Governments in approval of General 
Arrangement Drawing (GAD), the Ministry have stated as under :-  

38 
 
Approach alignment of ROB/RUB is fixed jointly with State Government. 
Accordingly, GAD is prepared/approved. Sometimes, fixing of approach 
alignment is getting delayed due to requirement expressed by public which is 
resolved through meeting with Railway authorities. The alignment is 
generally decided keeping in view the functional requirements, keeping the 
land acquisition requirement as low as possible, to avoid shifting of existing 
utilities & encroachments. 
4.16 Regarding d ifficulties faced in construction of ROBs/ RUBs, the Ministry 
have stated as under : 
“LCs are safety hazard for bothroad user as well as train operations. 
Elimination of LC in densely populated urbanareas is desirable to avoid 
inconvenience to road user.  Normally, Railway used to construct ROB in 
Railway portion whereas approaches  are constructed by State Government. 
There is no problem in construction of ROB in  Railway portion. However, 
construction of approaches of ROB is used to be difficult  due to various 
reasons enumerated as under (which were used to be generallyresponsibility 
of State Government/Road owning agencies): 
(i) Land acquisition requirements & Rehabilitation & Resettlement. 
(ii) Coordination issues. 
(iii) Allocation of requisite funds by State Government as required. 
(iv) Old Sanctioned cost sharing works, but stalled, due to no response 
regarding cost sharing from State Government.” 
4.17 Regarding no response for cost sharing from State Governments for 
construction of ROBs and RUBs, the Ministry have stated that in case of no response 

39 
 
by State Government w.r.t. to cost sharing, LC elimination works already sanctioned 
on cost sharing basis will be undertaken at 100% Railways cost. Construction of 
ROB/RUB works is a continuation and dynamic process, which depends on various 
factors like consent for closure of LC, fixing of approach alignment, approval of 
General Arrangement Drawing (GAD), land acquisition, removal of encroachment, 
shifting of infringing utilities, and statutory clearances from various authorities. So 
far 52 Nos. of cost sh aring work, have now been taken up at 100% railway cost as 
per railway requirement. 
Maintenance of ROBs and RUBs 
4.18 With regard to maintenance of Road-over- Bridges (ROBs) and Road-under-
Bridges (RUBs), the Ministry have stated as under :- 
“As per extant rule the portion of Flyover (ROB)/underpass (RUB) within 
railway land area shall be maintained by Railways at its own cost. The 
remaining portion outside railway land area including maintenance and 
lighting of the roadway of the bridge and its approaches will be maintained 
by State Government/Road owning Authority/Local Authority at its own cost. 
All such ROBs & RUBs are inspected periodically as per schedule prescribed 
for Railway bridges.” 
4.19 When enquired about the reasons for not assigning the work for construction 
and maintenance of ROBs/RUBs and measures being taken to resolve the issues, the 
Ministry have stated as under :- 
“Assigning of the work to an executing agency is a dynamic and continuous 
process which depends upon specific site conditions/ request from the State 
Government/requirement of work. As per policy, all works should be 
executed on a single entity basis as far as possible. In case any Road owning 

40 
 
authority/ State Gov insists, the GM may permit them to execute the work 
either on single entity basis or dual entity basis i.e., construction of approaches 
by road owning authority & Railway portion by Railways on specific 
locations.” 
Level Crossings to prevent trespassing 
4.20 When enquired about the policy for providing RUB/FOB/pedestrian subway 
at such locations where no Level Crossings exists, but proper road is already 
existing/in use upto railway land boundary  to check trespassing, the Ministry have 
stated that additional road crossing works at non –LC location may be taken up as 
part of Road project by Road Owning Authorities/ state Govt/ NHAI. However, in 
exceptional cases, provision of railway track crossing work (Subway / FOB) may be 
taken up by Railways, if the location is affecting safety in train operations, mobility 
of trains and conditions of infrastructures adversely due to trespassing, in phases 
depending on its priority, feasibility and availability of funds. 
4.21 While elaborating further, the Ministry have categorized  and outlined 
sanctioned and the execution of additional crossings as under: 
Category A (Permission of water -way Bridge opening for road/ 
pedestrian movement):   
– Vehicular as well as pedestrian traffic is not permitted through the 
Railway water way bridges. 
– However in case of demands for allowing use of Water Way Bridge for 
vehicular as well as pedestrian crossings and if it is a source/potential 
source of trespass, affecting safety in train operations, mobility of trains 
and fixed infrastructure of railway, subways/FOBs etc . may be 
provided at a suitable nearby location as per feasibility at railways cost. 

41 
 
Category B (Provide RUB/FOB/pedestrian subway at locations where no 
LC exists or LC closed in past) :   
– If location is a source of trespass, affecting safety in train operations, 
mobility of trains and fixed infrastructure of railway, Railway may 
consider providing suitable subways/FOB etc. as per feasibility at 
railways cost. 
Category C (Provide RUB/FOB/pedestrian subway at locations where no 
LC exists, but proper roads already in use up to railway land boundary):    
In exceptional cases, where the location is a source of trespass, affecting safety 
in train operations, mobility of trains and fixed infrastructure of railway, 
Railway may consider providing suitable RUBs/ LHS/ FOBs as per feasibility 
at railways cost. 
Construction of ROBs/RUBs in major cities 
4.22 With regard to status of ROBs/RUBs construction to replace Level Crossings 
in major cities, the Ministry have submitted as under :- 
“There are 46 nos. of Major cities (having population more than 10 lacs)  in 
India. There are 305 Level Crossings (LCs) existing in these major cities. Out 
of which 123 LCs are sanctioned for elimination by  ROB/RUB. Completion 
& commissioning of ROB/RUB wo rks depends on various factors like 
cooperation of   State Governments in giving   consent for closure of 
LC,  fixing of approach alignment, approval of General Arrangement 
Drawing (GAD), land acquisition, removal of encroachment, shifting of 
infringing uti lities, statutory clearances from various authorities,   law and 
order situation in the area of project / work sites,  duration of working season 
in a year for the particular project / area   due to climatic conditions etc. All 
above factors affect the completion time of the projects / works.”  

42 
 
Traffic congestion near Level Crossings 
4.23 Regarding steps being taken by the Railways to address traffic congestion near 
Level Crossings, the Ministry have stated as under: 
“Indian Railways is implementing several measures to alleviate traffic congestion 
at level crossings, aiming to enhance safety and streamline transportation. 
• Elimination of Level Crossings: The Railways are replacing level 
crossings to facilitate uninterrupted traffic flow by:- 
i. road over bridges (ROBs) and/or 
ii. road under bridges (RUBs)/ Limited Height Subways(LHS)  
• Up-gradation of Infrastructure: Timely maintenance of Road surface at 
level crossing, provision of speed breaker, signage etc and widening of 
level crossing. 
• Awareness programs are also conducted to educate the public about the 
dangers of crossing tracks and the importance of using designated 
crossings, thereby reducing accidents and congestion.” 
Water-logging in Road Under Bridges (RUBs) 
4.24 The Committee enquired about the design, maintenance and persistent water 
logging issues in RUBs and  about the specific measures being adopted by the 
Railways to minimize these issues. The Ministry in this regard stated as under: 
“Railways have taken following remedial measures to mitigate the problem of 
water logging. 
• Adequate drainage arrangement has been made as integral part of planning 
of new Road under Bridge (RUB)/Subways.  
• In existing RUBs/subways following remedial measures 

43 
 
i. Water flow diversion to nearby bridge and nallahs/drains,  
ii. Provision of cover shed on approach roads,  
iii. Provision of hump at entry to Road under Bridge (RUB),  
iv. Provision of cross drains,  
v. Sealing of joints 
vi. Pumping arrangement 
As on 01.04.2025, there are 14745 nos. of RUBs/ LHS over Indian Railways. 
The inspection of Subways/RUBs is conducted before and after the onset of the 
monsoon. The monitoring of Subways/RUBs to prevent water logging is an 
ongoing process and redressal is undertaken whenever so warranted. The 
following measures are being taken to prevent waterlogging: 
  
a) Providing the cover sheds over subways/RUBs: Presently,2119 Nos. 
of Subways/RUBs are having cover shed on their approaches and works 
for providing cover sheds at 375 Nos. Subways/ RUBs are at different 
stages of planning, sanction and execution.  
b) Enhancing pump capacity: In 3995 RUBs, pumps are provided as per 
the requirement including 1298 nos. RUBs, where pump capacity has 
been increased recently. 
c) Increasing the sump size at Subways/RUBs: The works of increasing 
the size of the sump at 585 nos. Subways/RUBs have been completed and 
the works of increasing the sump size at 163 nos. Subways/RUBS are at 
different stages of planning, sanction and execution. 
All above measures will help in addressing water -logging problems during 
Rains. “     
4.25 When further enquired as to whether the present ROBs and RUBs withstand 
flooding, especially in flood -prone areas  and remedial measures proposed to be 

44 
 
taken for upcoming ROBs and RUBs in flood prone areas, the Ministry have stated 
as under: 
“ROBs and RUBs are means to cross the railway track and to connect the 
existing road network. Flooding in adjoining area will affect road network 
approaching to ROB and RUB & traffic movement over it.  
However, construction of RUB is planned after detailed site investigation 
including issues related with localized flooding.  
To prevent water logging of Road over Bridges/ Road under bridges (ROBs/ 
RUBs) the Ministry of Railways has taken up following remedial measures:- 
(i) Adequate drainage arrangement has been made integral part of 
planning of new RUBs/Subways, 
(ii) Water flow diversion to nearest bridge & nallahs, provision of 
covered shed on approach roads, provision of hump at entry to 
RUBs,  
(iii) Provision of cross drains, sealing of joints etc. as per site suitability,   
(iv) Pumping arrangement has also been made in identified RUBs/LHS 
to drain out water expeditiously in case of water logging.” 
  

45 
 
V. TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
5.1 In response to a query regarding adoption of technological innovations for the 
constructions, monitoring and maintenance of railway bridges and tunnels, t he 
Ministry have informed that t he following technological innovations have been 
implemented for the first time on Indian Railways  for the construction, monitoring 
and maintenance of railway bridges and tunnels :- 
(i) At Pamban Bridge, first vertical lift span bridge has been constructed with 
welded connection. Polysiloxasin based painting scheme having long life 
of 35 year has been adopted as per corrosion environment of the location.  
(ii) At Anji Bridge,  first cable stayed bridge on Indian Railway has been 
constructed at Anji Khad near Reasi with main cable stayed span of 
473.25m. Inbuilt sensors for monitoring of strain, tilt, wind speed, 
temperature & other important parameters have been provided for 
validation of design. 
(iii) At Chenab, first steel arch bridge having height of 359 mtr has been 
constructed. 
(iv) Use of High Strength Friction Grip(HSFG) Bolts are provided in new 
designs of Steel Girder Bridges. 
(v) NITM (New Australian tunneling Method) has been suitably modified to 
suit the Himalayan Geology. 
(vi) Tunnel Boaring Machine (TBM) is used for tunneling in Himalayan 
geology Rishikesh –Rudraprayag section. 
(vii)  Tunnels in new projects are being provided with Ballast Less Track(BLT) 
for reducing maintenance. 
 

46 
 
5.2 Elaborating further on  technological innovations in construction and 
maintenance of ROBs and RUBs, the Ministry have stated as under : 
Innovative Designs: 
Guidelines have been issued to adopt pre-cast construction in piers/pier caps, 
girder in the approaches for faster execution with better control on quality. 
Additionally, guidelines have also been issued to Zonal Railways for use in 
planning and execution of grade separator works to ensure all weather 
LHS/RUB & pedestrian friendly ROBs. 
1. RUBs/Subways with combination of openings with different 
heights and differential road levels:  
2. ROB with Subway/Ramp:  
RUBs/Subways with combination of openings with different heights and 
differential road levels  
Innovative options to being adopted 
Option-1
Option-2
 

47 
 
Option-3
 
ROB with Subway 
 
 
 


48 
 
5.3 Regarding educational programme offered by Gati Shakti Vishwavidyala  
(GSV) in Bridge & Tunnel Engineering, the Ministry have stated that Gati Shakti 
Vishwavidalaya (GSV) is presently offering a course in B . Tech in Civil 
Engineering. GSV also conducted a two -week training program on "Design, 
Fabrication, Launching, and Maintenance of Steel Girder Bridges" during 
November/December 2024 in which 37 officers across Indian Railways, PSUs and 
other organisations participated. A one -week training program on "Steel Bridge 
Design, Fabrication & Inspection" is scheduled to be held from June 23 to 28, 2025. 
Further, an M.Tech Program in Bridge and Tunnel Engineering from the Academic 
Year 2025-26, commencing in August 2025 has been proposed at GSV. Officials 
training is conducted at IRICEN Pune and in ZBTI (Zonal Bridge Training Institute) 
at DDU (ECR) & Manmad (CR). 
 

49 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Monitoring of Railway Bridges 
1. The Committee note that Indian Railways ha ve established a 
comprehensive system for the inspection and monitoring of bridges, with all the 
bridges being inspected twice in a year, once before the onset of monsoon and 
another after the monsoon by the designated officials supplemented by 
additional checks for vulnerable structures. The Committee further note that 
the adoption of modern technologies such as drone surveys, 3D riverbed 
scanning and continuous water level monitoring have been adopted for  
enhancing the reliability and efficiency of inspecti ons. The implementation of 
the Bridge Management System (BMS) for data recording and monitoring has 
further streamlined decision-making and prioritization of rehabilitation works.  
The Committee note with appreciation that real time monitoring of Anji 
Bridge, Chenab Bridge and Bogibeel Bridge are being carried out using sensors 
to monitor strain, tilt, wind speed, temperature and other important 
parameters to assess the condition of the bridges and validate their design. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to develop a comprehensive database of railway 
bridges located in vulnerable areas such as flood-prone zones, landslide-prone 
regions and other high-risk locations. The Committee are of the view that these 
bridges require special inspections during the peak monsoon period, in addition 
to the regular inspections c onducted before and after the monsoon. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to expand the scope of the real -time bridge 
monitoring system to include these bridges.  Furthermore, the Com mittee 

50 
 
emphasize the need to strengthen inter -agency coordination particularly with 
agencies such as the IMD, Ministry of Jal Shakti and local authorities to ensure 
timely information exchange, advance warnings  and prompt joint action for 
safeguarding bridge infrastructure and ensuring uninterrupted and safe rail 
operations during adverse weather conditions. 
Inspection of underwater bridge sub-structures 
2. The Committee note that the Ministry have established a mechanism for 
underwater inspection of bridge sub -structures, particularly for those 
perennially submerged, by engaging third -party specialized agencies and 
deploying advanced technologies such as Remote Operated Robotic Vehicles 
(RORV) and other specialized equipment. The Committee appreciate that 
underwater repair works have been carried out on 98 bridges over the last five 
years. However, the Committee recommend that the Ministry further enhance 
the capacity and availability of such specialized services, ensure periodic review 
of underwater inspection protocols  and explore the adoption of newer, more 
advanced underwater inspection and repair technologies . Currently, the  
quality of underwater structure inspection is heavily dependent on human skill 
and the effectiveness of inspection is not consistent ly reliable. The Committee 
urge the expanded  and extensive us e of advanced technologies like RORV 
which can provide precise location and extent of defects while simultaneously 
minimizing risks to human operators who can remotely operate the vehicle 
from surface. Such technological intervention will improve the safety, 
durability and operational reliability of railway bridges, especially in flood -
prone and vulnerable areas. 
 

51 
 
Mitigation of environment impact in construction of railway bridges/tunnels 
3. The Committee appreciate the Ministry's efforts to mitigate the 
environmental impact of constructing new railway tunnels and bridges. 
Notably, the preference for elevated alignments to preserve ecology and wildlife 
as well as the use of steel , a recyclable material , for large -span bridges, 
demonstrates a commitment to sustainability. The Committee commend the 
initiative of constructing Amrit Sarovar  by utilizing excavated earth from 
formation works. The Committee are of the view that this innovative approach 
not only ensures the p roductive use of surplus soil but also contributes 
significantly to water conservation and ecological balance within the project 
area. The Committee recognize that the concept of Amrit Sarovar aligns well 
with sustainable practices, such as reducing earth disposal issues, promoting 
rainwater harvesting, aiding groundwater recharge, supporting local 
biodiversity and creating community water sources. While the Committee 
applaud the concept as sound and potentially highly valuable, its success 
depends on the q uality of its execution, ecological planning and post -
construction maintenance.  Therefore, the Committee strongly emphasize that 
Amrit Sarovar  should not be treated as a mere checkbox activity or mere 
formality for compliance. Instead, it must involve thorough catchment 
planning, effective water retention measures, community participation and a 
long-term sustainable maintenance strategy. In light of its multiple 
environmental and community benefits, the Committee recommend th at 
Ministry actively incorporate the development of Amrit Sarovar into all major 
railway infrastructure projects, particularly in water-stressed and ecologically 
sensitive regions. 
 

52 
 
Tunnel Management System (TuMS) 
4. The Committee note that Tunnel Management System (TuMS) has been 
developed in year 2024 -25 which is a  positive step toward the digital 
management of tunnel infrastructure.  The Committee further note that the 
feeding of Indian Railways tunnel data into TuMS has been completed and data 
validation is currently underway, indicating proactive efforts in data 
management and quality assurance.  The Committee desire the Railways to 
ensure regular updation and integrate inspection, maintenance and safety audit 
records into TuMS to enable real-time monitoring, predictive maintenance and 
timely decision -making for tunnel infrastructure safety and reliability.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to expedite the completion of validation of 
data for all operational railway tunnels into the Tunnel Management System 
(TuMS) and ensure its full operationalization at the earliest. 
Escape/service tunnels 
5. The Committee note that as per current norms, escape tunnels with adits 
or lateral exits are provided for tunnels exceeding 3 km in length. The 
Committee also observe that certain existing tunnels, such as Tunnel No. 9 on 
the Lumding-Badarpur section (3.25 km), which carries both passenger and 
freight traffic, and Tunnel No. 57A on the Obulavaripalli -Krishnapatnam 
section (6.63 km), used for goods trains, do not have escape tunnels. The 
Committee further note that the planning for Tunnel No. 9 was undertaken 
prior to the introduction of the policy mandating such provisions. Given the 
critical importance of  passenger and staff safety in case of emerg encies, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry examine the feasibility of providing 
escape tunnels or suitable alternative evacuation arrangements for all existing 

53 
 
tunnels longer than 3 km. The Committee also urge that tunnels currently used 
exclusively for goods movement should be considered for escape tunnel 
provision, bearing in mind the potential future use for passenger traffic . 
Additionally, the Committee observe  that Railways is actively expanding its 
network in regions like the North East, Jammu & Kashmir  and other 
mountainous areas where tunnels and bridges constitute a major part of the 
infrastructure. In light of this, the Committee urge  the Ministry to con duct a 
comprehensive review of all operational and under -construction railway 
tunnels — including those shorter than 3 km — with priority given to  those 
located in vulnerable zones such as seism ic areas, flood -prone stretches and 
regions with challenging geology. Wherever feasible, the Ministry should 
consider the provision of escape routes, cross passages or alternative evacuation 
facilities to enhance safety measures and ensure preparedness for emergencies. 
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the findings of the team 
comprising representatives from the Railway Board, RDSO and NHAI which 
is examining the feasibility of utilising escape tunnels for road commuters to 
ensure optimum utilization of the infrastructure being developed. 
Construction of ROBs/RUBs  
6. The Committee have reviewed the status submitted by the Ministry 
regarding the construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under 
Bridges (RUBs) in major Indian cities for the replacement of existing level 
crossings. The Committee note that out of 305 level crossings in 46 cities with 
populations exceeding 10 lakh, works for 123 have been sanct ioned. The 
Committee appreciate  the continuous and dynamic approach adopted by 
Railways in sanctioning such works based on oper ational safety, mobility 
impact and feasibility. Howev er, the Committee are concerned over the slow 

54 
 
pace of implementation and completion of these sanctioned projects, which is 
impeded by delays in land acquisition, utility shifting, encroachment clearance, 
statutory approvals and coordination with State Governments. Recognizing the 
critical importance of eliminating level crossings in congested urban areas for 
both rail safety and city traffic mana gement, the Committee recommend  that 
the Ministry devise a city -specific action plan in collaboration with State 
Governments and urban local bodies to fast-track pending ROB/RUB projects 
in major cities. The Committee further observe that delays in the construction 
and completion of such projects cause public inconvenience, resource wastage 
and cost escalation. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure elimination of 
level crossing on National Highways  on pilot project mode basis with clearly 
established timelines in coordination with NHAI/MORTH. The Committee also 
urge the Ministry to set clear timelines, conduct periodic joint review meetings 
with all stakehold ers and explore public-private partnership (PPP) models to 
expedite the construction of these vital infrastructure projects,  thereby 
ensuring seamless movement of both rail and road traffic. 
Cost-sharing in construction of ROBs/RUBs 
7. The Committee note the Ministry’s submission regarding the challenges 
faced in obtaining consent and financial participation from State Governments 
and Road Owning Authorities for the construction of Road Over Bridges 
(ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) o n a cost -sharing basis. The 
Committee appreciate the proactive approach of Railways in examining such 
cases and, wherever feasible and necessary, deciding to fully fund these projects 
in the interest of improving operational safety and train mobility. T he 
Committee also note that 52 such cost -sharing projects have already been 
undertaken at 100% railway cost. However, considering the critical importance 

55 
 
of eliminating level crossings  to enhance public safety and streamlin e train 
operations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry  formulate a 
structured framework for prioritizing and independently funding such critical 
projects, wherever persistent delays arise due to non-cooperation or lack of 
response from State Governments. Additionally, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to strengthen coordination mechanism with State Governments to 
secure timely consent and support for approach alignments, land acquisit ion 
and utility shifting . The Committee also recommend  exploring alternative 
funding models including central assistance schemes for projects of high public 
utility and importance. 
Level crossings to prevent trespassing 
8. The Committee note the Ministry’s policy framework for addressing the 
provision of Road Under Bridges (RUBs), Foot Over Bridges (FOBs) and 
pedestrian subways at locations where no level crossings (LCs) exist, but where 
public movement continues, either through existing roads leading up to the 
railway boundaries without LC or at sites where LC have been discontinued. 
The Committee observe  that many such locations  exist, particularly , where 
proper roads extend up to railway boundaries , yet serve as  informal access 
points for trespassing . This situation results in recurring safety hazards, 
unauthorized crossings  and potential disruption to train oper ations. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry conduct a comprehensive joint survey 
of these locations across the railway network to assess safety risks, public 
demand and traffic density. This exercise should be carried out in coordination 
with State Governments, NHAI, and local civic bodies. Based on the  survey 
findings, a time-bound action plan should be prepared for th e provision of 
RUBs, limited or restricted height subways (LHSs), FOBs  or pedestrian 

56 
 
subways, wherever technically feasible and operationally essential  on priority 
basis. Further t he Committee desire that such infrastructure works be 
integrated with nearby road development or urban infrastructure projects to 
optimize r esources utilization, improve public access to  enhance operational 
and public safety. 
Traffic congestion at Level Crossings 
9. The Committee note the various measures undertaken by Railways to 
ease traffic congestion and enhance safety at level crossings, including the 
progressive elimination of level crossings through the construction of Road 
Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs), regular infrastructure 
upgradation such as maintenance of road surfaces, speed breakers, signage and 
widening where needed. The Committee appreciate the public awareness 
programs educating the dangers of unauthorized track crossings and 
promoting use of designated pathways. However, the Committee observe that 
despite complete elimination on unmanned level crossing and significant sale 
up during 2014-2024 for complete elimination of the man level crossing, traffic 
congestion near several busy level crossings continues to be a persistent issue, 
particularly in urban and semi-urban areas. Therefore, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to intensify efforts to expedite sanctioning and execution of ROB/RUB 
projects and prioritize level crossings at high -traffic zones. Additionally, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to collaborate more closely with State 
Governments, municipal bodies and road authorities to integrate railway 
crossing elimination works with local traffic decongestion and urban transport 
plans. Public awareness campaigns should be further expanded using modern 
communication strategies and community outreach to improve compliance and 
reduce trespassing and congestion near level crossings. 

57 
 
Water-logging in RUBs 
10. The Committee note the various measures taken by Railways to address  
recurring water -logging problems in Road Under Bridges (RUBs) and 
subways, including integrating adequate drainage systems in new RUBs designs 
diversion of water to nearby natural drains, provision of humps and cross 
drains, sealing of joints  and installation of high -capacity pumps at vulnerable 
sites. The Committee also appreciate the provision of cover sheds at many 
locations and the systematic inspection of RUBs before and after the monsoon 
to identify and re solve issues. However, despite these efforts the Committee 
observe that water-logging during heavy rainfall remains a significant problem 
in several regions, causing traffic disruptions, safety hazards, and public 
inconvenience. The Committee recommend  that the Ministry prepare a 
comprehensive inventory of all water -logging prone RUBs and subways and 
prioritize remedial works in a time-bound initiative. Further, the Committee 
urge Railways to actively coordinate with municipal bodies and local 
authorities to ensure seamless integration of railway drainage with civic 
drainage systems. The Committee also desire the Ministry to e stablish a clear 
protocol for temporarily halting road traffic during exceptional ly heavy 
rainfall to safeguard commuters. 
Capacity Building in Bridge and Tunnel Engineering  
11. The Committee note  the initiatives by Gati Shakti Vishwavidyalaya 
(GSV) bridge and tunnel engineering, including the ongoing B.Tech program 
in Civil Engineering and the successful two -week specialized training on 
“Design, Fabrication, Launching, and Maintenance of Steel Girder Bridges,” 
benefitting officers from Indian Railways, PSUs, and other organizations. The 

58 
 
Committee appreciate the proposal to start an M.Tech program in Bridge and 
Tunnel Engineering from the acad emic year 2025 -26 and recommend  the 
Ministry to ensure timely commencement of this program. The Committee also 
suggest introducing short-term certificate and diploma courses focused on 
modern technologies in bridge and tunnel construction and inspection. The 
Committee emphasize i ntegration of Artificial Intelligence and technology in 
designing and monitoring techniques to build a specialized and skilled technical 
workforce equipped to manage the growing demands and challenges in railway 
bridge and tunnel infrastructure. Further, t he Ministry should explore 
collaborations with specialized global institutes/organizations to develop 
curricula and programmes  on cutting edge infrastructure technologies. The 
Committee emphasize that these initiatives will empower indigenous talent and 
reduce reliance on foreign consultants and contribute to more cost effective  
infrastructure development.  
Institutional mechanism for the active involvement of People’s Representatives 
during the planning and execution of  ROB/RUB Infrastructure Projects 
 
12. The Committee observe that the construction of Road Over Bridges 
(ROBs) and Road Under Bridges (RUBs) faces significant challenges such as 
land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement issues, poor coordination 
among stakeholders, delays in approval of General Arrangement Drawings 
(GADs), shifting of utilities, removal of encroachments and obtaining necessary 
statutory clearances. Moreover, cost-sharing complications particularly in the 
case of older sanctioned works which often result in stalled projects due to the 
absence of timely response from State Governments regarding their share also 
lead to delays.  The Committee note that as per existing norms, the portion of a 

59 
 
ROB/RUB falling within railway land is to be maintained by the Railways, 
whereas the portion beyond railway limits, including the approach roads and 
lighting, falls under the maintenance responsibility of  the concerned State 
Government/road-owning agency or local authority. The Committee express 
concern over the recurring issue of faulty designs, water-logging, public 
inconvenience and traffic stalling in RUBs and stress the need for long lasting 
solutions. While appreciating the efforts of the Railways in adopting innovative 
designs to tackle water-logging and enhance user convenience, the Committee 
feel that more practical and sustainable solutions are required. In light of these 
challenges, the Committee desire the Ministry to establish a structured and 
institutional mechanism with proper implementation framework for the active 
involvement of people’s representatives during the planning and execution 
stages of ROB and RUB projects in a constituency.The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that their engagement will play a crucial role in addressing 
local concerns, ensuring early consensus for land acquisition and resettlement, 
facilitating smoother coordination with State and local authorities for utility 
shifting and clearances thereby help in timely completion and better 
maintenance of RUBs. The Committee are of the view that such participatory 
planning will lead to more efficient, transparent and community -responsive 
railway infrastructure development. 
 
 
  
       New Delhi; DR. C.M. RAMESH 
      07 August, 2025                                                               Chairperson 
      16 Shravan, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 

60 
 
ANNEXURE-I  

61 
 


62 
 


63 
 


64 
 


65 
 


66 
 


67 
 
 


68 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
Status of ongoing ROB/RUBs as on 01.04.2025 (State-wise) 
SN State Ongoing ROB/RUBs Total 
No. of 
ROBs 
No. of 
RUBs 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 174 117 291 
2.  Assam 19 42 61 
3.  Bihar 112 106 218 
4.  Chandigarh - - - 
5.  Chattisgarh 38 74 112 
6.  Delhi 9 7 16 
7.  Goa 3 1 4 
8.  Gujarat 153 182 335 
9.  Haryana 53 82 135 
10.  Himachal Pradesh - - - 
11.  Jammu & Kashmir 2 0 2 
12.  Jharkhand 48 104 152 
13.  Karnataka 90 33 123 
14.  Kerala 130 10 140 
15.  Madhya Pradesh 158 132 290 
16.  Maharashtra 155 130 285 
17.  Manipur - - - 
18.  Mizoram - - - 
19.  Nagaland/ 
Meghalaya/ 
Arunachal 
- - - 
20.  Odisha 161 96 257 
21.  Puducherry 2 0 2 
22.  Punjab 28 60 88 
23.  Rajasthan 94 447 541 
24.  Tamilnadu 113 122 235 
25.  Telangana 64 55 119 
26.  Tripura - - - 
27.  Uttar Pradesh 228 508 736 
28.  Uttarakhand 3 6 9 
29.  West Bengal 128 123 251 
Total 1965 2437 4402 
***** 

69 
 
Status of existing works of ROB/RUBs as on 01.04.2025 (State-wise) 
SN State Existing ROB/RUBs Total 
No. of ROBs No. of RUBs 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 220 1025 1245 
2.  Assam 84 329 413 
3.  Bihar 197 452 649 
4.  Chandigarh 1 2 3 
5.  Chattisgarh 76 221 297 
6.  Delhi 62 64 126 
7.  Goa 9 12 21 
8.  Gujarat 296 1026 1322 
9.  Haryana 153 569 722 
10.  Himachal Pradesh 20 20 40 
11.  Jammu & Kashmir 34 146 180 
12.  Jharkhand 246 425 671 
13.  Karnataka 249 842 1091 
14.  Kerala 216 147 363 
15.  Madhya Pradesh 240 1195 1435 
16.  Maharashtra 492 1157 1649 
17.  Manipur 3 2 5 
18.  Mizoram 0 0 0 
19.  Nagaland/ 
Meghalaya/ 
Arunachal 3 29 32 
20.  Odisha 162 725 887 
21.  Puducherry 2 20 22 
22.  Punjab 152 423 575 
23.  Rajasthan 237 1918 2155 
24.  Tamilnadu 493 822 1315 
25.  Telangana 173 720 893 
26.  Tripura 85 101 186 
27.  Uttar Pradesh 562 1535 2097 
28.  Uttarakhand 12 60 72 
29.  West Bengal 179 758 937 
Total 4658 14745 19403 
***** 
  

70 
 
Status of ongoing ROB/RUBs as on 01.04.2025 (Railway-wise) 
SN Zones No. of ROBs No. of RUBs Total 
1 CR 104 87 191 
2 ER 99 78 177 
3 ECR 131 135 266 
4 ECOR 206 108 314 
5 NR 150 277 427 
6 NCR 121 258 379 
7 NER 45 185 230 
8 NFR 30 79 109 
9 NWR 54 436 490 
10 SR 248 135 383 
11 SCR 180 161 341 
12 SER 83 107 190 
13 SEC 96 81 177 
14 SWR 80 29 109 
15 WR 192 219 411 
16 WCR 146 62 208 
Total 1965 2437 4402 
***** 
  

71 
 
Status of existing works of ROB/RUBs as on 01.04.2025 (Railway-wise) 
SN Zones No. of ROBs No. of RUBs Total 
1 CR 377 827 1204 
2 ER 199 498 697 
3 ECR 257 412 669 
4 ECOR 171 825 996 
5 NR 597 1618 2215 
6 NCR 244 880 1124 
7 NER 134 573 707 
8 NFR 228 764 992 
9 NWR 248 1729 1977 
10 SR 714 1003 1717 
11 SCR 387 1787 2174 
12 SER 136 450 586 
13 SEC 163 526 689 
14 SWR 253 886 1139 
15 WR 408 1169 1577 
16 WCR 142 798 940 
Total 4658 14745 19403 
***** 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 28th November, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Chhotelal 
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
5. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6. Shri Balabhadra Majhi 
7. Shri Khagen Murmu 
8. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
9. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
10. Shri Sudama Prasad 
11. Shri M.K. Raghavan 
12. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Narhari Amin 
14. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
15. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
16. Dr. K. Laxman 
17. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
18. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
19. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 

73 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  -  Additional Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   -  Director  
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY 
BOARD) 
 
1. Shri Satish Kumar  Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, 
Railway Board & Ex. -officio Principal 
Secretary to the Government of India 
2. Shri Naveen Gulati Member(Infrastructure), Railway Board  
& Ex. -officio Secretary to the Government 
of India 
3. Ravindra Kumar Goel PED/Bridge, Railway Board 
 
2.    At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting. The 
Chairperson then informed that the meeting has been convened to have a briefing 
from the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the Subject ‘Construction and 
maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road Over Bridges/Road Under 
Bridges’.  The Chairperson also drew the officials' attention to the provisions 
of  Direction 55 of the Directi ons by the Speaker, Lok Sabha emphasizing that the 
proceedings must be treated as confidential.  
 

74 
 
3.    The representatives  then briefed the Committee on the bridge management 
system and technologies being used in inspection of railway bridges and 
tunnels.  The Committee was further informed that all unmanned Level Crossings 
had been eliminated on Broad Gauge, and all the Level Crossings on the National 
Highways Corridor would  be eliminated through  the construction of Road Over 
Bridges (ROBs) by the National Highway Authority of India.   The Committee was 
further apprised that a team comprising NHAI, RDS O, and the Railway Board had 
been formed to study the design aspects of escape tunnel in the Rishikesh – 
Karnaprayag new rail project. 
  
4.    The Committee then sought clarifications on several issues, including the delay 
in the completion of the Reasi –Bakkal tunnel project, the timely completion of 
railway bridges, ROBs, RUBs, drainage system in RUBs, and traffic -related 
concerns. The Committee also inquired about media reports raising safety concerns 
regarding the new railway sea bridge at Pamban. The representatives replied to some 
of the queries. The Chairperson thanked the officials of the Ministry for providing 
valuable information and directed the Ministry to submit replies to the queries for 
which the information was not readily available. 
 5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
  

75 
 
APPENDIX – II 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
 
The Committee met on Wednesday, the 25 th June, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 
1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri T.R. Baalu 
5. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
6. Shri Chhotelal 
7. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
8. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
11. Shri M. K. Raghavan 
12. Dr. Swami Sachidanand Hari Sakshi 
13. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
14. Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
15. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
16. Shri Narhari Amin 
17. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 

76 
 
18. Dr. K. Laxman 
19. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
20. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam   -  Director  
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary    
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY 
BOARD)  
1. Shri Satish Kumar  Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, 
Railway Board & Ex. -officio Principal 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
2. Shri Naveen Gulati Member (Infrastructure) Railway Board &  
Ex.-officio Secretary to the Government of 
India 
3. Shri Anand Bhatia Additional Member, Civil Engineering, 
Railway Board 
4. Shri Ravindra Kumar Goel PED/Bridge, Railway Board 
 
2.       At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Railways (Railway Board) to the sitting of the Committee.  The Chairperson then 
informed that the meeting has been convened for oral evidence by the 
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subject 
“Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road Over 
Bridges/Road Under Bridges”. He also drew the officials' attention to the provisions 
of Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha empha sizing that the 
proceedings must be treated as confidential. 
3.    Based on the responses received to the list of points sent to the Ministry, the 
representative of the Ministry of Railways subsequently gave a detailed visual 
presentation before the Committee on the design and construction of railway 

77 
 
tunnels and bridges, with particular emphasis on their safety specifications. The 
Committee were apprised of the system of regular inspections of bridges and 
tunnels and progress achieved in the removal of speed restrictions of bridges. The 
Committee were informed about the ongoing works for elimination of level 
crossings through construction of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) and Road Under 
Bridges (RUBs), challenges faced in their execution, steps taken for early resolution 
and recent policy initiatives aimed at  streamlining approval processes for timely 
project delivery.   The Committee were also apprised about the technological 
innovations used in construction of RUBs and to mitigate the issue of water logging. 
4.       The Committee then sought clarifications on several important matters, 
including the timely construction and maintenance of Road Over Bridges (ROBs) 
and Road Under Bridges (RUBs), coordination with concerned agencies and 
ensuring environmental sustainabil ity in railway infrastructure projects, 
technological innovations being adopted in the construction of rail tunnels. Further, 
the Committee stressed the importance of establishing a structured mechanism for 
the active involvement of people’s representatives in the planning and execution of 
ROBs/RUBs; addressing persistent challenges such as land acquisition, utility 
shifting in railway infrastructure projects particularly related to ROBs/RUBs; 
strengthening coordination with local authorities for re solving issues like water 
logging in RUBs and improving associated drainage systems. 
5.       The representatives replied to some of the queries. The Chairperson thanked 
the officials of the Ministry for providing valuable information and directed the 
Ministry to submit replies to the queries for which the information was not readily 
available. 
6.       A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been 
kept. 
  The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
 
  

78 
 
APPENDIX – III 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS (2024-25) 
 
The Committee met on Thursday, the 7 th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Damodar Agrawal 
3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
4. Shri Ummeda Ram Beniwal 
5. Shri Chhotelal 
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
7. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
8. Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
9. Shri Khagen Murmu 
10. Shri Awadhesh Prasad 
11. Shri Sudama Prasad 
12. Shri M K Raghavan 
13. Smt. Satabdi Roy 
14. Dr. Bhola Singh 
15. Shri Bharatbhai Manubhai Sutariya 
16. Shri Vijayakumar Alias Vijay Vasanth 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
17. Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
18. Shri Narhari Amin 
19. Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
20. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
21. Dr. K. Laxman 
22. Smt. Sadhna Singh 
23. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
 
 

79 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Md. Aftab Alam  -  Director 
3. Smt. Savdha Kalia  -  Deputy Secretary 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports :- 
(i) Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and Bridges including Road Over 
Bridges/Road Under Bridges. 
(ii) *****  *****  *****  *****  
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any modifications.  
3.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned.  
-------- 
* Not related to the Report 
 
 