intrgg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 7
th Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) of 
the Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
                                       
 
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
NOVEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
9 

SCR NO. 236 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 7
th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.11.2021 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.11.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
NOVEMBER, 2021/AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………………………
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government………………………………………… 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
26 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
27 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………………………… 
 
 
32 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 I.    Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on   
26.11.2021 
33 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.  Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.  Smt. Ranjanben Bhatt 
4.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury 
5.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar 
6.  Smt. Diya Kumari 
7.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
8.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
9.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
10.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
13.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
14.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
15.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
16.  Dr. Amar Singh 
17.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
20.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
21.  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle 
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
27.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
28.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
29.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
30.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha
# 
31.  Vacant 
 
* The Committee constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2021 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3192 
dated 09.10.2021. 
# Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha nominated w.e.f. 14.10.2021 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II 
No. 61163 dated 18.10.2021.
 
 

 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K.Kaushik   - Director 
3. Shri R.L. Yadav   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Committee Officer 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Ra ilways (2021-22), having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, this Ninth Report on Action Taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Railways’. 
 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
08.03.2021.  The Report contained 19 Observat ions/Recommendations. The Ministry of 
Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 23.07.2021. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Dr aft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 26.11.2021.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Standi ng Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                        RADHA MOHAN SINGH
26 November, 2021            
                                                                           Chairperson,
5 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)                                         Standing Committee on Railways
  

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in their Seventh Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on "Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Railways".  
 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.03.2021. It 
contained 19 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of the Government in respect of all these 
Observations/Recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
 
Para Nos. 1,2,3,6,7,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17and 19      
                                                  Total :  15 
              Percentage: 78.94% 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Commi ttee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies:- 
 
NIL                      
                                    Total :00 
              P e r c e n t a g e :  0 0  
            
(iii) Recommendations/observations  in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
 
Para Nos. 4,5,8 and 18 
                              Total :04 
              Percentage: 21.06% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies are still awaited:-  
 
NIL                      
                                    Total :00 
              P e r c e n t a g e :  0 0  
 

 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to the implementation of the 
Recommendations accepted by the Government.  The  Committee desire that Action Taken notes in 
respect of observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the actio n taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations/observations. 
 
A. INTERNAL REVENUE GENERATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4) 
5. The Committee found that Internal Revenue Generation in Railways is only 3.4 percent of the 
Annual Plan 2021-22, which is not a positive indicator . The trend from previous years showed that the 
Ministry in recent years have not been able to generate enough internal resources. As for 2017- 18, actual 
internal revenue generation was Rs.3070 crore which was only 3.01 percent of the total CapEx. Further, for 
the year 2018-19, Internal resources rose margina lly and stood at Rs.4663 crore or 3.5 percent of the 
outlay. The Committee were concerned to note that in the subsequent years, the Railways were not able to 
sustain even these low figures and the share of internal resources slumped to an abysmal 1.14 percent in 
2019-20. During 2020-21, the provisioning under internal resources was still a meagre 2.3 percent only. The 
main reasons attributed for this decline in internal resources has been attributed by the Ministry to the 
burden of the 7thCentral Pay Commission and exacerbated by the additional burden imposed on account of 
payment of allowances which led to a sharp increase in staff cost since 2017-18, inflexibility of a major part 
of revenue expenditure, periodic slowing down of the core sector of the economy affecting IR’s freight traffic 
and stiff competition of the ever expanding road sector to  Railways’ passenger & goods traffic. Additionally, 
the Committee were given to understand that funds gener ated by internal resources cater to four critical 
requirements, i.e., appropriations to Depreciation  Reserve Fund, Development Fund, Rashtriya Rail 
SanrakshaKosh (RRSK) and the Railway Safety Fund (RSF ). Under-provisioning for any of these funds will 
adversely impact system productivity, replacement/ renewal of assets and upgradation/developmental 
works, which the Railways can ill-a fford. The Committee had emphasised th at any shortfall in generation of 
revenue from Internal Resources increasingly compel Railway to rely on Extra Budgetary Support in the 
form of borrowings which eventually bear extra interest liability. The Committee, therefore, urged the 
Ministry to explore and re view all possible areas where resources can be mobilized with a view to increase 
their internal resources and refrain themselves from depending on Budget/EBR to the extent possible. The 
Committee had stressed that the Ministry should endeavour  to remove inherent deficiencies in the overall 
delivery mechanism, prioritise completion and commiss ioning of remunerative projects, besides exploring 
other commercial viable avenues that would not put  the Railways under financial duress in order to 

 
 
3 
 
supplement internal resources. The Committee expected a hike in internal resources generation through the 
steps initiated by Railways and desired the railways should implement these measures with full vigour and 
keep the Committee informed of the same. 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under: 
“The share of internal resources in total capex, both in absolute and percentage terms, had improved 
in 2018-19 vis-a-vis 2017-18. While the Railways were expecting further improvement in 2019-20 and 
2020- 21, Railways’ internal resource generation was adversely impacted by the spread of Covid 19 
pandemic. Expecting containment of the pandemic and normalization of train services in 2021-22, 
Railways have estimated to provide Rs.7,500cr from internal resources for capex. Railways have 
taken a lot of measures towards increasing revenues and expenditure control which are likely to bring 
results in the coming year 2021-22 and beyond. As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, 
Railways would continue to pursue them and take other necessary measures for maximizing internal 
resource generation. 
However, given the volume of investment required in the Railways and given the constraints of 
Railways, Railways’ internal resources can at best supplement GBS and market borrowing for capex. 
Efforts are also being made to attract private sector investments in Railways.” 
7. The Committee are aware that Covid-19 pandem ic has severely impacted the internal revenue 
generation of the Railways. However, the Ministry had informed that funds generated by internal 
resources cater to four critical fundings i.e. appropriations to DRF, Development Fund, RRSK and 
the Railway Safety Fund. Short of any of these funds would certainly impact upon system 
productivity, replacement/renewal of assets and up gradation/developmental works. The Committee 
find that the Ministry has taken a lot of measures towards increasing the internal revenues and 
exercising expenditure control am ong other things and outcomes of which would be visible in the 
coming years. The Committee are happy to note that the Railways are making serious efforts for 
augmentation of internal resources which have sh own drastic fall over the past several years and 
have been a little indicative of inherent defici encies on the part of the Railways. The Committee 
desire that this should be addressed pragmatically. They are of the firm belief that the efforts taken 
in right earnest towards increasing the internal  revenues would go a long way in addressing their 
problems of funding and shaping their performance.  The Committee while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation urge the Ministry to take all out efforts to augment their internal revenues so as to 
get refrained from the dependency of EBR as far as possible.  

 
 
4 
 
B. EXTRA BUDGETARY RESOURCES (EBR) 
(Recommendation Para No.5) 
 
8. The Committee had noted that railway projects ar e highly capital intensive which require huge 
investments from GBS for execution. Since internal revenue generation have shown a declining trend over 
the years and the Budgetary Support is also limited, the Railways have no option but to resort to EBR to 
fund their projects. The Committee also noted that during the past years the EBR financing has shown 
upward trend which indicates the dependence of Railways on EBR in GBS. In the opinion of the Committee, 
Railways have to pay a huge amount on account of interest and other liabilities of EBR. The Committee 
noted that the EBR at BE of 2021-22 has been kept  at Rs.100258 crore as against RE of Rs.128567 crore 
during 2020-21. The Committee were not satisfied with the funding pattern of the railways wherein 
approximately half of the CapEx is dependent on EBR funding which is detrimental to the overall financial 
health of the Railways. The Committee had, therefore,  desired the Ministry to take intensive measures to 
step up the generation of internal revenue with a view to avoid dependence on EBR to the extent possible. 
 
9.  In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:  
 
“Despite increase in GBS over the years, progr essively higher market borrowings has been resorted 
to in order to address the problem of underinvestment which resulted in severe capacity constraints 
leading to shrinking of Railways’ share in freight market. Hence, the market borrowings are 
consciously being invested primarily for remunerative capacity augmentation projects of Doubling & 
Electrification and procurement of Rolling Stock. In the medium and long run, such investments are 
expected to create huge capacity which would be beneficial for Railways as also the economy at 
large. 
Thus, while Railways would continue their efforts for internal resource generation for supplementing 
capex, given the volume of investment required in the Railways and given the constraints of 
Railways, market borrowing cannot be avoided altogether as a major source for capex. These 
borrowings in the form of leasing of assets are only for remunerative projects in general.” 
10. The Committee concur with the Ministry that higher market borrowings had been resorted to 
in order to address the problem of under-investme nt which had led to capacity constraints in the 
Railways. The Committee are of the opinion that the Railways need to assure fiscal discipline and 
thoroughly assess the bankability of all such proj ects where funding has been planned through 
EBR. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railways s hould utilize this high-cost and risk-
infested market borrowings cautiously and pref erably in those sectors only that can offer assured 
returns. 

 
 
5 
 
C. RASHTRIYA RAIL SANRAKSHA KOSH (RRSK) 
Recommendation Para No. 8 
 
11. The Committee had found that the Rashtriya Rail SanrakshaKosh (RRSK), a dedicated fund for 
safety was created in 2017-18 with a corpus of Rs.1  Lakh crore over a period of 5 years for clearing the 
backlog of critical safety related works. It was ex pected to fund track renewals/safety, strengthening of 
bridges, elimination of unmanned level crossings, upgra dation of maintenance facilities, signalling 
improvement and complete switchover to LHB/coaches/retro fitment of CBC couplers in ICF coaches. The 
Committee also found that as per its mandate RRSK is financed annually through – (i) additional Budgetary 
Support (Rs.5,000 crore), (ii) contribution from Railwa ys’ share from Central Road & Infrastructure Fund 
(Rs.10,000 crore) and (iii) Railways’ contribution from internal resources (Rs.5,000 crore). However, it has 
been seen that since the inception of the fund in 2017- 18 the actual utilization has invariably fallen short of 
the intended utilization figures. To illustrate, while the RE during 2017- 18 was kept at Rs 20,000 crore, 
actuals were to the tune of Rs.16,091 crore or a reduction of almost 20 percent. Similarly during 2018-19, 
the actuals were about 90 percent of the allocatio ns. During 2019-20 the actuals were Rs.15023.88 crore 
against the revised allocation of Rs.17500 crore. Th e Committee found that during 2020-21 due to resource 
constraints only Rs.2000 crore was proposed from the internal resource segment. The Committee were 
constrained to note that year after year, there has been a noticeable gap in the funding of RRSK from the 
internal resources utilization. The Committee felt that since RRSK was created with a vision to have a single 
head to cater to safety related nee ds, such a shortfall reflect s poorly on the ability of Indian Railways to 
generate surpluses. The Committee also felt that the railways need to address this inherent deficiency in the 
overall delivery mechanism and ensure that the objectives of creation of the fund is not diluted. They, 
therefore, recommended that funding to and expenditure from RRSK for safety purposes should be ensured 
at highest level in order to accord top priority to safety. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under:  
 
“Total expenditure of Rs .49130 cr has been incurred out of RR SK till 2019-20. During 2017-18, 
utilization of funds was 80% of the total allocation, which rose to al most 90% in 2018-19.  In 2019-20 
utilization was up to 84%. Sharp increase in sta ff cost and pension expendi ture in 2016-17 resulting 
from implementation of 7th Central Pay Commission recommendations also continued during 2017-
18. 2018-19 and 2019-20.  Further, the spread of Covid19 pandemic and consequential impact on rail 
operations impacted railway revenues adversely. The adverse resource position did not permit 
desired level of funds to be transferred to RRSK.  However, all out efforts are being made to minimize 
variable revenue expenses and to generate adequate in ternal resources for contribution towards 
RRSK. In RE 2020-21, in addition to appropriation of Rs.2000 cr to RRSK in view of resource 
constraints, adequate provision has also been made under ‘EBR(Special)’ with Rs.51000 cr, as a 
one-time arrangement. In BE 2021-22, provision of Rs.20000 cr has been made for RRSK, including 

 
 
6 
 
Rs.5000 cr from Railways’ internal resources.  Railways are trying to increase Revenue earnings 
through increase in loading, number of passengers. Additionally, certain other measures including 
increase in non-fare revenue are also being taken in this regard. The Zonal Railways have been 
advised to priortise works and incur expenditure as per priority and availability of resources, so that 
sufficient funds to important safety works are ensured. With the easing out of country-wide Covid19 
related restrictions and the economy showing signs of picking up pace, hopefully the Railways will be 
able to contribute the full amount of Rs.5000 cr towards RRSK.” 
 
13.  The Committee note that the Rashtriya Ra il SanrakshaKosh (RRSK), a dedicated fund for 
safety was created in 2017-18 with a corpus of Rs.1 Lakh crore over a period of 5 years for clearing 
the backlog of critical safety related works.  Furt her, they had expressed certain concerns over its 
implementation which needed to be addressed. These included non-achievement of the intended 
utilization figures where actual utilization has invariably fallen short of the intended utilization since 
the inception of the RRSK and the contraction in th e contribution of the Railways from their internal 
revenue segment towards the RRSK. The Committee are of the opinion that since RRSK was 
devised with a view to clear critical safety works backlog and is nearing its full term, the Ministry 
needs to proactively ensure full utilization of th e funds so that the objectives of the creation of the 
fund are successfully accomplished. 
D. WATER LOGGING IN RUBs 
Recommendation Para No. 18 
 
14. The Committee had observed that during their meetings with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways, the issue of water logging in RUBs is raised by the Members from almost all the parts of the 
country. This menace has caused serious problems for users passing through these RUBs. The matter was 
discussed by the Committee in their earlier reports al so. The Committee had noted that in spite of frequent 
assurances from the representatives of Railway Board, a little has been done in this direction. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to take urgent action in the matter and inform the 
Committee about the action taken in this regard. 
 
15. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have submitted as under:  
 
“Railway Board in April 2012 communicated to all Zonal Railways that level crossings which do not 
qualify for sanction of RUB on cost sharing basis in terms of Para 925 of Indian Railway Permanent 
Way Manual (IRPWM), can be planned for elimination by subways, if found technically feasible. 
Railways were to bear the complete initial cost of construction of subway and future maintenance cost 
of subway proper. Any land required over and above the road passing through the level crossing for 

 
 
7 
 
purpose of construction of subway outside the Ra ilway area alongwith the maintenance of road 
passing through subway, lighting, drainage system, diversion road and any other allied works, will rest 
on the State Government. 
 
The above instructions were revised after thor ough scrutiny and suggestions of various Zonal 
Railways in July’2018. It was decided that the responsibility for the maintenance of road passing 
through the subway, lighting, drainage system, diver sion road and any other allied works in Railway 
portion will be with Railways and beyond Railway po rtion the responsibility of maintenance will rest 
with State Govt. 
 
Railway Board on 22.4.2020, issued comprehensive guidelines to all Zonal Railway for taking specific 
measures to avoid water logging problem in RUBs. Drainage plan has been made integral part of 
RUB for all future construction. 
 
Further, based on detailed survey of RUB/Subways, 13 68 locations were identified by zonal railways 
prone to water logging out of total 9964 RUB/Subways already constructed. Railways have taken up 
the work of permanent remedial measures on these RUB/Subways and with consistent efforts, 920 
RUBs/Subways have been provided with necessary infrastructure to prevent water logging and 
maintain its functionality in future. Works in balance RUB/Subways are also planned for completion by 
31.03.2021. The objective of all this exercise is to keep RUBs/Subways functional throughout the 
year.” 
 
16.  The Committee take note of the steps initiated by the Railways with a view to alleviate the 
problem of water-logging of RUBs during the M onsoons/rainy seasons. The Committee are of the 
considered view that the actions initiated are in th e right direction and should be continued with in 
right earnest so that the hardships faced by  the common man can be reduced and eventually 
permanently removed. They are, however, not convin ced with the contention of the Ministry that 
only 1368 of the 9964 RUBs/subways constructed ar e prone to water logging. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to consult the local authoritie s while undertaking surveys so that the factual 
ground situation can be accurately assessed and remedial actions can  be initiated appropriately. 
The Committee would like to be kept apprised of all actions initiated in this regard. 
  

 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
The Indian Railways is one of the world’s largest rail networks with 67,956 Route KMs of track and 
more than 21648 number of passenger and freight trains carrying approxi mately 22.15 million passengers 
and hauling 3.32 million tonnes of frei ght per day. Indian Railways has alwa ys played a major role in India’s 
socio-economic development besides an engine of growth in diversed economic activities. Railways provide 
an economic mode of transportation to all strata of the society especially to the poorer, managing a large 
volume of manpower and endeavours to fulfill the expectations of their customers. In a vast and large 
populated country like India, the growth of Railwa ys has a larger connotation beyond measuring or 
accessing it merely in numeric and economic terms. After the merger of Railway Budget with the General 
Budget which was aimed to facilitate Multi-model transport planning among Highways, Railways and Inland 
Waterways, the Railways have undergone a paradigm sh ift in terms of their budgetary process and 
discontinued the decades long Victorian legacy of presenting a separate budget for Railways. The 
expenditure of the Railways is now a part of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Finance akin to other 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The Committee undertook a detailed scrutiny of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Railways, 20 21-22 which were tabled in the House on 3 February, 
2021. Based on the deliberations with the representati ves of Railway Board before the Committee and the 
written replies submitted by the Ministry of Railways, they have reached at certain conclusions which have 
been discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
Reply of the Government 
Noted.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
The Committee note that the Budget for 2021-22 has been presented under very difficult situations. 
The COVID-19 pandemic worldwide disrupted normal lif e in general and the transportation sector in 
particular. For the first time in the history of 167 ye ars, the Indian Railways saw the suspension of its entire 
passenger segment on 21.03.2020. The revenue targets fo r 2020- 21 of the Indian Railways were severely 
hit which caused the gross traffic receipts, passenger earnings, freight earnings and internal resource 
generation showing a downward trend. 

 
 
9 
 
The Committee's find that the Annual Plan outlay for the year 2021-22 is to the tune of Rs.2,15,058 
crore which would be broadly financed through Gross Bu dgetary Support of Rs.1,07,300 crore, internal 
resources of Rs.7500 crore and market borrowing under Extra Budgetary Support of Rs.1,00,258 crore 
consisting of EBR (IRFC-Bond) of Rs.31000 crore an d EBR-Public Private Partnership (PPP) of Rs.35000 
crore and EBR (Institutional Finance) of Rs.34258 crore. The Annual Plan 2021-22 is financed through GBS 
(50 percent), IR (3 percent) and through EBR (47 percent). The last few years have witnessed a growing 
emphasis on the proliferation of the rail network in India which has been matched by higher outlays during 
each succeeding year culminating in the highest e ver outlay during 2021-22. The Committee laud this 
positive step and urge the ministry to fully exploit t he benefits of this enhanced allocation and fast-track the 
pace of capacity augmentation. They hope that augmentation in Capital Outlay would be justified and 
utilized in those areas/projects which would yield optimum output in terms of finances and at the same time 
fulfilling their social service obligations. They, ther efore, recommend the Ministry to ensure that the 
availability of funds be matched by strict financial discipline and close monitoring on their part to ensure 
optimum utilisation of resources, coupled with accomplishment of the physical targets in the stipulated 
timeframe without cost escalations or delays.  
Reply of the Government 
Capital Outlay for 2021-22 has been fixed at an all time high of Rs.2,15,058 crore. The thrust of the 
Budget is on infrastructure dev elopment, throughput enhanc ement, development of te rminal facilities, 
augmentation of speed of trains, signalling systems, improvement of passengers/ users’ amenities, safety 
works of road over/under bridges etc. Focused allocation has been made for New Lines, Gauge 
Conversion, Doubling, Electrification Projects, Roll ing Stock, Road Over/Under Bridges, Track Renewal, 
Passenger Amenities, Investment in PSU/JV/SPVs and Metropolitan Transport Projects. This will propel the 
Railways into fast track development of infrastructure and capacity enhance for laying foundation of future 
ready Railways. However, observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for making all out efforts 
in achieving targets optimally and utilising allocated funds to the full. 
REMARKS: 
In the overall interest of the nation and to ensure that projects are completed in time without cost 
overrun, lot of monitoring is done in Railways at various levels (field level, divisional level, zonal level and 
Board level) and regular meetings are held with the officials of State Government and concerned authorities 
to resolve the pending issues that are obstructing the progress of projects. 
With the view to prioritise proj ects and ensure optimum resource utilization, Indian Railways has 
undertaken large number of initiatives in the last few years, such as: 
• Taken up capacity enhancement works like doubling /multitracking and prioritised the same into 
super critical and critical works for focused execution. 

 
 
10 
 
• Eliminated all Unmanned Level Crossings. 
• Totally switched to the production of modern and safer Linke Hoffman Busch (LHB) coaches. 
• Taken up the target for 100% electrification. 
• Up gradation of speed to 160 kmph on Delhi-Howrah and Delhi-Mumbai routes taken up. 
• Up gradation of speed to 130kmph on all othe r Golden Quadrilateral- Golden Diagonal (GQ/GD) 
routes taken up. 
• Elimination of all Level Crossings on all GQ/GD route taken up. 
• Proliferation of indigenously developed Train Protecti on System to minimise accidents due to human 
error. 
• Commissioning of Eastern and Western Dedica ted Freight Corridors (DFC) fast tracked. 
• Identified 3 additional DFCs. 
• Introduced indigenously made first ever semi high  speed train set –The Vande Bharat Express. 
• Indigenously manufactured 12000HP Electric locomotive  making India the first country in the world 
to operationalise it on a broad gauge network. 
• Prepared a National Rail Plan for the first time wi th the objective to create capacity ahead of 
demand, which in turn would also cater to future growth in demand right up to 2050 and increase the modal 
share of Railways to 45% in freight traffic. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3)  
The Committee's examination has revealed that while the share of the GBS during 2020-21 
contracted from 44 percent to only 18 percent of the budget at revised estimates, it was offset by a 
provision made under EBR (Special) to the tune of Rs. 51,000 crore. At the same time the share of internal 
revenues of the Railways in the total budget shrank from 5 percent at BE to only 2 percent at RE. The 
Committee find that over the years, there has been a sharp decline in the generation of internal resources 
by the Railways which has resulted in greater dependency on market borrowings which are 
counterproductive in the long term. While taking cognisance of the fact that over the last few years the 
contribution of GBS has been steadily increasing the Co mmittee feel that the diminishing contribution from 
the share of internal revenue should not impede the growth of the Railways. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the NITI (National Institution for Tr ansforming India) Aayog/Ministry of Finance should 
consider a higher allocation under GBS till such a time that the Railways succeed in bringing the generation 
of internal resources in line with budgetary planning so as to effectively meet their objective of transforming 
the Railways into an efficient vehicle for progress as well as for meeting the cumulative demands of the 
economy.  

 
 
11 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee that till such time the Railways are able to generate 
sufficient internal resources, NITI Aayog / Ministry of Finance should consider a higher allocation under 
Gross Budgetary Support to Ministry of Railways to meet objective of transforming the Railways into 
efficient vehicle for progress and for meeting cumulative demands of the economy has been noted. 
In BE 2021-22, Government has provided the highest ever Budgetary Support of Rs.1,07,100 crore for 
Railways’ capex.  
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
The Committee note that the Railways maintain various funds for nurturing their developmental 
agenda viz. Depreciation Reserve Fund, Development Fund, Railway Safety Fund and Capital Fund. The 
Committee further note that appropriations to the DRF has been to the tune of Rs.534 crore in 2018-19, 
Rs.524 crore in 2019-20 and Rs.503 crore till January 2021. Under provisioning for depreciation and 
development funds can result in piling up of throw- forward of works concerning renewal of over aged 
assets, safety, traffic works etc. The Committee are given to understand that appropriations to the DRF 
have reduced in recent years in light of the fact that with the introduction of the RRSK a major part of 
renewal and replacement works having safety implicati ons are being financed from it. The DRF for the time 
being finances only identified renewal and replacement works. The Committee take note of the assurance 
given by the Ministry that in the case of RRSK not continuing beyond 2021-22, all such works would have to 
be funded out of DRF again. The Committee, therefore, recommend that irrespective of the injection of 
funds from time to time, the Ministry on their part should ensure that available funds are invested 
strategically and existing assets are optimally utiliz ed. The Committee would also like to recommend that 
the railways should re-examine their working model with  a view to generating higher revenues so that it 
may accrue increased allocations under the various funds.  
Reply of the Government 
In the light of recommendations of Hon’ble Comm ittee, the Ministry would continue to pursue the 
revenue enhancing and expenditure control measures wi th a view to maximizing internal resource 
generation for ensuring higher appropriation to Railway Funds and their utilization.  
Recommendation (Para No. 7)  
The Ministry has also to administer the Pension Fund as well as to finance pensionary payments to 
the retirees. The Committee find that during RE 2019- 20, the appropriation to the Pension Fund which was 
targeted at Rs.49,188 crore could not be achieved and the actuals were only Rs.20,708 crore resulting in 
adverse closing balance of Rs .28,398 crore in Pension Fund (includ ing interest payment liability on the 

 
 
12 
 
adverse balance). Taking note of the fact that Railway revenues were adversely impacted in 2020-21 due to 
spread of COVID-19 pandemic and consequent lockdown as a result of which Railways could appropriate 
only Rs.523 crore to Pension Fund from railway  revenue against a pension expenditure estimate of 
Rs.51,000 crore. The Committee have been informed that a Special Loan of Rs.63,000 crore for the 
COVID-19 related resource gap and Rs.16,398 crore for liquidating adverse balance occurred in Public 
Account has been extended to the Railways which have been appropriated to Pension Fund in RE 2020-21 
accordingly. In this regard, the Committee recall that they had desired in their 3 rd Report (17 th LS) that the 
feasibility of bearing at least a part of the Railway ’s pensionary liabilities by the Ministry of Finance, 
consequent upon the merger of the Railway Budget with the General Budget, be explored so as to provide 
some relief to the Railways. The Committee would like  to reiterate that the Railways should vigorously 
pursue this matter with the Ministry of Finance.  
Reply of the Government 
Post merger of Railway Budget with Union Budge t, Ministry of Railways had requested Ministry of 
Finance(MoF) to consider taking over Railways’ pensi onary expenditure but the same was not agreed to by 
MoF citing the terms of merger approved by the Union Cabinet. In the light of the recommendations of the 
Committee to vigorously pursue the matter, Member Finance, Railway Board has written to Secretary, 
Department of Economic Affair on 19.03.2021 to consider taking over a part, if not completely, of the 
pension liability so as to ensure financial viability and sustainability of Indian Railways. 
Recommendation (Para No. 9)  
The Committee note that the actual earnings of the Railways have fallen short of projected earnings 
for all years since 2016-17. While it was Rs.4913 crore during 2016-17, the net revenue fell to Rs.1665.61 
crore in 2017-18. It rose sharply to Rs.3773.89 cror e in the subsequent year to again slump during 2019-20 
to Rs.1589.62 crore. The Committee further find that in all of these years accruals were far short of 
budgetary targets which clearly indicate that either unre alistic projections were made in this regard or the 
efforts of the Ministry to actualise the accruals during the financial year have not been sufficient. 
Notwithstanding the reasons forwarded by the Ministry as being responsible for the decline in net revenue, 
the Committee strongly feel that it is imperative on the part of the Railways to keep the targets for Net 
Revenue realistic and strive for achieving the same. They therefore recommend the Ministry to institute 
such remedial measures so as to plug any leakages and stem the trend of declining net revenue while at 
the same time finding ways and means to generate and augment rail revenues. The Committee would also 
like to suggest that the Ministry should rigorously and sternly monitor the revenue receipts on a regular 
basis in order to ensure optimal achievement of proposed targets.  

 
 
13 
 
Reply of the Government 
After absorbing the impact of 7th Central Pay Commission, Railways’ Net Revenue had shown signs 
of improvement in 2018-19 vis-a-vis 2017-18. Howeve r, in 2019-20 the same declined vis- a-vis 2018-19 
due to adverse impact of Covid 19 pandemic on railway revenues. Despite improvement in trend of railway 
revenues in the 2nd and 3rd quarter vis-a-vis the 1st quarter and containment of variable operating 
expenses, the Net Revenue position in 2020-21 is not expected to improve. 
Expecting containment of the pandemic, normalization of train services, return of the economy in the 
growth trajectory, a higher Net Revenue target of Rs. 6,561 cr has been kept in BE 2021-22. Accordingly, 
while keeping the revenue expenditure to the bare minimum, a higher loading target of 1270 mt has been 
kept and mobilization of non-fare revenues through asset monetization etc has been planned. For the 
medium and long run, policy initiatives have been/are being undertaken to diversify freight basket, to 
achieve a loading of 2024 mt by the year 2024, substantially regain Railways’ market share in freight, heavy 
investment on capacity augmentation projects are expected to ensure financ ial viability and sustainability of 
Railways. The progress on all these fronts is constantly being monitored and reviewed at the highest level in 
the Ministry.  
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
The Operating Ratio (OR) is an effective tool to  gauge the financial health and reflect the overall 
performance of the Railways. Operating Ratio indicates  how much the Railways spend to earn a rupee. To 
illustrate, an operating ratio of 98.3 6% as seen for 2019-20 indicates th at to earn Rs.100, the Railways 
would have to spend Rs.98.36 implying a tiny surplus. The Committee observe that for the fiscal year 2015-
16, the Railways Operating Ratio was 90.5%. In cont rast in the succeeding years the Operating Ratio has 
regularly deteriorated. For the fiscal year 2016-17,  the Operating Ratio sharply rose to 96.5% which 
worsened during 2017-18 to 98.4%. In the succeeding years the Operating Ratio has remained consistently 
high. For the year 2020-21, Operating Ratio is estimated to be 131.4%. The Committee find that for 2021-
22 the Railways have projected a target of 96.15% Operat ing Ratio. The Committee are of the view that in 
order to arrest the Operating Ratio, it is essential that the Railways espouse a long-term planning strategy 
to enhance the efficiency in operations and target higher rail revenues. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Railway finances should be monitored and managed prudently by keeping a close and 
constant tab on the undesirable/ unproductive expenditure so that the Operating Ratio may reach at 
acceptable level in the near future.  
Reply of the Government 
The reasons of high Operating Ratio in 2016-17 and 20 17-18 owing to implementation of 7th Central 
Pay Commission recommendations has been submitted to Hon’ble Committee in detail and need no 

 
 
14 
 
reiteration. But the Operating Ratio in 2018-19 improved to 97.3% from 98.4% in 2017-18. Adverse impact 
of the Covid 19 pandemic on Railway revenues has disr upted the improvement chances of the Operating 
Ratio. 
Expecting containment of the pandemic, normalization of train services, return of the economy in the 
growth trajectory, a better Operating Ratio target of 96.15% has been kept in BE 2021-22. Accordingly, 
while keeping the revenue expenditure to the bare minimum, a higher loading target of 1270 mt has been 
kept and mobilization of non-fare revenues through asset monetization etc has been planned. 
For the medium and long run, policy initiatives have been/are being undertaken to diversify freight 
basket, to achieve a loading of 2024 mt by the year 2024, substantially regain Railways’ market share in 
freight, heavy investment on capacity augmentation projects are expected to improve the Operating Ratio to 
a reasonable level.  
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
14. The Committee note that freight is the mainstay of the Indian Railways as almost 85 percent of the 
revenue of the Railways comes from freight earnings. Ye t in recent years they have seen a contraction of 
the freight business attributable to the over-dependence on a conservative ‘freight basket’ and cross 
subsidisation by using profits from its freight business to counterbalance the losses in the passenger 
segment. The Committee are, therefore, apprehensive t hat the increasing freight cost in the Railways will 
have a cascading effect on the earnings and will also nullify the efforts of the Railways to expand their 
freight carrying capacity. The Committee feel that Indi an Railways should identify key measures to capture 
the traffic from high potential segments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that with a view to attracting 
to boost freight traffic volumes, the Railways should operate their existing capacity in a refined market 
oriented approach in a commercially-viable manner. The Committee would also like to recommend that the 
Indian Railways should reduce their reliance on transportation of bulk commodities and instead diversify 
their freight portfolio to meet the goals of attract ing a larger share of the total goods movement in the 
country. In this regard the Committee urge the Ministry of Railways to work on a structured plan to target 
development of last mile connectivity and customised interventions in order to make rail competitive vis-à-
vis road transport. 
The Committee feel that the cumulative levels of subsidisation in passenger fares were generating 
disproportionate demand resulting in heavy network congestion and decline in the level of services 
provided. The resultant excessive demand for passenger tr affic displaces and slows down the speed of 
freight traffic especially on HDNs. To this end, the Committee are of the opinion that Railways should 
accord the highest priority to the Dedicated Freight Corridor Projects to enhance not only the revenue from 
freight but also to increase the carrying capacity as well.  While noting that certain sections of the Eastern 

 
 
15 
 
and Western DFCs have been made operational, the Committee recommend that the timelines for 
completion of the DFCs should be adhered to so that the objectives of the projects are not defeated. 
The Committee note that the intended purpose of  setting up of CONCOR was to facilitate the 
customers to pick up their goods and deliver them at doorstep. However, the existing trend has shown that 
the goods are delivered to the warehouses only by freight services and the clientele has to arrange to pick 
up the same from there on their own. On the contrary, the road facilities provide them to pick up from the 
origin and deliver them at doorstep. As a result, most of the customers of the railway have opted for road 
transport. The Committee are of the view that if the Railways evolve some mechanism for extending 
transportation of goods at doorstep similar to road transport, the clienteles lost by the railway would 
certainly return which would definitely increase the railway revenue manifold. The Committee, therefore, 
would like to suggest the Ministry to act proactively and take corrective measures accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The tariff policy of Indian Railways (IR) has been to keep passenger fares low especially in the lower 
classes so that even the poorest segment of the people can travel by rail. Railways have traditionally cross- 
subsidized passenger business through their freight business as a result of which Railway freight rates have 
increased regularly while passenger fares have stagnated. 
IR has taken a number of measures to capture its market share. Detail are as under: 
1.  Short lead traffic: 
a)  Normally, Short lead traffic prefers to move by road and long lead traffic by Rail. To attract 
such short lead traffic from road to rail, Indian Railways (IR) have introduced concession in 
freight for Short Lead Traffic i.e. @50%, 25% and 10% is granted to the traffic booked upto 
0-50 km, 51-75 and 76-90 km respectively except Coal & Coke and Iron ore traffic. 
b)  With a view to facilitate transportation of  coal from mines to pow er houses near pit heads 
(Short lead i.e. upto 100Km), the Merry-go- round (MGR) policy has been issued, the freight 
rates for MGR have been kept very competitive and low. 
c)  In container, to attract ultra short lead traffic (upto 50Km), Round Trip based charging has 
been implemented which provide an economical and reliable alternative for ultra short lead 
(upto50Kms) container traffic. 
2.  Long lead traffic: 
a)  There is very negligible traffic of Coal & Coke, Iron Ore and Iron & Steel, limestone, Clinker, 
beyond 1000 km. To attract long lead traffic of Coal & Coke, Iron ore and Iron & Steel traffic, 
graded concession is granted; 20% to Coal & Coke for distance >1400KM, 20% to Iron & 

 
 
16 
 
Steel for distance >1600KM; and 15% for distance >700KM and 20% for distance >1500 
Km for Iron ore. 
b)  These long lead concession has also been extended to Clinker traffic @20% and 25% for 
the lead >1000 km and Limestone traffic @25% for the lead >1500 km subject to certain 
terms and conditions. 
3.  Freight Incentive Schemes: To increase the market share of Indian Railways and to increase 
the revenue from freight business, a slew of Freight Incentive Schemes have been launched. Based 
on the feedback of the Railways and Customers, suitable modifications are made in the Schemes to 
make it more attractive. These schemes are direct ed towards better utilization of railway assets in 
Traditional Empty Flow Directions (TEFD), enc ouraging freight forwarders, loading of bagged 
consignment in open wagons, etc. The procedure for availing the benefits has been simplified. 
Besides, guidelines for various transportation products like Mini Rake (20 wagons) and two point 
rakes has been issued. Distance, for operation of Mini Rake (20 wagons), has been increased to 
1500KM. Mini rakes have also been permitted beyond 1500KM upto 2000KM and beyond 2000KM on 
payment of supplementary charge @7.5% and @10%, respectively. 
4.  Long Term Tariff Contract Policy is based on the concept of pre-determined price escalation 
principles. The objective of the policy is to attrac t additional traffic and revenue by offering growth- 
based rebate and also stability of freight rate to its key customers. 
More than 30 contracts have al ready been signed under LTTC polic y till now. Most of the key 
customers like Tata Steel, Ultra tech Cement, ACC Cement, Ambuja Cement, SAIL, JSW steel etc. 
are under agreement with Railway under this policy. 
5.  Railway has undertaken action to gain lar ger share of new traffic under container and 
automobile traffic. Some of these are as following- 
a)  Automobile transportation and e-commerc e segment are two sectors which are largely 
untapped as far as transportation through railways is concerned. 
b)  Ministry of Railways has a scheme for Automobile Freight Operators (AFTO), wherein 
Operators invest in privately owned rakes customized for automobile transportation 
(BCACBM type) through Railway. Till date  approvals have been gr anted for 59 privately 
owned rakes, out of which 23 rakes are already operational. 
c)  Besides, railways also use modified old passenger coaches (NMG rakes) for carriage of 
cars. 
d)  Railways are also embarking on the idea of tapping the vast and growing market of e- 
commerce transportation by developing long- term relationships with major players in the 

 
 
17 
 
field. Already, a pilot project has been executed on Delhi–Mumbai and Delhi– Kolkata 
sectors, which has been largely successful. 
6.  Various initiatives has been to prompting containerization such as 25% concession on 
Haulage Charge in case of empty containers and wagons, 5% concession on loaded containers, 
Introduction of Cube Container for two wheeler auto mobile traffic, large numbers of commodities has 
been de-notified and brought under FAK rates (Fre ight All Kind) which are even lower than 
CCR(container Class Rate). 
7.  Moreover time to time various initiati ves has been taken to increase loading such as 40% 
discount in movement of fly ash in open & flat wagons, withdrawal of levy of Busy of season Charge 
@ 15%, Introduction of Premium Indent Scheme for bene fit of freight customers in sidings and goods 
sheds, Liberalisation of Terminal Access Charges (TAC), Customer friendly rationalization of 
weighment Policy etc. 
 
Ministry of Railways has sanctioned for construction of two dedicated freight corridors; i.e.  Eastern 
and Western Dedicated Freight Corridors (EDFC & WDFC ) primarily to augment the rail transport capacity 
to meet the growing need of the economy and facilitate faster evacuation of freight traffic. 
 
The construction of DFC is in advanced stage and the following sections of DFC have been 
commissioned for traffic: 
• Eastern DFC - New Bhaupur-New Khurja section (approx. 351 Kms.)  on 29-12-2020  
• Western DFC New Rewari - New Kishangarh- Madar (306 Kms.) on 07-01-2021.  
The balance portion of Eastern and Western DFCs are expected to be completed in phases by June 
2022.   All efforts are made to complete the DFC projects within the target date. 
Remark has been obtained from Container Corporation of India Ltd. (CONCOR). CONCOR stated that 
they are having the arrangement of first mile pick up of  containers and last mile delivery of containers since 
its inception at the most of the terminals. However, this facility was optional wherein customers were free to 
use CONCOR services for first mile last mile connectivity as per their requirement. 
Further, to strengthen first mile last mile connect ivity for its customers, CONCOR has created own 
App based platform "FMLM App" in the year 2020 wh erein empanelled local transporters at the respective 
terminal participate in bidding process by way of e-auction followed by e-reverse auction for providing 
competitive, cost effective rates to our customers. 
Despite COVID-19 pandemic CONCOR has moved 1,33,260 TEUS under first Mile Last Mile 
Connectivity In the financial year 2020-21 and 98,418 TEUs in the first quarter (April 2021 to June 2021) of 
financial year 2021-22.  

 
 
18 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
The Committee note that the traffic receipts on the passenger segment have always been lower as 
compared to freight traffic. The passenger earnings during 2018-19 were Rs.51066.65 crore which dropped 
to Rs.50669.09 crore in 2019-20. Budget Estimates for 2020-21 were understandably reduced at RE levels 
from Rs.61000 crore to Rs.15000 crore. However, the actuals (upto the end of January, 2021) were 
Rs.9529 crore only due to suspension of Passenger trains during COVID-19 as informed by the Railways. 
Some of the reasons for shortfall in passenger earnings have been stated to be the social responsibility and 
operation on un-remunerative routes by Railways. The Committee note that the recent COVID pandemic 
has also deteriorated the receipts of passenger segment when the passenger trains were suspended for a 
considerable period and still the same have not yet been fully resumed. The Committee are of the view that 
the Railways should consider to resume their passenger services keeping in view the protocol norms in 
various States with a view to boost their revenues. They hope that the earnings on passenger segment 
would gradually improve once the operation of passenger trains are resumed completely. 
The Committee note that the tariff policy of the Indi an Railways has traditionally followed the principle 
of cross subsidization in order to offset the losses incurred in the heavily subsidised passenger and other 
coaching services through additional revenue from freight movement. It is seen that in such a scenario, 
overall fare structure of the railways are unable to generate sufficient surpluses necessary for capacity 
expansion and provision of enhanced amenities. The Committee feel that both passenger fares and freight 
rates have to be demand-cum-market driven and fixed differently for different segments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to undertake a prudent adjustment of passenger fares with a view to 
reduce the burden on freight segment.  
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways (IR) is committed to offer affordable transportation solution to the poorest section of 
the society and therefore, the passenger fares have traditionally been kept at low level particularly for 
second class ordinary and suburban passengers which constitute about 79.7% of the total passenger traffic. 
Indian Railways continues to incur losses every y ear by performing a va riety of un-remunerative 
service. These losses are mostly due to (a) Low ordinary second class fare, (b) Low Suburban and non-
suburban season ticket, (c) Loss on essential commodities carried below cost, and (d) a variety of 
concessions granted on passenger ticket. Working of uneconomic branch lines, too, imposes a heavy 
burden on Indian Railways’ finances. A gap is thus created between the revenue income generated through 
these service and their costs. In order to compensate this loss, freight services are priced higher and are 

 
 
19 
 
used to cross-subsidize the loss in passenger services. Resultantly, passenger fares have not been 
increased proportionately to increase in input cost. 
Due to worldwide outbreak of Novel Corona-virus  Disease (COVID-19) pandemic including India in 
March 2020, the entire country was under lockdown condition. The passenger service was totally put on 
hold and still these services are not normalized. In freight segmen t, loading and revenues were badly 
impacted during April to July-2020. To promote econom ic activities in the country during Covid pandemic, 
Indian Railways have taken a number of freight polic y measures to boost up its loading. Relaxations have 
been provided to the customers by slew of incentives announced by Indian Railways. These include graded 
discount in long lead traffic of Coal & Coke, Iron Ore, Iron & Steel, clinker and limestone; reintroduction of 
Short lead discount (10-50% in freight) upto 90Km, 40% discount in freight to fly ash traffic booked in Open 
Stock; both in bagged condition as well as bulk/loose c ondition, increase in distance for operation of Mini 
Rake (20 wagons) beyond 2000 KM etc. In order to promote container traffic initiatives such as 5% discount 
on movement of loaded container, non-levy of Stabling charges for container traffic till 31.03.2021, 25% 
discount on haulage charges for movement of empty containers and empty flat wagons etc. have also been 
taken as a relief measure during difficult economic conditions prevailing currently. 
By doing so IR has been able to achieve the loading of 1100.48 MT from 2020-21 (upto Feb), which is 
almost at par with same period of the previous year. 
Keeping in view the demand and market pattern, Indian Railways had already introduced Flexi fare 
system for Rajdhani/Duronto and Shatabdi trains w.e.f. 09.09.2016. Under this system, the fare increases 
by 10% after booking of 10% berths subject to maximum ceiling limit of 1.5 times for 2 AC, Sleeper, 2S, 
Chair Car and 1.4 times for 3 AC. Moreover the fare structure of new semi/high speed train like Humsafar 
Express, Tejas Express, Antyodaya Express and Mahamana Express, Vande Bharat Anubhuti coaches, 
Gatimaan trains have been introduced on higher fare on cost recovery basis due to higher capital cost and 
various additional facilities provided. 
Indian Railways has planned to run trains under Public Private Partner (PPP) on different clusters to 
attract customer and improve the travelling experience.   
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
The Committee note that capacity creation is one of the thrust areas of the 2021-22 railway budget. 
They further note that the throw-forward in terms of new lines is Rs.3,10,278 crore, Gauge conversions it is 
Rs.36,294 crore, Doubling works is Rs.2,17,508 cror e Track renewals Rs.41,057 crore and for Railway 
Electrification Rs.25,288 crore. Cumulatively there is a massive throw- forward of Rs.6.3 lakh crore in terms 
of rail expansion works. The Committee find that the Railways have instituted a number of remedial 
measures to give an impetus to rail expansion projects. The Committee are of the firm opinion that New 
Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling and Track Renewals being a long-term asset and a major revenue 

 
 
20 
 
multiplier it is imperative that the Railways shoul d exercise due diligence in  identify and removing the 
obstacles of network expansion so as to achieve the targeted growth figures within the stipulated time. 
The Committee further note that in respect of new lines, against a target of 300 kms during 2019-20, 
the achievement was 359.71 kms. For 2020-21, 196 kms of lines have been laid till January, 2021 against a 
target of 300 kms. With regard to doubling, against a target of 2450 kms, 1458.22 kms was achieved during 
2019-20. For 2020-21, 998 kms. of doubling has been achieved till January, 2021 against a target of 1400 
kms. In respect of gauge conversion, 408.49 kms was achieved during 2019-20 against a target of 400 
kms. In 2020-21, 299 kms. of gauge conversion has been achieved till January, 2021 against a target of 
400 kms. The Railways have managed to renew 3667 kms. of tracks till January, 2021 against a target of 
4000 kms. The Committee appreciates these achievements of Railways in meeting the physical targets and 
hope that the Railways will be able to meet the physical targets set for New Lines, Doubling, Gauge 
conversion and Track Renewals for the year 2020-21.  
Reply of the Government 
The achievements vis a vis targets for the y ear 2020-21 for construction of New Line, Gauge 
Conversion, Doubling and Track Renewal are given below: 
SN Plan Head Target 
(in Kms)
Achievements (in Kms)
1 New Line 300 286.31
2 Gauge Conversion 400 469.93
3 Doubling 1400 1614.18
4. Track Renewal 4000 4363
 
1. Various steps being taken by the Government for effective and speedy implementation of rail 
projects include (i) prioritisation of projects  (ii) substant ial increase in allocation of funds on priority projects 
(iii) delegation of powers at field level (iv) close monito ring of progress of project at various levels, and (v) 
regular follow up with State Governments and concer ned authorities for expeditious land acquisition, 
forestry and Wildlife clearances and for resolving other issues pertaining to projects.  
2. The execution of Track renewal works have also been prioritized according to the condition 
of the Track and availability of funds. 
 

 
 
21 
 
Railway tracks are replaced through track renewal  works which is an ongoing process. Track renewal 
works are undertaken as and when a stretch of track becomes due for renewal on the basis of criteria laid 
down in Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual on age / condition basis viz. traffic carried in terms of gross 
million tonnes, incidence of rail fracture  / failure, wear of rails, corrosion of rails, maintainability of track as 
per standards, etc. 
Track renewal works are sanctioned every year on the bas is of traffic carried, condition etc. and their 
execution is prioritized acc ording to condition of track  and overall availability of  funds. Normally, track 
renewal works are completed in two to three years of sanction. 
During 2020-21, track renewal of 4363 track km has been done, against original target of 4000 track 
km.   
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
The Committee note that the Railways have targeted to achieve 100 percent electrification on BG 
routes by 2023. The Committee find that so far 4235 4 km or 65.47 percent of the BG network has been 
electrified. During 2020-21 as against the target of 6000 kms, the achievement upto January, 2021 has 
been 3279 kms or roughly 50 percent. The Committee woul d also like to draw attention of the Ministry 
towards their submission that during COVID period, the works of Railways were taken up at a faster speed. 
They feel that the under achievement on this count could have been averted. While expressing their 
apprehension on achievement of targets, the Committee des ire that Railway take more stringent measures 
to accelerate their pace for achievement of 100% electrification on broad gauge lines by 2023. They also 
desire the Railways to plan for the provisions of Rolling Stock and other logistics required by them 
consequent upon completion of electrification process.  
Reply of the Government 
At the end of Financial Year 2020-21 (i.e. by 31.03.2021), BG routes of 45,881 RKM (71%) have 
been electrified. 
During 2020-21, total BG routes of 6,015 RKM have been electrified against the target of 6,000 
RKM, which is highest ever electrification in singl e year in the history of Indian Railways, surpassing 
previous best ever electrification of 5,276 RKM during 2018-19. 
As recommended by Committee, all the measures are being taken to accelerate the pace for 
achievement of 100% electrification. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
The Committee note that the National Infrastructur e Pipeline aims to augment infrastructure and 
generate employment in the country. From the information furnished, the Committee note that currently 670 

 
 
22 
 
number of railway projects have been identified under the NIP of which 470 are at various stages of 
implementation. The Committee laud the initiative taken by the Railway and trust that the Ministry would 
fully utilize the earmarked funds and ens ure strict monitoring to achieve financial and physical targets in a 
time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
Noted please. 
REMARKS: 
The National Infrastructure Pipeline aims towards enhancing the pace of infrastructure development, 
which is so vital for the growth of national economy as a whole including employment generation. Railway 
achieved Capital Expenditure of Rs 1,55,162 Cr (96% ) as against Revised Estimate of Rs 1,61,692 Cr for 
FY 2020-21, despite impact of Covid-19 during initial months. Further Railways has been allotted Rs 
2,15,058 Cr for Capital Expenditure for FY 2021-22 out of which Railways has already achieved capital 
expenditure of Rs 29,455 Cr by May'2021.  
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  
The Committee note that as announced in the Budget Speech, Indian Railways will be focusing on 
transforming into 'Green Railways'. For this purpose var ious initiatives such as 100% electrification of BG 
routes by December, 2023, becoming ‘Net Zero Carbon Emission' by 2030, assessment and rating of major 
Railways Workshops and Production Units as ‘Green Indu strial Units’ etc. are proposed to be taken. The 
Committee are happy to note that more than 600 Railway Stations have been certified for implementation of 
Environment Management System to ISO:14001 in last 2 years. The Committee also note that Railways 
plan to utilise its unused vacant land parcels for setting up Solar Plants for its traction power requirement. 
The Committee appreciate these initiatives and desire the Railways to frame a time bound plan to 
accomplish these initiatives at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
In line with Budget Pronouncemen t 2020-21, Indian Railways (IR) plans to utilize its unused vacant 
Land parcels for setting up of Land Based Solar Plants for its traction power requirement as ‘Green mode of 
transportation’.  
Directions have already be en issued to Zonal Railways for ident ification of unutilized vacant Railway 
land parcels along the tracks & vacant Railway plots available for setting up of solar panels. There is about 
51,000 hectare of vacant Railway land. IR has already taken up 3 pilot projects: 
1) 50 Mega Watt (MW) solar power plant at vacant unused land at Bhilai (Chhattisgarh). 
2) 2 MW solar plant at Diwana (Har yana). Commissioned in Sept.’2020. 

 
 
23 
 
3) 1.7 MW solar plant at Bina (Madhya Pradesh). Commissioned in July, 2020. This is a First of 
its kind of solar project in the world wherein solar po wer is directly fed to the Over Head Equipment (OHE) 
system for electric traction. With s uccessful commissioning of  this pilot project, IR intends to further utilize 
solar energy on large scale for electric traction. 
 
Indian Railways plans to set up 20 Giga Watt (GW) solar plants on its unused vacant Land parcels for 
meeting its traction power requirement and therby becoming a ‘Net Zero Carbon Emitter’ by 2030. 
In this regard, initially Railway’s has planned for setting up of solar power plant of combined capacity 
of 3 Giga Watt (GW), details of which are as under: 
✔ Phase-I: 1.6 GW capacity in Railway plots under Developer Model. 
✔ Phase-II: 0.4 GW capacity in Railway plots under ownership model (Captive use). 
✔ Phase-III: 1 GW capacity in Railway Plots along the tracks under Developer model. 
 
Indian Railways will provide solar panels on vacant Railway land progressively in a phased manner as 
per feasibility. 
With a view to transform Indian Railways into “G reen Railways” and to capture the economic benefits 
of electric traction in an accelerated manner, Indian Ra ilways has planned to electrify balance BG routes by 
December, 2023 to achieve 100% electrification of BG routes as per planning below: 
Year Target (RKM) 
2021-22 6,000 
2022-23 6,500 
2023-24 
(upto December, 2023 
6,308 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 17)  
One of the Budget announcements of 2020-21 was the implementation of the Kisan Rail initiative to 
enable movement of perishables including fruits, vegetables, meat, poultry, fishery and dairy products from 
production or surplus regions to consumption or de ficient regions and speedy movement to ensure minimal 
damage during transit. The Committee note that since August 2020 the Railways have operated 271 Kisan 
Rail services. The Committee further note that the Ministry is taking a number of measures to make Kisan 
Rail more user friendly. The Committee laud this initiative of the Railways and desire that the Railways 
should expand the network of Kisan Rails throughout th e country and diversify the nature of goods carried 
through it. They further desire that last mile connectivity for increasing the potential client-base should be 
provided.  

 
 
24 
 
Reply of the Government 
Potential circuits for movement of vegetable, fruits and other perishables are primarily based on 
demand received from farmers and farming community, and are also being identified in consultation with 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and Agricu lture/ Animal Husbandry/ Fisheries Departments of 
State Governments. Necessary action is being taken by Railway as and when demand for Kisan Rail is 
received. 
As regard last mile connectivity, it is informed that most of the services of Kisan Rail have originated 
from stations situated within agricultural zones, i.e. Devlali, Sangola, Sangli, Yeola, Nagarsol, Dhahanu 
Road, Dhoraji, Mahuva, Amalasad, etc. The Kisan Rail trains also have adequate stoppages to facilitate en-
route loadings. Besides, there is no restriction on th e minimum quantity that can be booked in Kisan Rail 
services - to enable small and marginal farmers benefit from the scheme. 
Upto 19th March, 2021, around 403 Kisan Rail services have been operated on 44 routes, 
transporting approximately 1.3 lakh tones of commodities.  
Recommendation (Para No. 19)  
The Committee find that notwithstanding the fact  that the COVID-19 pandemic has severely crippled 
railway finances due to suspension of passenger services, yet the Railways overcame all odds by offering 
unparalleled service to the people of India especially to  the poorest during this very difficult and challenging 
time. Addressing the issue of mass-migration of wor kers from the States such as Maharashtra, Gujarat and 
Punjab since the early months of the pandemic, the Indian Railways operated 4,621 'Shramik Special' trains 
for carrying over 63.13 lakh migrants/stranded passengers to their respective destination. This endeavor 
was made more challenging since such a large group had to be moved within the restrictions imposed by 
Covid-19 protocols. The Railways also provided more than 2 crore meals during this period. 
The Committee further find that in addition to providing transportation to our migrant work force the 
Railways also undertook yeoman's service in Indi a's battle against Covid-19 pandemic by running special 
parcel services to ensure the transportation of medical equipments, medicines, and other essential 
commodities at a time when all modes of transportation had been suspended due to the nation-wide lock-
down. The Committee further find that as a precautiona ry measure and to buttress the health infrastructure 
of the States, Indian Railways had converted 5601 railway coaches to be used as COVID quarantine and 
isolation centers. 
Taking into cognizance the vital role played by the Indian Railways in the fight against COVID 
pandemic especially in light of the life-threatening natur e of the virus the Committee would like to place on 
record their deep sense of appreciation for the matchless service provided by the Railways during this 

 
 
25 
 
difficult time. The Committee would like to state in cl ear and unequivocal terms that Indian Railways true to 
their role as a national asset have undertaken an initia tive worthy of emulation by their counterparts across 
the world.  
Reply of the Government 
This is an appreciation of the efforts of IR in fight against Covid-19. 
The Ministry and the entire Rail Parivar feel encou raged by the words of appreciation of the Hon’ble 
Committee and assure continuation of their service to the nation in all circumstances. 
 
 
  

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
The Committee find that Internal Revenue Generation in Railways is only 3.4 percent of the Annual 
Plan 2021-22, which is not a positive indicator. The tr end from previous years shows that the Ministry in 
recent years have not been able to generate enough internal resources. As for 2017- 18, actual internal 
revenue generation was Rs. 3070 crore which was only 3.01 percent of the total CapEx. Further, for the 
year 2018-19, Internal resources rose marginally and stood at Rs.4663 crore or 3.5 percent of the outlay. 
The Committee are concerned to note that in the subsequent years, the Railways were not able to sustain 
even these low figures and the share of internal resources slumped to an abysmal 1.14 percent in 2019-20. 
During 2020-21, the provisioning under internal r esources was still a meagre 2.3 percent only. The main 
reasons attributed for this decline in internal resources has been attributed by the Ministry to the burden of 
the 7 th Central Pay Commission and exacerbated by the additional burden imposed on account of 
payment of allowances which led to a sharp increase in staff cost since 2017-18, inflexibility of a major part 
of revenue expenditure, periodic slowing down of the core sector of the economy affecting IR’s freight traffic 
and stiff competition of the ever expanding road sector  to Railways’ passenger & goods traffic. Additionally, 
the Committee are given to understand that funds generated by internal resources cater to four critical 
requirements, i.e., appropriations to Depreciation  Reserve Fund, Development Fund, Rashtriya Rail 
Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) and the Railway Safety Fund (RSF). Under-provisioning for any of these funds will 
adversely impact system productivity, replacemen t/ renewal of assets and upgradation/developmental 
works, which the Railways can ill-afford. The Committee wish to emphasise that any shortfall in generation 
of revenue from Internal Resources increasingly compel Railway to rely on Extra Budgetary Support in the 
form of borrowings which eventually bear extra interest liability. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to explore and review all possible areas where resources can be mobilized with a view to increase their 
internal resources and refrain themselves from depending on Budget/EBR to the extent possible. The 
Committee stress that the Ministry should endeavour to remove inherent deficiencies in the overall delivery 
mechanism, prioritise completion and commissioning of  remunerative projects, besides exploring other 
commercial viable avenues that would not put the Railwa ys under financial duress in order to supplement 
internal resources. The Committee expect hike in inte rnal resources generation through the steps initiated 

 
 
28 
 
by Railways and desire the railways to implement these measures with full vigour and keep the Committee 
informed of the same.  
Reply of the Government 
The share of internal resources in total capex, both in absolute and percentage terms, had improved 
in 2018-19 vis-a-vis 2017-18. While the Railways were expecting further improvement in 2019-20 and 2020- 
21, Railways’ internal resource generation was adversely impacted by the spread of Covid 19 pandemic. 
Expecting containment of the pandemic and normali zation of train services in 2021-22, Railways have 
estimated to provide Rs. 7,500 cr from internal resources for capex. Railways have taken a lot of measures 
towards increasing revenues and expenditure control whic h are likely to bring results in the coming year 
2021-22 and beyond. As recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, Railways would continue to pursue 
them and take other necessary measures for maximizing internal resource generation. 
However, given the volume of investment required in the Railways and given the constraints of 
Railways, Railways’ internal resources can at best supplement GBS and market borrowing for capex. Efforts 
are also being made to attract private sector investments in Railways.  
Recommendation (Para No. 5)  
The Committee note that railway projects are highly  capital intensive which require huge investments 
from GBS for execution. Since internal revenue gen eration have shown a declining trend over the years 
and the Budgetary Support is also limited, the Railways have no option but to resort to EBR to fund their 
projects. The Committee note that during the past years the EBR financing has shown upward trend which 
indicates the dependence of Railways on EBR in GBS. In the opinion of the Committee, Railways have to 
pay a huge amount on account of interest and other li abilities of EBR. The Committee note that the EBR at 
BE of 2021-22 has been kept at Rs.100258 crore as against RE of Rs.128567 crore during 2020-21. The 
Committee are not satisfied with the funding pattern of the railways wherein approximately half of the 
CapEx is dependent on EBR funding which is detrimental to the overall financial health of the Railways. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take intensive measures to step up the generation of internal 
revenue with a view to avoid dependence on EBR to the extent possible.  
Reply of the Government 
Despite increase in GBS over the years, progressively higher market borrowings has been resorted to 
in order to address the problem of underinvestment which resulted in severe capacity constraints leading to 
shrinking of Railways’ share in freight market. Hence, the market borrowings are consciously being invested 
primarily for remunerative capacity augmentation projects of Doubling & Electrification and procurement of 

 
 
29 
 
Rolling Stock. In the medium and long run, such investments are expected to create huge capacity which 
would be beneficial for Railways as also the economy at large. 
Thus, while Railways would continue their efforts for internal resource generation for supplementing 
capex, given the volume of investment required in the Railways and given the constraints of Railways, 
market borrowing cannot be avoided altogether as a major source for capex. These borrowings in the form 
of leasing of assets are only for remunerative projects in general.  
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee find that the Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK), a dedicated fund for safety was 
created in 2017-18 with a corpus of Rs.1 Lakh crore over  a period of 5 years for clearing the backlog of 
critical safety related works. It was expected to fund track renewals/safety, strengthening of bridges, 
elimination of unmanned level crossi ngs, upgradation of maintenance facilities, signalling improvement and 
complete switchover to LHB/coaches/retro fitment of CBC couplers in ICF coaches. The Committee also 
find that as per its mandate RRSK is financed annually through – (i) additional Budgetary Support (Rs.5,000 
crore), (ii) contribution from Railways’ share from Cent ral Road & Infrastructure Fund (Rs.10,000 crore) and 
(iii) Railways’ contribution from internal resources (Rs.5,000 crore). However, it is seen that since the 
inception of the fund in 2017-18 the actual utilization has invariably fallen short of the intended utilization 
figures. To illustrate, while the RE during 2017-18 was kept at Rs 20,000 crore, actuals were to the tune of 
Rs.16,091 crore or a reduction of almost 20 percent. Similarly during 2018-19, the actuals were about 90 
percent of the allocations. During 2019-20 the actuals were Rs.15023.88 crore against the revised 
allocation of Rs.17500 crore. The Committee find that during 2020-21 due to resource constraints only 
Rs.2000 crore was proposed from the internal resource segment. The Committee are constrained to note 
that year after year, there has been a noticeable gap in the funding of RRSK from the internal resources 
utilization. The Committee feel that since RRSK was created with a vision to have a single head to cater to 
safety related needs, such a shortfall reflects poorly on the ability of Indian Railways to generate surpluses. 
The Committee also feel that the railways need to address this inherent deficiency in the overall delivery 
mechanism and ensure that the objectives of creation of  the fund is not diluted. They therefore recommend 
that funding to and expenditure from RRSK for safety purposes should be ensured at highest level in order 
to accord top priority to safety.  
Reply of the Government 
Total expenditure of Rs.49130 cr has been incur red out of RRSK till 2019-20. During 2017-18, 
utilization of funds was 80% of the total allocation, which rose to almost 90% in 2018-19.  In 2019-20 
utilization was up to 84%. Sharp increase in staff cost and pension expenditure in 2016-17 resulting from 
implementation of 7th Central Pay Commission reco mmendations also continued during 2017-18. 2018-19 

 
 
30 
 
and 2019-20.  Further, the spread of Covid19 pandemic and consequential impact on rail operations 
impacted railway revenues adversely. The adverse resource position did not permit desired level of funds to 
be transferred to RRSK.  However, all out efforts are being made to minimize variable revenue expenses 
and to generate adequate internal resources for contribution towards RRSK. In RE 2020-21, in addition to 
appropriation of Rs.2000 cr to RRSK in view of resource constraints, adequate provision has also been 
made under ‘EBR(Special)’ with Rs.51000 cr, as a one-time arrangement. In BE 2021-22, provision of 
Rs.20000 cr has been made for RRSK, including Rs.5000 cr  from Railways’ internal resources.  Railways 
are trying to increase Revenue earnings through increase  in loading, number of passengers. Additionally, 
certain other measures including increase in non-fare  revenue are also being taken in this regard. The 
Zonal Railways have been advised to priortise works and incur expenditure as per priority and availability of 
resources, so that sufficient funds to important safety works are ensured. With the easing out of country-
wide Covid19 related restrictions and the economy sh owing signs of picking up pace, hopefully the 
Railways will be able to contribute the full amount of Rs.5000 cr towards RRSK.  
Recommendation (Para No. 18)  
The Committee observe that during their meetings with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Railways, the issue of water logging in RUBs is raised by the Members from almost all the parts of the 
country. This menace has caused serious problems for users passing through these RUBs. The matter has 
been discussed by the Committee in their earlier reports  also. The Committee note that in spite of frequent 
assurances from the representatives of Railway Board, a little has been done in this direction. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent action in the matter and inform the Committee 
about the action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Water-logging in RUBs: 
Railway Board in April 2012 communicated to all Zonal Railways that level crossings which do not 
qualify for sanction of RUB on cost sharing basis in terms of Para 925 of Indian Railway Permanent Way 
Manual (IRPWM), can be planned for elimination by subways, if found technically feasible. Railways were to 
bear the complete initial cost of construction of subway and future maintenance cost of subway proper. Any 
land required over and above the road passing through the level crossing for purpose of construction of 
subway outside the Railway area alongwith the ma intenance of road passing through subway, lighting, 
drainage system, diversion road and any other allied works, will rest on the State Government". 
The above instructions were revised after thorough scrutiny and suggestions of various Zonal 
Railways in July’2018. It was decided that the responsibility for the maintenance of road passing through the 

 
 
31 
 
subway, lighting, drainage syst em, diversion road and any other allied works in Railway portion will be with 
Railways and beyond Railway portion the responsibility of maintenance will rest with State Govt. 
Railway Board on 22.4.2020, issued comprehensive guide lines to all Zonal Railway for taking specific 
measures to avoid water logging problem in RUBs. Drainage plan has been made integral part of RUB for 
all future construction. 
Further, based on detailed survey of RUB/Subways, 1368 locations were identified by zonal railways 
prone to water logging out of total 9964 RUB/Subways already constructed. Railways have taken up the 
work of permanent remedial measures on thes e RUB/Subways and with consistent efforts, 920 
RUBs/Subways have been provided with necessary infrastructure to prevent water logging and maintain its 
functionality in future. Works in balance RUB/Subways are also planned for completion by 31.03.2021. The 
objective of all this exercise is to keep RUBs/Subways functional throughout the year. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
26 November, 2021 
                             Chairperson 
5 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
  

 
 
33 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS  
(2021-22) 
 
 
The Committee met on Friday, the 26 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
3.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
4.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
5.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
6.  Shri Gopaljee Thakur 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7.  Shri Narhari Amin 
8.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
9.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
10.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
11.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik  - Director 
3. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Sh. Suneet Sharma Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, Railway 
Board & Ex. –officio Principal Secretary to the 

 
 
34 
 
Government of India. 
2. Sh. Sanjeev Mittal Member (Infrastructure), Railway Board & Ex. -
officio Secretary to the Government of India. 
3 Sh. Ram Prakash Additional Member, Railway Electrification 
4 Sh. Rahul Agarwal Additional Member, Signal 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.    
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the two draft Reports on (i) ‘Passenger 
Reservation System of Indian Railways’ and (ii) Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 7
th Report on “Demands for 
Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Railways”.   
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Reports without any modifications. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise and present the Report to the 
Parliament during the ensuing Session. 
4. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
5. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
6. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
7. A verbatim record of  the proceedings of the Committee has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
-------- 
xxxx not related to the Report. 
  

 
 
35 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 7TH REPORT 
(17TH LOK SABHA) ON "DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
RAILWAYS" 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 19 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the  Government –  
Para Nos.  1,2,3,6,7,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17and 19  
 
15 
 Percenta ge of total   78.94% 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No. NIL    
 
Nil 
 Percentage of total   -- 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  4,5,8, and 18  
 
 
4 
 Percentage of total   21.06% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
Para No. NIL     
 
NIL 
 Percentage of total -- 
 
       
 