intrgg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 8
th Report of 
the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Reservation System of 
Indian Railways’] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
                                       
 
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
12 

SCR NO. 239 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 8
th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Reservation System of Indian 
Railways’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST, 2022/SRAVANA, 1944 (SAKA) 

 
 
CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………………………
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government………………………………………… 
 
10 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
29 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration …………………………………………… 
 
30 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited ……………………………….. 
 
32 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 I.    Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on   
03.08.2022 
33 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.  Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
35 
  
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.  Smt. Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt 
4.  Shri A. H. Khan Choudhury
5.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
6.  Ms. Diya Kumari 
7.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
8.  Smt. Satabdi Roy# 
9.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
10.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
13.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta
14.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
15.  Shri Arvind Sawant 
16.  Dr. Amar Singh 
17.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
20.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
21.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah^ 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
27.  Vacant$ 
28.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki
29.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
30.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha* 
31.  Vacant 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2021 vide Lok Sabh a Bulletin Part II No. 3192 dated 09.10.2021. 
* Nominated as Member w.e.f. 14.10.2021 vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 61163 dt 18.10.2021 
# Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 01.12.2021 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3440 dated 01.12.2021 in 
place of Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
^ Nominated as Member w.e.f. 07.02.2022 vide Lo k Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 4134 dt 07.02.2022 
$   Shri Ashok Siddharth retired w.e.f. 04.07.2022 vide CB-I note dated 03.02.2022 
 

 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Director 
3. Shri R.L. Yadav   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Ra ilways (2021-22), having been authorized 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, this Twelfth Report on Action Taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Reservation System of Indian Railways’. 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
30.11.2021.  The Report contained 18 Observat ions/Recommendations. The Ministry of 
Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 23.02.2022. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Dr aft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 03.08.2022.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                        RADHA MOHAN SINGH
03 August, 2022                                                                                       Chairperson,
12 Sravana, 1944 (Saka)                                         Standing Committee on Railways
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eighth Report (17 thLok 
Sabha) on “Passenger Reservation System of Indian Railways”. 
 
2. The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
30.11.2021. It contained 18 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been 
received and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos.: 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18. 
Total  : 17 
Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies: 
 Para Nos.: Nil 
Total  :Nil 
Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Para Nos.: 7 
Total :1 
Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendationsin respect of which final replies are still awaited: 
 Para Nos. NIL 
Total : NIL 
Chapter - V 

2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost care will  be given to the implementation of the 
Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee desire that final action 
taken notes to the Observations/Recommendations  contained in Chapter-I of this Report 
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the presentation of this Report.  
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations/observations. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
6. The Committee had noted that presently the PRS processes over one crore transactions 
per day involving about 5 crore passengers on an average. Though, the system had been 
empowered to handle a maximum of 28,000 transactions per minute (TPM), yet the average 
transaction per minute for the year 2019-20 was about 8711. The Committee had, therefore, 
desired the Ministry to act proactively and take all preparedness to further strengthen the capacity 
of server/website to yield desired results so that no hardship is faced by the users on this count. 
 
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 
PRS is continuously upgraded for enhancing booking facilitation and infrastructure 
capacity. In 2014, the Next Generation E-ticke ting (NGeT) system was launched to provide 
seamless e-ticketing services - higher booking loads and better user interface. 
 
While the PRS in its current format is highly efficient, but the volume of data and 
transactions required to be handled is huge and increasing multi-fold. Indian Railways is 
committed to the continuous modernization of PRS. Indian Railways has instituted an 
expert study through IRCTC, for strengthening the core application and backbone 
infrastructure, for efficient and sustainable aspects to perform adequately by providing 
facilitation for new functionalities, interope rability among other railway modules, external 
applications with more maturity. M/s Grant T hornton, which is one of the world’s leading 
advisory firms, has been engaged by IRCTC to study the existing PRS system and provide 
the recommendations to upgrade the Indian Railway PRS systems. 
 
8. The Committee note that the Indian Ra ilways are on a continuous and committed 
pathtowards modernization of PRS system.  Th e Committee further note that PRS in its 
current format is highly efficient, but the vo lume of data and transactions required to be 

3 
 
handled is huge and increasing multifold.  The Committee find that the Ministry has 
instituted an expert study through IRCTC, for strengthening the core application and 
backbone infrastructure, for efficient and su stainable aspects, for engaging M/s Grant 
Thornton, which is one of the world’s leading advisory firms, to study the existing PRS 
system and provide the recommendations to upgrade the Indian Railway PRS systems.  The 
Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the Railways for strengthening the PRS 
system, desire that a time-frame must be given to M/s Grant Thornton for timely furnishing 
their recommendations and the Ministry should  draw a timeframe to upgrade PRS in order 
to provide seamless e-ticketing service.  The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in the matter. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
9. The Committee had found that tickets could be booked online as well as through 
computerised PRS counters till the preparation of second reservation charts between 30 minutes 
and 5 minutes before the scheduled time of departure of the train. The Committeehad found no 
logic in booking of tickets between the time of 30-5 minutes before the departure of the train when 
there were thousands of RAC/waitlisted ticket s already booked and waiting to be confirmed. The 
Committee had opined that since Tatkal facilities were available for passengers who wished to 
travel at a short notice, all seats of the train found vacant after preparation of the first reservation 
chart which are being prepared 4-5 hours before the departure time should automatically be 
allotted to RAC/Waitlisted passengers to facilitate them to travel as per their plan. The Committee 
had, therefore, desired that the need for preparat ion of second reservation charts should be 
reviewed with a view to facilitate the needy passe ngers and also to refrain the touts from being 
involved in the probable mal-practice during the last minute rush. 
10. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-   
 
With a view to rationalize computerized PRS, the system of preparation of reservation 
charts was rationalized in the year 2015 and following provisions were made: 

4 
 
i. In the computerized PRS of Indian Railways, the reserved accommodation can be 
booked on first-come-first-serve basis. After exhaustion of available accommodation, 
Reservation against Cancellation (RAC)/Waiting list tickets are issued.  
ii. The status of RAC/Waiting list tickets get s updated against the cancellation of tickets 
booked prior to such tickets.  
iii. A provision was introduced to prepare re servation charts at least 4 hours before 
scheduled departure of train i.e. if reservation charts of the train are not prepared by 
the Railways, the system will automatically  release unutilized reservation quota by 
updating the RAC/Wait list status of passengers and finalize the reservation charts. 
These charts were known as First Reserv ation charts. As such, the provision to 
update the RAC/Waiting list status of passenger against the vacant accommodation 
available (at the time of preparation of first reservation chart) is already there.  
iv. After preparation of first reservation char ts, the vacant accommodation available, if 
any, becomes available for booking across  computerized PRS counters of Indian 
Railways as well as through internet. It was done to facilitate passengers in getting 
confirmed accommodation through both across PRS counters as well as through 
internet and to reduce the scope of misuse, as earlier this facility was available only 
as nominated counters at train originating stations only.  
v. It was prescribed that this vacant accommodation can be booked upto preparation of 
second reservation charts and second rese rvation charts are prepared between 30 
minutes and 5 minutes before the scheduled/rescheduled time of departure of train.  
vi. This provision was made to ensure optimal utilisation of available accommodation, 
allow passengers to cancel already booked tickets and to make on-board Ticket 
Checking Staff aware of the cancellation of the bookings made between first 
reservation charts and second reservation charts.  
vii. It is clarified that in case, there is RAC/Wait list in the train, no accommodation can 
be booked in between preparation of first reservation charts and second reservation 
charts i.e. Wait list tickets are not issued after preparation of first reservation charts. 
As such the question of its updation at the time of preparation of second reservation 
chart does not arise.  
viii. The time gap of 30 minutes to 5 minutes before scheduled/rescheduled time of 
departure of train, for preparation of second reservation charts has been kept to give 
Railways the discretion to take out second reservation charts depending upon the 
distance between the charting location and the platform from which the train is going 
to depart.  
ix. At the time of preparation of second reservation charts, vacant accommodation 
available, if any, gets transferred to next remote location facilitating passengers at 
that location to book tickets.  
x. It may be appreciated that the above-said system has given the following benefits: 
a. Brought transparency in the reservation system.  
b. Facilitated passengers to book ticket online or through PRS till preparation of 
second reservation charts saving them from the botheration of coming to the 
nominated train/journey originating station.  
c. Reduced the scope of misuse of the system by unscrupulous elements.  
d. Optimal utilization of available accommodation.  
e. Increased passenger satisfaction. 
 

5 
 
11. The Committee in their earlier recomm endation had deliberated on preparation 
of second reservation chart and had reasone d about no logic in booking of tickets 
between the time of 30-5 minute just before th e departure of the train to facilitate those 
passengers who already had RAC or waitlist ed tickets and also to refrain the touts 
from probable malpractices in the last mi nute rush.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that those passengers having RAC/waitlisted tickets should always be prioritized to 
those passengers who wish to reserve tickets in last minute rush.  The Committee are 
of the view that if the practice of booki ng of tickets between the time of 30-5 minutes 
before the departure of the train is continued, it may burden the PRS system also, as 
the passenger will wait till last to book a confirmed ticket.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to re-visit their decision of 
booking of tickets between the time of 30-5 minutes before the departure of the train 
with a view to facilitate the needy passenger. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
12. The Committee had noted that while senior citizens were granted a fare concession 
amounting to 40-50 percent of their fare on the other hand, offered 'give up' scheme to forego the 
concession and pay full fare if he/she so desires. The Committee, while appreciating the 
scheme,had suggestedfor giving wider publicity of the scheme to create awareness among the 
senior citizens so that only deserving passengers could avail the benefit.  
13. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
In view of Pandemic &Covid Protocol, concession to all categories of passengers (except 4 
categories of Divyangjan, 11 categories of Patients and Students) have been withdrawn 

6 
 
from 20.03.2020. Accordingly, at present conc ession in passenger fare is not admissible to 
Senior citizen which implies that Give it up scheme is not applicable. 
 
14. Given the reply of the Government, the Committee note that as of now, the 
concession to Senior Citizens has been wi thdrawn in view of the Pandemic &Covid 
Protocol.  The Committee are of the view that since the Railways are heading towards 
normalcy, they should consider the concessi ons granted to different categories of 
passengers judiciously.  The Committee desire that concession to senior citizens which 
was available in pre-COVID times may be reviewed and considered at least in Sleeper Class 
and III AC urgently, so that the vulnerable an d the genuinely needy senior citizens could 
avail the facility in these classes. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
15. The Committee had found that the Ministry do not maintain any separate data about the 
number of Privilege Passes/PTOs and complimentary passes issued to railway employees and the 
number of persons who availed them. They even do not maintain data of revenue lost as a result 
of such concessions. While concurring with the reasoning of the Ministry, the Committee had 
impressed to prevent the abuse of such privileges, as well as including the expense in their 
accounting so that it correctly reflects their revenue expenditure. 
 
 
16.  In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
The system of issuance of Physical Pass es/PTOs has already been switched over to -
Pass/PTO mode with the launch of e-Pass/PTO Module as an IT Project of Human 
Resource Management System (HRMS) on 10.08.2020 and made available to all the 
employeesw.e.f. 24.08.2020.   Pursuant to the rolling out of e-Pass/PTO Module, Privilege 
Pass and PTOs are being issued only electronically.  The data of Passes/PTOs issued is 
also presently captured and available in the system. Post Retirement Complimentary 
Passes are also issued under e-Pass module as a preferred option.   
 
With reference to the recommendation to take stringent steps to prevent misuse of 
Passes/PTOs, it is stated that the Railway Servants (Pass) Rules, 1986 provides for 
imposing punishments including dismissal/ removal from Railway Service on detection of 

7 
 
misuse/fraudulent use of Pass/PTOs which serves as a deterrent against misuses.  The 
Pass/PTO holder is also treated at par with other passengers and subjected to all existing 
checks by Ticket Checking Staff, Vigilance Squad, etc. during travel.  Moreover, consequent 
to issuance of Pass/PTOs in electronic mode, misuse/re-use of Passes stands prevented to 
a larger extent. 
 
17. The Committee had noted that the Railways maintain no data about the details of 
Privileges Passes, PTOs and complimentary pass es issued to their employees and revenue 
spent thereon.  They had impressed upon the Mini stry to prevent misuse of such privileges 
and reflect the amount in their account book.  In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry has 
stated that the system of issuance of Privilege Passes/PTOs has now been switched over to 
e-Pass/PTO mode and such users would be captured in the system.  It would prevent 
misuse/re-use of Passes to a large extent.  The Committee find that they have provided 
deterrent in ‘The Railway Servants (Pass) Rules, 1986’ against misuse.  However, the 
Committee find that the reply is silent about maintenance of the data of expenditure 
incurred on Privilege Passes/PTOs and Complimentary Passes etc. to reflect in their 
revenue expenditure.  The Committee, therefor e, reiterate their recommendation and desire 
the Ministry to take appropriate action to mainta in the data of expenditure incurred on such 
privileges to reflect the actual expenditure made per annum. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
18. The Committee had found that the Railways have initiated a number of steps to de-register 
the suspected accounts/Ids of malafide users. In this regard, the IRCTC had deactivated 1.15 Lakh 
Personal User IDs in FY 2018-19, and about 11.20 Lak h Personal User IDs in FY 2019-20. While 
appreciating this initiative, the Committee had urged to maintain the momentum and weed out 
such accounts on a day to day basis. 
 
19. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
 

8 
 
IRCTC continuously monitors the suspects, wh ich involves the following through analysis 
before deactivation of Personal User IDs. 
 
1 The personal user IDs are deactivated based on the pattern or series noticed in the 
user IDs involved in CRIS report, RPF report or vigilance report. 
2 Search is also conducted on all the user IDs which are booking all 6 tickets in a day or 
2 and then similar or same looking ID series are identified. 
3 Those user IDs which have been continuously booking all six tickets in Tatkal 
continuously for last more than 3 months are identified and the tickets booked with 
name on user ID and passenger are compared and then similar series are found out 
and deactivated, if required. 
4 Analysis is also done on the profile details of personal user IDs registered on previous 
day on random basis of their profile address if found that the address details provided 
by user is not correct then all such user IDs are deactivated/suspended. 
 
Practice to weed out suspected users is regularly followed, based on various investigations 
and analysis carried out by IRCTC in coordination with CRIS and Railway Protection Force. 
As a result, in the FY 2021-22 (till Nov-21) about 3.60 Lakh user IDs have been deactivated 
by IRCTC.  The details of IDS deactivated in last five is as under:  
 
 
ID Deactivation Report Financial Year Wise 
S.No. Year Total ID Deactivated (In Lakhs) 
1 2015-16 191301 
2 2016-17 668913 
3 2017-18 127191 
4 2018-19 114737 
5 2019-20 1120236 
6 2020-21 1162493 
7 2021-22 (Till Nov,21) 360124 
Total 3744995 
 
Moreover, a dedicated ITAF (Internet Ticket Anti -Fraud) cell is instituted in IRCTC, which 
continuously monitors the su spected User IDs and takes up the deactivation of Personal 
User IDs, on the basis of extensive analysis. 
Regular drives are being conducted by Railway Protection Force (RPF) against 
persons/agencies found involved in illegally carrying on business of procuring and supplying 
railway tickets, for reserved accommodation. The offenders are booked under the provisions 
of Section 143 of the Railways Act, 1989 and action is taken against them as per law. The 
details of suspected IRCTC User IDs are communicated to IRCTC for its deactivation and 
further necessary action at their end on regular basis. Special drives are also conducted at 
regular intervals especially during the peak rush periods i.e. festivals and holidays. 
 
20. While appreciating the initiatives of the Railways to de-register the suspected 
accounts of malafide users, the Committee had urged the Ministry to maintain the 

9 
 
momentum and weed out such accounts on day-to-day basis.  They are happy to find that 
the Railways among other things, have institut ed a dedicated ‘Internet Ticket Anti-Fraud’ 
(ITAF) Cell in IRCTC to regularly monitor th e suspected user IDs besides regular drives by 
RPF against persons/agencies involved in ille gal business of procuring/supplying railway 
tickets for reserved accommodation.  The Committee note with concern that during the year 
2019-20,the total number of IDs deactivated were 1120236 which increased to 1162493 in the 
year 2020-21.  The Committee feel that there are some inherent drawbacks in the system 
which need to be looked into.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommend to take corrective 
measures and to upgrade the PRS system to avo id increasing number of IDs of malafide 
users.  The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in the matter. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
The Committee note that the Indian railways not only provide the most economical and environment 
friendly mode of transport but also play a vital role in socio-economic development of the country. They 
cover a long way to carry about 23 million passengers per day with th eir 13,500 passenger trains. With this 
magnitude of passengers it becomes imperative on the part of Rail ways to facilitate their passengers with a 
proper system of booking tickets from  any station to travel anywhere in the country in their coaches. The 
Committee find that the Passenger Reservation System (PRS), the main customer facing application of the 
Indian Railways, has been functional over the last three decades. Moving from the manual mode of PRS to 
Integrated Multiple Train Passenger Reservation System  (IMPRESS), the Indian Railways have now shifted 
to a new ticketing software i.e. Country Wide Network for Computerized Enhanced Reservation and 
Ticketing (CONCERT) system duly maintained by the Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS). The 
Committee are of the opinion that the emergence of new software has not only reduced the processing time 
manifold but also gave the rail users the opportunity to get real time information on all trains on their 
preferred route/destination as well as current position  of waitlisted tickets etc. enabling them greater 
flexibility in planning their journeys  which were not possible with the manual system of ticketing. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that with the advent of the PRS, mal-practices in ticketing have been 
curbed to a very large extent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) is a nationw ide online passenger reservation and ticketing 
system. PRS handles reservations, m odifications, cancellations , and refunds, reserving over 1.6 million 
seats and berths daily and handling more than 10 crore total transactions per day. PRS has been 
architected, designed, developed, implemented and being maintained by Centre for Railway Information 
Systems (CRIS). 
PRS is continuously upgraded for enhancing booking facilitation and infrastructure capacity. In 2014, 
the Next Generation E-ticketing (NGeT) system was launched to provide seamless e-ticketing services - 
higher booking loads and better user interface. 
Moreover, in Dec, 2020, e-ticketing website www.i rctc.co.in and IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App, 
were upgraded which are used for booking of Railway tickets ‘online’. 
 
 

11 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
Though the Committee appreciate the initiative of the Railways of launching the new software for 
booking tickets, yet they note that lakhs of passengers are left in lurch per day due to non-confirmation of 
their waitlisted tickets due to one reason or another. They are forced to opt for other modes of transport like 
bus and airlines etc. resulting into loss to railway exchequer. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
given the current scenario of railway finances coupled with growing customer expectations and 
conveniences especially in the face of increasing competition from road and low-cost airlines, the Indian 
Railways should make all out efforts to make their ticketing system more robust and weed out inherent 
deficiencies that hinder the process of ticketing with the ultimate aim of passenger convenience and 
passenger satisfaction. The Committee would also like the Railways to address the various technical, 
financial and resource constraints which hamper the working of its passenger reservation system. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has taken several steps from time to time to modernise the ticketing process.  
Next Generation e-Ticketing (NGeT) system, has been upgraded constantly to handle increased load of 
15,000 tickets per minute in 2016-17, 18,000 tickets per minute in 2017-18 and 20,000 tickets per minute in 
2018-19. Presently, IRCTC Website has a capacity of booking over 25,000 tickets per minute. A record 
number of 26,458 tickets were booked in a minute on 5 March, 2020. 
Ministry of Railways has revamped and upgraded its e-ticketing website www.irctc.co.in and Indian 
Railway Catering And Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) Rail Connect Mobile App, which are used for booking 
of ‘online’ Railway tickets on 31st December, 2020. Ra ilway customer has been the focus of the design of 
the revamped application. Novel user personalization features linked to user log in have been incorporated, 
along with customizations for seamless travel exper ience, one stop train selection for booking, and 
integrated booking for meals and accommodation with tickets. 
While the PRS in its current format is highly effi cient, but the volume of data and transactions 
required to be handled is huge and increasing multi-fo ld. Indian Railways is committed to the continuous 
modernization of PRS. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3)  
The Committee would like to stress that while certain deficiencies in PRS like difficult access, lower 
speed and efficiency are detr imental to its smart functioning, yet grave issues like possib ility of unethical 
practices and blatant cont ravening of rules by agents etc. may erode  the credibility of the Indian railways 
and dilute their public image. The Committee wish to point out the Ministry that the Indian Railways, being 
the backbone of the nation-wide transport system in the country carrying millions of passengers every day, 
any manipulation in reservation system would not only affect their journey but also impact upon their lives 

12 
 
too either directly or indirectly. To this end, the Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to explore more 
robust ticketing systems currently in vogue in countries  having high rail density/rail users and adopt best 
practices commensurate to that system to streng then the Indian Railways passenger reservation system. 
They also desire the Ministry to explore the possibilities to collaborate with renowned institutions/premier 
institutes of repute /organizations with a view to upgrade and refine the PRS in Indian Railways. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has revamped and upgraded its e-ticketing website www.irctc.co.in and Indian 
Railway Catering And Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) Rail Connect Mobile App, which are used for booking 
of ‘online’ Railway tickets on 31st December, 2020. Ra ilway customer has been the focus of the design of 
the revamped application. Novel user personalization features linked to user log in have been incorporated, 
along with customizations for seamless travel exper ience, one stop train selection for booking, and 
integrated booking for meals and accommodation with tickets. 
 
While the PRS in its current format is highly effi cient, but the volume of data and transactions 
required to be handled is huge and increasing multi-fo ld. Indian Railways is committed to the continuous 
modernization of PRS. Indian Railways has instituted an expert study through IRCTC, for strengthening the 
core application and backbone infrastructure, for efficient and sustainable aspects to perform adequately by 
providing facilitation for new func tionalities, interoperability among other railway modules, external 
applications with more maturity. The study includes the best practices of the ticketing systems around the 
world. M/s Grant Thornton, which is one of the wo rld’s leading advisory firm, has been engaged by IRCTC 
to study the existing PRS system and provide the recommendations to upgrade the Indian Railway PRS 
systems. Moreover, CRIS also seeks recommendations of M/s Gartner, which is a leading technology 
research and consulting company, time to time for the refinement of e-ticketing interface. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
The Committee find that currently Indian Railways have more than 4043 reservation centres with 
over 10725 terminals across the country. These include major stations, non-rail heads and other locations 
such as tourist centres and district headquarters etc. They note that though the Railways have made all out 
efforts to proliferate the reservation centres all over the network, yet the Committee are not satisfied with 
these numbers keeping in view the immense length and breadth of the country. The Committee would like 
the Ministry to take proactive actions to further prolif erate these centres across the country and explore the 
possibilities of mobile PRS etc. to get them reach to non-rail head centres especially in remote locations 
having poor or no road/internet con nectivity till a stable PRS is set up there so that passengers of these 
areas are also benefited at par with other areas of the country. The Committee would also like to suggest 
the Ministry to cover the sites of Technical hubs/p rofessional colleges (engineeri ng, medical etc.), large 

13 
 
industrial units, manufacturing plants etc. having sizable migrant population to help them to fulfill their travel 
needs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The provision of Passenger Reservation System (PRS) at railway stations, defence locations, post 
offices and other non-rail head locations is made as per  the policy issued vide letter No.2008/C&IS/New 
PRS Policy/15 dated 04.10.2013, in supersession of the earlier guidelines.  They are updated from time to 
time and uploaded on the website of Ministry of Railways. 
 
As regards, exploring the possibilities of mobile PR S, earlier ‘mobile ticketing vans’ were introduced 
in selected cities, however, due to very less patronage  and high cost of procurement and maintenance, the 
scheme was discontinued. To provide ticket booking facility for the people in far flung hilly and remote areas 
of the country, continuous efforts are being made by Indian Railways. Non-conventional ticket booking 
systems have also been explored, such as Mobile ticketing vehicles. Mobile App for unreserved ticketing 
and Online Web & Mobile App based e-ticketing of reserved tickets, have also been introduced. These 
measures are available to people in far flung hilly and remote areas. 
 
As regards providing PRS facility at sites of  Technical hubs/professional colleges (engineering, 
medical etc.), large industrial units, manufacturing plants etc., policy already exist for considering PRS 
facility in Government Universities & Institute of eminence.  Privately owned educational 
institutes/universities etc. may tie up with IRCTC on the pattern of corporate houses or they may opt for 
internet kiosks to have internet booking in their premises. 
 
Passengers can book tickets from anywhere using the online e-ticketing through website and Mobile 
App.   
 
Ministry of Railways has taken several steps to modernise and strengthen the Online - ticketing 
process, enabling passengers to book tickets from anyw here and at any-time. Next Generation e-Ticketing 
(NGeT) system, has been upgraded constantly to handl e increased load of online tickets. At present, about 
80% of the total reserved tickets are being booked online and it is becoming the preferred mode of ticket 
booking due to the convenience offered. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5)  
The Committee note that while there are several options available with the passengers for booking 
of reserved tickets for travelling on Indian Railways such as PRS counters, Postal PRS counters, Yatri 

14 
 
Ticket Suvidha Kendras, etc., yet the majority of ti ckets are booked online through the IRCTC website/ app 
which is one of the most convenient modes of passenger reservation. The Committee find that the reserved 
tickets booked online through IRCTC website/app during 20 19-20 is three times greater than that of tickets 
purchased at physical locations. However, this websit e is usually slow and particularly during rush hours 
considerable time is consumed in booking a ticket through it. The Committee would like to point out that e-
ticketing facility is not only conv enient for the passengers but also hel ps in decongesti ng railway counters 
and eliminates the menace of touts as well as the possibility of receip t of fake currency at counters. 
Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry the need of regularly strengthening and 
upgrading the capacity of the IRCTC website/servers so as to make it more robust to handle greater traffic 
with minimal turnaround time. They would also like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The NGeT System, launched in 2014 for strength ening online ticketing, is continuously being 
upgraded for its capacity. E-ticketing has reached up to 80.5 % share (till Dec-2021) of total reserved tickets 
on Indian Railways. The highest online ticket booking was 15,21,323 tickets, with 27,18,561 passengers on 
12.11.2021. IRCTC has a user base of more than 10 Cror es registered users out of which 7.60 crores are 
active users. E-Ticket statistics show constant increase in booking of tickets online, which is as under: 
FY E-Ticket share of total reserved tickets on Indian 
Railways 
2016-17 59.9% 
2017-18 65.8 % 
2018-19 70.1% 
2019-20 72.8% 
2020-21 79.6 % 
2021-22(till Dec- 21) 80.5 % 
  
Further, Ministry of Railways has revamped and upgraded its e-ticketing website www.irctc.co.in and 
Indian Railway Catering And Tourism Corporation (IRC TC) Rail Connect Mobile App, which are used for 
booking of ‘online’ Railway tickets on 31st December, 2020. Railway customer has been the focus of the 
design of the revamped application. Novel user pers onalization features linked to user log in have been 
incorporated, along with customizations for seamless travel experience, one stop train selection for booking, 
and integrated booking for meals and accommodation with tickets. 
While the PRS in its current format is highly effi cient, but the volume of data and transactions 
required to be handled is huge and increasing multi-fo ld. Indian Railways is committed to the continuous 
modernization of PRS. Indian Railways has instituted an expert study through IRCTC, for strengthening the 
core application and backbone infrastructure, for efficient and sustainable aspects to perform adequately by 
providing facilitation for new func tionalities, interoperability among other railway modules, external 
applications with more maturity. M/s Grant Thornton, wh ich is one of the world’s leading advisory firm, has 
been engaged by IRCTC to study the existing PRS sy stem and provide the recommendations to upgrade 

15 
 
the Indian Railway PRS systems. Moreover, CRIS also seeks recommendations of M/s Gartner, which is a 
leading technology research and consulting company, time to time for the refinement of PRS systems. 
Moreover, it is pertinent to mention that the ticket booking during Tatkal periods, takes slightly longer 
time due to several Checks deployed on IRCTC e-Ticketing Website and IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App 
to check the misuse of Tatkal Tickets by touts. Th e key system ‘checks’ during Tatkal booking period on 
online ticketing are - 
• Agent booking (except Defence and Paramilitary Forces) completely restricted from 10:00   to 10:15 
hours and 11:00 to 11:15 hours for opening Booking in Tatkal Quota. 
• Only One Tatkal ticket per day/per train is  allowed to Retail Service Providers (agents). 
• Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per user-id from 1000 Hrs to 1200 Hrs. 
• Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per IP from 1000 to 1200 hours. 
• Random Security question has been implemented for Tatkal Ticket bookings. 
• Blocking of Foreign IP addresses at peak time has been done at network level. 
• Individual users are logged out in case enquiries exceed 25 per session during opening hrs i.e. from 
0800 to 1200 hours. 
• Only one (1) booking in one user login session except for return/onward journey between 0800 and 
1200 hours. To do another booking user needs to logout and login again. 
• Individual users are allowed only 6 tickets in a month, unless authenticated through Aadhaar in 
which 12 tickets can be booked in a month to prevent mass bookings by a single user. 
  
CAPTCHA Related Checks 
• Variable minimum time check has been implemented at passenger input and payment process. 
• Captcha has been implemented in IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App and e-Ticketing Website Login 
process. 
• CAPTCHA Implemented in Registration, Logi n and Booking Summary Details Page to minimize 
fraudulent booking through automation software in Website booking process. 
• CAPTCHA is in place to check booking in batch mode and through Scripting related tools on the 
IRCTC e-ticketing website and Mobile App. 
• While in the past ARP ticket was allowed to be booked in 35 seconds, now the time limit has been 
increased to 70 seconds, with t he breakup of 50 seconds for pass enger form filling and 20 seconds 
for online payment through banks. 
• It is not possible for anybody to book a ticket in less than 70 seconds and no case of breach has 
been observed in the system. 
• Google V3 reCaptcha has been deployed during ARP opening on Website and Mobile App to detect 
users, who are using machines for fast filling dat a and using multiple user IDs on single machines. 
V3 reCaptcha employs Artificial intelligence and Machine Learning techniques and depending upon 

16 
 
the feedback of V3 reCaptcha, a physical captcha of  V2 version with increasing difficulty level is 
given to users. Suspected users are ultimately thrown out of booking system in the midst of the 
booking process. 
  
Others  
• Individuals are allowed only 2 ARP tickets per user-id from 0800 Hrs to 1000Hrs. 
• Agent booking (except Defence and Paramilitary Forces) completely restricted from 0800 hours to 
0815 hours for opening ARP Booking in GN quota 
• Only 4 passengers allowed in TATKAL ticket. 
• 120 Days ARP check for general ticket. AR P booking not allowed before 0800 hours. 
• Incoming day TATKAL booking for AC classes not allowed before 1000 hours. 
• Incoming day TATKAL booking for Non-AC classes not allowed before 1100 hours. 
  
IRCTC has been continuously putting efforts to check misuse and at the same time taking into the 
consideration customer satisfaction, convenience and enhanced ticketing experience to the customer. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
The Committee note that currently the PRS processe s over one crore transactions per day involving 
about 5 crore passengers on an average. Though the system has been empowered to handle a maximum 
of 28,000 transactions per minute (TPM), yet the a verage transaction per minute for the year 2019-20 was 
about 8711. The Committee, therefore, desire the Minist ry to act proactively and take all preparedness to 
further strengthen the capacity of server/website to yiel d desired results so that no hardship is faced by the 
users on this count. 
 
Reply of the Government 
PRS is continuously upgraded for enhancing booking facilitation and infrastructure capacity. In 2014, 
the Next Generation E-ticketing (NGeT) system was launched to provide seamless e-ticketing services - 
higher booking loads and better user interface. 
 
While the PRS in its current format is highly effi cient, but the volume of data and transactions 
required to be handled is huge and increasing multi-fo ld. Indian Railways is committed to the continuous 
modernization of PRS. Indian Railways has instituted an expert study through IRCTC, for strengthening the 
core application and backbone infrastructure, for efficient  and sustainable aspects to perform adequately by 
providing facilitation for new func tionalities, interoperability among other railway modules, external 
applications with more maturity. M/s Grant Thornton, wh ich is one of the world’s leading advisory firms, has 

17 
 
been engaged by IRCTC to study the existing PRS sy stem and provide the recommendations to upgrade 
the Indian Railway PRS systems.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee note that, as at present, in case a vacancy arises on account of passenger no-show, 
the same is allotted by on-board ticket checking staff to RAC passenger. The Committee are happy to find 
that the railways have facilitated the Train Ticket Examinees with t he hand held terminals for ease of 
booking available seats and to ensure automation so as to bring more transparency in their functioning. 
Sometimes, these staff do not co-operate with the passengers in addressing their queries. Since they have 
overall control over it and also it is not feasible for them to interact/respond each and every passenger’s 
queries the Committee would like the Ministry to put in place some mechanism in the respective coaches so 
that passengers could approach straight and witness the current status of seat/berth confirmation. They 
would also like to update information on real time basis for greater transparency in the allocation of vacant 
seats/berths onboard trains. 
Reply of the Government 
System is available on internet which provides the details of vacant berths post charting.  Current 
Booking facility is available over the internet. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9)  
The Committee note that Tatkal Scheme was introduced to provide reservation to those passengers 
who have to undertake journey at short notice. Tatkal ticket is booked on payment of premium charges on 
'first come-first-served' basis. Currently, this is booked from 1000 hrs. on the previous day of the journey for 
AC Classes and at 1100 hrs. for non-AC Classes at Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and Indian 
Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) we bsite. The Committee further note that Tatkal 
charges are levied at the rate of 10% of basic fare for second class and 30% of basic fare for all other 
classes subject to minimum and maximum charges. For example, for a minimum distance of 100 kms a 
second sitting reserved class ticket will accrue a minimum Tatkal charge of Rs.10 and a maximum of Rs.15 
over and above base fare. Similarly, in the Executive class for a minimum distance of 250 kms, the Tatkal 
charges will range between Rs.400 and Rs.500. The Committee while appreciating the scheme which is 
particularly aimed at meeting the urgent/ emergent travel requirement of passengers, are apprehensive over 
the possible involvement of touts whose unscrupulous activities may inhibit bonafide passengers to avail the 
benefits of this scheme. The Committee are of the opinion that Railways should be ever vigilant to threats 
posed by these elements in both the physical and cyber sphere. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 

18 
 
put in place a stringent monitoring mechanism to curb the misuse of the scheme and refrain the 
unscrupulous elements/touts from being involved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways are aware of the scope of misuse Tatkal reservation scheme and has already taken 
various steps to avoid its misuse. Concerted efforts are also being made by Indian Railway Catering & 
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) to provide seamless, safe e- ticketing service and to keep a check on the 
scope of its misuse. The various steps taken by In dian Railways and IRCTC to improve the working of 
Indian Railways’ reservation system for individual users are as under: 
General Restrictions:  
a. One of the passengers booked on Tatkal ticket has to produce any one of the prescribed proofs of 
identity (in original) dur ing the journey failing which all the passengers booked on th at ticket are 
considered travelling without ticket and charged accordingly.  
b. The timings of opening of booking under Tatkal  scheme on the opening day of reservation have 
been staggered to 1000 hours & 1100 hours on the previous day of journey from train originating 
station for AC and non-AC classes respectively.  
c. The facility of change of name  is not permitted on the booking made under Tatkal Scheme,  
d. No duplicate Tatkal tickets are issued. In excepti onal circumstances, it is issued on payment of full 
fare including Tatkal Charges.  
e. No refund is granted on the confirmed Tatkal tickets except under certain special circumstances 
prescribed in the scheme, like late running of trains, running of train on diverted route etc.  
f. Maximum four passengers per PNR for Tatkal Tickets. 
Checks deployed on IRCTC e-Ticketing Website and IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App  
g. Agent booking (except Defence and  Paramilitary Forces) completely restricted from 10:00 to 10:15 
hours and 11:00 to 11:15 hours for opening Booking in Tatkal Quota.  
h. Only One Tatkal ticket per day/per train is  allowed to Retail Service Providers (agents).  
i. Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per user-id from 1000 Hrs to 1200 Hrs.  
j. Individual users are allowed only 2 Tatkal tickets per IP from 1000 to 1200 hours.  
k. Random Security question has been implemented for Tatkal Ticket bookings.  
l. Blocking of Foreign IP addresses at peak time has been done at network level.  
m. Individual users are logged out in case enquiries exceed 25 per session during opening hrs i.e. from 
0800 to 1200 hours. 
n. Only one (1) booking in one user login session except for return/onward journey between 0800 and 
1200 hours. To do another booking user needs to logout and login again.  
o. Individual users are allowed only 6 tickets in a month, unless authenticated through Aadhaar in 
which 12 tickets can be booked in a month to prevent mass bookings by a single user. 

19 
 
CAPTCHA Related Checks 
p. Variable minimum time check has been implemented at passenger input and payment process.  
q. Captcha has been implemented in IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App and e-Ticketing Website Login 
process.  
r. CAPTCHA Implemented in Registration, L ogin and Booking Summary Details Page to minimize 
fraudulent booking through automation software in Website booking process.  
s. CAPTCHA is in place to check booking in batch mode and through Scripting related tools on the 
IRCTC e-ticketing website and Mobile App.  
t. While in the past Advance Reservation Period (ARP) ticket i.e. tickets being booked on the opening 
day of reservation as per ARP) was allowed to be booked in 35 seconds, now the time limit has 
been increased to 70 seconds, with the breakup of 50 seconds for passenger form filling and 20 
seconds for online payment through banks.  
u. It is not possible for anybody to book a ticket in less than 70 seconds and no case of breach has 
been observed in the system.  
v. Google V3 reCaptcha has been deployed during ARP opening on Website and Mobile App to detect 
users, who are using machines for fast filling data and using multip le user IDs on single machines. 
V3 reCaptcha employs Artificial intelligence and Machine Learning techniques and depending upon 
the feedback of V3 reCaptcha, a physical captcha of  V2 version with increasing difficulty level is 
given to users. Suspected users are ultimately thrown out of booking system in the midst of the 
booking process. 
Others 
w.  Individuals are allowed only 2 ARP tickets per user-id from 0800 Hrs to 1000Hrs.  
x. Agent booking (except Defence and Paramilitary Forces) completely restricted from 0800 hours to 
0815 hours for opening ARP Booking in GN quota  
y. 120 Days ARP check for general ticket. ARP booking not allowed before 0800 hours. 
Regular drives are being conducted by Railway Protection Force (RPF) against persons/agencies 
found involved in illegally carryi ng on business of procurin g and supplying railway tickets, for reserved 
accommodation. The offenders are booked under the provi sions of Section 143 of the Railways Act, 1989 
and action is taken against them as per law. The details of suspected IRCTC User IDs are communicated to 
IRCTC for its deactivation and further necessary action at their end on regular basis. Special drives are also 
conducted at regular intervals especially during the peak rush periods i.e. festivals and holidays. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee are of the considered view that the Indian Railways as a part of social service 
obligation, provide the cheaper mode of transport to  a huge magnitude of passengers per day. However, 

20 
 
the Tatkal scheme provides much needed relief to the people having urgent need to travel by paying 
premium charges. In the opinion of the Committee, the charges levied on the tatkal tickets a little 
unjustifiable and putting a huge burden particularly on those passengers who are financially weak and are 
forced to travel in urgency to meet their kith and kin or so for a very short distance also. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to devise a measures for a pro rata fare for the distance travelled. The Committee note 
that most of the tatkal tickets are booked online. The passengers opting to book tickets at PRS counters 
physically are facing problems and the accommodation availability exhausted when their turn comes after a 
long queue. They would like to suggest the Ministry to  provide a fix quota for Tatkal reservations at PRS 
counters so that the passengers having no internet access and visiting PRS counters for the needful could 
book a ticket. Such a step would let them avail the benefits of Tatkal ticket reservation in a more impartial 
and just manner.  
Reply of the Government 
Charges being realized under Tatkal reservation scheme – to be fixed on pro-rata fare basis: 
 Charges to be realized for booking tickets under Tatkal scheme in different classes have been kept 
keeping in view the class of travel viz. for 2S, these charges are nominal varying between Rs. 10 -15 
only. While for Sleeper, these are Rs. 100-200 and for other classes, charges are Rs. 125-500. 
 It may be appreciated that under Tatkal schem e, confirmed reserved accommodation is being 
provided approximately one day ahead of the day of journey from train originating station and hence, 
these nominal charges are justified. Fixing these charges on pro-rata basis will not make much 
difference specially in lower classes and will make it more complicated. 
 
Fixing of quota for Tatkal reservation at PRS and internet: 
 On Indian Railways, reserved accommodation can be booked on first come first served basis both 
through computerized Passenger Reservation System (PRS) counters as well as through internet. 
 Demand for reserved accommodation is not uniform and it varies during lean and peak periods. 
During peak periods, the reserved accommodation specifically in higher classes and on popular 
routes gets exhausted within short duration of opening of reservation, whereas in lower classes and 
on less popular routes, this is available for comparatively longer periods. 
 As per present trend, approximately 80% of reserved accommodation (both general as well as 
Tatkal) is being booked through internet and remaining through computerized PRS. Indian Railways 
provide its passengers the facility to  book reserved tickets on firs t- come-first-serve basis and no 
separate demarcation has been done for booking of accommodation through PRS or internet. 
Earmarking separate accommodati on for one mode will deprive the passengers approaching the 
other modes for booking re served tickets and will no t be desirable and also agai nst the principle of 
first come first served basis. 
 

21 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
The Committee are glad to note that the Indian Railways have launched the VIKALP scheme or 
alternate train accommodation system to help wait listed passengers to get a vacant berth in another train 
running on the same route whose time of departure is upto 72 hours from the date of journey of the original 
ticket. The Committee also note that the Vikalp option which has primarily been brought forward to assure a 
seat on the route selected by the passengers, has been well received by the passengers having not only an 
option of not only getting a reserved seat/berth but also of securing a higher accommodation in one of the 
elite trains. The Committee are happy to note with satisfaction that the Railways which were earlier plagued 
by huge waiting- lists, have found a panacea to this chronic problem. The Committee would, however, like 
to recommend the Ministry to continue this scheme and find out the rationale behind heavy patronage and 
utmost importance given to that popular train for tr avel by the passengers and on the other hand lesser 
attention given to trains having vacant seats/berths fo r accommodating VIKALP opting passengers. In their 
opinion, the arrival/departure timing s, punctuality, travel time, station of origin/destination, halts, 
facilities/amenities etc. may be the factors for popularity  of the trains resulting in waitlisted passengers. The 
Committee feel that if corrective actions are taken to provide similar conditions to Vikalp trains running on 
the same route, it would not only increase ridership but also reduce the waiting lists on popular trains 
enabling a larger number of people to travel. 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways (IR) will continue with Alternate Train Accommodation Scheme known as “VIKALP” 
for the benefit of Wait listed passengers. As far as adjustment of timings of less popular trains is concerned, 
it is stated that time-table of train services is dep endent on various factors which include the nature of 
service, availability of path enroute,  availability of terminals, etc. Besi des, subject to oper ational feasibility, 
availability of resources, etc, rationalization of time  table is a continuous and on-going exercise on Indian 
Railways. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
The Ministry have informed that the Flexi fare scheme has been introduced in Rajdhani, Shatabdi 
and Duronto trains in 2016. Under this scheme, the fa re is increased by 10% with every 10% of berths sold 
subject to a maximum limit of 1.5 times in second AC classes, sleeper, second sitting reserved, AC chair 
car and 1.4 times in AC third class. The Committee note that while no change has been made in the fare of 
AC first and executive classes but based on the feedback received on the scheme, the railways have now 
rationalised the scheme. The Flexi fa re scheme has now been di scontinued from 15 trains till further review 
and from 32 trains during a pre-defined lean period of three months (February, March and August). 
Moreover the maximum gap of Flexi fares has been reduced from 1.5 times to 1.4 times in all Flexi fare 

22 
 
applicable classes. In addition to these measures,  the Railways are now offering meaningful discounts 
where class -wise occupancy is less than 60% four days prior to the scheduled departure of trains. Though 
the Committee are happy to note that the Indian Railways are now rationalising Flexi fares yet they are 
constrained to note that flexi/dynamic pricing appears to be somewhat discriminatory given the facts that 
fares of the Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Durontos are already higher as compared to other mail and express 
trains and are almost at par and at some instances higher than those of budget airlines. The Committee are 
of the view that with an enhanced fare structure in place, passengers with modest income or the financially 
disadvantaged rail users may not be able to afford these fares and may not opt for these trains. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry  should, in greater public interest, review the 
flexi/dynamic fare mechanism and take a prudent decision of pricing of fares which are balanced and based 
on equal footing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
From many decades, Railways are running different types of train services with different fare 
structures to cater to the demands of various category of passengers. The important fare structures over 
Indian Railways as per the category of train services are Suburban locals fare, Non-Suburban local fare, 
Mail/Express fare, Superfast trains fare, Garib Rath Express fare, Gaatiman fares, Rajdhani fare, Shatabdi 
fare, Duronto fare, Mahamana Fare, Vande Bharat fare, Humsafar fare, Tatkal fare, Special trains on 
special charges, etc.,  
Passenger fare in most of the classes is very low. Passenger segment over IR has suffered 
continuous loss however no substantial increase in passenger fare has taken place for last one and half 
decade. In view of this in order to increase the revenue and to lessen the recurring loss the concept of flexi 
fare scheme has been introduced. 
Moreover, for the year 2019-20, the total loss in  Passenger services including Sundry earnings is 
approximately Rs. 50633 crore. 
In view of above the concept of flexi fare has been introduced in Rajdhani, Shatabdi & Duronto trains 
w.e.f. 09.09.2016. Under this scheme, at present the fare increases by 10% with every 10% of berths sold 
subject to maximum limit of 1.4 times in all classes (Before 15.03.2019 maximum limit was 1.5 times in 2nd 
AC, AC chair car, Second and sleeper classes).  No change has been made in the fare of 1st AC and 
Executive class. Other supplementary charges like reservation charges, Superfast charge, Catering 
charges, Goods and service tax etc., as applicable is levied separately. 
Moreover, Railways and Airlines are different modes of transport, which are not comparable in the 
terms of volume, connectivity as well as convenience.  
There is no fixed maximum limit of fare in Airlines whereas Railways have fixed maximum fare 
throughout the year. Airline fare varies significantly  depending on time of operation, stoppages, travel 
duration, Origin – Destination pair, carrier etc. Rail ways’ fare may or may not be higher than the air fare 

23 
 
depending upon the class of travel as well as factors like peak/ lean periods. It is the choice of the 
passengers to opt either for Railway or Airlines as per their convenience and requirement.  
Apart from above, Alternative train services on normal fare structure are available over Indian 
Railways on the routes of Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains and Railway also serves a large number of 
passengers boarding/de-boarding at intermediate stations. 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
 
The Committee note that as part of their Social Service Obligations, the Indian Railways extends 
concession in passenger fare to more than 50 catego ries of passengers. The element of concession varies 
from 10% to 100% and are permitted for certain categories of Divyang passengers, 11 types of patients, 
senior citizens, freedom fighters, Press correspondents, war widows, sports persons etc. The Committee 
also find that the Indian Railways also provides concessions to railway employees by way of Privilege 
Passes /Privilege Ticket Order and complimentary passes. The Committee further find that the quantum of 
revenue forgone in the passenger earnings segment as a result of concessions was Rs.1,670 cr during 
2016- 17, Rs.1,810 cr during 2017-18 and Rs.1,995 cr during 2018-19 which is a substantial burden on the 
Railway finances. The Committee feel that while concessions are required to maintain social equity, yet 
given the precarious finances of the Indian Railways and especially in respect of the dismal earnings of their 
passenger segment, there is an urgent need to asses s its impact on their finances. The Committee would 
like to recommend the Ministry to take proactive steps to review the criterion for granting of concessions 
with a view to contain the amount of concessions granted. They also desire the Ministry to have an internal 
mechanism in place to exercise control over the misus e of Privilege Passes /Privilege Ticket Order and 
complimentary passes by their employees and punitive action taken wherever required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Railway vigilance investigate the complaints and conduct preventive checks on the aspect of misuse 
privilege pass/PTO, duty pass and other complimentary passes issued to railway employee. In case any 
misuse is detected, action is taken in accordance with rules. 
 
The Railway Servants (Pass) Rules, 1986 (Second Edition – 1993) provides for imposing 
punishments including dismissal/ removal from Rail way Service on detection of misuse/fraudulent use of 
Pass/PTOs which serves as a deterrent against misuses.  The Pass/PTO holder is also treated at par with 
other passengers and subjected to all existing checks by Ticket Checking Staff, Vigilance Squad, etc. during 
travel.  Moreover, consequent to issuance of Pass/PTOs in electronic mode, misuse/re-use of Passes 
stands prevented to a larger extant. 

24 
 
 
In view of Pandemic & Covid Protocol with effect from 20.03.2020, Indian Railways rationalised the 
concession in  fare and in place of 53, concession is provided to only four categories of Divyangjan, eleven 
categories of Patients and Students. Cost of granting concessions weigh heavily on Railways, hence scope 
of concessions has not been extended to other categories of passengers even after restoration of most of 
the trains. 
 
As regards internal mechanism to check misuse of Privilege pass/Privilege Ticket 
Orders/Complimentary passes, it is apprised that online tickets can also be booked by Railway employees 
including pensioners w.e.f. 29.07.2020, using their Pr ivilege Passes/Privilege Ticket Orders which are 
generated through online system. Online issuance of Privilege Passes/Privilege Ticket Order - ensures 
transparency of records as there will be no manual intervention. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
The Committee note that while senior citizens are granted a fare concession amounting to 40-50 
percent of their fare on the other hand, offered 'give up' scheme to forego the concession and pay full fare if 
he/she so desires. It is seen that those who can afford to pay full fare, are availing the concession. The 
Committee while appreciating the scheme would like to suggest the Ministry to give a wider publicity of the 
scheme and create awareness among the senior citizens so that only deserving passengers could avail the 
benefit. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In view of Pandemic & Covid Protocol, conces sion to all categories of passengers (except 4 
categories of Divyangjan, 11 categories of Patients and Students) have been withdrawn from 20.03.2020. 
Accordingly, at present concession in passenger fare is not admissible to Senior citizen which implies that 
Give it up scheme is not applicable. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
 
The Committee find that the Ministry does not maintain any separate data regarding the number of 
Privilege Passes/PTOs and complimentary passes issued to railway employees and the number of persons 
who availed them. They even do not maintain data of revenue lost as a result of such concessions. The 
Committee do not concur with the reasoning of the Ministry. While fully acknowledging the fact that certain 
concessions may be granted by the transporter, they would like to point out that the revenue expenditure of 
the Indian Railways have to be met entirely out of t heir internal resources and any misappropriation of such 

25 
 
concessions may erode their internal finances. Therefore, the Committee would like to impress upon the 
Ministry to act proactively and make adequate provisions and take stringent steps to prevent the abuse of 
such privileges to the extent possible. To this end, t he Committee would also like the Ministry to include the 
expense in their accounting so that it correctly reflects their revenue expenditure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The system of issuance of Physical Passes/PTOs has already been switched over to e-Pass/PTO 
mode with the launch of e-Pass/PTO Module as an IT Project of Human Resource Management System 
(HRMS) on 10.08.2020 and made avail able to all the employees w.e.f. 24 .08.2020.   Pursuant to the rolling 
out of e-Pass/PTO Module, Privilege Pass and PTOs are being issued only electronically.  The data of 
Passes/PTOs issued is also presently captured and available in the system. Post Retirement 
Complimentary Passes are also issued under e-Pass module as a preferred option.   
 
With reference to the recommendation to take stringent steps to prevent misuse of Passes/PTOs, it 
is stated that the Railway Servants (Pass) Ru les, 1986 provides for imposing punishments including 
dismissal/ removal from Railway Service on detection of misuse/fraudulent use of Pass/PTOs which serves 
as a deterrent against misuses.  The Pass/PTO holder is also treated at par with other passengers and 
subjected to all existing checks by Ticket Checking Staff, Vigilance Squad, etc. during travel.  Moreover, 
consequent to issuance of Pass/PTOs in electronic mode, misuse/re-use of Passes stands prevented to a 
larger extant.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  
The Committee note that Indian Railways provides concessions to freedom fighters and their 
widows. The Committee appreciate this initiative of the Mi nistry and are of the firm opinion that this noble 
service of the Railways is an apt tribute for the trials and tribulation borne by our freedom fighters for gaining 
incredible independence. The Committee note that Complimentary Card Passes are issued on lifetime basis 
free rail travel in First Class and 2AC along with one companion in the same class by any train over all 
Indian Railways except Metro Railway, Kolkata. The Committee find that from 2016-18, a total of 10435 
Complimentary Card Passes have been issued. The Committee observe that almost 75 years have elapsed 
since independence and any freedom fighter has to be in the age group of more than 85-90 years. Though, 
a hefty expenditure of Rs.33,68,21,743 is reimbursed by the Ministry of Home Affairs on this count, the 
Committee wish to stress the need to have genuine proof for identification of the intended users with a view 
to prevent the misuse of the Scheme. The Committee, ther efore, desire the Ministry to be vigilant and take 
stringent actions to avoid misuse of these passes and und ertake regular audit. They also desire to arrange 
issuance of smart cards to bona-fide pass holders. 

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per extant instructions, one of the passengers booked on a ticket has to produce one of the 
prescribed proofs of identity (in orig inal) during the journey, failing which, all the passengers will be treated 
as travelling without ticket. These instructions are appli cable to all type of passengers. Further, recently, 
instructions have been issued that any passenger availing concession or booking ticket under the quota 
earmarked for specific ca tegory of passengers will be required to produce a valid proof of his/her 
genuineness and the claim for facility of concession/reservation quota availed. 
Identification of Freedom Fighters is carried out by the MHA under their “Swatantrata Sainik 
Samman Scheme”. All such Freedom Fighters receiving pension and certified as freedom fighters under the 
“Swatantrata Sainik Samman Scheme” of the Ministry of  Home Affairs are eligible  for Complimentary Card 
Passes issued by the Ministry of Railways. Expenditure incurred on this account is reimbursed to Ministry of 
Railways by the MHA. As such, no audit of the same is required. As regards issuance of smart cards to 
freedom fighters, it is stated that since smart card is intended to serve as an identity card, the same can be 
issued by the MHA at the time of certification under the “Swatantrata Sainik Samman Scheme”.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17)  
The Committee find that under the PRS, around three-fourth of the tickets are booked through the 
IRCTC website or the mobile app. The Committee note that Tickets can either be booked by the individual 
or by Principal Service Providers/PSP s (Principal agents) or their respective Retail Service Providers/RSPs 
(Sub agents) who are the license holder agents authorized by the Ministry of Railways to procure Rail 
tickets on behalf of passengers by charging nominal service charges from passengers fixed by the Railways 
from time to time. The Committee note that the Railways have taken all out efforts to deter the manipulation. 
They appreciate the additional measures taken by them to allow the Retail Service Providers (agents) to 
book only one Tatkal ticket per day/per train. The Committee are of the firm opinion that such an initiative 
may go a long way in discouraging unauthorized booking agents as Aadhar Number and PAN are unique to 
each citizen and can not be used many times and any irregularity committed in respect of the PRS, cannot 
continue without active involvement of touts/connivance of the officials manning the PRS. The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Railways to investigate all such cases of irregularities in a time bound manner and take 
deterrent punitive action against those found guilty. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Besides various checks in the system, if any Retail Service Provider (RSP) is found involved in 
touting activities (booking through personal user-i ds for commercial gain, overcharging, Electronic 
Reservation Slip (ERS) manipulation, sharing of agent id credentials), the RSP ID is permanently 

27 
 
deactivated and a penalty of Rs. 20,000 is imposed. In  case any Principal Service Provider (PSP) is found 
indulged in software tampering then a penalty of Rs. 25 lakhs is imposed under major irregularities. 
Moreover, in case any RSP is found indulged in improper display of sign board indicating IRCTC 
instructions, misuse of IRCTC logo, entering incorrec t mobile number of passengers at the time of booking 
etc., then a penalty of Rs. 5,000 is imposed under minor irregularities and warning letter is being issued. 
Based on the various checks conducted by the Railway Protection Force (RPF), IRCTC IT Anti 
Fraud Team (ITAF), Vigilance team, Customer complaints and other agencies, following are the cases 
wherein penalties have been imposed by IRCTC: 
Details of Penalties Imposed by IRCTC against various complaints 
Period No. of Cases IDs Deactivated Penalty Imposed 
2018-2019 91 101 3,642,065 
2019-2020 108 150 3,161,532 
2020-2021 88 86 9,396,849 
2021-2022 (till Oct., 2021) 43 43 909,705 
TOTAL 330 380 17,110,151 
IRCTC IT Anti Fraud Team (ITAF) also monitors first 5 minutes transactions of Tatkal intensively and 
blocks suspicious IDs who use other than normal channel such as cloud service to access the website. 
From 08.12.2021 to 22.12.2021, 99,283 user IDs have been deactivated and network level blocks of 
suspected IPs is being done. 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
In order to strengthen the fight against any malafide in e-ticketing and as a part of its checks and 
balances, the Committee find that the Railways have initiated a number of steps to de-register the 
suspected accounts/Ids of malafide users. In this regard, the IRCTC has deactivated 1.15 Lakh Personal 
User IDs in FY 2018-19, and about 11.20 Lakh Personal User IDs in FY 2019-20. The Committee 
appreciate this initiative of the Ministry and urge them to maintain the momentum and weed out such 
accounts on a day to day basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
IRCTC continuously monitors the suspects, which involves the following through analysis before 
deactivation of Personal User IDs. 
1 The personal user IDs are deactivated based on the pattern or series noticed in the user IDs 
involved in CRIS report, RPF report or vigilance report. 
2 Search is also conducted on all the user IDs which are booking all 6 tickets in a day or 2 and then 
similar or same looking ID series are identified. 
3 Those user IDs which have been continuously booking all six tickets in Tatkal continuously for last 
more than 3 months are identified and the tickets booked with name on user ID and passenger are 
compared and then similar series are found out and deactivated, if required. 
4 Analysis is also done on the profile details of personal user IDs registered on previous day on 
random basis of their profile address if found that the address details provided by user is not correct 
then all such user IDs are deactivated/suspended. 

28 
 
 
Practice to weed out suspected users is regularly followed, based on various investigations and 
analysis carried out by IRCTC in coordination with CR IS and Railway Protection Force. As a result, in the 
FY 2021-22 (till Nov-21) about 3.60 Lak h user IDs have been deactivated by  IRCTC.  The details of IDS 
deactivated in last five is as under:  
ID Deactivation Report Financial Year Wise 
S.No. Year Total ID Deactivated (In Lakhs) 
1 2015-16 191301 
2 2016-17 668913 
3 2017-18 127191 
4 2018-19 114737 
5 2019-20 1120236 
6 2020-21 1162493 
7 2021-22 (Till Nov,21) 360124 
Total 3744995 
  
Moreover, a dedicated ITAF (Internet Ticket An ti-Fraud) cell is instituted in IRCTC, which 
continuously monitors the suspected User IDs and takes up the deactivation of Personal User IDs, on the 
basis of extensive analysis. 
Regular drives are being conducted by Railway Protection Force (RPF) against persons/agencies 
found involved in illegally carryi ng on business of procurin g and supplying railway tickets, for reserved 
accommodation. The offenders are booked under the provi sions of Section 143 of the Railways Act, 1989 
and action is taken against them as per law. The details of suspected IRCTC User IDs are communicated to 
IRCTC for its deactivation and further necessary action at their end on regular basis. Special drives are also 
conducted at regular intervals especially during the peak rush periods i.e. festivals and holidays. 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7)  
 
The Ministry have informed that PRS can be used for booking, modification and cancellation of 
tickets in various categories of trains. They note that rail tickets can be booked 120 days prior to the date of 
scheduled journey known as the Advanced Reserved Period for almost all long-distance mail express 
trains/Shatabdi express trains except some short distance/inter-city trains. The accommodation through the 
PRS is allotted on first come first serve basis and thereafter reservation against cancellation (RAC) and 
waitlisted tickets are issued. The status of RAC tickets gets updated automatically against cancellation of 
confirmed tickets. The Committee also find that tickets can be booked online as well as through 
computerised PRS co unters till the preparation of second reser vation charts which are prepared between 
30 minutes and 5 minutes before the scheduled time of departure of the train. The Committee, however, 
find no logic in booking of tickets between the time of  30-5 minutes before the departure of the train when 
there are thousands of RAC/waitlisted tickets already b ooked and waiting for confirmation. In their opinion, 
there is no scope of getting these tickets confirmed. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that since 
Tatkal facilities are availab le for passengers wishing to travel at a sh ort notice, all seats of the train found 
vacant after preparation of the first reservation chart which are prepared 4-5 hours before the departure 
time should automatically be allotted to RAC/Waitliste d passengers to facilitate them to travel as per their 
plan. The Committee, therefore, desire that the need for preparation of second reservation charts should 
reviewed with a view to facilitate the needy passengers and also to refrain the touts from being involved in 
the probable mal-practice during the last minute rush. 
Reply of the Government 
With a view to rationalize computerized PRS, the sy stem of preparation of reservation charts was 
rationalized in the year 2015 and following provisions were made: 
i. In the computerized PRS of Indian Railways, the reserved accommodation can be booked on first-
come-first-serve basis. After exhaustion of available accommodation, Reservation against 
Cancellation (RAC)/Waiting list tickets are issued.  
ii. The status of RAC/Waiting list tickets gets updated against the cancellation of tickets booked prior to 
such tickets.  

31 
 
iii. A provision was introduced to prepare reservation charts at  least 4 hours before scheduled 
departure of train i.e. if reservation charts of the train are not prepared by the Railways, the system 
will automatically release unutilized reservation quota by updating the RAC/Wait list status of 
passengers and finalize the reservation charts. These charts were known as First Reservation 
charts. As such, the provision to update the RAC/Waiting list status of passenger against the vacant 
accommodation available (at the time of preparation of first reservation chart) is already there.  
iv. After preparation of first reservation charts, th e vacant accommodation available, if any, becomes 
available for booking across computerized PRS counters of Indian Railways as well as through 
internet. It was done to facilitate passengers in getting confirmed accommodation through both 
across PRS counters as well as through internet and to reduce the scope of misuse, as earlier this 
facility was available only as nominated counters at train originating stations only.  
v. It was prescribed that this vacant accommodation can be booked upto preparation of second 
reservation charts and second reservation charts are prepared between 30 minutes and 5 minutes 
before the scheduled/rescheduled time of departure of train.  
vi. This provision was made to ensure optimal utilisation of available accommodation, allow passengers 
to cancel already booked tickets and to make on-board Ticket Checking Staff aware of the 
cancellation of the bookings made between first reservation charts and second reservation charts.  
vii. It is clarified that in case, there is RAC/Wait list in the train, no accommodation can be booked in 
between preparation of first reservation charts and second reservation charts i.e. Wait list tickets are 
not issued after preparation of first reservation char ts. As such the question of its updation at the 
time of preparation of second reservation chart does not arise.  
viii. The time gap of 30 minutes to 5 minutes befo re scheduled/rescheduled time of departure of train, for 
preparation of second reservation charts has been kept to give Railways the discretion to take out 
second reservation charts depending upon the distance between the charting location and the 
platform from which the train is going to depart.  
ix. At the time of preparation of second reservati on charts, vacant accommodation available, if any, 
gets transferred to next remote location facilitating passengers at that location to book tickets.  
x. It may be appreciated that the above-said system has given the following benefits: 
a. Brought transparency in the reservation system.  
b. Facilitated passengers to book ticket online or through PRS till preparation of second 
reservation charts saving them from the botheratio n of coming to the nominated train/journey 
originating station.  
c. Reduced the scope of misuse of the system by unscrupulous elements.  
d. Optimal utilization of available accommodation.  
e. Increased passenger satisfaction. 

32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
       03 August, 2022 Chairperson 
       12 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on Railways 
 
  

33 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
The Committee met on Wednesday, the 3 rd August, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson  
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15.  Shri Narhari Amin 
16.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
17.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
18.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Joint  Secretary 
2. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Director 
3.  Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Addl. Director 
4. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
2.  Shri A. H. Khan Choudhury 
3.  Ms. Diya Kumari 
4.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
5.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
6.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
7.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
8.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta 
9.  Dr. Amar Singh 
10.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
11.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
12.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
13.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
14.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah 

34 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of the Committee.  Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the draft Re port on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in their 8 th Report on the “Passenger Reservation System of 
Indian Railways”. 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report without any modifications. 
 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Report to the 
Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.      
-------- 
 
  

35 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 8TH REPORT 
(17TH LOK SABHA) ON "PASSENGER RESERVATION SYSTEM OF INDIAN RAILWAYS" 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 18 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
Government –  
Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5 6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18  
 
17 
 Percentage of total   94.4% 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No.  NIL   
 
NIL 
 Percentage of total    00% 
(iii) Recommendations/Obser vations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration –  
Para No.  7  
 
 
01 
 Percentage of total   5.5% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies are 
still awaited -      
Para No.  NIL     
 
NIL 
 Percentage of total 00% 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 