intrgg`   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 6
th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Amenities including 
Modernization of Railway Stations’] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
                                       
 
             
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2022/MAGHA, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
10 

SCR NO. 237 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
(RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
 
[Action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 6
th Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Amenities including 
Modernization of Railway Stations’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.02.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2022/MAGHA, 1943 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................ (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v) 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER I REPORT…………………………………………………………………
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government………………………………………… 
 
6 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
reply………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
16 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
26 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………………………… 
 
 
27 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 I.    Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Railways held on   
28.12.2021 
28 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 I.  Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
 
30 
  
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
 
 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.  Smt. Ranjanben Dhananjay Bhatt 
4.  Shri A. H. Khan Choudhury
5.  Shri Kaushalendra Kumar
6.  Ms. Diya Kumari 
7.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
8.  Smt. Satabdi Roy# 
9.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
10.  Smt. Keshari Devi Patel 
11.  Shri Mukesh Rajput 
12.  Shri N. Reddeppa 
13.  Shri Achyutananda Samanta
14.  Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
15.  Shri Arvind Sawant 
16.  Dr. Amar Singh 
17.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
20.  Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
21.  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Narhari Amin 
23.  Shri Chh. Udayanraje Bhonsle
24.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
25.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26.  Ms. Saroj Pandey 
27.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
28.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki
29.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
30.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha* 
31.  Vacant 
 
@ Constituted w.e.f. 13.09.2021 vide Lok Sabh a Bulletin Part II No. 3192 dated 09.10.2021. 
* Nominated as Member w.e.f. 14.10.2021 vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 61163 dt 18.10.2021 
# Smt. Satabdi Roy Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 01.12.2021 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part II No. 3440 
dated 01.12.2021 in place of Shri Sunil Kumar Mondal 
 

 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Arun K.Kaushik   - Director 
3. Shri R.L. Yadav   - Additional Director 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Ra ilways (2021-22), having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Passenger Amenities including Modernization of 
Railway Stations’.  
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in the Rajya Sabha on 
08.03.2021.  The Report contained 33 Observat ions/Recommendations. The Ministry of 
Railways furnished Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report on 06.10.2021. 
 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Dr aft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 28.12.2021.  The minutes of the sitting are given in Annexure. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters.  
 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the Observations /Recommendations
 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                        RADHA MOHAN SINGH
04 February, 2022            
                                                                           Chairperson,
15 Magha, 1943 (Saka)                                        Standin g Committee on Railways
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Standing Committee on Railways deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Sixth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on “Passenger 
Amenities including Modernization of Railway Stations”. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.03.2021. It 
contained 33 Recommendations/Observations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received and 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Para Nos.: 2,4,8,9,12,13,18,19,21,22,23,24,25,27,30,31 and 33 
Total  : 17 
Chapter – II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies: 
 Para Nos.:  1,3,5,6,7,10,11,14,15,16,17,20,28,29 and 32 
Total  : 15 
Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 Para Nos.:  26 
Total : 1 
Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies are still awaited: 
 Para Nos. NIL 
Total : NIL 
Chapter - V 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost care will be given to the implementation of the 
Recommendations accepted by the Government. The Committee desire that final action taken 

2 
 
notes to the Observations/Recommendations containe d in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of this Report 
should be furnished to them not later than three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
5. The Committee will now deal with the acti on taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations/observations. 
 
A.   MODERNIZATION OF RAILWAY STATIONS  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
6. The Committee note that the proposal for rede velopment of 400 erstwhile ‘A-1’ and ‘A’ category 
stations as World Class Stations, was approved in June 2015, on ‘as is where is’ basis, by inviting open 
bids from interested parties with their designs an d business ideas duly providing for amenities and other 
requirements of the Railways including permitting commercial development by zonal railways. They have 
been informed that initially, 19 stations were identified for development by resorting to the PPP mode as per 
issued guidelines. The Committee note that at a later stage, this number was increased to 50. They were 
further informed that the Expert Group on Modernizat ion of Indian Railway had subsequently recommended 
modernization of 100 major stations at the cost of Rs. 1.10 lakh crore in 5 years under PPP mode and 
consequently, Indian Railways Station Development Corporation Ltd. (IRSDC) was developed. The aim of 
this scheme was to harness the real estate potential of land around and the airspace above the stations 
without any additional cos t to the Railways besides envisaging the pr ovision of modern f acilities at stations 
such as food plazas, hotels, ATM facilities, Curr ency exchange counter, car rent als etc. The Committee 
note that the first phase of station redevelopment program by Zonal Railways was launched on 08.02.2017 
and bids for redevelopment of 23 railway stations were invited. The Committee have been informed that 
bids for only two (2) stations of Jammu Tawi and Ko zhikode were received. To their utter dismay, they also 
find that bids for other stations had to foreclosed owi ng to not-so-encouraging response from the bidders. 
The Committee desire that the Railways should find out the reasons for low response for the bids and take 
out corrective measures in this regard. 
7. In their Action Taken Replies, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:-   
“The first phase of station redevelopment program by Zonal Railways was launched on 08.02.2017. 
Bids for redevelopment of 23 railway stations were invited in the first phase.  However bids for only 
two (2) stations i.e. Jammu Tawi and Kozhikode were received. In view of not-so-encouraging 
response, bids for other stations were foreclosed. 
During various interactions with developers, investors and other stakeholders, various issues including 
longer lease period for commercially developed assets, multiple sub leasing, simplified bid procedures 
etc were repeatedly raised. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Railways has revised the strategy and obtained Cabinet approval in October 
2018.  Station Redevelopment is planned by leveragi ng real estate potential of sparable land and air 
space in and around the stations, inviting private participation.  For this, Railway conducts techno-

3 
 
economic feasibility studies of stations across the country.  Based on the outcome of these feasibility 
studies, stations are taken up for redevelopment  in phases. The selection of developer is done 
following a transparent and competitive bidding process. 
A Group of Secretaries (GoS) was constituted by Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for 
redevelopment of 50 railway stations. The GoS inter-a lia suggested the levy of a nominal user fee for 
redevelopment of stations, which is presently under consideration.     
At present, works for Habibganj and Gandhinagar station are at advanced stage of progress.  Works 
are in progress at Ayodhya and Gomti Nagar stations.  Contracts have been awarded for Ajni and 
Safdarjung stations.  RFQ finalized for 8 stations (Nagpur, Gwalior, Sabarmati, Amritsar, Nellore, 
Tirupati, Puducherry and Dehradun).   RFQ invited for 3 stations (New Delhi, Chhatarpati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus and Ernakulam).” 
8. After taking note of the recommendations of  the Expert Group on Modernization of Indian 
Railway and emergence of ‘Indian Railways Stat ion Development Corporation Ltd.’ (IRSDC),first 
phase of station redevelopment programme was launched on 8
th February, 2017. Accordingly, bids 
were invited for redevelopment of  23 stations. However, 21 bids had to foreclosed due to poor 
response from the bidders. The Committee had desired the Ministry to find out the reasons for poor 
response of the bids and take corrective st eps in the matter. In compliance of their 
recommendation, the Committee find that the Ministry have interacted with the developers/investors 
and other stakeholders wherein the latter have repeatedly raised various issues such as longer 
lease period for commercially developed assets, multiple sub leasing, simplified bid procedures etc. 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has revised the strategy and obtained Cabinet’s 
approval in October, 2018. They are satisfied to note the progress with regard to redevelopment of 
the Railway Stations and hope that the projects will be completed in the scheduled time frame. 
 
 
B.   DRINKING WATER FACILITY 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
9. The Committee observe that safe drinking water is the most needed and essential amenities at 
stations and in trains. Though the Railways have taken all out efforts for supply of potable water, yet 
additional efforts are required to be taken to eradicate the problem of scarcity of drinking water particularly 
during peak hours. The Committee have, however, been informed that when the existing sources of drinking 
water are found inadequate, water supply is augmented through water tankers and various other sources 
like bore-well, municipality, rivers/dams etc. Furt her, the Ministry have endeavoured to proliferate Water 
Vending Machines in railway stations so as to ensur e availability of safe and pure drinking water to 
travelling passengers at affordable rates. The Committee note that the supply of free potable water is 
maintained through water taps. In addition, Water Vending Machines (WVMs) have been installed at railway 
stations for sale of drinking water at nominal cost. However, the packaged drinking water has been the most 
preferable and plausible drink among the passengers. The Committee find it imperative on the part of the 
Railways to make additional efforts for exuberant supply of packaged drinking water over railways. The 
Committee are, however, distressed to note that there is shortage of huge quantity of railway’s packaged 

4 
 
drinking water i.e. Rail Neer over railways. Currently, 11.22 lakh litres i.e. 62% of Rail Neer is being 
produced from 14 plants as against the demand of 18 lakh litres per day and the shortage of six point seven 
eight (6.78) lakh litres of Rail Neer is met by ot her Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) approved brands of 
Packaged Drinking Water (PDW). Though the railway has commissioned seven (7) more plants, yet the 
Committee are not happy with this scarce and deficien t arrangements of the Railways which is invariably 
leading to unauthorized entrants selling fake brand of packaged drinking water in railways and causing 
serious threats to passengers’ health besides loss to exchequer. The Committee would like to suggest the 
Ministry to come forward with a suitable plan to augment Rail Neer for ample supply not only to refrain 
unauthorized entrants for sale of fake brands of packaged drinking water but also help save the health of 
the passengers. 
10. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“Current production of PDW from 14 Rail Neer plant s is 5.67 lakh litre/day, with overall capacity of 
14.08 lakh litre per day. At present, the demand of Rail Neer is being fulfilled by IRCTC. 
Further, one more Rail Neer plant at Una (H.P.) has already been commissioned, which shall be 
operational shortly. 
In addition, 5 new plants are in the pipeline to be commissioned.” 
11. The Committee had noted that though the Railwa ys facilitate supply of free potable drinking 
water by way of taps installed and operated at various locations in railway premises and stations 
and sale of drinking water at nominal cost th rough Water Vending Machines (WVMs), yet they were 
distressed to note that there was huge shortage of railway’s packaged  drinking water i.e. Rail Neer 
over railways
. The Committee had found it mandatory on the part of the Railways to make additional 
efforts for exuberant supply of packaged drinking water, the most preferred and plausible drink, 
among the passenger. The Committee are happy to note that the Railways are taking adequate steps 
to augment the need of potable drin king water (PDW). For this purpos e, one more Rail Neer Plant at 
Una (HP) is already commissioned and 5 new plants are in the pipeline to be commissioned.  
However, the Committee note that against the overall capacity of 14.08 lakh litre per day, the current 
production of PDW from 14 Rail Neer Plants is only  5.67 lakh litre per day. The Committee desire the 
Railways to exploit the full potential of the available capacity.  
 
C.   OTHER FACILITIES/INITIATIVES 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
12. The Committee have been informed that as an alternative, the Railways have started sale of 
platform tickets through mobile phone/mobile App in Western Railway, Central Railway and Northern 
Railway (New Delhi and Hazrat Nizamuddin Railway Stations ). Though this step of the railways is laudable, 
yet the Committee find that this is a very small number to cater to the large number of passengers. The 
Committee wish to point out that railway counters are already over-crowded, more so, a lot of time is 
consumed for purchase of platform tickets. They feel that all major railway stations of each zone should be 
covered under this facility. The Commi ttee also desire that the Ministry should think for sale of platform 

5 
 
tickets through IRCTC website on the lines of sale of e-tickets/i-tickets which may go a long way both in de- 
congestion of railway counters and saving of revenue incurred on printing of platform tickets”. 
13. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:- 
“The passengers   intending to procure platform tickets can do so from the unreserved ticket counter, 
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs), currency/coin/card   operated ticket vending machines 
(COTVMs)  as well as UTS on Mobile App. The facility of UTS on Mobile APP has since been 
extended to all zonal Railways.  In UTS on Mobile A pp, provision is already   there for issuance of 
paper and paperless mobile ticket  including platform   tickets. In case of ATVMs/COTVMs, the 
passengers can purchase platform ticket   through smart card/cash. After completion of integration 
with QR code,   passengers will al so be able to purchase tickets through ATVMs by scanning QR   
code through any banking app, which will ease ticket-booking process”. 
14. The Committee though lauded the efforts of th e Railways for facilitating sale of platform 
tickets through mobile phone/mobile App in some of  the railway zones yet they were not satisfied 
with this scanty expansion restricted to selected zone (s)/ railway stations. Keeping in view the 
over-crowded railway counters and consumption of plen ty time in purchase of platform tickets, they 
felt that all major railway stations of each and every zone should be covered with this facility. Apart 
from this facility, the Committee had also desired th e Ministry for considerati on of sale of platform 
tickets through IRCTC website likewise e-tickets/i -tickets so as to de-congest the railway counters 
and save the expenditure of railways from being incurred on printing of platform tickets. The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation, desire the Ministry to come forward with a 
suitable and speedy action in the matter under their intimation.  
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
The Committee note that Railways provide three kinds of amenities at railway stations viz. Minimum 
Essential Amenities, Recommended Amenities and Desirable Amenities as per the stipulated norms. The 
Minimum Essential Amenities are provided soon after the construction of a station and remain in existence 
at all times, the Recommended Amen ities are facilitated over and abov e the Minimum Essential Amenities 
provided on the basis of volume of  travelling passengers handled as per norms subj ect to availability of 
funds and relative priority of works. The Desirable Amenities are considered to be desirable to improve 
customer satisfaction and the interface at stations depending upon the category of stations viz. catering, 
vending stalls, adequate parking and circulating area, train indication board, public address system among 
others. The Committee further note that the Recommended and the Desirable amenities are provided 
keeping in view the volume of passengers and interface. They have been informed that these amenities are 
provided subject to relative priority and availability of funds. From the information furnished, the Committee 
find that funds earmarked for the Head of Passenger Amenities in the years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2018-19 
and 2019-20 remained un-utilized to the tune of 16.3%, 38.2%, 4.3% and 44.4% respectively. They desire 
that since the passenger amenities are directly connected with the customer satisfaction and interface, 
there should be no dereliction on the part of Railways for proper utilization of funds under this ‘Head’.  
Reply of the Government 
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways in this regard.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4)  
The Committee have been informed that the Railways have formulated a well developed system of 
ensuring the maintenance of passenger amenities which are intensively inspected and monitored at regular 
basis at various levels viz. station, division and headquarter levels. The Committee note that it is through 
the effective monitoring, the slippages in amenities are seen and corrective actions are taken expeditiously. 
The Committee have been informed that Service Improvement Groups (SIGs) have been formed for this 
purpose. Besides, inspections are also carried out by Officers, Passenger Amenities Committee (PAC) and 
Passenger Services Committee (PSC) to further ensure monitoring. The Committee also note that the zonal 
railways have ‘Indian Railway Project Sanction and Management Module’ (IRPSM) to capture the data base 
of passenger amenities at each station for ensuring regular updation in co-ordination with divisions and 
action for the slippages is taken by them. Though, this  step of zonal railways is certainly laudable, yet the 

7 
 
Committee feel that much is required to be done in this regard. The Committee are in agreement with the 
findings of the C&AG that there is absence of robus t monitoring mechanism to ensure maintenance and 
upkeep of the assets created for pa ssenger facilities which has led to regular breakdown of the assets and 
caused inconveniences to passengers and defeated the intended purpose of their creation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to put in place a concrete method for effective and rigorous monitoring of 
amenities including updation of data in IRPSM by zonal railways.  
Reply of the Government 
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8)  
The Committee have been informed that the Railways have launched a Mobile application "IRCTC 
Rail Connect" for booking of reserved ticket as well as to promote digital payments. The Committee feel that 
this application be disseminated in the public and widely publicised so that more and more rail users could 
avail the benefit of this App for booking tickets.  
Reply of the Government 
Instructions have been issued to IRCTC to disseminate the information regarding IRCTC Rail   
Connect App for information of general public. 
IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App has been promoted extensively by IRCTC to all its users through 
mailers, banner advertisement on website and push notification on mobile phones. As a result more than 
75% of IRCTC users have downloaded this Mobile App. 
IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile Apps have gained popularity in the public leading to majority of online 
tickets being booked through Mobile App. IRCTC Rail Connect Mobile App is one of the Top Most Rated 
Mobile App of India in Google play store.  
Recommendation (Para No. 9)  
The Committee note that Railways have endeavoured setting up of 288 PRS centres at various Post 
Offices so as to make available PRS tickets at non-rail  head. The Committee appreciate this initiative of the 
Railways and desire the Ministry to ease out technical  and commercial feasibility for providing more PRS 
Counters at Post Offices for booking hassle free rail tickets by the rail users particularly residing in remote 
and rural areas of the country.  
Reply of the Government 
With a view to provide facility to passengers to book reserved tickets, computerized Passenger 
Reservation System (PRS) counters were provided in Post Offices in   2007.  An analysis of number of   

8 
 
transactions being handled at PRS counters provided in post offices from time   to time has revealed that at 
more than 60% of the locations, the number of   transactions handled are less than 10 per day which does 
not justify the expenditure   incurred by Railways in providing hardware, software and its maintenance and   
also, the cost of manning being borne by Department of Posts..  Accordingly, Department of Posts has been   
requested to explore the feasibility of pr oviding facility of booking   rese rved tickets through internet instead 
of computerised PRS counters of   Indian Railways.  
Recommendation (Para No. 12)  
The Committee note that the Railways have undertaken modernization of railway stations under 
various schemes such as Model Station Scheme, Modern Station Scheme and Adarsh Station Scheme. 
The year 1999-2000 being a ‘Passenger Year’, railway emphasized to improve passenger amenities at 
important stations. Each Division was given at least one station for immediate improvement in the quality of 
service as a Model Station. Under this Scheme, 590 railway stations were selected for modernization. The 
Committee also note that in the year 2006, the criter ia for selection of stations for modernization was 
revised to include all ‘A’ and ‘B’ category stations  on the basis of annual passenger earnings. The Zonal 
Railways were entrusted nomination of five stations per Division for development of stations as Modern 
Stations. In all, 637 stations were selected for upgr adation. Further, the emergence of Adarsh Station 
Scheme in the year, 2009 aimed 1253 stations for development as Adarsh Station. The Committee, 
however, find that in spite of considerable passage of time, only 1200 stations have, so far, been developed 
and 53 stations are yet to be developed as Adarsh Station. They are very unhappy with this tardy progress 
and emphasize that the very purpose of the scheme gets defeated if there are delays in its execution. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to prepare a time bound action plan for development of these stations.  
Reply of the Government 
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways in this regard. 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)  
The Committee note that the proposal for redevelopment of 400 erstwhile ‘A-1’ and ‘A’ category 
stations as World Class Stations, was approved in June 2015, on ‘as is where is’ basis, by inviting open 
bids from interested parties with their designs and business ideas duly providing for amenities and other 
requirements of the Railways including permitting com mercial development by zonal railways. They have 
been informed that initially, 19 stations were identified for development by resorting to the PPP mode as per 
issued guidelines. The Committee note that at a later stage, this number was increased to 50. They were 
further informed that the Expert Group on Modernization of Indian Railway had subsequently recommended 
modernization of 100 major stations at the cost of Rs. 1.10 lakh crore in 5 years under PPP mode and 
consequently, Indian Railways Station Development Co rporation Ltd. (IRSDC) was developed. The aim of 
this scheme was to harness the real estate potential of land around and the airspace above the stations 

9 
 
without any additional cost to the Railw ays besides envisaging the provision of modern facilities at stations 
such as food plazas, hotels, AT M facilities, Currency ex change counter, car rentals etc. The Committee 
note that the first phase of station redevelopment program by Zonal Railways was launched on 08.02.2017 
and bids for redevelopment of 23 railway stations were invited. The Committee have been informed that 
bids for only two (2) stations of Jammu Tawi and Kozhikode were received. To their utter dismay, they also 
find that bids for other stations had to foreclos ed owing to not-so-encouraging response from the bidders. 
The Committee desire that the Railways should find out the reasons for low response for the bids and take 
out corrective measures in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The first phase of station redevelopment program by Zonal Railways was launched on 08.02.2017. 
Bids for redevelopment of 23 railway stations were invited in the first phase.  However bids for only two (2) 
stations i.e. Jammu Tawi and Kozhikode were received.  In view of not-so-encouraging response, bids for 
other stations were foreclosed. 
During various interactions with developers, investors and other stakeholders, various issues including 
longer lease period for commercially developed assets, multiple sub leasing, simplified bid procedures etc 
were repeatedly raised. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Railways has revised the strategy and obtained Cabinet approval in October 
2018.  Station Redevelopment is planned by leveraging real estate potential of sparable land and air space 
in and around the stations, inviting private participation.  For this, Railway conducts techno-economic 
feasibility studies of stations across the country.  Based  on the outcome of these feasibility studies, stations 
are taken up for redevelopment in phases. The select ion of developer is done following a transparent and 
competitive bidding process. 
A Group of Secretaries (GoS) was constituted by Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for 
redevelopment of 50 railway stations. The GoS inter-alia suggested the levy of a nominal user fee for 
redevelopment of stations, which is presently under consideration.     
At present, works for Habibganj and Gandhinagar st ation are at advanced stage of progress.  Works 
are in progress at Ayodhya and Gomti Nagar stat ions.  Contracts have been awarded for Ajni and 
Safdarjung stations.  RFQ finalized for 8 stations (N agpur, Gwalior, Sabarmati, Amritsar, Nellore, Tirupati, 
Puducherry and Dehradun).   RFQ invited for 3 stations (New Delhi, Chhatarpati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus 
and Ernakulam).  
Recommendation (Para No. 18)  
The Committee are happy to note that the Railways have endeavoured to constitute the State Level 
Security Committee for Railways (SLSCR) under the Chairmanship of DGP of respective States / UTs for 
regular monitoring and review of security arrangements over Railways with a view to strengthen the security 
of rail passengers. However, they are distressed to find that only 18 States / Union Territories have, so far, 

10 
 
constituted these committees. They take a very serious view  of it. They are of the view that delay in setting 
up of SLSCR would certainly nullify the intended purpose of  the plan and usefulness of the initiatives taken 
for passenger safety and security. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take proactive steps to 
expedite constitution of these committee in remaining States and UTs for holding meetings to ensure 
regular monitoring and review of security arrangements in railways.  
Reply of the Government 
As on date 30 States/UTs have constituted the State Level Security Committees for Railways 
(SLSCRs) under the Chairmanship of DGP/Police Commissioner of respective States/UTs. Other 
states/UTs do not have substantial Railway connectivity.  
Recommendation (Para No. 19)  
 The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by  the Railways for chalking out Action Plan for 
security of women passengers which among other things, provides for installation of CCTV cameras at 
platforms to cover ladies coaches during halt and in l adies coaches of sub- urban trains. They have been 
given to understand that special drives are also taken against offenders to help protect women passengers 
as per the Railway Act. The Committee laud these initiatives taken by the Railways. They would like to be 
apprised about the extent the offences/offenders cu rtailed against women passengers post implementation 
era of the Action Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways is committed to provide safe and secure journey to all its passengers including 
women passengers. Consistent efforts are being made to ensure safety of women passengers. Based on 
the data provided by Government Police Railway Stations, there is 11 % decrease in the number of cases 
of crimes  against women passengers registered u/s 354 (A to D) Indian Penal Code in trains and in railway 
premises during the year 2019 as compared to those regi stered in the previous year 2018. Also, there is 
decrease of 64% in such cases registered during the year 2020 as compared to 2019, but that may be 
attributed to less running of trains as the nation battled the pandemic COVID-19. 
It is also worth mentioning here that regular driv es are conducted by RPF against entry of male 
passengers into compartments reserved for women passengers and persons apprehended are prosecuted 
under section 162 of The Railways Act, 1989. During the years 2019 & 2020, a total of 114170 & 23498 
male passengers respectively have been arrested for unauthorized entry/travel into compartments reserved 
for women passengers.  
Recommendation (Para No. 21)  
The Committee are happy to note that a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on care and protection 
of children over railways has been jointly prepared by the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Women 

11 
 
and Child Development (MOWCD). Accordingly, a round the clock Child Help Desk/Kiosk (CHD) has been 
set up at 126 railway stations. The Committee are happy to find that the Child Help Desks have rescued 
11178, 13091 and 11869 children in 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively. Though the initiative is certainly 
laudable, yet the Committee are distressed to find th at out of more than 8700 railway stations over the 
network, only 126 stations have, so far, been equipped with this facility. They are of the opinion that this is 
an abysmally small number to cater to the large number of trains carrying huge number of passengers 
including children per day that are being operated on the Railway Network. The Committee desire that more 
stations particularly stations of child trafficking prone areas should be brought within the ambit of CHDs so 
that the menace of child trafficking could be eradicated.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Railways, in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
(MoWCD) and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has issued a Standing 
Operating Procedure (SOP) which includes a protocol for rescue of young children found abandoned on 
railway stations or trafficked through trains.  
As per the instructions contained in the SOP, Indian Railways have to provide space of 6x6 feet at 
Railway station for setting up Child Help Kiosk/Help Desk. These Child Help Kiosk/Help Desks are to be 
manned by representatives of the organization nominated by Ministry of Women and Child Development. In 
addition, RPF supplements the efforts of GRP of the State concerned in rescuing the children from 
trafficking and to ensure safety and security of children at stations.  
The Ministry of Railways have approved extension of facility of Child Help Groups to a total of 262 
important railway stations in coordination with Ministry of Women and Child Development in a phased 
manner. Presently, CHDs have been set up at 132 important railway stations and the process of setting up 
of CHDs at more stations is under process in phased manner.   
Recommendation (Para No. 22)  
Indian Railways carry more than 23 million passen gers per day passing th rough more than 8700 
Railway Stations over the network. Therefore, it becomes imperative on the part of the Railways to maintain 
proper hygiene, cleanliness and sanitation at all times and to monitor them strictly. Though the Committee 
appreciate the initiatives taken by the Railways for introduction of mechanized cleaning to provide 
comprehensive cleaning of station premises, yet they are distressed to note that this service is operational 
only to areas of conducive surfaces furnished with tiles/kota stones. Therefore, the Committee would like to 
suggest the Ministry to explore possibilities to ex tend mechanized cleaning service to other areas where 
conducive surfaces have not yet been provided.  
 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
IR   is gradually adapting to mechanized cleaning wi th a view to bring visible   improvement in the 
level of cleanliness. Mechanized cleaning is being done at   around 950 major stations. On rest of the 
stations cleanliness is being   managed at local levels. Efforts were made to use mechanized cleaning on 
non-conducive surface but satisfactory cleanliness standard could not be achieved.   
Recommendation (Para No. 23)  
The Committee further note that most of the cleaning activities under the mechanized cleaning system 
have been outsourced to professional agencies to mainta in high standard of cleanliness including ‘Pay & 
Use’ toilets for better maintenance and 940 stations have, so far, been covered as such. Though the 
initiative is certainly laudable, yet the Committee are dissatisfied to find that out of total 8738 stations over 
the network, this is abysmally small number to fulfill the aspirations of the passengers of high magnitude. 
They, therefore, desire the Ministry to cover more and more stations under the umbrella of mechanized 
cleaning system to maintain high standard of cleanliness.  
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways accord a very high priority for ensuring cleanliness and hygiene at station. One of 
the initiatives taken to improve cleanliness Standard at Station premises including toilets is introduction of 
mechanized cleaning at more and more station over Indian Railways. The activity is mostly outsourced to 
professional agencies to maintain high standard of cleanliness on the railway premises including toilets 
under ‘Pay & Use’ scheme for better maintenance. At present, more than 1130 stations are already covered 
under mechanised cleaning. Zonal Railway have been advised to adopt Pay & Use model over most of the 
stations under their jurisdiction. 
Recommendation (Para No. 24)  
The Committee note that periodical review is conducted to monitor cleanliness and railways take 
remedial measures for prompt rectification of the deficiencies as and when noticed. The Committee learn 
that third party annual survey is conducted at major stations for cleanliness. In addition, action is taken 
against the staff/contractors who are found wanting in the performance of their duties for maintaining 
cleanliness. The Committee laud the measures taken by the Railways for strict compliance of cleanliness 
activities and sanitation in railways. They are of the considered view that such a step would certainly add in 
ensuring monitoring mechanism. At the same time, they wo uld like to exhort the Ministry to further intensify 
them for robust monitoring so that deficiencies are made good as and when noticed.  
Reply of the Government 
Indian Railways accord a very high priority for ensur ing cleanliness and hygiene at stations. However, 
owing to high density of usages of the stations, this is a very challenging area. To ensure  proper 

13 
 
cleanliness at stations and also to identify weak areas to take remedial measures along with regular 
checks/inspections, surprise checks at various levels are carried out and deficiency are made good 
whenever noticed. Service Improvement Groups (SIGs) at the Zonal/Divisional Headquarters and Station 
level have been activated to inspect amenities including cleanliness at Stations and to take remedial 
measures as and when required. Health Inspector are also  deployed at major Stations of Indian Railways to 
monitor hygiene and sanitation at stations. Enforcement of  Indian Railways (Penalties for activities affecting 
cleanliness at Railway premises) Rules, 2012 have been intensified. Instructions have also been issued to 
Zonal Railways to use Close Circuit Televisions (CCTVs) to monitor cleanliness at railway premises. These 
measures are reviewed on a monthly basis by Additional General Managers (AGMs) at Zonal level and by 
Additional Divisional Railway Managers (ADRMs) at divisi onal level.  Every effort is being taken at various 
levels to monitor the cleanliness of stations.  
Recommendation (Para No. 25)  
The Committee note that the Railways have introduced ‘On Board House Keeping Service’ (OBHS) in 
1100 pairs of trains for cleaning of coach toilets, doorways, aisles and passenger compartments during the 
run of the trains. Though the initiatives is certainly appreciable, yet the Committee are distressed to find that 
this is insignificantly small number to cater to 13,169 number of passenger trains that are being operated on 
the railway network. The Committee desire that more trains should be brought under the aegis of OBHS 
Service so that crores of rail users could avail the benefit of this service.  
Reply of the Government 
On Board Housekeeping Service (OBHS) has been provided in 1100 pairs of trains including 
Rajdhani, Shatabdi and other important long distance Mail/Express trains for cleaning of coach toilets, 
doorways, aisles and passenger compartments during the run of the trains. Starting from 2008-09, OBHS 
was provided in 416 pairs of trains up to March, 2014 . Around 1100 pairs of trai ns i.e. 2200 trains are 
presently having facility of this se rvice. It may be noted that total around 3300 mail / express trains are 
being operated. Remaining are mostly short distance passenger, EMU/ MEMU, DEMU etc. 
Recommendation (Para No. 27)  
The Committee note that the Railways have taken various steps to improve the punctuality of trains 
such as redressal of the problem of capacity constraints and real-time monitoring and regular review and 
conversion of coaches by LHB (Linke Hofmann Busch) coaches having higher speed capacity and 
replacement of conventional passenger trains by MEMU  (Mainline Electrical Multiple Unit) trains. The 
Committee though laud the initiatives taken by the railways,  yet they are distressed to find that most of the 
projects targeted for improving the capacity constraint, are pending since long. The Committee are of the 
view that the initiatives taken by the Railways would gain no score unless the projects to de-congest the 

14 
 
capacity constraints, are completed in time and without any extension of time leading to cost overrun. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to rigorously monitor their projects to complete them vigorously.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways (MoR) fully agrees with the recommendation. MoR is working in the same 
direction and main focus is to complete the important capacity enhancement projects. Projects have been 
prioritised into super critical and critical categories. 58  Super Critical projects are targeted to be completed 
by March, 2022. Out of these 28, Super Critical Proj ects have been completed upto March, 2021. Similarly 
68 projects have been categorized as critical projects and these are targeted to be completed by March, 
2024. Out of these 04 Critical projects have been completed upto March’2021. Capacity enhancements 
projects are being monitored rigorously at various levels (field level, divisional level, zonal level and Board 
level) and regular meetings are held with the officials of State Government and concerned authorities to 
resolve the pending issues that are obstructing the progress of projects.  
The observations of the committee are noted please.  
Recommendation (Para No. 30)  
The Committee note that the Railways have initiated setting up of the scheme of Multi Purpose Stalls 
(MPS) at stations for availability of all items of tr avelling needs for passengers on payment basis. They are 
aware that the scheme is at implementation stage. The Committee are of the opinion that once this scheme 
is implemented, it would cater to all items of travelling needs of passengers. They, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should take all preparedness to implement the same urgently.  
Reply of the Government 
Proliferation of Multi Purpose Stalls at stations is done by Railways keeping in view the master plan 
and requirement of passengers at stations, which is a continuous process. 
At present there are 910 Multi Purpose Stalls (MPS) at 425 Railway Stations. 
Recommendation (Para No. 31)  
The Committee find that 3382 ICF design rakes have been provided with divyangjan friendly SLRD 
coaches. The Ministry have informed that Production Units have already started manufacturing LHB type 
coaches for divyangjan passengers which are inducted in Indian Railway progressively. The Committee are 
of the opinion that Railways should make available t he maximum facilities for divyang passengers in these 
coaches. They desire the Ministry to take expeditious proliferation of divyangjan friendly LHB Coaches in 
Railways.  
Reply of the Government 
The following action have been taken to proliferate divyanjan friendly LHB coaches: 

15 
 
a. Around 3382 disabled friendly ICF design coaches (SLRD) are available in the fleet of Indian 
Railways. These coaches have a suitable designed compartment & toilet adapted to the needs 
of the disabled/wheel chair borne passengers. 
b. In these coaches, wider entrance door, wider berths, wider compartments, larger lavatory and 
lavatory doors, etc. have been provided. Inside the toilets additional grab rails on the side walls 
for support and wash basin and mirror at a lower height are also available. 
c. It is endeavored to have at least one coach in each Mail/Express train having ICF type coaches.    
 
LHB Divyang Coach Design: 
1. Production units have started manufacturing LHB type coaches for Divyang Passengers which 
are inducted in IR progressively. At present, 316 Nos. of LHB type LSLRD/LDSLR are 
manufactured over Indian Railways and further proliferation of LSLRD with augmentation in 
production plan has been planned. 
2. These coaches are provided with Seating capacity for 31 Passengers and 8 Divyang 
Passengers 
3. In these coaches, wider entrance door-suitable for wheelchair passengers, wider berths, wider 
compartments, larger lavatory and lavatory doors, etc. have been provided. 
4. Inside the toilets additional grab rails on the side walls for support and wash basin and mirror 
at a lower height are also available. 
5. These coaches are Equipped with fire and smoke detection system. 
6. Further, all Production Units have been advised to provide at least two doors of 920 mm width 
one on each side of the normal coach in future in all newly manufactured coaches. This will 
ensure improved accessibility to Divyangjan passengers inside coaches for wheel chair 
passenger. 
7. Braille Signage inside Divyangjan Coaches are been used. It has been ad vised to use Braille 
signage on partition pillars of aisle for seat numbers. 
8. It has been advised for Exterior Marking of “TRESSPASSERS SHALL BE PROSECUTED” in 
the exterior of Divyangjan Coach to caution the other passengers. 
 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)  
The Committee note that the guidelines administering amenities for rail users defined as 'basic 
amenities' and 'additional amenities’ were issued in 1952. These guidelines were revised in 1955 to expand 
their scope. In the course of time, deficiencies were further noticed which led to revisions in the years 1999, 
2003 and 2007. As per norms, these guidelines are r evised after every five years and railway stations are 
categorized accordingly. In 2012-13, the Railways had categorized the stations in seven categories viz. A1, 
A, B, C, D, E and F, based on the parameter of annual yield of passenger earnings of the railway stations in 
the preceding year of 2011-12. The Committee have been informed that the recent categorization has been 
accomplished in 2017-18 and this time, the Railways  have considered another criteria/parameter of 
footfalls/outward passengers handled at the station duri ng the preceding year of 2016-17 in addition to the 
earning criteria. In this regard, the Committee recall their earlier recommendation (19
th Report 15 th Lok 
Sabha) suggesting the Ministry not to review the categorization of railway stations solely based on the 
annual passenger earnings but also to take into account other factors like relative importance of the stations 
keeping in view their historical  and cultural importance, geographi cal location, industrial hubs, ports, 
agricultural/horticultural production centres, educati onal/professional institutions in remote areas from 
where a large travelling public are expected. The Committee find that the Ministry has not taken their 
suggestions into account while categorizing the stations as (i) Non- Suburban Grade (NSG), (ii) Suburban 
Grade (SG) and (iii) Halt Grade (HG) which have further been divided in Grades ranging from NSG 1 to 
NSG 6, SG 1 to SG 3 and HG 1 to HG 3. The Committee feel that the factors suggested by them should 
have been considered by the railways with a view to yield better results in attracting more and more 
travelling public for accrual of be tter revenues to Railways exchequer. They hope that the same will be 
given due consideration at the time of next categorization of stations.  
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Railways has more than 8700 stations.  For provision of passenger amenities, railway 
stations are presently categorized as Non-Suburban Gr ade 1-6, Suburban Grade 1-3 and Halt Grade 1-3 
based on the annual passenger earnings (reserved and unreserved) and number of outward passengers 
handled at stations for the year 2016-17.  The ear lier station categorization(s) for provision of passenger 
amenities was done based on the passenger earnings and as per the new categorization, both footfall and 
passenger earnings have been taken into account.  In addition, Zonal Railways have been given powers to 
categorize a station as Non Suburban Grade 4 category if it is a place of Tourist importance and /or is an 
important junction station. 

17 
 
Besides, Modernisation/Upgradation of facilities at stations has also b een undertaken under various 
modernization schemes and presently stations are upgraded under the ‘Adarsh Station Scheme’ where 
stations are selected based on identified need for provision/upgradation of passenger amenities. However 
upgradation of amenities is a continuous process.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the railways have not  been able to utilize MPLADS Funds and funds 
provided by Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) as an initiative under CSR activities, for installation of key 
amenities at railway stations due to negligence and non-pursuance of the matter by the Zonal Railway 
Authority. The Committee wish to point out that provision of these funds and CSR activities of the PSUs 
may play a vital role in shaping the customer friendly images of the railways particularly in a situation where 
the Railways are in want of funds for providing be tter passenger amenities. Hence, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should act proactively and take all preparedness to ensure that the funds are utilized 
promptly and in right earnest so that the amenities are augmented in an efficient manner. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The PSUs are required to take up Corporate Social Responsibility related activi ties in compliance to 
the Companies Act, 2013 and Co mpanies (Corporate Social Responsib ility Policy) Rule s, 2014, amended 
from time to time. They are also required to follo w the ‘Guidelines for CSR expenditure of CPSEs’, issued 
by Department of Public Enterprises vide O.M. No. CSR-08/0002/2018-Dir (CSR) dt: 10th December, 2018. 
Further, Department of Public Enterprises has also  issued directions on “Observance of Transparency & 
due diligence in selection and implemen tation of activities under CSR by CPSEs” vide O.M. No. CSR-
15/0008/2014-Dir (CSR) dt: 1st August, 2016, which is also required to be followed. 
Instructions with regard to proper utilization of funds have been communicated to Zonal Railways. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee have been informed that funds for works relating to passenger amenities are allocated 
under the unified Plan Head 53-‘Passenger Amenities’ under DRF, DF and RRSK. They note that no 
allocation is made category-wise or scheme-wise within this head and multi departments such as electrical, 
mechanicals, civil etc. are involved in the activities of passenger amenities. In their 19 th Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha), the Committee had recommended for separate allocations for each of the categories of the 
passenger amenities to have more transparency in utilization of funds, to better monitor the progress and to 
set both physical and financial targets for each item of passenger amenities instead of having a common 

18 
 
head. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their ear lier recommendation and desire the Ministry to keep 
apprise the steps taken in this regard within three months of the presentation of Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To have more transparency in utilization of funds and better monitoring of the progress of work, from 
financial year 2018-19 onwards, Ministry of Railways has introduced the concept of Umbrella works in PH-
53: ‘Passenger Amenities’.  Under this scheme, not only Department wise, but also allocation-wise (CAP, 
RRSK, DF, DRF)/work-wise separate Umbrellas have been created to sanction similar passenger amenities 
works. 
Accordingly, separate Umbrellas for works related to quick watering system under Mech. Deptt., Soft 
upgrades/improvements at station under Civil Engg . Deptt., Minimum essential amenities-telecom, 
expansion of information system under S&T Deptt and provision of lifts & escalators under Elect. Deptt . 
have been created. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
The Committee note with concern that actual expenditure on passenger amenities has invariably 
witnessed shortfalls against RE allocations during the years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2018-19 and 2019-20 to the 
extent of 16.3%, 38.2%, 4.3% and 44.4% respectively. They further note that in 2014-15, Rs.1025.70 crore 
was allocated and out of this amount, Rs.858.61 crore could be spent. In the year 2015-16, an amount of 
Rs.1081.21/- crore was spent as against allocated amou nt of Rs.1748.50 crore. In the year 2018-19, the 
actual remained to the tune of Rs.1585.88 crore against the allocation of Rs.1657.86 crore. Also in the year 
2019-20, Rs.1903.11 crore could be spent against the allocated fund of Rs.3422.57 crore. The Committee 
are not convinced with the rationale of th e Ministry that variation in utilization is also due to late introduction 
of New Fund ‘Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK)’ during the year 2017-18. They, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to act proactively and prepare the realisti c budget so that financial and physical targets are 
optimally achieved and the allocated funds could not be surrendered to Government account.  
Reply of the Government 
The outlay and utilisation of funds under Plan hea d 53-Passenger Amenities for 2014-15 to 2019-20 
under Budgetary sources [excluding EBR(P)] is shown in the following table- 
(Rs. in cr.) 
Year RE Actual Utilisation 
2014-15 1045.91 858.61 82% 
2015-16 1200.11 1081.21 90% 
2016-17 917.91 981.24 107% 
2017-18 1470.79 1286.8 87% 
2018-19 2022.75 1585.88 78% 

19 
 
Year RE Actual Utilisation 
2019-20 1889.71 1903.1 101% 
 
As can be seen from the above table, there has been utilisation of funds ranging from 82% to 107% of 
Revised allotments during the period, except 2018-19. Utilisation lesser than RE allotment can be attributed 
mainly to limited fund availability under Internal  Resources due to resource  constraints. However, 
observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for making all out efforts in achieving targets 
optimally and utilising allocated funds to the full. 
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways in this regard. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that the Railways have installed 10554 Passenger Reservation System (PRS) 
terminals at about 3553 locations throughout the network. In addition, 6242 Unreserved Ticketing System 
(UTS) locations have also been provided over Indian  Railways. Apart from PRS and UTS, 4077 Automatic 
Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) have also been commissioned to issue tickets and to incentivize the 
passengers with an incentive of 3% of recharge value gi ven to them on usage of card on every recharge of 
ATVM for promoting use of ATVM and cash/card based ATVMs (CoTVMs). Also, 2185 Station Ticket 
Booking Agents (STBAs) and 226 Yatri Ticket Suvidha Kendras (YTSK) have been engaged for booking 
tickets to avoid hardships to rail passengers. The Committee laud the efforts of the railways in providing 
these ticket terminals to arrest the hardships of the passengers. However, the Committee are of the opinion 
that the number of ATVMs is abysmally low which is inefficient to cater to the large number of commuters 
on the railway network. They desire that more stations should be brought into the ambit of ATVMs. Further, 
the Committee find that out of 4077 ATVMs, only 3332 ATVMs i.e., 82% are in working condition. The 
reason explained by the Ministry attributing that non-functioning of ATVMs is due to completion of codal life, 
is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee are of the view that railway should work proactively and 
take all preparedness before completion of their codal life and replace them in a time bound manner to 
ensure their functioning round the clock so that no passenger could put to any hardship on this count. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
Replacement of ATVM and related equipment exceeding Rs.1.00 Cr. have been sanctioned from 
Board. Sanctioned ATVM and related equipment replacement works sanctioned during the last 2 years is as 
under: 
Year Replacement of ATVM sanctioned Replacement of ATVM 
equipment sanctioned 
2018-19 714 220 
2019-20 1019 146 
 

20 
 
Further, powers have been delegated to General Managers of all Zonal Railways to sanction works 
costing upto Rs.1.00 crore under DRF for replacement of IT equipment.  
Recommendation (Para No. 10)  
The Committee have been given to understand that Mobile ticketing vehicles are presently not 
functional in the rail network and instead the passengers can book the tickets online, through Mobile 
Phones and Automatic Ticket Vending Machines etc. The Committee would like to suggest the Ministry to 
explore the feasibility of booking tickets through non- convent ional methods suc h as provision of mobile 
ticket vehicles especially for the commuters of remote, rural, hilly and far-reaching areas of the country.  
Reply of the Government 
Mobile ticketing vans, introduced earlier, have been discontinued long back due to very low patronage 
and high cost of maintenance/ equipment, including vehicle. 
After introduction of e-ticketing system various efforts have been made to make this system more 
robust, dynamic and user-friendly. 
Reservation facility on Internet has now become very popular with mo re than 72% of reserved tickets 
are being booked online on website www.irctc.co.in. Mobile applications on various platforms are also 
available for booking reserved tickets. 
Recommendation (Para No. 11)  
The Committee have been informed that about two third of total reserved tickets are booked from 
IRCTC website. The Committee concur with the views expressed by the Ministry that purchase of tickets 
through IRCTC website is not only convenient but also helps in decongestion of the ticket counters and 
abort the menace of touts. The Committee note that the Railways have taken various steps to modernize 
the ticketing process of IRCTC Website such as launching of next generation e-ticketing system with 
increased server capacity, implementation of multi-laye r security comprising frontend and backend firewall, 
web application firewall etc. Further, new user interface e-ticketing system is more user friendly for easier 
navigation and provides easy and fast way of booking rail tickets by automating the journey planning and 
purchase of tickets. Though the Committee are happy to note that the capacity of e-ticketing has increased 
from 2,000 per minute to 15,000 per minute, yet they wish the Ministry to take holistic measures to make 
the Website more robust and further enhance the capacity in order to get a much needed boost in the 
capacity of the server for booking/yielding tickets.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Railways has revamped and upgraded its e-ticketing website www.irctc.co.in and Indian 
Railway Catering And Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) Rail Connect Mobile App, which are used for booking 
of ‘online’ Railway tickets on 31st December, 2020. Ra ilway customer has been the focus of the design of 
the revamped application. Novel user personalization features linked to user log in have been incorporated, 

21 
 
along with customizations for seamless travel exper ience, one stop train selection for booking, and 
integrated booking for meals and accommodation with tickets. 
IRCTC Rupay card has been launched recently in collaboration with the State Bank of India (SBI), as 
a travel credit card with value back benefits to regular rail users, on booking of tickets through the IRCTC 
website. IRCTC has also integrated new payment modes like e-wallets, BHIM/UPI, Scan and Pay along 
with Credit Card, Debit Card and Net banking payment modes to give variety of payment modes for ease of 
transaction by customers. 
Ministry of Railways has taken several steps from time to time to modernise the ticketing process. 
Next Generation e-Ticketing (NGeT) system, has been upgraded constantly to handle increased load of 
15,000 tickets per minute in 2016-17, 18,000 tickets per minute in 2017-18, 20,000 tickets per minute in 
2018-19 and 25000 tickets per minute in 2019-20. A record number of 26,458 tickets were booked in a 
minute on 5 March, 2020.  
Recommendation (Para No. 14)  
The Committee further note that the railways have not indicated any time frame for redevelopment of 
stations. The Committee are concerned to note that no railway station has so far been developed under 
PPP mode. They feel that there is something amiss in the planning of the Railways so for as redevelopment 
of Stations are concerned. The Committee desire the Ministry to chalk out a time bound action plan for 
redevelopment of railway stations for providing modern and state-of-the-art amenities to rail users.  
Reply of the Government 
Station redevelopment program is first of its kind and complex in nature and requires detailed 
techno-financial feasibility studies and involves mult iple stakeholders consul tations including pre-bid 
conferences. Various statutory clearances from Urban/loca l bodies are also required.   Therefore, no time-
frame can be indicated at this stage.  
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
The Committee note that a three tier security system has been put in place which is handled by the 
Railway Protection Force (RPF), the Government Railway Police (GRP) and the District Police with their 
defined roles and responsibilities vested in each of them. While the GRP is a wing of State Police which, 
with a strength of 38,000 personnel, has been deployed for prevention and detection of crime and 
maintenance of law and order in station premises and stations, the RPF is responsible for protection and 
security of railway property, passenger area and passengers and related matters to supplement the efforts 
of the States. The Committee happy to note that as a result of these synergizing activities, 11178, 13091 
and 11869children were rescued from the clutches of the criminals from being trafficked in 2017, 2018 and 
2019.Further, 36834 and 36,849 cases of Theft of Passenger Belongings (TOPB) were registered in 
2018and 2019respectively. The Committee have been informed that several proposals for sanction of GRP 

22 
 
posts in MP, Karnataka and Rajasthan are pending with the Ministry of Railways. They desire the Ministry 
to clear these proposals urgently with a view to further strengthen the security in Railways.  
Reply of the Government 
Further, 3925 & 1788 children were rescued in year 2020 and 2021 (till March).11375 & 1388 cases 
of theft of passenger belongings were registered in 2020 and 2021 (till February).  
Indian Railways have to implement strict austerity measures in view of the crisis created by 
pandemic COVID-19. Therefore, it has been decided not to process for creation of any fresh post.  
As and when austerit y measures are withdrawn, further action in the matter will be taken 
accordingly. 
Recommendation (Para No. 16)  
The Committee further note that the Railway Protec tion Force (RPF) has no power to register and 
investigate the passenger related offences in passenger area. However, with a view to synergize activities 
related to passenger security and to empower RPF to deal with passenger related offences in passenger 
area, a proposal for amendment in the RPF Act was init iated by the Ministry. The Committee, in their 19
th 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) had also strongly felt it to be a positive step for consolidation of security to be 
handled by a single agency for quicker reaction in case of emergencies and also avoid inter-agency issues. 
The Committee fail to appreciate that the proposal could not be supported by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
They have been given to understand that the Ministry have instead initiated a proposal to amend the 
Railways Act, 1989 to empower authorized officers to  deal with seven (07) new sections covering the 
offences of Theft of Passenger Belongings (TOP B), eve teasing and drug ging etc. which has been 
supported by the MHA, Ministry of Women & Child De velopment, Department of Empowerment of Persons 
with Disabilities and National Security Council Secretar iat/NSA as well. The Committee desire the Ministry 
to expedite the proposed amendment in the RPF Act, 1989 so as to help curb crime graphs vigorously.  
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for amendment in RPF Act for empowering RPF to deal with passenger related offences 
could not materialize due to the proposal not being supported by 18 States. The MHA too, did not support 
the proposal. The Ministry of Railways could not proceed further in the instant case in view of the opposition 
by states.  
A policy decision has been taken by Ministry of Railways to empower authorized officers to deal with 
certain passenger related offences by proposing amendment under Railways Act 1989. The implementation 
of the policy decision is under way and entails following of legal procedure and consultation with 
stakeholders. Completion of many steps in the legal procedure are beyond the competence of the Ministry 
of Railways and likely to take considerable time.  
 

23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17)  
The Committee learn that the Railway Protection Force (RPF) with their strength of 74,830 personnel, 
is supplementing the efforts of GRP for strengthenin g and synergizing the railway security. The Committee 
laud the initiatives of the Ministry taken to augment th is strength to further strengthen it. In this regard, the 
proposals for creation of 4,192 and 2,187 posts are under consideration in the Ministry of Finance. They 
have been given to understand that once these proposals are cleared, overall security environment in 
railways would certainly be improved. The Committee, however, to their utter dismay, find that these 
proposals are still pending in the Ministry  of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure). They take a strong view of the 
delay in clearance of the proposals involving passenger safety and security and recommend the Ministry to 
vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Financ e (Deptt. of Expenditure) on top priority for early 
clearance. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
Brief description of the progress of creation of 4192 and 2187 posts in RPF/RPSF: 
A proposal for the creation of 3243 posts (1056 for 08 Mahila Vahinis & 2187 for 03 RPSF Battalions 
including 01 Mahila Battalion) was sent to Ministry of Finance (MoF) on 15.02.2011. Another proposal for 
creation of 4192 posts for women RPF personnel was sent to Ministry of Finance on 26.08.2014. 
Matter is still under inter ministerial consultation. M eanwhile, Indian Railways had to implement strict 
austerity measures in view of crisis created by pandemic COVID-19. Therefore, it has been decided not to 
process creation of any fresh post. As and when austerity measures are withdrawn, further action in the 
matter will be taken.  
Recommendation (Para No. 20)  
 The Committee are glad to note that the report on ‘Action Plan’ has also suggested the Railway 
Board to issue instructions to change colour of t he coaches earmarked for ladies, to install announcement 
system or panic button in coaches for disseminating information to security in case of need, construction of 
barracks, changing rooms, washrooms on priority. The Committee wish to point out that these measures of 
the Railways would certainly go a long way to curb cr imes against women commuters. The Committee urge 
the Ministry to expedite implementation of these suggestions on an urgent basis and give wide publicity 
among rail users particularly women passengers to increase their awareness so that they could use these 
facilities for their safety and security. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter of changing color of lady coaches suggested in the action plan has been examined. In 
general, there is no separate reserved coach earmarked for ladies at present in mail/express/passenger 
trains. However, seats are provided in last unreserv ed SLR coach of train and earmarked as ladies coach 

24 
 
(marked outside on the panel) in all/express/passenger trains for facilities of ladies passengers. Hence 
there is no need for changed colour of such coaches being the last coach of the Train formation.  
So far as provision PA system of panic button is concerned, at present Emergency Alarm Chain is 
already available in coaches, which are being used by  passengers (including women) in case of emergency 
or any issue related with safety/security. 
However, provision of talk back and panic button in every coach is under consideration through 
revision of RDSO specification of PAPAIS (Passenger Address and Passenger Information System). 
Comparative figures of construction of barracks fo r ladies, ladies changing & washing rooms existing 
prior to 2018 and additi onal provided from 20 18 to till date for RPF/RPSF l adies officers/staff is mentioned 
below: 
No. of ladies barrack constructed/ 
No. of other buildings modified as 
ladies barrack  
No. of ladies changing rooms  No. of ladies washrooms  
Existing prior 
to 2018 
Additional provided 
from 2018 to till date 
Existing 
prior to 
2018 
Additional 
provided from 
2018 to till date 
Existing 
prior to 
2018 
Additional 
provided from 
2018 to till date 
38 179 79 176 131 161 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28)  
The Committee have been informed that as an alternative, the Railways have started sale of platform 
tickets through mobile phone/mobile App in Western Railway, Central Railway and Northern Railway (New 
Delhi and Hazrat Nizamuddin Railway Stations). Though this step of the railways is laudable, yet the 
Committee find that this is a very small number to ca ter to the large number of passengers. The Committee 
wish to point out that railway counters are already over-crowded, more so, a lot of time is consumed for 
purchase of platform tickets. They feel that all major railway stations of each zone should be covered under 
this facility. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should think for sale of platform tickets through 
IRCTC website on the lines of sale of e-tickets/i-tickets which may go a long way both in de- congestion of 
railway counters and saving of revenue incurred on printing of platform tickets.  
Reply of the Government 
The passengers   intending to procure platform ti ckets can do so from the unreserved ticket counter, 
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs), curr ency/coin/card   operated ticket vending machines 
(COTVMs)  as well as UTS on Mobile App. The facilit y   of UTSonMobile APP has since been extended to 
all zonal Railways.  In UTS on Mobile App, provision is already   there for is suance of paper and paperless 
mobile ticket including platform   tickets. In case of ATVMs/COTVMs, the passengers can purchase platform 
ticket   through smart card/cash. After completion of integration with QR code,   passengers will also be able 
to purchase tickets through ATVMs by scanning QR code through any bank ing app, which will ease ticket-
booking process.   

25 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29)  
The Committee learn that pursuance to announcement made in the Rail Budget 2016-17, Zonal 
Railways were advised to ensure availability of baby food, hot milk and hot water at Railway Stations on 
payment basis. Accordingly, the ‘Janani Seva’ was introduced to ensure provision of packaged baby food, 
milk powder, hot milk and hot water from catering stalls and in Trains on payment basis on MRP. Though 
the initiative is certainly laudable, yet the Committee are distressed to find that only 1131 stations have 
been identified for ‘Janani Seva’. The Committee are of the opinion that this is an abysmally small number 
to cater to the large number of passengers over the ne twork. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to bring 
more stations under the umbrella of ‘Janani Seva’ so  that passengers could avail the benefits and get their 
items of all travelling needs during the trip.  
Reply of the Government 
The provision of warm water/milk, milk powder etc. is made by Railways through catering and vending 
units on the railway stations as per the demand and requirement of the passengers. 
In addition, under new Multi Purpose Stall (MPS) policy, MPS have also been mandated for sale of 
dry/spray Milk powder etc. making the availability of such items more convenient.   
Recommendation (Para No. 32)  
The Committee are happy to note that the Railways have initiated to promote digital payments and 
cashless transactions for purchase of ticket through Point of Sale (POS) / Swipe Machines at ticket 
counters. In the opinion of the Committee, cashless transaction has become the need of the hour 
particularly in wake of the technological revolution. It not only helps cashless transaction through cards and 
promote digitization but also refrains railway counters from being duped of fake currency/coin received from 
sale of tickets. The Committee are distressed to find th at only the important stations have been facilitated 
with the digital payment and many of them have been deprived with the facility. The Committee, therefore, 
feel that more stations should be brought into the ambit to cater to the needs of large number of passengers 
travelling over the network.  
Reply of the Government 
Payment through Credit/Debit card is enabled only at those counters where POS device is available, 
however, payment through UPI is already enabled at all UTS   counters across Indian Railways except 
Konkan Railway. Recently, integration   of Automated Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) application is 
done with SBI UPI   QR code, Paytm QR code and Freecharge QR code which is under testing. After   
completion of testing, it can be enabled in all ATVMs & Currency/coin/card   operated Ticket Vending 
Machines (COTVMs) of Indian Railways, which may pr oliferate digital transactions in Unreserved Ticketing 
System. 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26)  
The Committee observe that safe drinking water is the most needed and essential amenities at 
stations and in trains. Though the Railways have taken all out efforts for supply of potable water, yet 
additional efforts are required to be taken to eradicat e the problem of scarcity of drinking water particularly 
during peak hours. The Committee have, however, been informed that when the existing sources of 
drinking water are found inadequate, water supply is augmented through water tankers and various other 
sources like bore-well, municipality, rivers/dams etc. Further, the Ministry have endeavoured to proliferate 
Water Vending Machines in railway stations so as to ensure availability of safe and pure drinking water to 
travelling passengers at affordable rates. The Committee note that the supply of free potable water is 
maintained through water taps. In addition, Water Vending Machines (WVMs) have been installed at railway 
stations for sale of drinking water at nominal cost. However, the packaged drinking water has been the 
most preferable and plausible drink among the passengers. The Committee find it imperative on the part of 
the Railways to make additional efforts for exuberant supply of packaged drinking water over railways. The 
Committee are, however, distressed to note that ther e is shortage of huge quantity of railway’s packaged 
drinking water i.e. Rail Neer over railways. Currently, 11.22 lakh litres i.e. 62% of Rail Neer is being 
produced from 14 plants as against the demand of 18 lakh litres per day and the shortage of six point seven 
eight (6.78) lakh litres of Rail Neer is met by other Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) approved brands of 
Packaged Drinking Water (PDW). Though the railway has commissioned seven (7) more plants, yet the 
Committee are not happy with this scarce and deficient arrangements of the Railways which is invariably 
leading to unauthorized entrants selling fake brand of  packaged drinking water in railways and causing 
serious threats to passengers’ health besides loss to exchequer. The Committee would like to suggest the 
Ministry to come forward with a suitable plan to augment Rail Neer for ample supply not only to refrain 
unauthorized entrants for sale of fake brands of packaged drinking water but also help save the health of 
the passengers.  
Reply of the Government 
Current production of PDW from 14 Rail Neer plants is 5.67 lakh litre/day, with overall capacity of 
14.08 lakh litre per day. At present, the demand of Rail Neer is being fulfilled by IRCTC. 
Further, one more Rail Neer plant at Una (H.P.) has already been commissioned, which shall be 
operational shortly. 
In addition, 5 new plants are in the pipeline to be commissioned.  

27 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; RADHA MOHAN SINGH  
04 February, 2022 
Chairperson 
15 Magha, 1943 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

28 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 6TH REPORT 
(17TH LOK SABHA) ON "PASSENGER AMENITIES INCLUDING MODERNIZATION OF 
RAILWAY STATIONS" 
 
Total number of Recommendations/Observations 33 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the  Government –  
Para Nos.  
2,4,8,9,12,13,18,19,21,22,23,24,25,27,30,31 and 33 
 
17 
 Percentage of total   51.51% 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies –  
Para No. 1,3,5,6,7,10,11,14,15,16,17,20,28,29 and 32 
 
15 
 Percenta ge of total   45.45% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration –  
Para Nos.  26  
 
 
01 
 Percenta
ge of total   3.03% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies are still awaited -      
Para No. NIL     
 
NIL 
 Percenta ge of total -- 
 
       
  

29 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS (2021-22) 
 
The Committee met on Tuesday, the 28 th December, 2021 from 1400 hrs. to 1525 hrs. in Room No. 
63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Radha Mohan Singh -  Chairperson  
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri T.R. Baalu 
3.  Ms. Diya Kumari 
4.  Smt. Jaskaur Meena 
5.  Smt. Satabdi Roy 
6.  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
7.  Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8.  Shri Gopal Jee Thakur 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.  Shri Narhari Amin
10.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
11.  Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
12.  Shri Ashok Siddharth 
13.  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki 
14.  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Prasenjit Singh   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.L. Yadav   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Archana Srivastva  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

30 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
 
1. Sh.Sanjeev Mittal Member (Infrastructure), Railway Board & Ex. -officio 
Secretary to the Government of India. 
2. Sh. O.P. Singh Additional Member, Land and Amenities 
3. Sh. Ved Prakash Dudeja Vice Chairman, RLDA 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of th e Committee. Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations /Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 6 th Report on “Passenger Amenities 
including Modernization of Railway Stations”. 
The Committee adopted the above-mentioned Report without any modifications. 
3. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to fi nalize and present the Report to the Parliament 
during the next Session. 
4. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
5. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
6. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Committee has been kept. 
 
         The Committee then adjourned.     
-------- 
 
xxxx – Not related to the Report 
 
 