22
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
IMPLEMENTATION OF e-GOVERNANCE PROJECTS
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
IMPLEMENTATION OF e-GOVERNANCE PROJECTS
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 144
Price : Rs. 41.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
PART-I
I. Concept of e-Governance ........................................................ 1
II. National e-Governance Plan (NeGP):
(a) Concept of NeGP ............................................................ 3
(b) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) .................................. 4
(c) Major Components of NeGP ....................................... 8
(d) Implementation Strategy................................................ 8
(e) Institutional Framework for NeGP............................. 11
(f) Study of e-Governance Models ................................... 12
III. Financial Allocation and Capital Investment..................... 13
IV . Creation and Sharing of Infrastructure:
(a) Requirement of Common-Core Infrastructure ......... 16
(b) State Data Centres (SDCs) ............................................ 18
(c) State Wide Area Networks (SWANs) ........................ 19
(d) Common Service Centres (CSCs) ................................ 23
(e) Integrated Service Delivery Mechanism (e-Governance
Service Delivery Gateway) ........................................... 25
(f) e-Security ........................................................................... 26
V. Facilitation and Expansion:
(a) Uniformity of Standards ............................................... 26
(b) e-Assessment .................................................................... 27
(c) India Portal ....................................................................... 27
(d) Replication of Successful e-Governance Models ..... 27
(i)

VI. Human Resource Management (Capacity Building):
(a) Capacity Building Mechanism ..................................... 32
(b) Requirement of Technical Manpower ........................ 34
(c) Upgradation of Skills ..................................................... 35
(d) High Rate of Attrition ................................................... 35
(e) Outsourcing of Skilled Manpower ............................. 36
VII. Awareness Creation and Re-Engineering:
(a) e-Readiness........................................................................ 37
(b) IT Education/Publicity of e-Services ......................... 39
(c) Process Re-engineering and Change Management ... 40
VIII. Institutional Participation:
(a) Public-Private Partnership (PPP Model) ................... 42
(b) Suggestion by IT Service/Solution Providers .......... 45
(c) Role of NIC, NICSI and C-DAC in NeGP.............. 47
IX. Constraints and Problems ....................................................... 50
PART-II
Recommendations/Observations ............................................ 52
A
NNEXURES
ANNEXURE-I Minutes of the Thirty-first Sitting of the
Committee (2004-05) held on 25 April, 2005 .... 81
ANNEXURE-II Minutes of the Thirty-third Sitting of the
Committee (2004-05) held on 13 July, 2005....... 84
ANNEXURE-III Minutes of the Thirty-fourth Sitting of the
Committee (2004-05) held on 28 July, 2005....... 86
ANNEXURE-IV Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee
(2005-06) held on 18 August, 2005 ...................... 89
ANNEXURE-V Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee
(2005-06) held on 14 November, 2005 ................ 92
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
(iii)

26. Shri Dara Singh
*27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Smt. Geeta Parmar — Executive Officer
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27.9.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-second Report on
‘Implementation of e-Governance Projects’ relating to the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Information Technology).
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
National Institute of Smart Government (NISG), National Informatics
Centre (NIC), National Informatics Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI),
National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI) on 13.07.2005; Central Board
of Direct Taxes (CBDT), Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
Ministry of Rural Development, Railway Board, Ministry of Railways,
Centre for Railway Information System (CRIS) on 18.08.2005. The
Committee also took non-official evidence of the representatives of
NASSCOM, Sallstorm Consulting, Nathan Associates Inc. US and
Microsoft Corporation on 25.04.2005 and various IT solution/service
providing Companies on 28.07.2005. The representatives of Department
of Information Technology were present in all the above-mentioned
sittings of the Committee.
3. In this Report, the Committee, have desired the Government to
examine in-depth all aspects of e-Governance duly considering the
existing as well as emerging Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) for its present applications in e-Governance projects
and accordingly evolve a futuristic plan to provide citizen centric
services so as to meet the specific needs of the multilingual, multiracial
and multicultural Indian society in the years to come.
4. Taking into consideration the requirement of huge resources viz.
financial, technical or personnel, for timely and effective implementation
of e-Governance projects, the Committee have felt an urgent need to
look for a combination of the Government and private sector resources.
They have, therefore, emphasized the need to suitably devise a Public-
Private-Partnership model primarily from the point of view of
optimising and rationalizing of the resources and the advantage of
having the flexibility to hire the IT skilled workforce on need basis
thus avoiding the overhead cost to the Government organizations.

5. After examining the various initiatives taken by the Department
of Information Technology under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP),
the Committee have desired that the pace of implementation of them
should be accelerated.
6. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 14.11.2005.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Information Technology, National Institute of
Smart Government (NISG), National Informatics Centre (NIC), National
Informatics Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI), National Internet
Exchange of India (NIXI), Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT),
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Rural
Development, Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, Centre for Railway
Information System (CRIS), NASSCOM, Sallstorm Consulting, Nathan
Associates Inc. US and Microsoft Corporation and various IT solution/
service providing Companies for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing information in connection with examination of the subject.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
28 November, 2005 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(vi)

Business
NGOs
Civil Socieity
Fig. 1. Interactions between main groups in e-Governance.
Citizen G2C G2B
REPORT
IMPLEMENTATION OF e-GOVERNANCE PROJECTS
I. CONCEPT OF e-GOVERNANCE
In the present age of rising aspirations and expectations of people,
the thrust of the Governments all over the world has been to provide
good governance for peace, prosperity, growth and dignified life to its
citizens. The term governance means the process of decision making
and also the processes by which such decisions are implemented. Good
governance is primarily based on major components like participatory,
consensus-oriented, accountable, transparent, responsive, effective &
efficient, equitable & inclusive and also follows the rule of law. Mr.
Kofi A. Annan, Secretary-General of United Nations has rightly
observed that good governance is perhaps the single most important
factor in eradicating poverty and promoting development. A need is
felt to build and enhance the trust between government and citizens
through a system of Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) involving the least manual interface. Thus the need of electronic
governance (e-Governance) has been felt as an enabler to good
governance of country.
2. Electronic-Governance is the application of Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) to the processes of Government
functioning to bring about Simple, Moral, Accountable, Responsive and
Transparent (SMART) Governance. e-Governance is the application of
electronic means in the interaction between:
a. Government and Citizens (G2C),
b. Government and Businesses (G2B), and
c. Internal Government operations (G2G)
G2G
Central Government
G2G
Local Government
G2G

2
3. E-Governance is thus the use of Information and Communication
Technologies by the Government to provide information and service
delivery, encouraging citizen participating in the decision making
process and making the Government more accountable, transparent
and effective. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tools,
are considered to be the best delivery gateway to provide citizen centric
services in an effective and transparent manner. e-Governance intend
to improve the internal organizational process of Government, provide
better information and service delivery, increase Government
transparency in order to reduce corruption, reinforce political credibility
and accountability and to promote democratic practice through public
participation and consultation.
4. E-Governance, in simple terms may be considered as the
performance of the Government via electronic medium in order to
facilitate an efficient, speedy and transparent process of disseminating
information to the public and other agencies and also for performing
other administrative activities of Governments.
5. The Committee held discussions on the various aspects of
‘Implementation of e-Governance Projects’ with the National Association
of Software Companies (NASSCOM) on 25th April, 2005, with the
National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG), National Informatics
Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI) and National Internet Exchange
of India (NIXI) on 13th July, 2005, and with major IT Services/Solution
Providers on 28th July, 2005. The Committee further held discussions
with Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), Railway Board, Centre for
Railway Information System (CRIS), Ministry of Rural Development,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, NIC and NICSI on
18th August, 2005 in the context of implementation of projects of both
Central and State Governments. The Committee also had interactions
with the representatives of Department of Information Technology on
all such occasions. During their study-visit, the Committee also held
discussions on 7th October, 2005 with the representatives of Centre for
Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune on various issues
including e-Governance.
6. The Committee’s analysis of the materials received from the
Department of Information Technology and also their discussions with
the representatives of different Ministries, Departments, various
Governmental agencies and private IT Service/Solution Providers
revealed that the major aspects involved in the National e-Governance
Plan (NeGP) are Mission Mode Projects (MMPs), components of NeGP ,
Institutional framework, implementation strategy, financial allocations

3
and capital investment, study of e-Governance models, requirement of
common-core infrastructure, establishment of State Data and State Wide
Area Network, Common Service Centres, e-Governance service delivery
gateway, capacity building mechanism, requirement of technical
manpower, need for continuous upgradation of skills, high rate of
attrition of IT workforce, outsourcing of skilled manpower, process
re-engineering and change management, uniformity of standards,
e-assessment, India portal, replication of successful e-Governance
models, Public-Private Partnership, Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG
and C-DAG etc. The Committee have inter alia examined all these
aspects in the succeeding paragraphs under appropriate Sections in
this Report.
II. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PLAN (NeGP)
(a) Concept of NeGP
7. The Committee have been informed that the importance of
e-Governance has been recognized in the Government’s National
Common Minimum Programme. The Government is committed to bring
about total transparency in administration and make Government
functioning more citizen centric. As e-Governance has immense
potential in realizing these objectives and improving efficiency,
responsiveness and convenience for end users of Government services,
the Government has proposed to promote e-Governance on a massive
scale by harnessing all possible resources that are available both in
public and private sectors and provide required policy initiatives and
budgetary support needed to stimulate its growth. Keeping these
objectives in view, the Department of Information Technology (DIT)
jointly with the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances (DAR&PG) conceived the National e-Governance Plan
(NeGP) in mid 2003 and it received in-principle approval of the then
Prime Minister on 6th November, 2003.
8. The vision, scope and objective of the NeGP is to make all
Government services accessible to the common man in his locality,
throughout his life through a one-stop-shop (integrated service delivery)
ensuring efficiency, transparency & reliability at affordable costs to
meet the basic needs of the common man.
9. On being specifically asked by the Committee to furnish a copy
of the document on National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), the DIT in
a note furnished on 18 October, 2005 stated as under:
“There is no formally approved document of the National
e-Governance Plan although the DIT is now moving a Cabinet
Note in this regard”.

4
(b) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
10. Under National e-Governance Plan, initially 22 Mission Mode
Projects (MMPs) were identified on 14.11.2003 for implementation on
priority basis. Subsequently, four more projects have been added to
the list of Mission Mode Projects namely e-courts on the suggestion of
the Judiciary, e-Office on the suggestion of DAR&PG, e-Procurement
on the suggestion of Central Vigilance Commission, and Employment
Exchanges at the instance of the Planning Commission. The proposed
plan now covers 26 Mission Mode Projects in three categories: Central,
States and Integrated Services. These Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
intend to create citizen centric and business centric environment
mechanisms, set up core infrastructure, formulate key policies and
channelise private sector technical and financial resources into the NeGP
efforts. These projects are to be taken up on priority basis by the
concerned Line Ministries/Departments as indicated in table below.
Some of these projects are stated to be under various stages of
implementation and may require some refinement and adjustment of
scoping and implementation strategy to achieve the desired service
level objectives:
Sl.No. Mission Mode Line Ministries/Departments
Projects (MMPs) responsible
12 3
Central Government
1. Income Tax Ministry of Finance/Central Board of Direct Taxes
2. Passport Visa & Ministry of External Affairs/Ministry of Home
Immigration Project Affairs
3. DCA21 Department of Company Affairs
4. Insurance Department of Banking
5. National Citizen Database Ministry of Home Affairs/Registrar General of
India
6. Central Excise Department of Revenue/Central Board of Direct
Taxes
7. Pensions Department of Pension & Pensioners Welfare &
Department of Expenditure
8. Banking Department of Banking
9. e-Office Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances

5
 12 3
State Government
 1. Land Records Ministry of Rural Development
 2. Road Transport Ministry of Road Transport & Highways
 3. Property Registration Ministry of Rural Development
 4. Agriculture Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
 5. Treasuries Ministry of Finance
 6. Municipalities Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation
 7. Gram Panchayats Ministry of Rural Development
 8. Commercial Taxes Ministry of Finance
 9. Police (Uts initially) Ministry of Home Affairs
10. Employment Exchanges Ministry of Labour & Employment
Integrated Services
 1. EDI (E-Commerce) Ministry of Commerce and Industry
 2. E-Biz Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion/
Department of Information Technology
 3. Common Service Centres Department of Information Technology
 4. India Portal Department of Information Technology and
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public
Grievances
 5. EG Gateway Department of Information Technology
 6. E-Procurement Ministry of Commerce & Supply/Department of
Information Technology
 7. E-Courts Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs
11. The Committee desired to know the specific services rendered
by the Consultants engaged by Department of Information Technology
in connection with extending its support to concerned Government
Departments in defining scope for the Mission Mode Projects in terms
of service and service levels that would be covered to serve the needs
of citizens and businesses and also whether the Department was

6
satisfied by the services so rendered by the Consultants. The DIT
replied as under:
“The consultants visited a few States and held interactions with
most of the Line Ministries and also studied international
benchmarks for similar services to arrive at a definition of services
and service levels for the various Mission Mode Projects. The DIT
is satisfied with the performance of the consultant so far. However,
it may please be noted that the Consultant Report has recently
been circulated to all the concerned Line Ministries and a proper
assessment of the Consultant role would be possible only after
obtaining reaction from the Line Ministries.”
12. In a specific query, the Committee inquired about the targets
fixed and progress made so far in respect of each of the Mission
Mode Projects identified for implementation under NeGP . In reply
thereto, the Department stated as under:
“There is no time target as such for NeGP as a whole… concerned
Line Ministries/Departments have been advised to work out their
respective project proposals for obtaining financial approval duly
indicating project service goals, outlays and time frames.”
13. The DIT however did not furnish the specific information
relating to the targets fixed and progress made so far in respect of
each of the Mission Mode Projects under National e-Governance Plan.
14. Drawing the attention of the DIT to the fact that more than
half of the period prescribed for implementation of the National
e-Governance Plan i.e. 2003-07 is already over, the Committee enquired
as to whether the target milestones upto this stage have been achieved
and the pace of implementation has been satisfactory so far and if
not, whether the Department has reviewed to analyse the reasons
therefor so that the process could be accelerated to meet the targets.
The DIT however, did not furnish specific reply to this question.
15. The Committee also desired to know the Ministry/Department/
State-wise progress of Mission Mode Projects (MMPs), with the reasons
of shortfalls, if any. The Department replied as under:
“Information is not readily available. Information in respect of the
approved projects would be obtained from concerned Line
Ministries/Departments and on receipt of the same would be placed
before the Standing Committee on IT.”

7
16. On being enquired as to what mechanism has been evolved by
Department of Information Technology to monitor the implementation
of Mission Mode Projects by different Line Ministries/Departments
and also about the trend reflected from the feedback received through
such monitoring, the Department stated:
“.....In the absence of the required manpower and requisite tools,
it has not been possible to effectively carry out monitoring of all
the MMPs. The Programme Management Unit (PMU) has now
been set up in the DIT and they would be tasked to provide
Secretarial support to the Apex Committee. PMU will design and
put in place a Programme Management Information System (PMIS),
which would monitor the progress of the MMPs.”
17. The Committee enquired about the persuasive techniques being
adopted by the DIT to advise and encourage the Line Ministries/
Departments and also the State Governments to implement their MMPs
at a faster pace. The Department, in their reply, stated as under:
“The DIT has been having constant interaction with the Line
Ministries/Departments and State Governments concerned and has
been offering its assistance to them in formulating their proposals.
The DIT has been advocating need for building of internal
capacities appointment of Mission Leader and formation of
Implementation Team for each of the MMPs. It may also be
mentioned that the DIT recently formulated guidelines for Capacity
Building and the institutional framework for Implementing
Structure with a Council headed by the Chief Minister at the top
and an Apex Committee headed by the Chief Secretary for all
State level Programe issues. Further as part of the guidelines there
was a proposal to set up a State e-Governance Mission Team
(SeMT) preferably under the Secretary, DIT which would comprise
of Government and private sector personnel. The States were also
instructed to put in place Departmental e-Governance Mission
Teams (DeMTs) in those departments, which are having an
e-Governance initiative or are proposing to have such an initiative
shortly. The entire funding for setting up of a SeMT and (some)
DeMTs would be borne under Additional Central Assistance to
States. Further, the States had also been informed that funding for
e-Governance projects in the States would depend on formulating
suitable projects, which would only be possible if the SeMT was
set up. Apart from this, the Department was instrumental in
moving the proposal for setting up the Apex Committee under
the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary, which has been
reviewing the progress of various MMPs.”

8
(c) Major Components of NeGP
18. To sustain the Mission Mode Projects, there is a need to create
the right governance and institutional mechanism, set up core
infrastructure, formulate key policies, standards and the legal
framework for adoption and to channelise the private sector’s technical
and financial resources into the e-Governance efforts. The Committee
have been informed that for this purpose, certain key components
have also been identified for implementation as given below:
Sl.No. Support Components Line Ministries/Departments responsible
1. Core Policies Department of Information Technology
2. Core Infrastructure Department of Information Technology
3. Support Infrastructure Department of Information Technology
4. Technical Assistance Department of Information Technology
5. R & D Department of Information Technology
6. Human Resource Department of Information Technology
Development & Training and Department of Administrative
Reforms & Public Grievances
7. Awareness & Assessment Department of Information Technology
and Department of Administrative
Reforms & Public Grievances
8. Organisational Structure Department of Information Technology
and Department of Administrative
Reforms & Public Grievances
19. The Committee desired to know the specific initiatives being
taken by the DIT in respect of each of the above mentioned components
of NeGP , but no specific reply has been furnished by the DIT in this
regard.
(d) Implementation Strategy
20. The Committee have been informed that various Central
Ministries/Departments and State Governments are involved in
implementation of the NeGP . In view of the multiplicity of agencies
involved and the need for overall aggregation and integration at the
national level, it has been considered appropriate to implement NeGP
as a programme, define roles & responsibilities of each agency involved

9
and create an appropriate programme management structure. For the
NeGP , the following role assignments/responsibilities are proposed to
be followed:
(a) Apex Committee (NeGP), which has already been constituted
with Cabinet Secretary as its Chairman and Secretary , DIT
as its Member Convener, would be overseeing the
programme and providing policy and strategic directions
for its implementation and resolving inter-ministerial issues.
(b) Line Ministries/Departments would be responsible for the
implementation of the assigned Mission Mode Projects
(MMPs)/Components. These agencies would be responsible
for defining Services and Service goals being aimed at for
each of their assigned MMP/Components, work out
implementation plan indicating major and intermediate
milestones and the corresponding timelines. They would also
need to appoint a Mission Leader, position a dedicated
implementation team, etc. for timely completion of the
project(s)/Components. In each project, service delivery areas
and service delivery levels would be clearly defined; for
example in land records, the services could include the issue
of copy of Record of Rights and the service level for this
service could be issue of copy of Record of rights in 10
minutes.
(c) To achieve the desired service levels, process re-engineering
is essential and the same would form an integral part of
the project design of all NeGP Mission Mode Projects.
Change Management, needed to sensitise and motivate the
internal and external stakeholders in the project would also
be central to the implementation strategy.
(d) State Governments would be responsible for implementing
State Sector MMPs, under the overall guidance of respective
Line Ministries. An Apex Committee would also be
constituted at the State level headed by the Chief Secretary
to manage the programme at the State level.
(e) DIT would be the facilitator and catalyst for the
implementation of NeGP by various Ministries and State
Governments. It would serve as a secretariat to the Apex
Committee and assist it in managing the programme of the
Governments and would also provide technical assistance
to them. In addition, it would implement pilot/
infrastructure/technical/special projects and support
components of the NeGP .

10
(f) DAR&PG would be responsible for the Generic Process Re-
engineering, Change Management, Human Resource
Development and Training and Awareness building. For the
last two components they would be sharing responsibility
with DIT.
(g) Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance would
allocate funds for NeGP through Plan and Non-Plan
budgetary provisions.
21. The Committee also wanted to know about the specific requests
received from the Line Ministries/Departments in regard to different
aspects of NeGP and the assistance rendered by Department of
Information Technology from time to time in this regard. The
Department, however, did not furnish any specific reply to this.
22. On being asked as to whether instances have come to the
notice of Department of Information Technology where the Line
Ministries/Departments found it difficult to define scope for the Mission
Mode Projects and if so, how did the Department helped them to
overcome such difficulties, the Committee was informed as under:
“Some departments have faced difficulties in defining service levels.
This is particularly true of those departments, which are at an
early stage of project formulation. Interaction with the line
ministries to define service levels has been an ongoing process
and the latest assistance provided to the departments was through
the consultants, appointed by the DIT, to define the services and
service levels for various Mission Mode Projects under the NeGP .”
23. The Committee then asked about the initiatives taken by the
DIT under NeGP . In reply, it was stated that there was State Wide
Area Networks (SWANs), Common Services Centres (CSCs), State Data
Centres (SDCs), India Portal, e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway,
Standards in e-Governance, Capacity Building, e-readiness, e-assessment,
Horizontal Transfer of successful e-Governance applications and setting
up of a Programme Management Unit in DIT for NEGP . Information
regarding initiatives taken so far by DAR & PG under the NeGP was
stated to be not available with the DIT and was being collected.
24. On being asked about the mechanism existing for co-ordination
of functions of Department of Information Technology (DIT) and
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (DAR&PG)
in regard to implementation of NeGP , the DIT replied that both DIT
and DAR&PG are represented on all the major committee constituted
for the NeGP (like Apex Committee, Advisory Group) and as such
coordination among them is ensured through these Committees.

11
(e) Institutional Framework for NeGP
25. As regards the institutional framework for NeGP , it has been
stated that for the effective management of the NeGP , an organizational
structure has been worked out that will accord credibility to the
programme, provide a forum to solicit views of stakeholders, oversee
the programme and resolve inter-ministerial/inter-departmental issues,
ensure speedy sanctioning of projects. The structure would have the
needed secretarial/monitoring/technical support and appropriate
decentralization of power and responsibility to ensure effective
execution of the various projects/components by the implementing
departments/teams. Key components of the proposed Programme
Management Structure would be:
(i) Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for
programme level policy decisions; and for according
approval to projects valued at more than Rs. 100 crores.
(ii) National e-Governance Advisory Group, which has already
been constituted, headed by the Minister C&IT, to solicit
views of external stakeholders and to provide inputs to the
CCEA, advise the government on policy issues and strategic
interventions necessary for accelerating introduction of
e-Governance across Central and State Government
Ministries/Departments.
(iii) Apex Committee (already constituted)  headed by the
Cabinet Secretary empowered to drive and monitor the
NeGP programme; approve MMP services and Service levels,
define programme related conditions of participation by State
Governments in the NeGP . The Apex Committee would also
be empowered to add or delete MMPs as considered
appropriate.
(iv) Empowered Financial Committee  headed by Expenditure
Secretary to accord approval for the NeGP projects costing
Rs. 25 crores and above.
(v) Expenditure Finance Committee/Committee on Non Plan
Expenditure to financially appraise/approve projects as per
existing delegation of financial powers. EFC/CNE headed
by Secretary Expenditure to define the financial terms of
participation by State Governments in the NeGP , with the
approval of the CCEA. A representative of the Planning
Commission would also be included in both the EFC and
CNE. EFC headed by Expenditure Secretary would also

12
recommend the manner in which NeGP Projects are to be
implemented, i.e. as a Central Sector Scheme, Centrally
Sponsored Scheme etc., to the CCEA. Also, considering the
complexities of the Programme and the need to look at
issues such as overall technology architecture, framework,
standards, security policy, funding strategy, service delivery
mechanism, sharing of common infrastructure etc. at a
program level it is proposed that the Technical appraisal of
all NeGP Projects be done by the DIT, prior to a project
being placed before the EFC/CNE. It may be mentioned
that the DIT is already setting up a Programme Directorate
to provide support to departments in conceptualizing,
developing, appraising, implementing and monitoring
respective, MMPs, as well as to provide secretarial support
to the above committees. It is being proposed that the
Secretary DIT or his representative may also be included as
a Standing Special Invitee to all EFC meetings, which are
appraising/approving NeGP MMPs.
(vi) State level Apex Committees  headed by Chief Secretaries
to allocate State level resources, set priority amongst projects
and resolve inter-departmental issues. The States have also
been directed to build up capacities to ensure that e-
Governance projects proposed to be undertaken under the
NeGP are smoothly implemented. The States are also being
funded to build their capacities by setting up State e-Mission
Teams and have an appropriate governance structures to
ensure that implementation is taken up as a programme.
26. Asked whether the proposed organizational structure as stated
above was in place and started functioning, and also what important
decisions have been taken by them so far, the Department informed
the Committee as under:
“For the NeGP , the institutional mechanism is being evolved and
would be put in place after obtaining approval of the competent
authority”.
(f) Study of e-Governance Models
27. The Committee desired to know whether the Department has
made a comprehensive study of the e-Governance systems existing in
some of the developing countries. In reply, the DIT has stated that the
approach to NeGP is based on lessons learnt from the past and
experiences from successful e-Governance applications that have been

13
implemented nationally and internationally. However, no formal study
of e-Governance in developing countries has been undertaken.
Information has only been gathered from the published materials/
reports. There could be a need to acquire know-how for programme
management practices being followed in other countries. This is also
a focus area of the collaboration being discussed with the World Bank.
28. During evidence of the representatives of National Institute of
Smart Governance (NISG), it has been stated that one of the area
which is needed to run the NeGP project smoothly is knowledge
management which means how to learn what has happened in one
part of a State or States or in the world and how lessons can be learnt
and translated to different parts of the country .
29. In post-evidence questionnaire, the Committee enquired as to
whether any study has since been undertaken to find out the strategy
behind the reported tremendous success of various e-Governance
projects in the developed countries and if so how far those strategies
could be effectively used in implementation of several such projects in
our country, the Department replied as under:
“It has been observed from the study of the domestic e-Governance
projects that there is no substitute of field study to comprehend
various salient features and the critical success factors related to
the successful e-Governance projects. In most of the situations,
recipe of success is quite embedded into the process of
implementation and design of the deliverables. On-site field studies
in other developed countries would help in expanding the
knowledge base and experience that would be beneficial in
executing similar projects in India. However it has to be kept in
mind that conditions in those countries as well as motivation for
under training e-Governance initiatives can be quite different from
ours. Visit & study of implementation in developed countries
should be encouraged at the project and programme levels.”
III. FINANCIAL ALLOCATIONS AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT
30. The information furnished to the Committee indicated that for
promotion of e-Governance, the DIT had provided a budgetary support
of Rs. 215 crore during 2004-05 which was fully utilized and has made
a provision of Rs. 300 crore in 2005-06. Similarly, Planning Commission
provided a support of Rs. 17 crore during 2004-05 and has kept a
provision of Rs. 30 crore in 2005-06 for NeGP .

14
31. To a specific query regarding requirement of funds for NeGP ,
the DIT has stated to have been discussing detailed requirements of
funds with the concerned Line Ministries/Departments who are nodally
responsible for the implementation of various MMPs. The MMPs
account for major fund component of the NeGP . To a subsequent similar
query, it has been stated that requirements of funds has not been
finalised yet as most of the projects are under various stages of
formulation. It will take another 3-4 months before scoping of the
projects is completed and funds requirement fainlised.
32. The Committee observed that the Department of Information
Technology had awarded a Consultancy assignment to Price Water
House Coopers Pvt. Ltd. for programme management structure and
funding arrangement for NeGP . The task included: (i) to recommend
appropriate Programme Management Structure (PMS) for NeGP
covering all projects and components; (ii) to recommend broad project
management mechanism and structures for various projects and
components and their linkage with PMS; and (iii) to recommend an
appropriate fund mobilization management and deployment strategy
and structure for NeGP .
33. When asked about the major recommendations of the report,
the Committee have been informed that the Price Water House Coopers
Pvt. Ltd. (PWC) has generated a set of feasible options regarding the
programme management structure and funding structure for the NeGP .
As regards follow-up action initiated by the Department on the
recommendations made in the said report, it has been stated that follow
up discussions were held with Planning Commission as well as with
the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The PWC report provides inputs to the
DIT for discussions with the World Bank on Funding and Programme
Management Support for the NeGP . However, concretization of possible
programme and funding structures is an ongoing process.
34. The Committee drew the attention of the Department to the
discussions stated to have been held on 22.12.2004 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Planning Commission where it was decided
that NeGP should clearly indicate how the plan would link-up transfer
of 2-3% of Plan funds allocated to Line Ministries for e-Governance
and IT related activities and how the 2-3% would come from in the
Ministries where there is no Plan funding like Ministry of Finance and
how would they be accommodated in the NeGP . It was further
mentioned in the said discussion that only after ascertaining clear-cut
funding pattern and process re-engineering methods appropriately
incorporated in NeGP , the Department of Information Technology could

15
go for approval. In this context, the Committee enquired about the
follow up action taken by DIT. In reply, the Department stated as
under:
“At present, there is some level of aggregation of funds through
provisioning of budget allocation to DIT for NeGP components
including common infrastructure, allocation to NIC and
provisioning of Additional Central Assistance to States for NEGP .
A concept Note has also been submitted to the Finance Ministry
regarding sources and pattern of funding for the NeGP and the
same is under discussion. So far, no agreed position has emerged
regarding pooling of resources and creating a single fund for the
NeGP .”
35. The Committee desired to know the total requirement of funds
under each Mission Mode Projects for their implementation during the
prescribed period of four years from 2004-2005 and also the actual
allocation and utilization of funds so far. The Department stated that
the total requirements of funds for each MMPs was still being worked
out.
36. When further asked about the pattern of sharing of the funds
among DIT, Line Ministries/Departments and State Governments for
implementation of various MMPs, the DIT has stated that as of now,
the pattern of cost sharing varies from project to project since the Line
Ministries concerned most the cost sharing proposals. Thus for example
for the SWAN project, DIT has taken the position that the recurring
bandwidth cost and site preparation should be borne by the States,
while for the Transport Project, the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways has maintained that the Ministry would only fund a pilot
with the roll out should be implemented by the States on their own.
For the World Bank project, the DIT is proposing a 75:25 cost sharing
arrangement between the Centre and the States for which proposals is
yet to be accepted by the MoF.
37. During discussion with the representatives of NASSCOM on
25.04.2005 on the subject, the Committee was informed about the low
capital investment in IT Sector in India, as under:
“First, despite the phenomenal success of India’s IT industry, it
has been a success serving foreign markets. India’s domestic market
has been left behind. The first way to realize this is to think of the
amount of total capital in India’s economy, the capital being the
machines plants and equipment. I am talking about capital in the
economic sense, that is how, much of that is IT capital. The capital

16
share in India is low. In fact, it is the lowest among the 30
economies according to my studies. I will provide more statistics
in a minute. But, the second point I want to make is that use of
IT, particularly, industry use of IT provides the greatest impact on
economic growth. In effect, it has a terrible charging effect on
growth? Because India is under invested in IT capital.
xx xx xx
If somebody says of IT, we can think of India or perhaps the US
or Ireland. But I doubt that anyone would say of Turkey, Columbia,
the Philippines and Thailand. But in each of those countries, IT
capital accounts for more of the total capital than it does in India.
In each of those countries, the economy has invested more in IT
capital than an India. In India, the IT capital share of the total
capital is only three-and-a-half per cent. The average among the
eight countries that have also under-invested, the average IT capital
share is approximately 25 per cent. So, despite the phenomenal
success of India’s IT industry, India’s economy has significantly
under-invested in IT capital.”
IV . CREATION AND SHARING OF INFRASTRUCTURE
(a) Requirement of Common-Core Infrastructure
38. The Committee desired to know about the various types of
infrastructure that are required for implementation of different
e-Governance projects. In reply, the Department informed that apart
from computer hardware & software, most of the e-Governance projects
need Data Connectivity, Secured Data Repositories and Service Delivery
Outlets/Access points. Under the NeGP , following common core
infrastructure is being considered:
• National/State Data Centres
• State Wide Area Networks/augmented NICNET to carry
both Central and State e-Government data/services
• Common Services Centres infrastructure to connect the areas
below the block level with the rest of the country through
SWAN/NICNET for citizen-centric services.
39. The Department however did not furnish details of
infrastructure created separately by the Line Ministries/Departments
and different State Governments for implementation of various
e-Governance projects. As informed, the Department of Information

17
Technology is contemplating to create common infrastructure in respect
of SWANs, Data Centres and CSCs, which can be used by the different
Ministries/Departments and State Governments for G2G (Intranet) and
G2C applications.
40. To a pointed question as to what specific initiatives have been
taken by the Department of Information Technology for developing
common infrastructure and also for sharing of the existing infrastructure
for faster implementation of projects at lower costs, the Department
stated that the DIT has already been initiatives for developing the
SWANs and the Common Service Centres (CSCs). The SWAN scheme
has been approved at a total outlay of Rs. 3334 crores with central
assistance component of Rs. 2005 crores over a period of 5 years. For
the CSCs, DIT has called for proposals for selection of a National
Level Service Agency (NLSA) to manage the CSC programme. All
departments  have been advised to make use of common core
infrastructure as a part of their project design. There is considerable
cost advantage in pooling of resources by way of creating common
core infrastructure.
41. The representative of Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) during
discussion with the Committee on 28 July 2005 stated as under:
“....The IT provides an opportunity to create that binding factor
which can help achieve shamelessly inter-operable
Government.....The need for holistic deployment of IT rather than
pilots. ....You can redefine the Department’s role in the light of
acts like IT wing being able to provide interpretability across the
Departments in the light of the fact that you have the Right to
Information Act. You will have a tremendous transformational
responsibility of the Ministries as in the case of Central and State
Governments. Share Infrastructure: Everybody has his own network,
everybody has his own data centres; and everybody has his own
applications. The IT deployment provides the opportunity for
sharing infrastructure and thereby reducing the cost or defraying
the cost across many Ministries rather than everybody building
his own castles and empires.”
42. Expressing their concern over the duplication of infrastructure
being created while implementing MMPs under NeGP , the Committee
desired to know how it would be ensured that the resources were not
wasted in creating separate infrastructure. To this, the Secretary, DIT
submitted during evidence:
“At the moment, so far our network is getting established. So,
there was no intention to stop their work. At the moment, it is

18
going on, but for the future projects, wherever the infrastructure
is already being created under some other scheme of the
Government that attempt is being made by whoever represents
our department under such Committee, that is one of his
functions.”
43. Referring to Railways and Telecom Companies who have their
own networks, the Committee pointed out that it would be advisable
to use their infrastructures which are already available, while ensuring
that they have adequate bandwidth for their transactions. To this, the
Secretary, DIT submitted that they have been trying to work out an
aggregation of all these bandwidth for carrying some of their traffic.
Power grid, Railnet and GAIL together have fair amount of capacity.
DIT has also been talking to Department of Telecommunications and
have also taken approval within the Ministry in this regard. If these
organizations can get the license, a lot of e-Governance services can
go on their network. Subsequently, in a written note furnished to the
Committee, it has been stated that DIT is contemplating to create
common infrastructure in respect of SWANs, Data Centres and CSCs,
which can be used by the different Ministries/Departments and State
Governments for G2G (Interanet) and G2C applications.
(b) State Data Centres (SDCs)
44. Accordingly to DIT, establishment of State Data Centre (SDC)
has been identified as another important element of the core
infrastructure for supporting e-Governance initiatives under the NeGP .
It is proposed to create data repositories/data centres in various States
so that common secured data storage could be maintained to serve
host of e-Governance applications. Most of the States are
conceptualising setting up of Data Centres and would need GOI
technical and financial assistance both for the project formulation and
its establishment. Broad policy guidelines are being formulated by the
DIT to support these initiatives at State level.
45. The Committee learnt that the DIT had sanctioned the project
for establishing the State Data Centre to the Government of Karnataka
though the guidelines in this regard are still under consideration. When
asked about the reasons for such disparity, the Committee have been
informed that Karnataka is one of the States which has computerized
the Land Records. It has implemented the same in all the 178 Taluks
across the State. The State had dispensed with the manual system of
Record of Rights and completely implemented the computerized system.
It was felt necessary to centralize the 30 million land records in a

19
central location and also host various other applications viz. property
registration, Rural Digital Services etc. at the Central location. It was
also not feasible to wait until formulation of the guidelines for State
Data Centres (SDCs). This initiative was thought to serve as a learning
and an experience to the DIT towards common Technology
Infrastructure for centralized management, monitoring and
troubleshooting etc. which other States could also, consider eventually
for adoption in the land Records Computerization Programme and
various other e-Governance initiatives. Lastly it was felt that this
experience would provide valuable ground-level inputs into the
guidelines for establishment of SDCs.
46. When asked as to how the Department would utilise
experiences gained so far in establishing State Data Centres (SDCs) in
other States, it has been stated in a written note that the Karnataka
Data Centre has been operationalised recently . This was taken up as
a proof of concept. The experiences/learnings are being documented
by the State on the request of the DIT, which shall be studied and
kept in view while considering proposals from other States.
47. Regarding the time frame for establishing the State Data Centres
(SDCs), it has been stated that no fixed time frame has been set for
establishing them. Several States are planning to set up Data Center
with a view to aggregating their IT infrastructure/resources at a
common location at the State level as opposed to having disperate
infrastructure at the departmental/district/block level. It is intended
to extend technical and financial support to the States in this initiative
once the scheme is finalised in this regard.
(c) State Wide Area Networks (SWANs)
48. Network connectivity is a significant enabler of any modern,
efficient administration. The Development Block is the basic tier of the
development administration, particularly for rural areas in our country.
Provision of reliable network connectivity, particularly for rural areas,
is an imperative. The DIT has, therefore, decided to extend the high-
speed, high capacity (minimum 2 Mbps) reliable network connectivity
for Government-to-Government communication up to the Block level
through State Wide Area Networks and/or NICNET. The latter is
currently being run by the National Informatics Centre i.e., primarily
as a VSAT based network up to the District level.
49. It has been further informed that various e-Governance projects,
which would be implemented in a phased manner over the next 4-5
years by the Line Ministries/Departments concerned at the Central

20
and State levels may avail themselves of seamless connectivity using
these State Wide Area Networks (SWANs) and NICNET. This network
connectivity could also be progressively leveraged to provide
electronically to citizens at the village level by extending its reach
purpose appropriate Policy Framework is being worked out keeping
in view the recently announced Broadband Policy.
50. It has been further stated that the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) is primarily responsible for establishing the shared
Core backbone Infrastructure identified in NeGP . Policy Guidelines have
been issued laying down the modalities for technical and financial
support that will be provided by the DIT to the States for establishing
State Wide Area Networks (SWANs). These include the technical and
administrative norms to be followed by the States, depending on the
implementation option adopted by each State to establish the SWAN.
For this purpose, a scheme to establish State Wide Area Networks for
providing data connectivity of 2 MBPS at block level has been approved
at a total outlay of Rs. 3334 crores with Central Assistance component
of Rs. 2005 crores over a period of 5 years.
51. In a written note furnished to the Committee, the Department
has stated that the following eligibility criteria are fixed for the State/
UTs for preparation and submission of the SWAN proposals.
“States would need to enter into firm agreements regarding
bandwidth with operators in order to avail of the DIT support for
establishing SWANs. A State may opt for coverage up to district
level only initially, or up to block level. Minimum bandwidth to
be made available would be 2 Mbps up to district level as well as
up to block level on a dedicated basis (leased lines/satellite). The
DIT would separately indicate Norms for leasing of bandwidths in
consultation with DoT and BSNL. States utilize these Norms as
benchmarks for contracting. The State would need to make available
to 2 Mbps bandwidth (which is negotiated from the service
provider) to the PPP vendor or to NIC depending on the
implementation Option adopted for establishment of the SWAN.
A State would need to have undertaken implementation of at least
three major statewide e-Governance projects that require such
connectivity of which at least one should have been completed in
order to be eligible for funding support.”
52. The Committee was earlier informed that during the year 2004-
2005 proposals from 14 States/UTs for establishment of State Wide

21
Area Network (SWAN) had been received and these States/UTs had
selected the following implementing agencies:
Sl.No. State Implementing Agency
1. Uttar Pradesh NIC/NICSI
2. NCT Delhi NIC/NICSI
3. Kerala C-DAC, Trivandrum
4. Punjab Punjab State e-Gov. Society, Chandigarh
5. Karnataka Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. Bangalore
6. West Bengal Webel Technology Ltd., Kolkata
7. Maharashtra Setu Maharashtra Society, Mumbai
8. Gujarat Gujarat Informatics Ltd., Gandhinagar
9. Assam Amtron Ltd., Guwahati
10. Madhya Pradesh MP State Electronics Dev. Corpn. Ltd., Bhopal
11. Jharkhand Jharkhand Agency for Promotion & IT, Ranchi
12. Andhra Pradesh APTS Ltd., Hyderabad
13. Tripura NIC/NICSI
14. Tamil Nadu ELCOT Ltd., Chennai
53. In a subsequent note submitted to the Committee, the
Department informed that proposals from 17 States had been received,
considered and approved by the Empowered Committee. SWAN
proposals have not been submitted by the States of Goa, Uttaranchal,
J&K, Nagaland, Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Meghalaya
and from the UTs of Daman & Diu, Andaman & Nicobar, Dadar and
Nagar Haveli. Out of these States, Mizoram as already been granted
fund for Project Development and other pre-project activities. As
informed by the DIT, similar proposal for Project Development and
other pre-project activities are expected shortly from Manipur,
Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh. First version of proposals from
Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Bihar, Chandigarh, Pondicherry , Lakshadweep
have been received and are under scrutiny and revision stage.
54. To a follow up question as to what steps have been taken to
expedite the submission of SWAN proposals by all the States, The
Committee have been informed that the Department of IT is under

22
constant dialogue with State IT Departments to facilitate submission
of the SWAN proposals within next 2 to 3 months time.
55. The Committee specifically desired to know as to how the
delay in submission of SWAN proposals by the States would affect
the timely implementation of various e-Governance projects. To this,
the Department responded as under:
“Since e-Governance projects are expected to use the common core
infrastructure including SWAN, any delay in the implementation
of the SWAN would have direct bearing on the implementation of
the e-Governance projects. In this context, while preparedness of
the States on back-end integration requirements of the e-Governance
projects are closely coupled with their SWAN proposals, one of
the eligibility criteria for the States to prepare and submit SWAN
proposal requires implementation of at least three major
e-Governance projects that may require SWAN connectivity. These
eligibility criterion with respect of the preparedness may have
caused some delay from some of the States/UTs to prepare and
submit their proposals.”
56. Regarding the time frame for establishing the State Wide Area
Network, it has been stated that the establishment of SWAN in the
States envisages three stages of the implementation process, after the
approval, as given below:
• Finalization of the Network Design, Request for Proposal
and Selection of the Network Operator including finalization
of the Service Level Agreements—expected time frame 4-6
months.
• Physical commissioning and testing of the network upto
the Block level in line with the approved network design—
expected time frame 6-8 months or more depending on the
size of the State.
• Hand holding and monitoring of the network performance
in line with the Service Level Agreements—fixed 5 years.
57. The Department of IT has informed that in those SWAN cases
where the Implementing Agency is a Central/State-owned agency, there
may be a requirement of one-time up front payment for the capital
expenses. All other expenses would be incurred as recurring for the
project duration of 5 years. For the other cases, wherein SWAN would
be implemented through a PPP model, the DIT’s liability would be for

23
the total project outlay devided by 5 years on a quarterly basis
(20 quarters for 5 years) in the form of ‘Quarterly Guaranteed Revenue’
(QGR) expenses, to be released by the DIT to the State Implementing
Agency on a quarterly basis.
(d) Common Services Centres (CSCs)
58. The Committee have been informed that a Draft Frame Work
for establishment of 1,00,000 CSCs across the country has been finalized
and posted in the DIT Website to make it available to all stakeholders.
Earlier versions of this Draft Framework had been discussed at various
levels viz. entities currently active in ICT based kiosk business, NGOs,
academic institutes and State Governments. Another round of formal
consultations with the State Governments on various details on the
structure of implementation is envisaged within few weeks. The
Framework will take its final shape in the form of an Annexure to the
Cabinet Note, which is planned to be submitted for consideration and
approval of CCEA by November 2005. The salient features of the Draft
Frame Work are as follows:
• Three-tier implementation structure with State Governments/
their field formation at the top-tier, Service Centre Agency
at the middle tier and Village level Entrepreneur at the
bottom tier.
• An entrepreneur ship-based business model to ensure
financial sustain ability to be achieved within a reasonable
period.
• Institutionalization of a Programme management, facilitating
and hand holding mechanism involving all stakeholders, to
ensure operational sustain ability within a defined period.
• Operational and final ownership of the CSCs to be passed
on to the Village level Entrepreneur after a defined period.
• Citizen-centric services to be made available at remote and
rural areas with a judicious mix of government and private
services to ensure credibility and sustain ability respectively.
• Calibrated policy and financial support to the Scheme by
DIT to provide balance between fast proliferation and
ownership among stakeholders.
59. As regards the estimated time frame for establishment of
Common Services Centres (CSCs), it has been stated that based on the

24
framework, the DIT is currently in the process of selecting a National
Level Service Agency (NLSA), which would carry out the following
activities:
(i) Effective project management and implementation,
(ii) Mobilise requisite financial resources to supplement
Government support to the project,
(iii) Benefit from significant economies of scale in the
identification, customization and implementation of the
physical and digital infrastructure,
(iv) Enable aggregation of potential citizen-centric services at the
national level,
(v) Agglomerate best practices and content providers, and
(vi) Incorporate standardized design, content and processes.
60. It has further been informed that expression of Interest stage
is now over and Request For Proposal (RFP) has been sent to the
short listed vendors. After the selection process is over, the selected
NLSA would be given responsibilities to carry out the tasks mentioned
above and ensure successful and timely implementation of the CSCs
project. The target for setting up the 1,00,000 CSCs is stated to be
2007.
61. During evidence, the Committee enquired about the possibility
of establishing the CSCs as revenue model which could create
employment for the people. The Secretary, DIT replied as under:
“It is contemplated that it will be done involving private
entrepreneurial model. Guidelines for that are still being worked
out. We have not yet issued the guidelines.”
62. The Committee pointed out that it was important not only to
build efficiency into the system, but the manner in which it was being
delivered at the implementation level. It would not be a pleasurable
experience for the average citizens to go to locations that would not
suit them, irrespective of it being a manual process or automated
process. To this, the Secretary , DIT submitted:
“Sir, the points suggested by you have also been envisaged under
National e-Governance Plan, and the Ministry has been working
on it. However, if the Committee so directs, then we will take a
little more interest in this issue. The whole purpose of it is to
make it a more effective model. They already have the pilot project,
and the concept, which is proven. Therefore, it is only a question
of rolling out.”

25
63. In their 15th Report (14th Lok Sabha), the Committee had
observed that the Department of Information Technology had
successfully set up 487 CICs in eight North-Eastern States and 60 CICs
in J&K on replications basis to bring the benefits of ICT for socio-
economic development of these areas by providing broad band
connectivity. The remaining 75 CICs were to be set up by October,
2005 and the proposal for setting up CICs in Uttaranchal had been
formulated and the EFC Memo of the project was under review by
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.
(e) Integrated Service Delivery Mechanism
(e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway)
64. The Committee have been informed that the DIT has initiated
a pilot implementation of the Mission Mode Project on E-Governance
Service Delivery Gateway through National Institute for Smart
Government (NISG). This Gateway will be forming a part of the NeGP
Core Infrastructure that would enable connectivity between multiple
back-end applications with multiple front-end service providers in a
secure and reliable manner. An Advisory Group and a Technical Sub-
Committee comprising of members from NIC, NISG, CDAC, DAR&PG
and Industry has been constituted to oversee and guide the
implementation of the Gateway pilot. A Proof of Concept of the
Gateway Pilot has been built and demonstrated. Gateway Specifications
and Request for Proposal is currently being formulated.
65. The Committee desired to know the steps taken by the
Government to establish an effective integrated delivery mechanism
for single window delivery of various public services under different
e-Governance projects and also the progress made so far in this regard.
In reply, the Department elaborated that under the NeGP , some
initiatives like India Portal, EG service Delivery Gateway, e-Biz,
Common Service Centers have been taken to achieve the objective of
single window facility for delivery of public services.
66. During the discussion held on 28th July 2005, a representatives
of the IBM expressed their opinion before the Committee about the
service delivery as under:
“If we look into the overall different milestones in which different
Governments right from the place of a manual Government up to
a completely automated Government, we think, there are four ways
by which the Governments can implement the e-Governance project.
They can start with online information to citizens wherein citizens

26
can just go and access various websites. They can also get into an
Interative System where the citizens can start getting some
information, downloading the forms and updating the information
as and when required. Then, there is Integrated Government where
two Governments or two Departments can start talking and also
provide the citizens various services. We have an On-Demand
Government model where Governments can provide services
instantaneously. We also have to pick up policies as well as
processes and the infrastructure wherein Governments, Ministries,
Departments, etc. can actually say with confidence that they can
reach the citizens instantaneously.”
(f) e-Security
67. On being asked as to what effective measures were being taken
to make infrastructure safe and secure to avoid loss/misuse of valuable
information/data, the Department has informed that the Safety of the
infrastructure involves both physical and logical security. While physical
security is ensured through normal conventional methods (guards,
access and control to authorized persons, surveillance, fire safety etc.)
and, logical security is implemented in the system to safeguard from
hackers, unauthorized access, viruses, denial of access service etc. by
Firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Disaster Recovery Sites,
Data Back-up etc. through well laid down policies and security
measures.
V. FACILITATION AND EXPANSION
(a) Uniformity of Standards
68. In a note furnished to the Committee, it has been stated that
a Core Group on standards in e-Governance has been constituted by
DIT with DG, NIC as the Chairperson. Four sub-groups viz. major
priority areas, documentation, quality & localization have been
constituted under the Core Group to look into specific areas.
Institutional mechanism for evolving and enforcement of Standards
for NeGP has been finalized. NIC would be creating a separate “e-
Governance Standards Division” to steer the process of evolving
standards, Apex Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DIT
would be approving standards and STQC would be responsible for
documentation, adoption and enforcement of standards.
69. The DIT subsequently informed the Committee that the sub-
groups on Documentation, Quality, Major areas and Localization helping
a core group on standards in e-Governance have submitted their

27
reports. Asked about steps taken on the major recommendations and
to bring uniformity in standards of various e-Governance projects being
implemented by different Line Ministries/Departments and States, it
has been informed that some of the Key priority areas of immediate
concern identified by the Core Group for Standardization are Technical
Standards, Localization Standards, Quality & Documentation, Security
Standards and Meta Data & Data Standards for various application
domains.
70. It has further been informed that as setting Standards and
their maintenance are an ongoing concern, it is important to establish
an Institutional Mechanism to evolve them and put in place a process
for adopting and maintaining them. Based on the recommendations of
the core group, an Institutional mechanism has been setup for evolving
e-Governance standards at the National level.
(b) e-Assessment
71. The Committee have been informed that e-Assessment is one
of the important components of NeGP . It is planned to list out all the
e-Governance projects running across various States and at the National
level and undertake Summary/Detailed assessment of these projects
for their effectiveness and sustainability. e-Governance Assessment
Framework (EAF 2.0) has been prepared and has been put in public
domain on DIT Website. A Working Group has been constituted to
provide overall guidance and steer the e-Assessment progarmme.
(c) India Portal
72. In a note furnished to the Committee, it has been stated that
the India Portal is envisaged to be a unified portal for accessing
information in the State Sectors (Executive, Judiciary, Legislature and
Constitutional Authorities), for electronic delivery of citizen services
and a major facilitator for implementing e-Governance initiatives. This
project is being implemented by the NIC and would be an extension
to their “India Image” portal catering to the G2C services. A prototype
Portal would be up and running by September 2005.
(d) Replication of Successful e-Governance Models
73. The Committee have been informed that the DIT has initiated
a pilot scheme aimed at spreading the benefits of e-Governance to
citizens in all parts of the country. One key component of this multi-
pronged initiative is to identify and replicate major successes that have
been achieved in some States. The specific success stories that have

28
been identified on this basis are Land Records, Transport, Registration,
Municipalities, Gram Panchayats and Integrated Citizen Service Centers.
Each of these projects has been implemented very successfully in one
or more States. However, most other States, for various reasons, have
not been able to cross implementation hurdles and derive the benefits
of these projects. The successful implementation models of Land
Records, Property Registration and Road Transport sectors were first
studied in the States viz. Bhoomi in Karnataka, SARITA in Maharashtra,
CARD in Andhra Pradesh, Vahan, Sarathi in Himahal Pradesh and a
strategy was formulated to replicate in other States on a pilot scale
with necessary modification to suit the State’s requirement. Success of
such projects depends on capturing entire solutions including
technology components, process re-engineering and change management
and transfer the knowledge and experience through other states as a
package of assistance. It is envisaged that at the end of the pilot
implementation Request for Proposal (RFP) will be generated for roll
out with an appropriate PPP model.
74. It has further been informed that the strategy is to build
capacity to horizontally transfer the recipe for success from the
successful to the not-so-successful States. So far, replication project is
being carried out in 17 States, with a total of 14 pilot projects on Land
Records, 11 projects on Property Registration and 6 projects on Road
Transport. Though there are various factors contributing to the success
of the pilot projects under the Replication Program, the success rate is
generally high for those projects where degree of State ownership has
been high and where there has been active participation by project
committee members.
75. To a specific query , it was stated that the Replication Project
was to be implemented at the pilot district of those States which made
request for DIT assistance in implementing the same. Though the
project was to be funded centrally, it was envisaged that the State
would take the ownership of the project. For replicating the best
practices from successful projects, DIT offered its financial assistance
to various States for covering one district in each State on a pilot
basis so that a workable model can be developed for subsequent State-
wide roll out. On receiving willingness from States, projects are initiated
on Land Records, Registration and Transport.
76. As regards project monitoring, it has been informed that a
State Level Committee was formulated, typically chaired by the
Secretary from the respective Line Department. A Project Manager,
typically a District authority, was to monitor the project implementation.

29
When asked about the constraints being faced by the States in
implementing the above-mentioned projects, it has been stated that as
the States officials who have been appointed as Project Managers have
additional responsibilities at the District Level, it often prevent them
from giving the project the necessary fillip to ensure timely intervention.
Frequent transfers, reallocations also hamper the project momentum.
Legal changes to necessitate project success in terms of banning of
manual records, etc. are done towards the fag end of the project and
this also delay project completion. However, one of the key success
criteria is stated to be the complete replacement of manual records
and discontinuation of the manual system, though many States have
not fully discontinued the use of manual system/process.
77. During the discussion held on 28 July 2005, a representatives
of IT Service/Solution providers, expressed their opinions as under:
“IT takes a lot of time to build solutions and therefore we are
focusing on the need of reliability. What has happened in the
Ministry of Company Affairs, for example, could actually work for
Ministries across the Government of India. What is the need for
re-doing all these applications over and over again? What is the
need of having data centers for each Ministry across the country
incurring a lot of capital expenditure where we could have a
leverage for Government? So, it is time for us to adopt e-
framework, move forward to e-vision and have elements in a
roadmap so that we can then employ and implement a holistic
development IT which ultimately is not in the forefront but it only
enables governance.
** ** **
This is regarding successful e-Governance project. They have to be
identified and appropriately funded so that they can be replicated
all over the country. I think, this is a very important need because
everyone is trying to reinvent will have maximum impact. The
Government has to really see which one are the ones which the
Government actually propagate to take them all over the country.
** ** **
Another point is to standardize, customize and to replicate. Instead
of starting, many projects are being getting rolled out. They are
getting changed to the customized localized requirement. Instead
of it, let us standardize the set of practices. They say that this is
what we are offering and this is what is to be replicated across
the country.”

30
78. During the discussion held on 18th August 2005 with the
representatives of Centre for Railway Information Service (CRIS), the
Committee were informed that the Railway Project, though was not
part of the National e-Governance plan but it was one of the better
achievement of the government in delivering services in a very
transparent and convenient way. The Pilot Project of Railway was
started in 1984-85 in Delhi initially and once it became successful, it
was replicated in four other centers in Sikandarabad, Chennai, Kolkata
and Mumbai. The whole system was networked and the CONCERT
(Country Wide Network of Computerized Enhanced Reservation and
Ticketing) started in 1999 by which any person could reserve for any
train from any where in the country. The CRIS was equipped to provide
technical support and services to develop, setup, operate and maintain
any computerized system and underlying infrastructure. CRIS has got
a judicious mix of both the domain and computer professionals.
79. The representative of the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
informed the Committee during their evidence on 18th August 2005,
that in 2002 when the National e-Governance Plan was thought of,
they devised functionality by which a number of services would be
delivered to tax payers through electronic means. There were eight
services, which were identified for electronic delivery as part of the
National e-Governance Plan. Some of them were dissemination of tax
related information, information on PAN, on line filing of PAN
application, PAN related enquiry, payment of challan, on line
preparation of returns etc. The concern of the Department was to
reduce the interface between the department and the taxpayers. Most
of the services were being brought on the electronic delivery system
only for the reason that the taxpayers need not come to office of
collecting these kinds of routine things.
80. The representative of the Ministry of the Road Transport and
Highways informed the Committee during evidence on 18th August
2005 as under:
“We have provided two software with the help of NIC, that is,
software for RC is called VAHAN and the software for the driving
licence is called SARATHI. Thus, we also have to provide them
the Smart Card Security Infrastructure that is Symmetric Key
Infrastructure (SKI).
We have also developed it through NIC and IIT, Kanpur and also
we have got it audited by a third party to ensure that proper
processes are in place. In the front end it would require a smart

31
card operating system. Otherwise people will come with their own
smart cards and with their own operating systems. So, we
developed, again through NIC and IIT, Kanpur, a Smart Card
Operating System for Transport Applications-(SCOSTA). Then for
certification of smart card under SCOSTA procedure, as on this
date NIC has already certified about 15 Companies.
We have amended the Central Motor Vehicle Rules to enable and
facilitate all these aspects. The specification of the smart cards and
peripherals also are notified in the rules. We have given powers to
the States to mandate the use of smart cards when they are ready.
This replication has started in many States, both in Sarathi with
respect to DL and in Vahan with respect to RC. After one pilot
project, they have gone to extend it and replicate it throughout
their State. What we are looking at is whether the driving licence
can be issued by driving schools, which are certified and authorized
by the State Government so that it does not have to come to RTO
for this, following all the procedures. We are also looking at
whether learning licences can be issued by some of the college
principals even.”
81. During evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Rural
Development informed the Committee about the computerization of
land records that the scheme was started in the Ministry in 1988-89 as
a pilot project, which was taken up in eight districts in Andhra Pradesh,
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and
Rajasthan. After seeing the implementation of these pilot projects, the
scheme was extended to other districts in the country. Initially, the
scheme was to undertake data entry at the district level, but in
1997-98, it was extended to Tehsils and Talukas. It has a hundred
percent Centrally-sponsored scheme, and the software and technical
support was from NIC. The major objectives of our programme was
to provide computerized copies of ownership and crop details to the
land owners on demand; updating the land records through mutations;
ensuring accuracy and transparency in land records, and effective public
delivery of services from the Tehsil-Taluka centers. Further objectives
which have come up over time were things like on-line filing of
mutation application, submission and tracking of complaints, and
locational details of plots along with ownership. These were things
which have come up at a later date. So far, the computerization of
land records has been sanctioned in 582 districts and 3325 tehsils all
over the country. Out of the total sanctioned Tehsils, in 2721 Tehsils,
computer centers have been set up and computerized copies of the
records of rights were being issued to the land owners from 2607

32
P
R
O
G
R
A
M
M
E
P
R
O
J
E
C
T
Tehsils. The State which have done exceedingly well were Karnataka,
Goa, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat which have fully operationalised their
Talukas and they were actually updating the computerized copies of
RoR.
VI. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (CAPACITY BUILDING)
(a) Capacity Building Mechanism
82. The Committee have been informed that NeGP has an integral
component on “Capacity Building”, in which the State Governments
are required to build capacity in terms of resources of people, process
and tools for conceptualizing, developing and managing (and not for
implementation of the e-Governance projects) the e-Governance projects
under NeGP . The State Governments have been provided the flexibility
to augment their capacities. On being asked about the major
components of “Capacity Building” particularly in the context of
implementation and maintenance of several e-Governance projects
under NeGP , the Committee have been informed that for the
implementation of NeGP , Capacity Building is required at two levels
namely Programme level & Project level and each level consist of two
major components namely (i) positioning of specially recruited/
identified personnel having requisite skills and (ii) training of existing
personnel. The components of these are given in the diagram
below:
• Policy Formulation
• Committing Resources Leadership & Vision
• Taking hard decisions
• Preparing Roadmaps
• Prioritization Programme Development
• Frameworks, Guidelines
• Monitoring Progress
• Inter-agency Collaboration Programme Management
• Capacity Management
• Conceptualization
• Architecture Project Development
• Definition (RFP , SLA...)
• Bid Process Management
• Project Monitoring Project Management
• Quality Assurance

33
83. As regards the progress made so far in respect of these
components of “Capacity Building”, it has been stated that DIT along
with Planning Commission has formulated a detailed Capacity Building
Guidelines and circulated to all the State Governments. For better
understanding of Capacity Building requirements, DIT organized a
workshop in Delhi followed by two such workshops in Hyderabad
and Kolkata by the NISG. All State IT Secretaries and other stakeholders
were invited for the aforementioned workshops. The Planning
Commission allocated additional funds amounting to Rs. 17 crores to
States for Capacity building during the year 2004-05. This fund was
distributed to various States primarily for preparing Capacity Building
proposal covering the following components:
(i) State e-Governance Road Map including prioritizing of
MMPs
(ii) State Capacity Building Road Map
(iii) Financial proposal for Capacity Building Projecting
requirements for coming three years.
84. It has further been informed that NISG has offered its consulting
services to all the State Governments for preparing State Road Map
and Capacity Building proposal. Up till now, 15 States have engaged
NISG for preparing the above proposal, while 5 States are in the process
of considering NISG? States like Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh
have gone through the process of tendering for selection of the
consultant for preparing Road Map and Capacity Building. DIT has
drawn a scheme to provide support to UTs for the preparation of
project proposals for Capacity Building Programme as they are not
eligible for Additional Central Assistance (ACA) fund.
85. The Committee enquired as to whether any centralized/
institutionalized mechanism has been developed to provide regular
support for capacity building in different Ministries/Departments and
also as to what strategy has been adopted by NISG and other Govt.
agencies regarding imparting training etc. to the officials of various
Ministries/Departments/State Government. In reply there to, the
Department stated as under:
“Presently, NIC is providing regular technical support for
implementation of e-Governance projects to all Central Ministries/
Departments, State Governments and District, Administration.
Further, NISG is providing regular support in terms of conducting
workshop and training Programme to policy makers of various
States. Some of the features of the programmes are as follows:
• Design contents and methodology for training programs
related to the e-Governance domain.

34
•P rogram management for quality check at the National level.
(NISG would like to develop Institutional capacities in the
area of e-Governance)
• Concept demonstration of some of the successful G2C and
G2B projects. Training gives a focused learning on various
issues of e-Governance in context to the participant’s
respective States. NIC has also been running regular training
programmes for Government Staff at their Head Quarters
at Delhi and its States units”
86. Asked whether the Department considered that the number of
persons to be imparted training during the next 3-4 years would be
sufficient/adequate to effectively implement the e-Governance
programmes, the Department in their reply stated that as a part of the
Capacity Building exercise under NeGP , each State Government is
developing e-Governance Roadmap and Capacity Building Roadmap
(CBRM). The CBRM will give an overall strategy and plan to build
capacity for implementing e-Governance in the State. Such a plan will
give the type of training programs, Institutes, including the schedule
for training. It is desired that the Central Ministries/departments should
also develop similar CRBM. At the same time, NISG is building
framework and mechanism for Institutional capacity building to take
up Chief Information Officer (CIO) and other short term training
programmes. The training programme for CIOs is executed to equip
serving Government personnel with the skills needed to conceptualise,
design, manage implementation and operations of e-Governance projects
in their respective domains. This has been identified as one of the
major gap areas on accelerating e-Governance.
(b) Requirement of Technical Manpower
87. About the requirement of technical manpower, a representative
of NIC stated that:
“in our experience in more than almost a dozen of e-applications,
we state things very clearly. The first thing is that we insist that
the Government must have strong technical capabilities to decide
how to go about to change management…. It means that we should
have a set of people inside the structure who will then build over
a period of 4-5 years, a major project which has to roll out across
the country. In the absence of any such people, it is very difficult
for industry to realize how they really behave. So once we have
that set of people—whom we call the project leaders or project
directors—about 5-6 of them, who control technology it is good

35
because controlling technology is of paramount importance. If I
take fingerprints today, there are no standards. So we have
problems and the need to standardize and the need to give a
direction is there and the direction has to come from within. For
that, you really need the set of people who can plant it over a
period of time and then fan out specific requirements to
industry.....”
88. The Committee desired to know whether the Department has
made any long-term planning to meet the growing requirements of
skilled man-power in different departments for handling ICT related
activities as well as implementation of various e-Governance Projects.
In reply, it has been stated that the Dept. of Personnel & Training,
NIC and NISG have been conducting training programmes regularly
for the benefit of Government employees. Support is also being
provided for creating in-house training facility to meet growing
requirements of ICT literate people. Apart from these steps, the DIT,
under the capacity building programme, is enabling State Government
Departments and Line Ministries to laterally induct high skilled
personnel to manage the process of technology and e-Governance
project implementation.
(c) Upgradation of Skills
89. The Committee have further been apprised that they are also
facing problems in continuous upgradation of skills of IT professionals.
It was desired that the Government should provide better/advanced
training to IT professional, offer better promotional avenues or financial
incentives to encourage them not to leave them/remain with them for
a longer tenure.
(d) High Rate of Attrition
90. The Committee noted that one of the problems faced by
Government Departments/Ministries such as NIC, Centre for Railway
Reservation System (CRIS) etc. was high rate of IT staff turnover. The
IT professionals joined these organizations and after gaining experience
left these organizations and joined the private sector where they got
three times the salary. When the Committee wanted to know about
the means developed for retaining them, a representative of CRIS stated
that:
“But there is one request. What we find is that people come to us
and say that I am quitting the job and that he should be relieved
within a week’s time. The industry should come to an arrangement

36
saying that one cannot go unless the other party relieves. He may
be doing an important project, but what we are doing, but we are
doing a very important project, which has a target. I cannot
obviously relieve a person within a week’s time. Something can
be done about that. Some kind of understanding with the industry
should be there.”
91. The Committee then asked about the strategy adopted to curb
the high rate of attrition of IT skilled workforce particularly in the
Government bodies. In reply, it has been stated that within the present
prevailing salary structure in the Government vis a vis private sector,
it is becoming difficult to curb attrition rate of skilled workforce. An
alternative solution could be to motivate such persons by offering them
challenging assignments, opening for training at regular intervals,
provisioning of good housing facility and assured career growth path
with dignity and responsibility . There is also a need to accord due
recognition to accomplishments. Additionally induction of personnel
from private sector on medium-term contractual basis has been
introduced to offset attrition. However, attrition is an accepted
phenomenon in the ICT industry.
(e) Outsourcing of Skilled Manpower
92. Commenting on issue of outsourcing of skilled manpower, the
DIT has stated that the concept of outsourcing of services has generally
been accepted. However, for which activity the department can out
source would depend, both on the activity as well as the situation
prevailing in that department. Municipalities and e-seva are good
examples of outsourcing of services and these projects have been very
successful. In the MCA 21 projects, the entire project award has been
awarded for contracting of services and not merely for procurement of
Hardware & Software. On the other hand, the Income Tax Department
has resorted to in house implementation for most of their requirements.
93. The representatives of the DIT supplemented on this issue by
stating that increasingly the technical resources of the Government
would be required to handle these issues and also issues like security
because increasingly as more and more net-enabled services are on the
increase, security becomes a major area of concern and Government
cannot leave all these things to somebody to handle. The services of
various people can be utilized but the crore technologies have to be
held within the Government.
94. The Committee then enquired as to how these critical resources
could be identified and retained. In reply, a representative of DIT

37
stated that there is a need for every MMP to have a minimal core
infrastructure. The industry is very keen that the Government takes
that role of coordination inside the structure at the professional level.
As there are not enough resources but standardization can be done.
The representative of NIC supplemented that all the technologies have
to be nurtured inside the structure to be able to control induction of
technology in a more efficient manner. It was stated that the technical
organizations in the Government that handle the technology should
be able to recruit people in a more flexible manner. Some sort of
flexibility needs to be provided. He added:
“We should not apply the normal rules which the administrative
staff applies to the other organizations because these people come
and go. In a technical set up you find people are there for
25-30 years. In a technical set up you see people for four to five
years. When things like Smart Cards come, people who have
expertise disappear. .....Without technical experts in the Government
you cannot introduce this technology because nobody can introduce
the propriety technology which we are not aware and once you
start rolling it up, you find this is a propriety and you get stuck
up with a particular vendor forever.”
95. To another query, a representative of DIT admitted that technical
people have to be nurtured over a period of time and continuous
influx is necessary.
VII. AWARENESS CREATION AND RE-ENGINEERING
(a) e-Readiness
96. E-Readiness is the degree to which a country/state is prepared
to participate in the networked world. It would demand the adoption
of important applications of ICTs in offering interconnectedness between
government, businesses and citizens. It has been stated that the
Government of India has been conducting e-Readiness assessment of
the States/UTs for the past 2 years and publishing the e-Readiness
index of the states. The e-readiness index developed for this year’s
study is based on three broad categories ‘Environment’, ‘Readiness’
and ‘Usage’. These indexes have been sub-divided into various user
categories. Appropriate variables have then been selected which best
reflects the chosen categories.
97. On being asked about the present status of “e-readiness” in
different States of the country, the Department has informed that the
value of the e-Readiness index at the State level reflects the capacity

38
of a state to participate in the networked economy vis-a-vis the other
states. In continuation to last year’s work and in the light of new data
available the states have been ranked using in the 6 categories as
given in the diagram below:
Leader Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Chandigarh
Aspiring Leaders Kerala, Gujarat, Goa, Delhi, Punjab,
Haryana
Expectants W est Bengal, Pondicherry, Madhya
Pradesh
Average Achievers Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Orissa,
Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan
Below Average Achievers Mizoram, Jammu and Kashmir, Assam,
Meghalaya, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand
Least Achievers Lakshadeep, Manipur, Tripura,
Arunachal Pradesh, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Daman and Diu,
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Nagaland
98. To a specific query as to what was Indian’s rank in the e-
readiness Index on the World Map, the Department has informed that
INSEAD, the World Bank (infodev) and the World Economic
Forum have been conducting e-Readiness study for the past 4 years.
In the 2003-2004 report, India is ranked at 45th position out of
102 countries.
99. On being further asked as to what concrete measures have
been initiated by the DIT and other Line Ministries/Departments to
bring the country to the greater level of e-readiness, the Department
replied as under:
“National E-Governance Plan (NeGP) seeks to lay the foundation
and provide the impetus for long-term growth of e-Governance
within the country. The plan seeks to create the right governance
and institutional mechanisms, set up the core infrastructure and
policies and implement a number of Mission Mode Projects at the
center, State and integrated service levels to create a citizen-centric
and business-centric environment for governance.

39
DIT under the NeGP has the following core infrastructure projects
being implemented aimed at improving the e-Readiness of the
States.
1. Common Service Centre (CSC)—This project aims to
have 100,000 CSC’s across all states in the country by year
2007.
2. State Wide Area Network (SWAN)—This will enable the
States to have the data connectivity of 2 MBPS up to the
block level.
3. State Data Centre (SDC)—This project aims to have a
centralized storage and access of Core data, which can be
shared by many e-Governance applications.
4. DIT has also initiated Capacity building program at the
State level to improve the HR skills and to have the
necessary structures in place for faster implementation of e-
Governance projects.”
(b) IT Education/Publicity of e-Services
100. The Committee desired to know about the efforts made by
the Government to impart the requisite IT education to the public to
enable them to make maximum use of the electronic system and also
to avail maximum benefit of e-Governance projects. In reply, it has
been stated that NeGP includes a component on awareness, which is
meant to educate masses about the benefits of e-Governance and how
such services could be availed. However, IT education of masses is
not included in the present scope of the NeGP .
101. As most of the people across the country were not very much
aware of various services being provided through e-Government
projects, the Committee suggested that to make the general public
aware, appropriate publicity of such e-services should be given in the
local languages. In this context, they asked about the specific efforts
being made to give wide publicity in different local languages about
various e-service. In reply, it has been stated that NeGP includes a
component on awareness, under which it is proposed to prepare videos
and other publicity material to educate masses about the benefits of e-
Governance and how they could access such services. SAR&PG is
primarily engaged in this activity and they would be advised to
produce such publicity materials in different local languages.

40
102. During evidence, the Committee specifically asked as to
whether India’s rate of implementation was the fastest in the world.
To this, a representative of DIT stated as follows:
“I can say confidently that our ability to absorb e-Governance and
technology in India-based on my experience,......is far higher than
most of the countries. But our ability to derive benefit of e-
Governance is sometimes limited because of our willingness to
equally change and adopt our procedure to take advantage of
this........ For us and for all the developing countries for that matter,
getting the whole thing computerized is a big issue. That is a first
problem. That is why it is a slow process because you have to
deal with people you have to educate them, you have to make
them change. Sometimes there are resistance due to ignorance;
sometimes there is resistance due to people not wanting to do
things in a different way and sometimes there is resistance because
people do not want to change procedures. All these are there which
need to be dealt with. There is major management issue.”
103. To a subsequent similar query, the witness submitted:
“Yes, we have to increase the rate. Most importantly, in the projects
which are being done through a combination of introducing and
changing procedures, we must see that some actual benefits should
accrue to the citizens through such projects so that there is more
demand. It should not be that e-Governance is implemented
because the Government policy is to implement e-Governance. It
should be that there is more and more demand.”
104 In this context, a representative of NIC also stated that:
“In our country, the process of adoption of new technology is
very slow. Subsequently it picks up at a faster rate........If you see
the late 1980s and early 1990s, you would find that there were all
sorts of apprehensions about computers. It has taken a long time
for this to be established...”
(c) Process Re-engineering and Change Management
(Need for Suitable Changes in Laws and Administrative
Processes)
105. Under e-Governance, besides technology, the other important
areas which will play important roles are people, processes and
resources. The people within the Government have to accept the idea
of e-Governance and learn the techniques to implement the

41
e-Governance while the people outside the government should get
used to e-Governance and take benefits from it.
106. During the course of evidence held on 13 July 2005, The
representative of National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG)
informed to the Committee as under:
“As regards ‘process’, in most of the departments, we are governed
by more than hundred years’ old acts and rules. These are driving
inefficiency. If you put the same thing in the computers, a hundred-
year-old process, it will get inefficiency in a very efficient way. We
will be enlarging that inefficiency. We have to change the process
behind this. A lot of legislative effort at the highest level is also
needed in this process area. Of course, about the resources, which
the hon. Chairman touches upon, the Government itself is not
able to do the whole things. So, can we induct the private sector?
In what different ways can we have the resource base expanded?
That is not only in terms of money, people, management,
technological skills, etc. Once these four pillars are together and
properly developed, we will have successful implementation.
Now, I am repeating e-Government again. It is a multi-disciplinary
approach which is needed to introduce these improvements through
technological interventions. So, there are seven areas, at least, that
have been identified like process reforms, etc. That means, the
existing rules and processes have to be changed. There are also
the resource management, human resource, financial resource, cost-
effectiveness, public-private partnership models, user charges-
collecting a rupee or two where it is needed so that the project
goes on smoothly.”
107. The Committee held discussions on 28 July, 2005 with some
of the IT Service and Solution providers. During the discussion, a
representative expressed his opinion about change in processes, as
under:
“From our experience, we see that we are implementing e-
Governance by converting manual processes into electronic
processes. The change in process, to take up advantage of
technology enablement, is not happening to an extent which is
required in the Government sector. It is basically due to change in
the legal and regulatory processes within the Government. It is a
very tedious task. People go ahead and implement whatever the
manual processes they convert. So, the efficiency will not come.

42
Therefore, we would like to make a submission that if there is a
way in which we can fasten legal and regulatory changes in the
processes, it will help us to implement e-Government in a much
faster way. It will also improve the efficiency of the governance.
This is one important point which we would like to bring to your
notice.”
108. Another representative expressed his opinion on the issue as
under:
“I believe that the esteemed Members over here need to contribute
to ensure regulations and policies are taken care of, there has to
be regular evolution of this. Based on 1950 policy IT cannot run
2005. It is not possible. So, there has to be a constant endeavour
that all the things which we are talking about in the policy
framework, from spectrum, security , trust, privacy, each of these
has to be taken care of across the nation. It cannot be a State-run
initiative. It has to be an across the nation policy which runs
through the nation so that it helps both the Government to make
quick decisions as well as the industry to support that decision-
making process.”
109. When asked about the steps taken by the Department of IT
in this regard, it has been stated that for the execution of projects
under the NeGP , concerned Line Ministries/Departments have been
advised to design their project proposals with prime focus on targeted
Services and the Service Levels and based on that, to work out
requirement for Process Re-engineering and Change Management to
effect changes in Laws, Rules & Regulation. DIT through its proposed
Programme Management Unit (PMU) would be in a position to extend
such services to the Line Ministries/Departments.
VIII. INSTITUTIONAL PARTICIPATION
(a) Public Private Partnership (PPP Model)
110. During discussion held on 13 July 2005, the Committee desired
to know the specific advantages of a private-public partnership. The
representative of the DIT replied as under:
“There is a necessity to combine some of these resources from
outside the Government-whether its is financial, technical or
personnel depending upon the nature of the project and type of
services. That has to be worked out at project specific level. It is
difficult to make general statement as such. xx xx xx The best way

43
is to get a private sector person to come in and implement the
project using their own financial and technical resources and
personnel to a large extent. They will have to ensure that the
service goals which have been laid out for that particular project
are met. As far as the Departmental presonnel are concerned and
also the Departmental activities are concerned, the departmental
control of the functions remain but the personnel at some of the
operating levels are brought in by the operator xx xx Of course,
the private sector does not work for charity, they will see that
they recover the money over a period of time. But the advantage
is that initial investment does not come from the Government; but
the bigger advantage is that the Government pays only after you
get the services and not irrespective of whether you get the service
or not. The third is about the personnel who may be required for
some time for example you may require for software personnel
only for one year or so for development. After that you do not
want them. You may require data entry operator in a large number
initially for putting historical data. After two years you may not
need them. But finally we are monitoring through service level
agreements-what are the services that are being provided, whether
they met the specifications or not and then they are paid. You
may need some other personnel for a long time, but it must be
based on the productivity . So different types of requirements are
there which can be more easily done by the private sector and
more efficiently done and without the Government getting involved
in all those nitty-gritties; that is left to them.
** ** **
These are some of the advantages and when we look at the delivery
of service to the citizens the experience has been that in certain
area, this is a better model.
** However, I would not like to give an impression that this type
of partnership or private sector is an answer to all the problems
or that it is applicable in very single area. There are many areas
where the Government has to set up or manage its own show; it
could be for reasons of security; it could be for reasons of control
or it could be for strategic reasons.”
111. The Committee desired to know as to how the private sector
could be involved to play a greater role in the faster implementation
of e-Governance projects by overcoming these hurdles. In reply, the
representatives of the DIT stated that the Government work on different

44
principles than that of the private sector. One cannot expect the private
sector to work for social reasons. They may serve social objectives but
they are not motivated only by the social needs and they are motivated
by other factors.
112. In view of the fact that Public Private Partnership (PPP) model
can effectively be used in the area of implementation of various
e-Governance projects where some activities could be undertaken by
the Government and some other could be effectively carried out by
the private partners, the Committee desired to know the specific areas
of e-Governance where Public Private Partnership model was being
followed/proposed to be implemented. The DIT replied that specific
areas where PPP models have either been implemented of being
explored include projects on Municipalities, Property Registration,
e-Procurement, Citizen Service Centres etc. The MCA-21 (Ministry of
Company Affairs) project is also being implemented on PPP model.
113. It has been subsequently informed that in the implementation
of the SWANs, the Guidelines have specifically mentioned PPP model
as one of the Options for establishment of the network by the States.
It is envisaged that State Governments opting for PPP model, would
go through a bid process to identify a private vendor who would
establish, commission and run the network on behalf of the State
Government for five years and would get paid on a Quarterly
Guaranteed Revenue (QGR) basis against well-defined Service Level
Agreement between the State Government and the Private V endor.
The implementation of CSC is also being envisaged in a PPP
entrepreneurial model to the extent that the middle tier stakeholder
i.e. Service Centre Agency and the bottom tier stakeholders i.e. Village
Level Entrepreneur may be private stakeholders sharing the risk with
the Government for the project for a defined time period.
114. The Committee enquired about the operational difficulties,
faced by the Department in this process. In reply, the Department
stated that no major operational difficulties were anticipated as long
as PPP model meets with the financial and sustainability requirements.
For success of such project, it was highly desirable to involve all major
stakeholders to arrive at a common understanding of roles,
responsibilities and commitment of each stakeholder. National Institute
for Smart Government (NISG) has build up expertise in the area of
Public Private Partnership (PPP) Models and their advice could be
considered.
115. The Committee further desired to know as to who were
expected to participate in the PPP model to commit the resources at

45
the various levels-national, State and block and village levels. In reply,
the CEO, NISG stated that in the NeGP document, there were certain
initiatives at the Central level, State level and block and village levels.
Different layers will have to participate at different layers. The eligibility
criteria for participation was, for instance, for the national project,
there was a need for consortium of large companies to come together
to join hands with the Government to implement a large project.
Whereas when for the projects in the periphery areas, there was no
need for a big consortium to implement those initiatives. Further for
purely rural areas the commercial interest would be somewhat less
and there the NGOs, non-profit organizations have been joining hands
with the Government or Semi-Government agencies to deliver the
Services. In this way there was a variety of partnership, which was
possible in this scenario.
116. During the discussion held on 28 July 2005, a representative
of a IT Service/solution provider company (WIPRO), expressed his
opinion as under:
“Where do we see the private sector can play a role? It is in terms
of partnering with the Government in implementing the
e-Governance initiative through the PPP model, which my colleague
has just now brought out. It is not that the IT industry just brings
software and hardware. It also brings the investment into the
country through the PPP model. With the PPP model, it helps to
create self-employment in the rural areas. When the e-Governance
goes through the PPP model, the local people can set up simple
shops to provide service to the citizens. We can bring
standardization of technology for better inter-operability and high
penetration and usage within the country. Once we build the
systems, which are interoperable within the Government
Department then, it is very easy to implement.”
(b) Suggestions by IT Service/Solution Providers
117. The Committee held a discussion on 28 July, 2005 with some
of the major IT services and solution providers to hear their views on
the e-Governance initiatives taken by the Government and also to seek
suggestions as how to scale up their implementation. Some of the
suggestions made by various service/solution providers are as
under:
1. There is a need for a paradigm shift in the thought process
in the country moving from looking at IT as a commodity
to availing IT as a service for better governance.

46
2. Private sector can bring not just the expertise and technical
skills, which can in combination with the domain expertise
of Government can be a tremendously potent combination
to deploy the end objective of transparent and defficent
governance.
3. Private sector can also bring in capital so that the capital
expenditure can be defrayed to become revenue expenditure.
This way the Government can actually achieve more holistic
deployment of IT rather than piecemeal pilots because of
capital constraints.
4. Public-Private-Partnership can bring in investment and help
to create self employment in the rural areas. When
e-Governance goes through the PPP model, the local people
can set up simple shop to provide service to the citizens.
5. PPP models should be made more viable with equitable
sharing of risks and rewards.
6. IT deployment provides opportunity for sharing of
infrastructure and thereby reducing the cost or defraying
the cost across many Ministries.
7. There has to be concentrated efforts for capacity building
within the Government to equip them to handle the change
management. A dedicated cadre should be there to take
care of e-Governance activities within the Government.
8. The Change in process, is not happening to an extent which
is required in the Government sector. If the legal and
regulatory changes in the processes can be expedited, it
will help in the implementation of e-Governance in a faster
way.
9. Standardisation of technology has to be brought in for better
inter-operability, high penetration and usage of IT in the
country and therefore for easy implementation of the e-
Governance.
10. Successful e-Governance projects should be identified and
appropriately funded for replication at other Government
organizations.
11. It is very important to work on a business model of self-
sustainability after an initial investment of the Government
in deploying kiosks on one time investment basis.

47
12. The bottlenecks being faced in the areas of land records
and property registration are various laws within the
Government for valuation of the properties. If
computerization is brought in this area, it would be easy to
do valuation for a particular plot. A lot can therefore be
done to improve the e-Governance and scale it up at a
faster pace.
13. The entire delivery model should be based on certain
standards. All the applications should be build in India on
open-standards. The standards have to be put in as a part
of policy. These policies need to be articulated more clearly,
coherently in all the IT policy documents of the States or at
the Centre.
14. The e-readiness index is based on connectivity in the country.
The business environment is created to support the
e-infrastructure. It should be seen that what are the
businesses and legal policies which support the
transformation of Government from a manual process to an
e-Government process.
15. There is a need to re-look at import tariff on IT hardware
to make hardware affordable.
16. There should be a common Government framework of
procurement. The Government policies and framework of
procurement varies from State to State and from Department
to Department and hence wasting lot of time in going
through policy frameworks.
17. Intellectual Property Rights should be strengthened to enable
Companies to bring propriety software technologies.
18. e-Governance success stories have to be widely publicised
to create awareness and positive mindset among the
Government departments.
19. Like in US, there should be guideline for the Department
with regard to outsourcing process as to how they should
outsource the IT projects.
(c) Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG and C-DAC in NeGP
118. The National Informatics Centre (NIC) of the Department of
Information Technology is providing network backbone and
e-Governance support to Central Government, State Governments, UT
Administrations, Districts and other government bodies. It offers
network services over high-speed long distance and local leased line
Ku-band (RDMA, FTDMA, IPA and DVB and SCPC VSASTs), Wireless,

48
Metropolitan Area Networks (MANs) and Local Area Networks (LANs)
with NICNET gateway for Internet resources, facilitating informatics
services for decentralized planning, improvement in Government
services and wider transparency of national and local Governments.
NIC assists in implementing Information Technology Projects, in close
collaboration with Central and State Governments in the areas of
(a) Centrally sponsored schemes and Central sector schemes, (b) State
Sector and State sponsored projects and (c) District Administration
sponsored projects. NIC endeavor to ensure that the latest technology
in all areas of IT is available to its users.
119. The Committee have been informed that National Informatics
Centres Services Incorporated (NICSI), is a section 25 Company of the
NIC. NICSI is staffed by the personnel from NIC entirely on deputation
basis except for a full time Company Secretary who is employed by
the Company. It was basically conceived for providing logistic support
to NIC and various e-Governance projects. NIC has initiated several
MMPs such as road transport, land records, commercial taxes, gram
panchayats, police, treasuries etc. NICSI’s role is to facilitate smooth
execution of these projects at grass-root levels in various States of the
country. The basic concept in most of the projects is to focus on citizen
service delivery, centralized initiatives and decentralized
implementation. Benefits for going with NICSI are stated to be that
they have got standardization of products, better price performance
(every two or three months the prices are reviewed to ensure that the
customers get the best prices), single-window solution, technical
expertise on need basis, transparency in procedures, rigorous pre-
dispatch testing and continuous review of technology and prices.
120. The Committee have been informed that expertise of many
different kinds that is technical, managerial, strategic as well as financial
and economic is required for smooth implementation of NeGP . These
expertises are available in the Government, in the private sector and
in the academic institutions etc. to a substantial degree. Therefore, a
need was felt to bring these kinds of competencies into the national
effort. While the NIC, which was created in 1974 and is a premier
technical organization within the Government, the need was felt to
create another organization, the NISG, as a public-private partnership
in collaboration between the Government and the private sector as a
facilitator to lead private sector competencies into the e-Governance
efforts.
121. It was further informed that NISG’s vision is to establish
itself as a Center of Excellence in e-Government as several other
countries are also looking to India and also to leverage private sector
resources through PPP model for spread of e-Governance. As it is

49
small organization, the Board has decided to focus at the top level of
strategic planning. The strategy is to work on the top layer of
e-Government, that is how to plan a whole initiative, how to plan a
project. Secondly, there is Project Development i.e. to focus in that area
and contribute maximum so that with minimum inputs maximum
benefit can be derived. Thirdly Capacity Building is a very important
aspect. They have been holding Training Programmes for Policy Makers
viz. Political leaders, Senior Civil Servants and Members of
e-Governance Business Units in IT Companies. They have also been
holding workshops on Process Reforms, Security, Project development
and Institutional Capacity Building.
122. The projects undertaken by NISG are e-Seva (Government to
Citizen interface) and e-Biz (Government to Business area). e-Seva
project was started in the State of Andhra Pradesh two years ago.
There are about 50 Centres in Hyderabad and about 250 Centres all
over the urban areas of Andhra Pradesh. Here a citizen can avail a
huge number of services at one counter only. It’s a one-stop-shop for
citizen/business services with good ambiance for citizens. This provides
G2C services like payment of bills & taxes, registration & Certificates,
filling and others like RTC bus passes, examination results and sale of
non-judicial stamps. B2C services offered in e-Seva are payments of
cellphone bills for Reliance and Tata, Insurance premium etc., booking
of Cinema tickets, western union money transfer and courier services.
123. Recognizing the national importance of e-Governance and
capitalizing on its skills and technologies developed over the years,
C-DAC has taken major initiatives in this area. These have resulted in
greater efficiency and transparency through specific solutions. C-DAC
has successfully developed and deployed its solutions for various
government offices in states like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Punjab,
Tripura, Orissa, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Goa and
Uttar Pradesh. Successful Statewide computerization of the Department
of Registration and Stamps, Industrial Development Corporation,
Department of Archives, State Legislative Assembly, Election
Commission, Municipal Administration, Data Warehousing, Octroi
Management have been undertaken and some of these projects have
won coveted awards. Integrating its Language Technology expertise
with its e-Governance proficiency, C-DAC also develops important
solutions in Indian languages, which impact the users in the
Government and the citizens.
124. C-DAC has undertaken several projects, which have been
systematically implemented and effectively executed. C-DAC has
deployed its software in over 600 offices spread across thousands of

50
miles, thus establishing an unmatched ability in this domain. C-DAC’s
mastery in software development is also complemented by its
proficiency in assorted areas of consultancies. It has formulated
ingenious Information Strategy Plans, outlined Web Hosting
Architecture, yielded accurate RFP , and contributed to the IT policies
of different States.
IX. CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
125. Asked about the major challenges/hurdles/constraints/
obstacles being faced/anticipated by the Government in successfully
implementing the various Mission Mode Projects under National Action
Plan on e-Governance and steps taken/proposed to be taken by the
Government to overcome these hurdles/challenges, the Committee have
been informed that based on the feed back from various implementing
agencies and stake holders of e-Governance, following challenges/
hurdles/constraints are anticipated and would need to be addressed:
1. Poor or inadequate definition of project outcomes in terms
of Services.
2. Poor project development in terms of capturing the
expectations of all stakeholders and incorporating them into
project deliverables.
3. Inadequate project implementation strategy including
appropriate PPP/procurement models.
4. Inadequate internal capacity to conceptualise and manage
the change.
5. Lack of continuity of project team.
6. Lack of relevant skills of project leaders.
7. Lack of empowerment of project team to make necessary
process changes.
8. Financial Constraints.
9. Poor Data Connectivity .
10. Poor Literacy Rate.
11. Poor Affordability by Masses.
12. Need for Multiple Languages Interface.
13. Successes in islands, no institutional mechanism for mass
deployment.

51
14. Capacity constraints within government staff to fully
comprehend potential of e-Governance and how to manage
its deployments including Change Management.
15. Stability of tenure of Key Persons/Implementation Teams.
16. Lack of Standards (for Inter-operability and Integration of
different applications).
17. Need to Secure Data and maintain its Privacy.
18. Lack of necessary high-level political and bureaucratic
support for the programme.
126. As informed to the Committee, the DIT in order to address
the above issues, has prepared a draft Note to seek approval of the
competent authority for the Approach and Key components of the
NeGP . This draft note broadly covers Approach, Implementation
Strategy and Programme Structure for the NeGP . This Note has been
circulated for comments to Central Line Ministries concerned and State
Governments for comments.

52
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
I. CONCEPT OF e-GOVERNANCE
The Committee observe that the trend all over the world has
been to provide good governance which is broadly based on the
principles of participation, accountability, transparency,
responsiveness, efficiency, effectiveness etc. They take cognisance of
the increasing use of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) in the delivery of good governance. This is sought to be
achieved by adoption of the concept of what is popularly known as
Electronic Governance (e-Governance). E-Governance involves
delivery of various government services to the public at large through
electronic means. It has immense potential in realizing these
objectives and in improving efficiency, responsiveness and
convenience for end users of Government services. The Committee’s
analysis of the materials on the subject and also their discussions
with the representatives of different Ministries, Departments, various
Governmental agencies and private IT Service/Solution Providers
have revealed that the major aspects involved in the National
e-Governance Plan (NeGP) are Mission Mode Projects (MMPs), key-
components of NeGP , Institutional framework, implementation
strategy, financial allocations and capital investment, study of
e-Governance models, requirement of common-core infrastructure,
establishment of State Data Centres and State Wide Area Networks,
Common Service Centres, e-Governance service delivery gateway and
integrated delivery mechanism, Human resources management,
capacity building mechanism, requirement of technical manpower,
need for continuous upgradation of skills, high rate of attrition of
IT workforce, outsourcing of skilled manpower, process
re-engineering and change management, uniformity of standards,
e-assessment, India portal, replication of successful e-Governance
models, Public Private Partnership, Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG and
C-DAC etc. The Committee’s observations and recommendations
arising out of these aspects are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs
of this Report.
II. NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PLAN (NeGP)
(a) Concept of NeGP
The Committee observe that in order to bring about total
transparency in administration and make government functioning

53
more citizen centric, the importance of e-Governance has been
recognized in India and the Government has proposed to promote
e-Governance on a massive scale by harnessing all possible resources
that are available both in public and private sectors and by providing
required policy initiatives and budgetary support needed to stimulate
its growth. Keeping these objectives in view, the Department of
Information Technology (DIT) jointly with the Department of
Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances (DAR&PG) conceived
a National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) in the year 2003. The
Committee view that e-Governance through usage of Information
and Communication Technology (ICT), facilitates the efficient, speedy
and transparent process of dissemination of information to the public
and other agencies and also substantially reduces the scope of
arbitrariness, discretion and corruption. It increases the citizen’s
participation in the decision making process of the Government and
simultaneously strengthens the trust between the Government and
the citizen. The Committee therefore, feel that it is imperative on
the part of the Government to apply all available Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) to provide efficient and effective
citizen centric services in a transparent manner at a faster pace.
3. The increasing usage of ICT world-wide acknowledges the
fact that there shall be extensive application of electronic means in
future for interaction not only between Government to Government
(G2G), Government to Business (G2B) and Government to Citizen
(G2C) but also among peoples/cross sections of the societies all over
the world involving minimal manual interface and intervention. The
Committee, therefore, suggest that all aspects of e-Governance need
to be examined indepth by the Government duly considering the
existing as well as emerging ICT not only for its present applications
in e-Governance projects to provide citizen centric services but also
to evolve a futuristic plan to meet the specific needs of the
multilingual, multiracial and multicultural society like ours in the
years to come.
4. The Committee appreciate the proposed vision of NeGP to
make available all Government services to the common man in his
locality throughout his life through one-stop-shop ensuring efficiency,
transparency and reliability at affordable cost. They are, however,
disappointed to learn that the Department of Information Technology
(DIT) has not even been able to develop a formally approved
document on NeGP till date although NeGP was conceived in mid
2003. The Committee consider the delay in placing the NeGP
document, a matter of great concern as it was necessary for a clear

54
articulation of Government Policy on e-Governance. They, therefore,
recommend that NeGP document should be placed before the Cabinet
without any further delay so that the various projects under NeGP
find a defined track to move ahead towards the destination of
implementation at a faster speed.
(b) Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
5. The Committee observe that 26 Mission Mode Projects (MMPs)
have been identified for implementation under National
e-Governance Plan (NeGP) by the concerned Line Ministries/
Departments and State Governments for delivery of various
government services on priority basis. These MMPs cover the areas
of Income Tax, Passport Visa & Immigration Project, DCA21,
Insurance, National Citizen Database, Central Excise, Pensions,
Banking and e-Office under Central Government category; Land
Records, Road Transport, Property Registration. Agriculture,
Treasuries, Municipalities, Gram Panchayats, Commercial Taxes, Police
(UTs initially) and Employment Exchanges under State Governments
category; and EDI (E-Commerce), E-Biz, Common Service Centres,
India Portal, EG Gateway, E-Procurement and E-Courts under the
Integrated Services category. Since these 26 Projects apparently do
not cover the whole gamut of Governmental activities, the Committee
desire that the remaining areas should either be added in MMPs list
or efforts be made to cover them under some other projects to ensure
that e-Governance projects are taken up as a composite and
comprehensive programme to deliver all citizen centric services
through integrated delivery mechanism. This would also be in tune
with the proposed vision of NeGP which promises to make all
government services to the common man through a one-stop-shop.
6. The Committee observe that the Consultants engaged by DIT
for extending their support to concerned Government Departments
in defining scope for the MMPs in terms of services and service
levels have visited a few States and held interactions with most of
the Line Ministries. They also studied international benchmarks for
similar services to arrive at a definition of services and service levels
for the various MMPs. According to the Department, the Consultant’s
Report has recently been circulated to all the concerned Line
Ministries and a proper assessment of the Consultant role would be
decided only after obtaining the reaction of the Ministries. The
Committee would like the DIT to take up the matter with the
Ministries for early submission of their comments so that the need
and necessity of further retention of the Consultant could be

55
examined by the Department and also the precise role could be
defined in case of further retention of the Consultant.
7. The Committee are constrained to note that no time targets
have been fixed for implementation of various Mission Mode Projects
(MMPs)/Key components under the NeGP . The issue becomes all
the more serious as two years have passed since NeGP was conceived
and almost half of the period prescribed for implementation of the
NeGP i.e. 2003-2007 is already over. According to the DIT, the
concerned Line Ministries/Departments have been advised to work
out their respective project proposal for obtaining financial approval
duly indicating project service goals, outlays and time frames. Taking
serious note of this, the Committee would like to know from the
DIT whether the period of two years was not sufficient enough to
prepare project proposals. In view of the slow pace of progress made,
the Committee earnestly desire that instead of leaving things to Line
Ministries/Departments, DIT being facilitator to Line Ministries/
Departments in formulating their project proposals, should play a
pro-active role to impress upon them to formulate their project
proposals immediately for getting the financial approval so that the
projects are completed in a prescribed time frame.
8. The Committee are unhappy to note that the information
regarding the progress made so far by the Line Ministries/
Departments/States in respect of each of the MMPs is not readily
available with the Department of Information Technology. What has
surprised the Committee is that till now no mechanism is in place
in the DIT to monitor the progress of various Mission Mode Projects
being implemented by the different Line Ministries/Departments
ostensibly on the ground that it was not possible for the Department
to effectively carry out monitoring of all the MMPs in the absence
of the required manpower and requisite tools. In this connection,
the Committee are informed that the Programme Management Unit
(PMU) set up now in the DIT would be tasked to provide Secretarial
support to the Apex Committee. PMU will design and put in place
a Programme Management Information System (PMIS) to monitor
the progress of the MMPs. The Committee feel that DIT being the
nodal Department and the facilitator is responsible for proper take
off of various projects under NeGP and therefore, should have
strengthened itself at least to monitor the progress of the projects in
various Ministries/Departments. Unfortunately the DIT could not
timely develop any such mechanism which apparently resulted in
slow progress in almost each area of e-Governance. The Committee
are unable to comprehend as to why the Programme Management

56
Unit (PMU) which should have been constituted much earlier, has
been formed almost after two years since the formulation of NeGP
in November, 2003. While deploring the apathetic attitude of the
DIT in such an ambitious Plan encompassing the whole nation, the
Committee would like the DIT to ensure that at least now Programme
Management Unit is adequately strengthened so that it could
effectively design the Programme Management Information System
(PMIS) to monitor the progress of the MMPs and also provide
secretarial support to the Apex Committee efficiently. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the precise progress made so far
by the Line Ministries/Departments/States in respect of each of the
MMPs.
(c) Major Key-Components of NeGP
9. The Committee observe that to sustain the Mission Mode
Projects, 8 key components viz. Core Policies, Core Infrastructure,
Support Infrastructure, Technical Assistance, R&D, Human Resource
Development & Training, Awareness & Assessment and
Organizational Structure have been identified for implementation.
While expressing their unhappiness over non-submission of a precise
reply with regard to specific initiatives being taken by DIT in respect
of each of the above-mentioned key components of NeGP , the
Committee would like to be apprised of the factual position in this
regard at the earliest.
(d) Implementation Strategy
10. The Committee observe that various Central Ministries/
Departments and State Governments are involved in the
implementation of the NeGP and therefore, the DIT have proposed
separate role and responsibilities for them. As proposed by the DIT,
the Apex Committee would be overseeing the programme and
providing policy and strategic directions for its implementation and
resolving inter-ministerial issues. The Line Ministries/Departments
would be responsible for implementation of the assigned Mission
Mode Projects (MMPs)/Components. The State Governments would
be responsible for implementing State Sector MMPs under the overall
guidance of respective Line Ministries. The DIT would be the
facilitator and catalyst for the implementation of NeGP by various
Ministries and State Governments. The DAR&PG would be
responsible for the generic process re-engineering, change
management, Human Resource Development and Training, and the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance would allocate

57
funds for NeGP through Plan and non-Plan budgetary provisions.
The Committee feel that the role and responsibilities proposed under
the Plan appear to be too general in nature and, therefore, there is
a need to evolve an integrated coordinating mechanism which could
precisely define the functional responsibilities of each Department
in regard to step-wise completion of NeGP within a definite time-
frame and also could review their assigned role and responsibilities
regularly to suitably redesign them to meet the requirement of
changing scenario.
11. The Committee observe that the DIT have taken initiatives
in the areas of State Wide Area Networks (SWANs), Common
Services Centres (CSCs), State Data Centres (SDCs), India Portal,
e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway, Standards in e-Governance,
Capacity Building, e-readiness, e-assessment, Horizontal Transfer of
successful e-Governance applications and setting up of a Programme
Management Unit in DIT for NeGP . The Committee appreciate the
initiatives being taken by the DIT in different areas of NeGP .
12. The Committee, however, observe that information regarding
initiatives taken so far by DAR&PG under the NEGP , is being
collected from them. They are perturbed to find that no precise reply
was given about the specific requests received from the Line
Ministries and assistance rendered to them by DIT with regard to
different aspects to NeGP . The Committee are of the strong view
that the Department of Information Technology should develop an
effective internal mechanism which could ensure timely submission
of the point-wise and precise reply to the Committee after collecting
the same from various sources. They would like to be fully apprised
of the various initiatives taken by the DAR&PG under its assigned
role and responsibilities under NeGP .
13. The Committee are not convinced by the statement given by
the DIT that as both DIT and DAR&PG are represented on all the
major committees constituted for the NeGP (like Apex Committee,
Advisory Group), the coordination among them is ensured through
these committees. In their opinion, this arrangement would certainly
lead to delay in execution of the projects. They, therefore, recommend
that a formal coordination mechanism should be developed for direct
interaction between DIT and DAR&PG for sorting out various issues
pertaining to NeGP in general and for accelerating the
implementation of e-Governance projects in particular.

58
(e) Institutional Framework for NeGP
14. The Committee note that for effective management of NeGP ,
an Organizational Structure has been worked out which will accord
credibility to the e-Governance programme, provide a forum to solicit
views of stakeholders, oversee the programme and resolve inter-
ministerial/inter-departmental issues and ensure speedy sanctioning
of projects. The proposed structure would have the needed secretarial/
monitoring/technical support and appropriate decentralization of
power and responsibility to ensure effective execution of the various
projects/components by the implementing departments/teams. At
present, the Programme Management Structure consists of Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), National e-Governance
Advisory Group, Apex Committee, Empowered Financial Committee,
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)/Committee on Non-Plan
Expenditure (CNE), and State level Apex Committees. The Committee
are pained to note that the requisite institutional framework is yet
to be made fully operational pending approval of the competent
authority. They are of the firm opinion that existence of the
organizational structure is an essential pre-requisite for successful
implementation of any project. Since various components of the
proposed organizational structure are still in a conceptual stage, the
Committee believe that successful implementation of e-Governance
project will remain a distant dream. They, therefore, recommend that
the DIT should speed up the process, complete the formation of
Programme Management Structure including all proposed
Committees/Bodies, obtain necessary approvals and make them
operational at the earliest so that the implementation of e-Governance
projects could gain momentum.
(f) Study of e-Governance Models
15. The Committee learn that the approach to NeGP is based on
lessons learnt from the past and also experiences from successful
e-Governance applications implemented nationally and internationally.
Admittedly, there could be a need to acquire know-how for
programme management practices being followed in other countries
and similarly on-site field studies in other developed countries would
help in expanding the knowledge base and experience for executing
similar projects in India. It is quite surprising that despite being
aware of the necessity, no formal study of e-Governance applications
of other countries has been undertaken so far. The Committee observe
that “Knowledge Management” is an equally important element to
build the strong foundation for successful implementation of

59
e-Governance projects and they, therefore, feel that formal studies of
some successful e-Governance models of other countries would have
helped the DIT to suitably design the strategy for all domestic
e-Governance projects. Although such studies, being pre-requisite
for drafting a policy, should have been conducted in the beginning
itself, the Committee nevertheless enjoins upon the DIT to undertake
a formal study of e-Governance models of some of the developed/
developing countries so as to use the feedback in formulating
appropriate strategy for implementation of NeGP successfully.
III. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT
16. The Committee are informed that the requirements of funds
to meet the expenditure for implementation of NeGP have not been
finalized yet, the reason being that most of the projects are under
various stages of formulation. The DIT is still discussing the detailed
requirement of funds with the concerned Line Ministries/Departments
which are nodally responsible for implementation of various Mission
Mode Projects. The finalization of requirement of funds is stated to
take another 3-4 months time. Similarly, the total requirement of
funds for each Mission Mode Project is also being worked out. The
Committee are further apprised that sharing of funds among DIT,
Line Ministries/Departments and the State Governments vary from
project to project. The Committee observe that financial management
being a critical area need to be strategically managed well in advance
for successful completion of any project. They, therefore, recommend
that DIT should take immediate steps to prepare and finalize the
estimates of not only the total requirements of funds for NeGP but
also those required for each individual Mission Mode Projects/Key
components under the NeGP with a well defined sharing pattern of
funds among Line Ministries/Departments and the State
Governments. The Committee further desire that planning for
funding mechanism for e-Governance projects should be based on
the annual maintenance charges for both the system and the software.
17. The Committee observe that the DIT had awarded a
consultancy assignment to M/s Price Water House Coopers Pvt. Ltd
(PWC) for programme management structure and funding
arrangement for NeGP . On the basis of a set of feasible options
suggested by the Firm, the DIT held follow up discussions with the
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The PWC report
has also provided inputs to the DIT for discussion with the World
Bank on funding and programme management support for the NeGP .
The Committee note with concern that not much progress has been

60
made in finalizing the funding structure beyond the stage of
discussions and consultations. They do not agree with the plea of
DIT that the programme and funding structure is an ongoing process.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the findings of PWC
Report should be constructively utilised to finalize the programme
and funding structure of NeGP quickly so as to accelerate the process
of implementation of various e-Governance projects.
18. The Committee note that a decision was taken on 22.12.2004
in a meeting of Planning Commission that NeGP should clearly
indicate how the Plan would link-up transfer of 2-3 percent of Plan
funds allocated to Line Ministries for e-Governance and IT related
activities and how 2-3 percent would come from the Ministries where
there is no Plan funding like Ministry of Finance and how they
would be accommodated in NeGP . A clear direction was given in
the said meeting that DIT could go for approval only after
ascertaining clear cut funding pattern and process re-engineering
method appropriately incorporated in NeGP . The Committee note
with displeasure that even after a lapse of almost one year,
admittedly, the concept note is still at the stage of discussion and
no agreed position has emerged regarding pooling of resources and
creating a single fund for NeGP . The Committee, in view of the
urgent need of funds for NeGP , strongly recommend that the DIT
should immediately move a proposal for making provision for
allocation of funds for NeGP by all Ministries from their total
budgetary allocations instead of confining such allocations from Plan
funds only. This would facilitate those Ministries in allocation of
funds for IT related activities, which do not operate “Plan” head in
their budget.
19. The Committee note that the overall capital investment in IT
sector in our country at present is far below the desired level. They
learn that the IT capital share of the total capital is only three-and-
a-half percent in India while the average IT capital share is
approximately 5.7 percent in the eight countries that have also under-
invested in IT Sector. Despite the phenomenal success of India’s IT
industry, India’s economy has significantly under-invested in the IT
Capital. The Committee observe that sufficient capital investment in
IT sector is inevitable in view of the requirement of huge and
extensive infrastructure needed for delivery of e-Governance services
and also to have a marketing edge over the big multinational
competitors. They feel that the country is not leveraging its IT
strength. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that a long term
policy of capital investment in IT sector for usage of IT in the
country is essential.

61
IV . CREATION AND SHARING OF INFRASTRUCTURE
(a) Requirement of Common-core Infrastructure
20. The Committee observe that implementation of different e-
Governance projects require various types of infrastructure like
computer hardware & software, secured data repositories, data
connectivity, service delivery outlets/access points etc. The Common
core infrastructure being considered under NeGP are National/State
Data Centres (SDCs), State wide Area Networks (SWANs), augmented
NICNET to carry both Central and State data e-Governance services,
Common Service Centres (CSCs) to connect the areas below the block
level with the rest of the country through SWAN/NICNET.
21. The Committee are of the firm view that it would be a
wasteful expenditure to create separate infrastructure for e-
Governance projects by all concerned Line Ministries/States
particularly when the same has already been created by some other
Ministries/Departments. The Committee are infrormed that the
Powergrid, Railnet and GAIL together have fair amount capacity
and an attempt has been made to work out an aggregation of all
these bandwidth for carrying some of their traffic. They are further
apprised that the DIT is also contemplating to create common
infrastructure in respect of SWANs, Data Centres and CSCs, which
can be used by the different Ministries/Departments and State
Governments for G2G (Intranet) and G2C applications. The
Committee recommend that the infrastructure available with
Railways, Department of Telecom, and other organizations be
gainfully utilized and shared among the user Ministries/States as
this would bring down the cost and also speed up the rolling out
of NeGP . They feel that organization such as NIC should be given
the primary responsibility of co-ordinating the use of infrastructure
of all these organizations essentially for optimum utilization of capital
expenditure as a nation.
(b) State Data Centres (SDCs)
22. The Committee note that it is proposed to create data centres/
data repositories in various States so that common secured data
storage could be maintained to serve a host of e-Governance
applications. However, they are distressed to find that broad policy
guidelines for creation of State Data Centres are still in a formulation
stage. Since the technical and financial support to States in this
initiative are to be extended only after finalisation of the scheme in

62
this regard, the Committee apprehend that any delay in finalisation
of the scheme would hamper the process of setting up of State Data
Centres which in turn will result in slow execution of NeGP . The
Committee are unable to understand that when NeGP was approved
two years back in the year 2003 and also when State Data Centre
has been identified as one of the important elements of Core
Infrastructure for supporting e-Governance initiatives under NeGP ,
why the DIT has not been able to formulate and finalise the policy
guidelines in this regard during these two years. The Committee
would recommend for early finalisation of a comprehensive Policy
Guidelines for creation of State Data Centres (SDCs) by the States.
They would also recommend that the DIT should ensure that all
requisite technical and financial support is extended to the States in
establishing State Data Centres (SDCs).
23. The Committee observe that DIT had sanctioned the project
for establishing the State Data Centre to the Government of
Karnataka though the guidelines in this regard are still under
consideration. This initiative was taken with a view to providing a
learning experience to the DIT towards common Technology
Infrastructure for centralized management, monitoring and
troubleshooting etc. which other States could also, consider eventually
for adoption in the land records computerization programme and
various other e-Governance initiatives. The Committee trust that the
Department would invariably incorporate the experiences gained
through this initiative while finalising the policy guidelines for
establishment of SDCs at the earliest.
24. The Committee are perturbed to note that no time frame has
been fixed for establishing the State Data Centres (SDCs), the reason
though seem obvious from the fact that the policy guidelines to set
up State Data Centres have not been finalized yet. However, the
Committee feel that absence of fixed time-frame in this regard has
actually worked as a de-motivator as the States had not been put
under any obligation to fulfil the commitment of establishing the
SDCs by a prescribed date. The Committee feel that there should
not be any laxity and ambiguity in an ambitious and important plan
like NeGP . The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a
definite time frame should be drawn and all the States/UTs should
be motivated and persuaded to establish their State Data Centres
within the prescribed time schedule. The Committee would also like
the DIT to explore the possibility of interconnectivity of all SDCs
through a common network.

63
25. The Committee feel that greater efforts should be made for
planning reliable and adequate data storage redundancy arrangements
in the event of any technical malfunctioning or natural calamities.
(c) State Wide Area Networks (SWANs)
26. The Committee observe that the DIT is primarily responsible
for establishing the shared core backbone infrastructure identified
in NeGP . Policy Guidelines have been issued laying down the
modalities for technical and financial support that will be provided
by the DIT to the States for establishing State Wide Area Networks
(SWANs). These include the technical and administrative norms to
be followed by the States, depending on the implementation option
adopted by each State to establish the SWAN. The DIT proposes to
establish State Wise Area Network (SWAN) and NICNET to provide
seamless connectivity to Line Ministries/Departments which would
be progressively leveraged to provide services electronically to
citizens at the village levels by extending its reach through wireless
and other technologies relevant for the last mile. The Committee,
however, are disappointed to note that only 17 proposals from the
States have been received, considered and approved by the
Empowered Committee and the proposals from other States/UTs are
yet to be submitted. In view of the fact that setting up of SWAN
network is the basic requisite for running the e-Governance projects
and admittedly any delay in the implementation of the SWAN would
have direct bearing on the implementation of the e-Governance
projects, the Committee recommend that DIT being the nodal
Department for implementation of NeGP should take the matter with
all seriousness with the remaining States/UTs to expedite submission
of their SWAN proposals. The Committee would also like the DIT
to bring out at the earliest an appropriate Policy Framework keeping
in view the recently announced Broadband Policy.
27. The Committee observe that one of the eligibility criteria for
the States to prepare and submit SWAN proposal requires
implementation of at least three major e-Governance projects that
may require SWAN connectivity. According to the DIT this eligibility
criterion with respect to the preparedness may have caused some
delay from some of the States/UTs to prepare and submit their
proposals. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that if the
eligibility criteria happens to be one of the reasons for delay in
submission of SWAN proposals by the States, the Department should
review the same with a view to finding out, whether any,
modification, in the eligibility criteria keeping the spirit of the policy

64
intact, would help the States in early submission of their SWAN
proposals.
28. The Committee are satisfied to note that for this purpose, a
scheme to establish State Wide Area Networks for providing data
connectivity of 2 MBPS at block level has been approved at a total
outlay of Rs. 3334 crores with Central Assistance component of
Rs. 2005 crores over a period of 5 years. They trust that the approved
outlay will be gainfully utilized by the Department to establish
SWAN in a time bound manner.
(d) Common Services Centres (CSCs)
29. The Committee learn that the draft framework for
establishment of 1,00,000 Common Services Centres (CSCs) across
the country has been finalized but it will only take a final shape
after its consideration and approval by the Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) by November, 2005. The Committee further
note that a National Level Service Agency (NLSA) is still to be
selected which would carry out activities like effective project
management and implementation, mobilizing requisite, financial
resources to supplement Government support to the project, acquiring
benefits from significant economies of scale in the identification,
customization and implementation of the physical and digital
infrastructure, enabling aggregation of potential citizen-centric services
at the national level, agglomerating best practices and content
providers and incorporating standardized design, content and
processes. Since the crore activities relating to the e-projects are to
be carried out by NLSA, which is yet to be selected, the Committee
would recommend that the selection process of the agency be
completed early so that the selected NLSA could carry out their
assigned tasks to ensure successful and timely implementation of
the CSCs project with a view to achieving the proposed target of
setting up of 1,00,000 CSCs by the year 2007.
30. The Committee are of the opinion that 1,00,000 Common
Services Centres (CSCs) proposed to be set up by the year 2007
should be on a revenue sharing model because such a model would
not only be economically viable but also be an avenue to provide
employment opportunities to a large workforce. They, therefore,
recommend that the DIT should consider this aspect seriously while
giving final shape to the methodology for establishment of Common
Services Centres (CSCs) and its operations.

65
31. While emphasizing the urgent need for timely setting up of
Common Services Centres (CSCs), the Committee are of the opinion
that it is equally important to build efficiency in the system and
even more important is the manner in which these services are
provided to the citizens. Delivery of services should not only be
efficient, effective and citizen friendly but also need to be provided
in a good ambience so that the citizens should have a pleasurable
experience in the process. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
utmost care should be taken to select suitable locations for CSCs
and also to provide user friendly and attractive ambience so that the
citizen should have a feel of good governance in the process itself.
The Committee trust that these initiatives would raise the confidence
level of the citizens and encourage them to avail services through
CSCs and at the same time it will also enhance credibility of the
Government in the minds of the people.
32. The Committee had observed in their 15th Report (14th Lok
Sabha), the Department of information Technology had successfully
set up 487 Community Information Centres (CICs) in eight North-
Eastern States and 60 CICs in J&K on replications basis to bring the
benefits of ICT for socio-economic development of these areas by
providing broadband connectivity. The 75 CICs were proposed to be
set up by October, 2005 and the proposal for setting up CICs in
Uttaranchal had been formulated. In view of the fact that CIC project
is an effective interface between the Government and the citizen,
the Committee would recommend the Department to utilize the
Community Information Centres as an integrated e-delivery gateway
in the areas having CICs, to provide citizen centric services of e-
Governance projects under NeGP which would not only make
optimal, use of infrastructure but also avoid duplication of efforts.
(e) Integrated Service Delivery Mechanism
(e-Governance Service Delivery Gateway)
33. The Committee note that DIT has initiated a pilot
implementation of the Mission Mode Project on e-Governance Service
Delivery Gateway through National Institute for Smart Government
(NISG). This Gateway would enable connectivity between multiple
back-end applications with multiple front-end service providers in a
secure and reliable manner. An Advisory Group and a T echnical
Sub-Committee comprising of members from NIC, NISG, C-DAC,
DAR&PG and Industry has been constituted to oversee and guide
the implementation of the Gateway pilot. Gateway Specifications
and Request for proposal is currently being carried out. The

66
Committee would like to know the timeframe fixed in this regard.
As informed to the Committee, some initiatives like India Portal,
EG Service Delivery Gateway, E-Biz, Common Service Centres (CSC)
have been taken to achieve the objective of single window facility
for delivery of public services. The Committee observe that the entire
motive behind all the e-Governance projects is to provide all
necessary services to the common man through a single window
facility and in the absence of such a mechanism, a citizen has to
move from place to place for getting the requisite services/information
even in the fully automated system. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the DIT should coordinate with all the Line
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs to establish an effective integrated
delivery mechanism for single window delivery of various public
services under different e-Governance projects.
(f) e-Security
34. The Committee note that logical security of infrastructure is
being maintained in the system to safeguard from hackers,
unauthorized access, viruses, denial of access service etc. by Firewalls,
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Disaster Recovery Sites, Data
Back-up etc., through well laid down policies and security measures.
They strongly believe that the infrastructure being developed should
be safe and secure to avoid loss and misuse of valuable information
and data. They would, therefore, recommend that DIT should evolve
a comprehensive e-security mechanism, which could ensure full
protection of data/information generated under various e-Governance
projects by the Line Ministries/States.
V. FACILITATION AND EXPANSION
(a) Uniformity of Standards
35. The Committee note that the DIT has constituted a Core
Group on Standards in e-Governance with the Director General, NIC
as the Chairman. Four sub-groups namely Major priority areas,
Documentation, Quality and Localisation constituted under the Core
Group to look into specific areas have submitted their Reports. The
Committee are apprised that some of the key priority areas of
immediate concern identified by the core group for standardization
are technical standards, localization standards, quality and
documentation, security standards, data standards. Based on these
recommendations, an institutional mechanism has been set up for
evolving e-Governance Standards at the National level. The
Committee apprehend that the involvement of multiple agencies in

67
implementation of variety of e-Governance projects would,
inescapably, result in variation in the processes of application of
cyber technology in delivery of citizen centric services and thus the
inter-operability of the system would become impossible. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that DIT should make strategic
planning through institutional mechanism to bring uniformity in
standards of various e-Governance projects being implemented by
different Line Ministries/Departments and States.
36. The Committee are further informed that NIC would create
a separate “e-Governance Standards Division’ to steer the process of
evolving the Standards. They would also originate white papers on
all desired Standards which would serve as discussion papers for
Working Groups to develop the Standards. The Working Groups
with members from DIT, Associations, Industry, Academia and
representatives from Central and State Governments etc will be
constituted with the approval of DIT. Further, Apex Body has been
constituted with a mandate to approve, notify and enforce the
Standards formulated by various Working Groups and to oversee
that, they are in accordance with international practices in this regard.
After approval by the Apex Body, Standardisation Testing & Quality
Certification Directorate (STQC) will be releasing these approved
Standards on the web and make them available to all the
stakeholders for free download. STQC will further ensure
confirmance and certification of these standards and would create a
separate “e-Governance Division” for this purpose. STQC will also
be responsible for enhancement of these Standards and liaise with
the national and international standardization bodies for
harmonization and acceptance of these Standards. The e-Governance
Division of NIC and STQC will function in tandem with e-
Governance Programme Management Unit of DIT. The Committee
note that up till now “e-Governance Standards Division” which will
steer the process of evolving the Standards and “Working Groups”
which will also develop the Standards have not been constituted
and are only at proposal stage. The Committee urge upon the
Department to take up the matter on priority basis to complete all
the necessary formalities for early operationalization of the proposed
units, since bringing uniformity of Standards in various e-Governance
projects is an undeniable feature for inter-connectivity and inter-
operability of the successful implementation of the projects.
(b) e-Assessment
37. The Committee note that it has been planned to list out all
the e-Governance projects running across various States and at the

68
National level and undertake Summary/Detailed assessment of these
projects for their effectiveness and sustainability. E-Governance
Assessment Framework has been prepared and put in public domain
on DIT Website. A Working Group has also been constituted to
provide overall guidance and steer the e-Assessment programme. The
Committee would like to be informed of the constitution of the
Working Group and how it would provide overall guidance etc.
(c) India Portal
38. The Committee note that India Portal, a project being
implemented by NIC is envisaged to be a unified portal for accessing
information in the State Sector viz. Executive, Judiciary, Legislature
and Constitutional Authorities, for electronic delivery of citizen
services and a major facilitator for implementing e-Governance
initiatives. This project would be an extension to the “India Image”
postal catering tot he Government to citizen (G2C) services. While
appreciating the concept of “India Portal” to enable the citizens to
have access to all information pertaining to Executive, Judiciary and
Legislature etc. through single window shop, the Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard so far.
(d) Replication of Successful e-Governance Models
39. The Committee note that one key component of the multi-
pronged initiative to replicate successful e-Governance model is to
identify successfully implemented citizen centric e-Governance
models in some States for replication to other willing States. The
successful implementation models of Land Records, Property
Registration and Road Transport sectors were first studied in the
States viz. ‘Bhoomi’ in Karnataka, SARITA in Maharashtra, CARD
in Andhra Pradesh, ‘Vahan’, ‘Sarathi’ in Himachal Pradesh and a
strategy was formulated to replicate them in other States on a pilot
scale with necessary modifications to suit the State’s requirement.
According to DIT, the success of such projects depends on capturing
entire solutions including technology components, process re-
engineering, change management and transfer of the knowledge and
experience through other States as a package of assistance. While
appreciating successful implementation of these projects in one of
more States, the Committee regret to note that the other States, for
various reasons have not been able to cross the hurdles of
implementation and derive the benefits of these projects. They,
therefore, recommend that DIT being the facilitator and catalyst for
implementation of NeGP should play an active role to overcome the

69
obstacles being faced by some of the States in replication of projects
and render all the strategic and technical assistance to enable these
States to replicate the successful models in their respective States.
40. The Committee note that Replication Project is being carried
out in 17 States, with a total of 14 pilot projects on Land Records,
11 projects on Property Registration and 6 projects on Road Transport.
The Committee are informed that the DIT has initiated a pilot scheme
aimed at spreading the benefits of e-Governance to citizens in all
parts of the country and the strategy is to build capability to
horizontally transfer the recipe from the successful to the not so
successful States. The Committee are sure that the scheme would
save a lot of capital expenditure and would certainly avoid the
duplication of efforts in conceptualising and programming of the
same project time and again. They trust that the replication strategy
being followed by the DIT would suitably take care of all aspects
viz. standardization, localization, customisation etc, so that replication
of the successful e-Governance models of one State is done in other
States keeping in view the State specific requirements.
41. During examination, the Committee looked into the
implementation of certain e-Governance projects both at the Centre
and the State levels. They are happy to note that the Centre for
Railway Information Service (CRIS) has successfully implemented
the CONCERT (countrywide network of computerized enhanced
reservation and ticketing) for the various kinds of services to be
availed by the general public through the computerized network.
The CRIS is stated to be fully equipped to provide technical support
and services to develop, setup, operate and maintain any
computerized system and underlying infrastructure. Similarly, the
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) has initiated a number of
measures in the area of dissemination of tax related information
including PAN and tax returns. The Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways have developed softwares in the name of V AHAN for the
RC (Registration Certificate) and SARTHI for DL (Driving License).
They have also developed Smart Card Operating System for Transport
(SCOSTA). The Ministry of Rural Development has started
computerization of Land Records as a pilot project in some States to
be extended in other parts of the country. The main objective of the
programme is to provide computerized copies of ownership and crop
details to the land owners on demand, updating the land records
through mutations, ensuring accuracy and transparency in land
records and affected public delivery of services from the T ehsil to
the Taluka centres. Karnataka, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat have

70
fully operationalised their Talukas under this scheme. The Committee
applaud the sincere efforts made by certain Departments of the
Government of India and various States in the successful delivery
of citizen centric services and hope that the other Departments of
the Government of India and States would also mobilize their
resources to successfully replicate these models in their Departments/
States.
VI. HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (CAPACITY BUILDING)
(a) Capacity Building Mechanism
42. The Committee note that capacity building, for
implementation of NeGP , is required at two levels i.e. programme
level and project level. Each level consists of two major components
namely (i) positioning of specially recruited/identified personnel
having requisite skills; and (ii) training of existing personnel. The
State Governments are required to building capacity in terms of
resources of people, process and tools for conceptualising, developing
and managing the e-Governance projects under NeGP . The Committee
further note that DIT alongwith Planning Commission has formulated
detailed Capacity Building Guidelines and circulated them to all the
State Govts. DIT organised a workshop in Delhi and NISG in
Hyderabad and Kolkata, for better understanding of Capacity
Building requirements. The Planning Commission had also allocated
additional funds amounting to Rs. 17 crore to States for capacity
building during the year 2004-05, which was distributed to various
States primarily for preparing Capacity Building proposals covering
the components like State e-Governance Road Map including
prioritising of MMPs, State Capacity Building Road Map and
Financial proposal for Capacity Building projecting requirements for
coming three years. The Committee observe that except circulation
of guidelines and organizing workshops, nothing concrete has been
done on the ground level in regard to capacity building. As capacity
building would need a lot of efforts and time, they recommend that
the process for actual capacity building in terms of resource of
people, process and tools be started at the earliest to ensure complete
roll out of e-Governance projects.
43. The Committee further note that NISG has offered its
consulting services to all the State Governments for preparing State
Road Map and Capacity Building proposal. As of now, 15 States
have engaged NISG for preparing the above proposal, while 5 other
States are in the process of considering engaging them. States like
Tamil Nadu, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh have gone through the process

71
of tendering for selection of the consultant for preparing Road Map
and capacity building. A scheme has been drawn by DIT to provide
support to UTs for the preparation of project proposal for Capacity
Building Programme as they are not eligible for Additional Central
Assistance (ACA) fund. The Committee are of the view that although
these steps are in the right direction but these cannot be termed as
adequate. They would, therefore, like to impress upon the DIT to
take the capacity building component in a comprehensive manner,
and persuade the line Ministries/Departments/States/UTs to complete
the exercise in a time bound manner. The Committee feel that
initially the elementary training programmes are needed or the
officials of all the Line Ministry/Departments/States etc. so that they
are well acquainted with the e-Governance projects. The objective
of such training should be to prepare them to redesign their working
pattern in the cyber atmosphere so that the desired result of good
governance is achieved through e-Governance projects. The
Committee would in fact like to emphasize the need for undertaking
a parallel planning for capacity building along with the on-going
implementation of e-Governance projects.
44. The Committee further note that NIC is providing regular
technical support for implementation of e-Governance projects to all
the central Ministries/Departments, State Governments and District
Administration. Further, NISG is providing regular support in terms
of conducting workshop and training programmes to policy makers
of various States. The Committee desire that instead of piecemeal
measures, centralized and institutionalised mechanism should be
developed to provide regular support to Line Ministries and States
etc. for capacity building at different levels of the implementation
of e-Governance projects.
(c) Upgradation of Skills
45. The Committee observe that another problem being faced by
the Government Departments is the requirement of continuous
upgradation of skills of IT professionals engaged by them. They
further note that the Department of Personnel and Training, NIC
and NISG have been conducting training programmes for the benefit
of the Government employees and support is also being provided
for creating in-house training facilities to meet the growing
requirements of ICT literate people. Recognizing the paramount need
of continuous upgradation of skills of the technical manpower, the
Committee, recommend that a suitable training programme be
chalked out specifically for IT skilled workforce for upgradation of

72
their skills on regular basis which could help successful running of
all IT related projects of the Government.
46. The Committee further observe that no definite programme
has been drawn so far either for recruitment of personnel of
specialized skills or for training of existing personnel in different
Line Ministries/States. In the Committee’s opinion, efforts should
have been made, in the first instance, to organize familiarisation/
awareness programme for employees of all levels in the line
Ministries/Departments/States and subsequently extensive training
should be organized for those employees who are actually to be
deployed for execution of e-Governance projects. The Committee
recommend that an annual training programme for different levels
of officials in various Institutes in the country be drawn immediately
by the Department in such a manner that all involved in the process
acquire the requisite skills to enable the successful implementation
of e-Governance projects.
Requirement of Technical Manpower
47. The Committee observe that there is a growing need for
technical and skilled manpower in different Departments and at
different outlets for handling information and communication related
activities as well as for implementation of various e-Governance
projects. They are, however, perturbed to note that no long term
planning has been made by the DIT in this regard despite clear
evidence of enhanced requirements of technically qualified people
in this area. They are afraid that increasing workload without
corresponding increase in the skilled workforce would adversely
affect the functioning of the e-Governance projects. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should assess the actual
requirements of skilled manpower in different areas of e-Governance
projects by taking inputs from various departments so as to make a
long term comprehensive planning for recruitments of new people
as well as imparting suitable and timely training to the existing
manpower.
(d) High Rate of Attrition
48. The Committee are constrained to note the rising trend in
the attrition rate of the IT skilled workforce in the Government
sector. The reason for high staff turnover is stated to be relatively
lower compensation package than those offered by the private sector
companies. As brought to the notice of the Committee, the IT
professionals join the Government organization and after gaining

73
experience level these organizations and join the private sector for
better salary. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the DIT
should work out a strategy to retain the technically qualified
manpower in the Government sector and for this purpose the
possibility of providing advanced training, better promotional
avenues, adequate housing/medical facilities, suitable financial
incentives may also be explored to encourage them to continue with
the Government organization for longer tenure.
(e) Outsourcing of Skilled Manpower
49. The Committee observe that the concept of outsourcing of
the services has become a common phenomena now-a-days and it
has proved to be successful in the projects like Municipalities,
e-Seva and MCA 21 project. They, however, observe that outsourcing
of services is to be resorted to on selective basis as per the
requirement of the individual project. The Committee feel that there
are broadly two major areas of activities namely core and the
peripheral. The core area which governs the key components, safety
and security of data, policy initiatives, fixation and achievement of
targets should, in the opinion of the Committee, be invariably
manned by the in-house people of the organization for strategic
reasons; and the activities in the peripheral areas of the project could
be got done by outsourcing of services. They, therefore, strongly
recommend that the concept of outsourcing may be considered and
applied by the user Departments primarily on these parameters as
the basic idea should always be to retain the core technology with
the Government itself.
VII. AWARENESS CREATION AND RE-ENGINEERING
(a) e-Readiness
50. The Committee observe that e-readiness is the degree to which
a country is prepared to participate in the networked world and it
is based on the level of adoption of important applications of ICTs
in offering interconnectedness among Government, business and
citizens. The value of the e-readiness at the State level reflects the
capacity of a State to participate in the networked economy vis-a-
vis other States. The Committee observe from the categorization in
the ladder of preparedness that while Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chandigarh are placed in the position of
leader, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Andaman
& Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Nagaland are the least achievers. The other remaining States/UTs are

74
in the different states in the middle level. The Committee are of the
view that e-readiness index reflects the actual preparedness of the
State for adoption of IT and delivery of IT Enabled Services (ITES)
and seen in this background, the most of the States are yet to bring
them to the required level of e-readiness to be capable to deliver
the citizen centric services of e-Governance projects. In such a
situation, the Committee are apprehensive about the desired success
of e-Governance projects in near future. They, therefore, recommend
the DIT to persuade all the States/UTs and also the Ministries/
Departments for vigorous process re-engineering and deployment of
additional resources for achieving at least the requisite level of
e-readiness for successful roll out of citizen centric services through
e-Governance projects. The DIT may also extend their full support
and guidance to them in this regard.
51. The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 102 countries,
India ranks at 45th position in the e-readiness index as per 2003-04
Report of World Economic Forum. Aiming at improving the
e-readiness of the States, the core infrastructure projects being
implemented under NEGP are the Common Service Centre (CSC)
which aims to have 100,000 CSC’s across all States in the country by
year 2007, State Wide Area Network (SWAN) which will enable the
States to have the data connectivity of 2 MBPs up to the block level;
and State Data Centre (SDC) which aims to have a centralized storage
and access of core data, with sharing facility by many e-Governance
applications and the capacity building program at the State level to
improve the Human Resource skills and to have the necessary
structures in place for faster implementation of e-Governance projects.
The Committee desire that all these infrastructures which are the
backbone of the e-Governance projects be established in a time
bound manner so as to bring the country as well as States at higher
level in e-readiness index which would ultimately facilitate the early
start of delivery of Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES)
to the general public.
(b) IT Education/Publicity of e-Services
52. The Committee note that the NeGP includes a component on
awareness for educating the masses about the benefits of
e-Governance and the method of utilizing these services. However,
IT education of masses has not been included in the present scope
of NeGP . Since most of the people across the country are not very
much aware of various services being/to be provided through
e-Governance projects, the Committee feel that there is a need to

75
initiate measures for demystifying the e-Governance Projects. They
desire that the DAR & PG which is primarily engaged in awareness
programme should give wider publicity of various e-services through
implementation of e-Governance projects to be provided well in
advance so that people can make up their mind and start availing
of the services as soon as they are commenced to derive maximum
benefits out of them.
53. The Committee are informed that the ability to derive benefit
of e-Governance is limited in our country because of various reasons
including unwillingness among public to adopt the new technology,
resistance due to ignorance, resistance to change the procedure etc.
Admittedly, the slow progress is attributable to some extent to non-
fulfilment of the requirements of educating the people and changing
their mindset. The Committee feel that a project could be considered
to be successfully implemented if the common man starts fully
availing of all the services being delivered through such projects.
Taking into account the demographic composition, geographical
terrain, literacy rate and the apprehensions expressed, the Committee
recommend the Department to design a well defined plan to make
these projects acceptable to the common man through organizing
awareness camps particularly in villages and far-flung areas. They
would further like to suggest that the DIT may consider to associate
the local representatives of the people and also the NGOs in such
campaign to ensure whole-hearted participation by the public.
(c) Process Re-engineering and Change management
(need for suitable changes in laws and administrative process)
54. The Committee observe that the age old statutes and
regulations governing the manual process will not be suitable for
governing the electronic processes which require altogether a different
set of legal framework and guidelines to make the e-Governance
successful. They are of the strong opinion that the legal and
regulatory changes in the processes would be able to deliver the
services more efficiently and effectively and remove a lot of other
hurdles of manual regulatory mechanism. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a comprehensive review of all relevant statutes and
regulations should urgently be done to bring about suitable changes
therein so as to make them compatible with the cyber age technology
enabling the citizens to obtain maximum advantage of e-Governance
projects. They further recommend that possibility of bringing a new
legislative mechanism may also be explored, if need be, to ensure
that the implementation of e-Governance projects delivers the citizen
centric services in an effective and successful manner.

76
VIII. INSTITUTIONAL PARTICIPATION
(a) Public Private Partnership (PPP)
55. According to the Committee, there is no doubt that the
implementation of e-Governance projects is a gigantic task which
would require huge resources viz. financial, technical of personnel.
In traditional economy, these resources for any government project
were used to be provided by the Government alone. However, taking
into account the increase in population, economic development and
people’s aspirations, the Committee anticipate massive demands to
avail e-services. They feel that there is an urgent need to look for
a combination of the Government and private sector resources for
timely and effective implementation of e-Governance projects. The
Committee are apprised of the benefits of Public-Private-Partnership
(PPP) model such as the Government would not have to make the
initial investment and would be paying only when they get the
services. Requirements of different types of personnel would be met
easily by the private sector and monitoring of the projects will be
done through service level agreements and only then they will be
paid. In the opinion of the Committee, while engaging the private
sector, a better system can be evolved any many of the constraints
faced by the DIT can be easily addressed. They are, therefore, of
the considered view that there are numerous advantages of
implementing the e-Governance Projects through suitably devised
PPP model primarily from the point of optimising and rationalizing
of the resources and the advantage of having the flexibility to hire
that IT skilled workforce on need basis thus avoiding the overhead
cost to the Government organizations.
56. The Committee observe that the projects dealing with security
of the country of similar other sensitive areas, requiring control of
technology are required to be handled fully by the Government
without any private participation. Even in the projects on PPP model,
the Government have to maintain their control in critical areas of
the particular project. The Committee hope that a balanced view
need to be taken into consideration while finalizing the PPP model
for different projects. They desire that the DIT should take care of
these aspects while adopting PPP model and the mandate should be
made clear on what terms they have to work and the goals related
to the needs of the citizens should also be very specifically spelt
out.
57. The Committee are satisfied to learn that Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) models have either been successfully implemented

77
or being explored in the projects viz. Municipalities, Property
Registration, e-Procurement, Citizen Service Centres (CSCs) etc. The
Ministry of Company Affairs (MCA-21) project is also being
implemented on PPP model. Further, the guidelines for SWANs have
specifically mentioned PPP model as one of the options for
establishment of the network by the States and the implementation
of SCS is also being envisaged in a PPP entrepreneurial model.
While no major operational difficulties are anticipated as long as
PPP model would be meeting the financial and sustainability
requirements, the Committee desire that the National Institute for
Smart Government (NISG) having expertise in the area of PPP
Models should continue to give their guidance in this regard in all
the e-Governance projects.
(b) Suggestions by IT Services/Solution Providers
58. The representatives of various IT Services/Solution Providers
have given various suggestions for speedy and effective
implementation of e-Governance projects. Some of the important
suggestions are related to the need for a paradigm shift in the
thought process, capital investment by private sector, utilization of
available expertise and technical skills in the private sector, public
private partnership (PPP), need for sharing of infrastructure, concerted
efforts for capacity building, change in process and process re-
engineering, standardisation of technology for better operability, high
penetration and usage of IT in the country, identification of successful
e-Governance projects and replication thereof, designing self-
sustainable mode, strengthening of intellectual property rights,
publicity of e-Governance success stories, guidelines for outsourcing
etc. The Committee note that representatives of the IT Services/
Solution Providers have given some important and valuable
suggestions from their perspective. They, therefore, recommend that
the DIT should thoroughly examine these suggestions with a view
to exploring the possibility of translating them into practical reality
keeping in view the observations of the Committee on different
issues in this Report. They would like to be apprised of the precise
action taken by DIT in the matter. The Committee are of the view
that DIT should have frequent interactions with the IT service/
solution providers to solicit their suggestions to increase the pace of
implementation of e-Governance Projects.
(c) Role of NIC, NICSI, NISG and C-DAC
59. The Committee note that the National Informatics Centre
(NIC) is providing network backbone and e-Governance support to

78
Central Government, State Governments, UT Administrations,
Districts and other government bodies. It offers network services
over high-speed long distance and local leased line Ku-band (RDMA,
FTDMA, IPA and DVB and SCPC VSATs), Wireless, Metropolitan
Area Networks (MANs) and Local Area Networks (LANs) with
NICNET gateway for Internet resources, facilitating informatics
services for decentralized planning, improvement in Government
services and wider transparency of national and local Governments.
NIC assists in implementing Information T echnology. The Committee
further note that National Informatics Centres Services Incorporated
(NICSI) was basically conceived for providing logistic support to
NIC and various e-Governance projects. NIC has initiated several
MMPs such as road transport, land records, commercial taxes, gram
panchayats, police, treasuries etc. and the NICSI’s role is to facilitate
smooth execution of these projects at grass-root levels in various
States of the country. The basic concept in most of the projects is to
focus on citizen service delivery, centralized initiatives and
decentralized implementation. The Committee further note that the
NISG, has been created as a public-private partnership in
collaboration between the Government and the private sector as a
facilitator to lead private sector competencies into the e-Governance
efforts. It was further mentioned that NISG’s vision is to establish
itself as a Centre of Excellence in a e-Governance as several other
countries are also looking to India and also to leverage private sector
resources through PPP made for spread of e-Governance. The strategy
is in the major areas viz. planning a project, Project Development
and Capacity Building through holding Training Programs for Policy
Makers viz. Political leaders, Senior Civil Servants and Members of
e-Governance Business Units in IT Companies. The Committee
observe that the projects undertaken by NISG are e-Seva
(Government to Citizen Interface) started in Andhra Pradesh and
e-Biz (Government to Business area). Similarly, the Committee find
that C-DAC has successfully developed and deployed its solutions
for various government offices in States like Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Punjab, Tripura, Orissa, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Goa and Uttar Pradesh, successful statewide computerization of the
Department of Registration and Stamps, Integrating its Language
Technology expertise with its e-Governance proficiency, C-DAC also
develops important solutions in Indian languages, which impact the
users in the Government and the citizens. C-DAC has undertaken
several projects, which have been systematically implemented and
effectively executed. C-DAC has deployed its software in over 600
offices spread across thousands of miles, thus establishing an
unmatched ability in this domain. The Committee appreciate the

79
large variety of informatics services being provided by the premier
institutions like NIC, NICSI, NISG and C-DAC to the Government
Ministries/Departments, States, UTs etc. in successfully carrying out
their IT projects. The Committee recommend the DIT to undertake
a scientific assessment of the potentials of these Institutions so as to
assign them a definite role and responsibilities for effective and
efficient implementation of various e-Governance projects under
NeGP . The Committee also recommend that these institutes of
excellence should be further assisted to enhance their capacities and
capabilities for delivering the increasing expectations from them.
IX. CONSTRAINTS/PROBLEMS
60. The Committee are informed that the major constraints which
are anticipated are the poor and inadequate definition of project
outcomes in terms of services, poor project development in terms of
capturing the expectations of all stakeholders and incorporating them
into project deliverables, inadequate project implementation strategy
including appropriate PPP/procurement models, inadequate internal
capacity to conceptualise and manage the change, lack of continuity
of project team, lack of relevant skills of project leaders, lack of
empowerment of project team to make necessary process changes
and financial constraints. The other constraints are stated to be the
poor data connectivity, poor literacy rate, poor affordability by masses,
need for multiple languages interface, successes in islands, no
institutional mechanism for mass deployment, capacity constraints
within government staff to fully comprehend the potential of e-
Governance and to manage its deployments including change
management, stability of tenure of key persons/implementation teams,
lack of standards (for inter-operability and integration of different
applications) need to secure data and maintain its privacy, lack of
necessary high-level political and bureaucratic support for the
programme.
61. As informed to the Committee, a draft Note to seek approval
of the competent authority for the Approach and Key components
of the NeGP , in order to address the above issues has been prepared
and circulated for comments to Central Line Ministries concerned
and State Governments. The Committee observe that the constraints
identified above though prima facie appear to be serious hurdles
before the Department but most of them, in the Committee’s opinion,
are basically integral part of the core issues required to be addressed
under NeGP . The Committee have examined most of these issues
separately in this Report and have given their opinions and

80
recommendations. They would, therefore, like the DIT to gear up its
machinery to address these issues in the light of the various
observations of the Committee in a time bound manner in
consultation with all concerned implementing Ministries,
Departments, State Governments and other agencies.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
28 November, 2005 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

81
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Monday, 25 April, 2005 from 16.00 hours to
17.30 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Charenamei
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
4. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
5. Col. G. Nizamuddin
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Vijay J. Darda
7. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF SOFTWARE
AND SERVICE COMPANIES (NASSCOM),
1. Shri Kiran Karnik, President, NASSCOM
2. Shri Sunil Mehta, Vice-President, NASSCOM
3. Ms. Sangeeta Gupta, Vice-President, NASSCOM
4. Shri Girish Srivastava, Asstt. Vice-President, NASSCOM

82
5. Ms. Laura Sallstorm, President, Sallstorm Consulting
6. Shri Robert Damuth, President, Nathan Associates Inc. US
7. Shri Rakesh Bakshi, Director-Legal, Microsoft Corporation
8. Shri Ravi Venkatesan, Chairman, Microsoft Corporation
9. Shri Ankhi Das, Corporate Sales Manager, Microsoft
Corporation
Representative of National Institute of Smart Government (NISG)
1. Shri Satyanarayana, Chief Executive Officer
Department of Information Technology
1. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri R. Chandershekhar, Joint Secretary
3. Dr. N. Vijayaditya, DG, NIC
4. Shri S.S. Grover, Sr. Director
5. Shri S. Abbassi, Director
6. Shri V .K. Jain, Joint Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Kiran Karnik,
President, NASSCOM, Ms. Laura Sallstorm, President, Sallstorm
Consulting, US, Shri Robert Damuth, President, Nathan Associates Inc.
US and other representatives of Microsoft Corporation. The Chairman
also welcomed Shri Satyanarayana, Chief Executive Officer, NISG and
the representatives of the Department of Information Technology. The
Chairman apprised the Members that Shri Kiran Karnik has been
invited to present his views before the Committee on the subject
“Implementation of e-Governance projects” selected by the Committee
for examination during the year 2004-2005.
3. Shri Kiran Karnik and his colleagues made a presentation on
the role of IT sector in India and how IT can be used to trigger
economic growth. They also mentioned factors effecting IT growth in
India and suggested ways to promote domestic IT market. The
Members sought certain clarifications on these issues. Shri Karnik and
his colleagues responded to the various queries raised by the Members.
The Chairman conveyed his thanks to Shri Karnik and his colleagues
for appearing before the Committee and tendering valuable information.
He also thanked the representatives of the Department of Information
Technology for appearing before the Committee. The Chairman then
asked for Shri Satyanarayana’s convenience to present his views on

83
role of NISG in implementation of e-Governance projects some other
day due to paucity of time. Shri Satyanarayana acceded to the request.
The Chairman conveyed his thanks to Shri Satyanarayana for making
his presence before the Committee.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

84
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 13 July, 2005 from 15.00 hours
to 17.30 hours in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P . Karunakaran
7. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
8. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
9. Col. G. Nizamuddin
10. Shri Sohan Potai
11. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
12. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
13. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Ashwani Kumar
15. Shri Motiur Rahman
16. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Under Secretary

85
WITNESSES
1. Shri R. Chandrashekhar, Joint Secretary , DIT
2. Shri Pankaj Agrawala, Joint Secretary, DIT
3. Shri Ajeer Vidya, JS & FA, DIT
4. Dr. U.P . Phadke, Advisor, DIT
5. Dr. N. Vijayaditya, DG, NIC
6. Dr. B.K. Gairola, DDG, NIC
7. Shri Satyanarayana, Chief Executive Officer, National Institute
of Smart Government (NISG)
8. Shri Mahesh Chandra, Managing Director, National Informatics
Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI).
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives to
the sitting of the Committee. The representatives gave a presentation
and briefed the Members about the role of NISG, NICSI and NIXI in
the “Implementation of e-Governance projects”.
3. The Members sought certain clarifications on various issues
involved in the matter. The representatives responded to the queries
raised by the Members. The Chairman conveyed his thanks to the
representatives for appearing before the Committee and tendering
valuable information.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

86
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 28 July, 2005 from 1500 hours to
1800 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Dr. P .P . Koya
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
10. Shri Sohan Potai
11. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
12. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
13. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Vijay J. Darda
15. Shri Ashwani Kumar
16. Shri Dara Singh
17. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
18. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao

87
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Under Secretary
Special-Invitee
Shri Rahul Gandhi
WITNESSES
1. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri R. Chandrasekhar, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ajeer Vidya, JS & FA
4. Shri Pankaj Agarwala, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. B.K. Gairola, DDG, NIC
Representatives of the IT Companies
1. Shri Tanmoy Chakrabarty, Vice-President & Head, Tata
Consultancy Services (TCS)
2. Shri Murali Dhara, General Manager, Wipro Infotech
3. Shri Satish Kaushal, Country Manager, IBM India Ltd.
4. Shri S.P .S. Grover, Sr. Director, Oracle India Pvt. Ltd.
5. Ms. Neelam Dhawan, Managing Director, Microsoft Corporation
(India) Pvt. Ltd.
6. Shri Ravindranath P ., Director, HP India Pvt. Ltd.
7. Shri T.S. Darbari, HP Lazer Jet
8. Shri Chetan Krishnaswamy, Director, Intel Technology India
Pvt. Ltd.
9. Shri Venkat Patnaik, Assistant General Manager, 3I Infotech
(ICICI Infotech Ltd.)
10. Shri Vivek Agarwal, President, C1 India Pvt. Ltd.
11. Shri Kamlakar Kaul, General Manager, HCL Technologies/HCL
Infosystems Ltd.
12. Shri Y. Subrahmanyam, Managing Director, Co Options
Technologies Ltd.
13. Shri K. Jagannath, National Business Manager, CMS Computers
Ltd.

88
14. Shri U. Lakshmi Narayana, Director Business Development,
Vortex Technologies.
15. Shri Praveen, Strategy Advisor, n-Logue
16. Shri Satyan Mishra, CEO, Drishtee
17. Shri Krishna Rupanagunta, Chief Operating Officer,
e-Governments Foundation
18. Shri Vinnie Mehta, Executive Director, MAIT
19. Shri Govind Chauhan, National Manager, ABN.
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department
of Information Technology, other officers of the Department and
representatives of various IT services and solution providers.
2. Thereafter, the representatives of various IT services and solution
providers gave a presentation and briefed the members about their
role in the “implementation of e-Governance projects”.
3. The Committee, then, sought certain clarifications from the
representatives of various IT services and solution providers on the
issues related to implementation of e-Governance in the country. The
representatives responded to the queries of the Members. The Chairman
thanked the representatives for appearing before the Committee,
tendering valuable information and for expressing free and frank views
on various points raised by the Members.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

89
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, 18 August, 2005 from 1500 hours to
1750 hours in Committee Room ‘G-074’, ‘K’ Block, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Vijay J. Darda
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
5. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Under Secretary

90
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Information Technology
1. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Secretary,
2. Shri R. Chandrashekhar, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ajeer Vidya, JS & FA
4. Shri Pankaj Agrawala, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. N. Vijayaditya, Director General, NIC
6. Dr. B.K. Gairola, DDG, NIC
Representatives of some of the Line Ministries/Departments
1. Shri Berjinder Singh, Chairman, Central Board of Direct Taxes
(CBDT), MoF
2. Shri J.G. Pendse, Member (Investigation), CBDT
3. Shri V .S. Mathur, Director General of Income Tax (Systems),
CBDT
4. Shri S.S. Khan, Director of Income Tax (Systems), CBDT
5. Shri S.K. Mishra, Director, Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways
6. Smt. Lalita Kumar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development
7. Shri Arun Dubey, Additional Member, Railway Board, Ministry
of Railways
8. Shri M.R. Ramakrishnan, M.D. Centre for Railway Information
System (CRIS)
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department
of Information Technology, representatives of the invited Line
Ministries/Departments viz. Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT),
Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Road Transport and Highways;
Ministry of Rural Development; Centre for Railway Information System
(CRIS), Ministry of Railways and other officers to the sitting of the
Committee.
2. Thereafter, the representatives of each of the Line Ministries/
Departments gave a visual presentation and briefed the Members about
the efforts and progress made so far, success achieved and difficulties
faced by them in the process of implementation of e-Governance
projects.

91
3. The Committee, then sought certain clarifications from the
representatives of the Line Ministries/Departments of the e-Governance
projects being implemented by them and also on similar other issues
related to implementation of e-Governance projects in the country. The
representatives responded to the queries of the Members. The Chairman
thanked the representatives for appearing before the Committee,
tendering valuable information and for expressing free and frank views
on various points raised by the Members.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

92
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on the 14th November, 2005 from 1500 Hrs. to
1615 Hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri Vishnu Sai
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Shri Balbir K. Punj
11. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Tiwari — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the Draft Report on “Implementation of e-Governance Project” and
adopted the same with some modifications.

93
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above mentioned Report to the House after factual
verification by the Department of Information Technology on a date
and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.