26
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)]
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 23.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 148
Price : Rs. 26.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 33
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 50
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 56
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2005-06)
held on 20.12.2005. ................................................... 57
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 59
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasada
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
(iii)

26. Shri Dara Singh
*27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27.9.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Sixth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Demands for Grants (2005-2006)” relating to the Department of
Posts.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st April,
2005 and laid in Rajya Sabha the same day. The Department furnished
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Report on 9th August, 2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 20th December, 2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2005-2006)’ pertaining
to the Department of Posts (DoP).
1.2 The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st,
April, 2005 and was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sahba on 21st
April, 2005. It contained 39 Recommendations/Observations.
1.3 Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received from the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Posts) and categorised as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos: 111, 112, 114, 118, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127,
128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 140, 141, 142, 147 and
148
(Total: 23, Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para Nos: 110, 117, 119, 121, 126, 136, 137, 138, 139, 143,
144, 145 and 146
(Total: 13, Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos: 113, 115,, and 116
(Total: 3, Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para No: Nil
(Total: Nil, Chapter-V)

2
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the Recommendations/Observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to them
at an early date.
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations.
Utilization of Budgetary Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 113)
1.6 Commenting on unspent balances, the Committee observed as
follows:
“The Committee find that while on one side the Department has
not been able to spend fully the allocated funds resulting in huge
unspent balances, there have been, on the other side, certain
activities such as modernisation of post offices, modernisation of
speed post centres, modernisation of mail offices, promotion of
premium products, construction of buildings etc., where more funds
could have been utilized, if it had been allocated to the Department.
The Committee’s apprehension about the poor budgetary exercise
in the Department, thus gets reinforced from the above stated
contradictory situation with regard to utilisation of funds. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Department to ensure that
the assessment of requirement of funds under different major, minor
and sub-heads of the Grant are made on realistic anticipations to
make the budgetary exercise more meaningful and accurate”.
1.7 The Department of Posts, in their action taken reply have stated
as under:
“The allocations are firmed up in consultation with Planning
Commission with whom each Department has to enter into an
MoU regarding scheme-wise outlays and physical targets. Therefore,
the Department is compelled to accede to their conditions regarding
limiting the allocations in some cases, even if there is scope to
utilize more funds under these activities. This is specially so in
the case of Construction of buildings, modernization activities, etc.

3
Since the total outlay received initially, is always far lower than
what is projected, and given the corporate compulsions to speed
up the computerization projects, funds for activities like promotion
of premium products, philately, financial services, etc., are often
compelled to be reduced. This is why there is a mis-match between
allocations and capacity to spend, in respect of certain schemes.”
“This disparity is sought to be reduced during the budgetary
process, to the extent possible, by carefully assessing the capacity
to spend in priority schemes and providing only token allocations
where there is doubt in spending capacity, and allocating these
resources to schemes which can absorb more funds, even if their
inter-se priority is lower. This fact can be clearly seen from the
figures relating to projection to Planning Commission and trend of
allocations made under BE/RE”.
1.8 The Committee are not convinced with the arguments adduced
by the Department of Posts (DoP) seeking to justify the deficiencies
pointed by the Committee in the budgetary exercise. While on the
one hand, DoP have sought to apportion the blame on the Planning
Commission for imposing restrictions on the allocation, on the other
hand, the Department have stated that they strive to maintain the
balance through the budgetary exercise. In the opinion of the
Committee, had it been so, there would not have been cases of
under utilisation. Also, the core schemes ought to have got better
considerations. Unfortunately, the budgetary mechanism to undertake
a proper assessment of this has not been effective and this needs to
be addressed to by DoP in all its implications. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the DoP should
ensure that the assessment of requirement of funds under different
major, minor and sub-heads of the Grant are made on realistic
anticipations to make the budgetary exercise more meaningful and
accurate.
Recovery of Arrears
Recommendation (Para No. 115)
1.9 Dealing with the arrears of recoveries the Committee had
recommended as under:
“The Committee note that the Department of Posts is paid agency
charges for the service rendered by them on behalf of the other
Government Departments and these earnings are accounted for as
recoveries. The Postal Life Insurance and the Rural Life Insurance

4
constitute 65 per cent of the total recoveries. The Department also
makes pension payment on behalf of a number of Departments,
including the Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of
Mines, the EPF organization and agency charges are paid for it.
The Committee also observe that various areas of recoveries to be
made by the Department include (i) Commission of money on
Western Union Money Transfer; (ii) Commission on payment of
Military Pension; (iii) Commission on sale of Non-postal stamps of
Delhi Administration; (iv) Commission on payment of pension
under CPFP; (v) Collection of Custom Duty; (vi) Telegraphs share
of combined office charges; (vii) PLI/RPLI; (viii) APS Accounts
and other Government Departments. According to the Department
of Posts, arrears worked out for the job of booking and delivery
of telegrams on behalf of the BSNL comes to Rs. 100 crore.
Similarly, huge arrears are stated to be recovered by the Department
of Posts from various Departments for rendering the above
mentioned services. However, the actual details of arrears of
recoveries in respect of each service were to be worked out by the
Department. The Committee therefore, recommend that arrears of
recoveries due on 31st March 2005 against all the Departments/
organizations on account of different services/agency functions
including those pertaining to disbursement of pension, may be
worked out unit/service/Department-wise and the matter of
expeditious recovery of the arrears may be taken up at the highest
level with the concerned Department/organizations at the earliest.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard with full details within a period of three
months”.
1.10 The Department of Posts in their action taken reply informed
as follows:
The Status of outstanding dues against various departments/
agencies as on 31st March 2005 for various agencies services rendered
by the Department of Posts are:—
1. Recoveries in the shape of Fixes Rate of Remuneration (FRR)
related to PLI and RPLI have been credited to the
Department of Posts up to 31.03.2005 at the rate of FRR
declared up to 31.03.2001. Although there is no arrear to be
recovered, some adjustment is likely to occur with
retrospective effect once the FRR is finalized.
1.A BSNL/DoT for delivery of Telegrams: Rs. 100 crore is the
progressive total of the outstanding against BSNL/DoT from

5
1992-93 upto 2002-2003. The rates of agency charges payable
to Department of Posts by BSNL/DoT for booking and
delivery of telegrams in combined offices is under dispute
and the matter is under discussion with DoT and the case
has been sent to Committee of Secretaries (CoS).
2. Ministry of Railways for payments of pensions: There are
no dues outstanding. Adjustment is made through RBI, CAS,
Nagpur.
3. Ministry of Coal & Mines (CMPF) for payments of pensions:
Rs. 9.4 crore are outstanding against Coal & Mines Provident
Fund (CMPF) towards commission for payment of pension
and towards the amount paid as pension. This matter has
also been taken up at Secretary level with the Secretary
(Labour) and Secretary (Coal & Mines) for early recovery.
4. Ministry of Labour (EPF) for payments of pensions:
Rs. 15.87 crore are outstanding EPF towards commission
for payment of pension and towards the amount paid as
pension. This matter has also been taken up at Secretary
level for recovery.
5. Western Union for International Money Transfer Service: No
dues are outstanding. All recoveries made up to 31.03.2005.
6. Ministry of Defence for commission on payment of Military
Pension: There are no dues outstanding. Adjustment is made
through RBI, CAS, Nagpur.
7. State Government of Delhi for commission on sale of Non-
Postal Stamps: No dues outstanding.
8. Department of Revenue for collection of customs duty: No
dues are outstanding.
9. Ministry of Defence APS Accounts: There are no dues
outstanding.
10. Department of Telecom for payment of pensions: The
amount due is Rs. 23.01 crore (provisional). All Heads of
Circles have been instructed to collect information in respect
of dues recoverable from DoT, to determine total outstanding
due in this regard. The matter has also been taken up with
Member (Finance) of Department of Telecom, who has
agreed to the rates proposed by DoP in this regard. The
matter has also been taken with Ministry of Finance for
concurrence as well as for providing necessary funds in the
Budget of DoT for payment to Department of Posts.”

6
1.11. The Committee note that the matter regarding outstanding
dues was taken up with the various Departments of Central
Government, State Government of Delhi and other Agencies on
account of services rendered by the Department of Posts. The
Committee appreciate that no dues are outstanding against the
Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence, State Government of
Delhi and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). However,
Rs. 100 crore is pending from BSNL/DoT for booking and delivery
of telegrams, Rs. 9.4 crore from Ministry of Coal & Mines
towards commission, Rs. 15.87 crore from Ministry of Labour and
Rs. 23.01 crore from Department of Telecom for payment of Pensions.
The Committee also note that efforts have been made by the
Department of Posts for recovery of these arrears. Considering the
sizeable extent of arrears, the Committee strongly recommend that
the matter should be taken up with the respective Ministries/
Departments at the highest level for their expeditious recovery. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 116)
1.12 Commenting on the agency functions, the Committee had
recommended as follows:
“The Committee further observe that the Department of Posts
provide agency services to the Ministry of Finance and in this
regard an expert Committee set up by the Ministry of Finance in
1993-94 had fixed the rates of remuneration for that year. They
had also recommended 10 per cent escalation per year but after
the year 2001-02, the increase has been only to the tune of
4.25 per cent and 3.88 per cent during the last two years resulting
in revenue deficit. Surprisingly, the Department did not get any
response for the references made to the Ministry of Finance despite
the fact that the matter was taken up with the Secretary
(Expenditure). The Committee express their serious concern over
such as state of affairs when the escalation rate fixed by the Expert
Committee was reduced unilaterally by the Ministry of Finance
which has adversely impacted the financial position of the
Department of Posts. The unilateraldecision taken by the Ministry
of Finance with regard to reduction of escalation rates without
consulting/involving the service provider/organization  i.e.
Department of Posts is, in the opinion of the Committee, highly
unreasonable and needs to be rectified very soon. Taking into
account the fact that working expenses of the Department are

7
steadily rising year after year while in sharp contrast thereto, the
escalation rate of remuneration have been reduced by the Ministry
of Finance resulting in an adverse financial position to the
Department, the Committee are constrained to recommend that
the Department of Posts should seriously take up the matter with
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission at the highest
level. In case no favourable response is received within a reasonable
period of time, the Department should explore the possibility of
placing the entire matter before the Cabinet.”
1.13 The Department in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The matter continues to be pursued with Ministry of Finance.
The last reminder was sent to the Ministry of Finance on
5-12-2005 and reply of Ministry is still awaited”.
1.14 The Committee are concerned to note that the matter
regarding enhancement of remuneration to the Department of Posts
by the Ministry of Finance for the agency functions rendered by the
Department of Posts on behalf of the latter is still pending with the
Ministry of Finance without any response. Since the issue has an
important bearing on the finance of the Department, the Committee
are of the view that there is an imperative need for DoP to show a
higher degree of urgency, than in evidence. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department of Posts should pursue at the highest
level in the Ministry of Finance to expedite the matter and arrive at
an early decision. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the action taken by the Government in this regard within six months
from the date of presentation of this Report to Parliament.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Proposals and Thrust Areas
Recommendation (Para No. 111)
The Committee note that certain thrust areas have been defined
by the PMO for the Department of Posts. These areas include timely
completion of tasks related to setting up of Finance Marts as one stop
shop for financial services, timely completion of franchising
arrangements to provide services in the areas not having post offices,
undertaking computerization of postal activities, taking necessary action
for replacing/amending the Indian Post Office Act of 1898 to take care
of the needs of competition, convergence and other new developments
and bringing institutional reforms in terms of decentralization,
simplification, transparency, accountability and e-governance. The
Committee trust that the Department will initiate all necessary steps
in this regard to achieve the desired results at the earliest in all the
thrust areas defined by the PMO which will not only make the
Department a vibrant commercial organization but also provide speedy
and smooth services to the public at large. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the specific steps being taken by the Department in
this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
Efforts are being made to effectively implement the thrust areas
identified for the Department. The steps taken in this regard till date
are summarised below:—
1. Setting up of Postal Finance Marts (PFMs): The proposal
to set up Postal Finance Marts was taken up only in the
Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th Plan and reflected in the
Annual Plan 2005-06. To implement this activity in the
current year, a proposal has been submitted to the Planning
Commission to enhance the outlay under the scheme
‘Modernisation (Improving ergonomics) of Post Offices’.
Meanwhile, short-listing of post offices for setting up of
PFMs has been completed. Circles have been advised to

9
organise AMFI training programmes in coordination with
Mutual Funds/Financial Institution that are retailing their
products through PFMs. Implementation will be done after
obtaining concurrence of the Planning Commission and
approval of MoC&IT.
2. Franchising Postal Facilities: A confirmation has been
received from the Ministry of Law that the concept of
franchising does not conflict with the provisions of the
Indian Post Office Act, 1898. Detailed provisions of the
scheme, including the modus of funding are being worked
out and is targeted to be ready by August 2005. Thereafter,
action will be taken on the remaining items.
3. (a) Computerisation of postal activities and ensure reliable
connectivity and quality services comparable to
international standards: Computerisation of post offices is
on schedule. Hardware is being supplied to 2860 sub-post
offices on the basis of advance purchase orders placed (with
the special permission granted by Ministry of Finance) in
March, 2005. Site preparation funds have also been released.
Processing of the proposal for Computerisation of the
remaining 606 post offices, Speed Post centres, and foreign
post offices and also for setting up the NDC is under
process.
3. (b) Re-orient future business development with special
emphasis on services like Speed Post, Express parcels,
e-post, e-billing, payments and presentments (EBPP),
e-commerce:
(i) Two separate Divisions, namely, Marketing Division and
Parcel Division have been created within Business
Development Directorate of the Department with a view to
undertake dynamic marketing activities and enter into parcel
segment in a big way.
(ii) Broad outlines and preliminary (operational) details have
been worked out to launch specialised Speed Post services
such as City Express, Post Express and Premium Speed Post
and corporate e-Post to cater to the special needs of different
customer segments.
(iii) Efforts to facilitate e-Commerce through post office network
is also under process. Value Payable Post (VPP) and e-Bill

10
Post are being redesigned for this purpose in consultation
with organisations such as CII and NIIT respectively.
4. Replace/amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1998: The
Amendment Bill is being finalised. Thereafter, the Bill will
be circulated to all concerned Ministries/Departments for
comments/suggestions. The draft Amendment Bill is likely
to be submitted to the Parliament during the Winter Session
2005.
5. Institutional reform in terms of (a) decentralization, (b)
simplification (c) transparency (d) accountability and (e)
e-governance:
This is an on-going process. Some of the major efforts taken so far
during 2005-06 include the following:
(i) Delegation of financial powers to meet operational
requirements being effected.
(ii) A professional consultant, M/s KPMG has been engaged to
undertake a Systems Study of the Department to identify
options available for the postal system to compete in a
commercial environment and achieving financial self-
sufficiency while continuing to fulfil its USO. Preliminary
Report has been received, and final report is targeted to be
received by October 2005.
(iii) Output norms in r espect of Savings Bank have been revised.
Timeframes for disposing of all savings bank related services
have been substantially reduced to provide faster service to
customers.
(iv) Implementation of Citizen’s Charter has been progressively
extended and all major Sub-Post Offices are expected to
covered by September 2005.
(v) Web-based complaint handling: Four Circles, viz.,
Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh Circle have achieved the target of handling
80% of the complaints through on-line system. The other
Circles are also aiming to achieve their target before
December 2005.
Progress in respect of all thrust areas are being reviewed at the
level of Secretary (Posts) periodically.

11
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations:
Recommendation (Para No. 112)
The Committee are constrained to note the recurring nature of
unspent balances left with the Department at the end of each financial
year. The unspent balances in the Revenue Section under Non-Plan
head had been Rs. 88.57 crore, Rs. 14.26 crore, Rs. 6.37 crore and Rs.
67.82 crore during the year 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04
respectively. Similarly, unspent balances in the Capital Section under
Plan head had been Rs. 41.54 crore, 5.84 crore, 33.87 crore, and 3.66
crore respectively under the same period. The figure projected as
unspent balances for the year 2004-05 under both the above mentioned
heads are Rs. 1194.07 crore and Rs. 137.73 crore respectively. The
Committee observe that the trend of continuous under-utilisation of
allocated funds both under the Revenue and Capital Sections is quite
alarming. In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons put forth by
the Department for such under-utilization such as the time taken to
complete the formalities and getting approval, booking of expenditure
under wrong heads of accounts etc. are clear testimony of poor
budgetary exercise prevalent in the Department coupled with the
lethargic bureaucratic processes involving a lot of delay in completion
of requisite formalities. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
budgetary and administrative mechanisms of the Department needs to
be revamped so as to avoid recurrence of past mistakes and to ensure
optimum utilization of funds within the financial year. The Department
should make serious efforts to procure and clear the bills of other
Departments like DGS&D within the financial year so that the funds
earmarked for that purpose are not left unutilised.
Action Taken by the Government
The concerns expressed by the Committee are noted. The reasons
for under utilisation of budgetary allocations are given below:
a. Non-Plan
Revenue Expenditure (Non-Plan)
(in Crores)
Year Revised Actual Unspent balances Percentage of
Estimate Expenditure (excess +)/(Savings-) column 4 to 2
2000-01 4975.00 4886.43 -88.57 -1.78
2001-02 5183.95 5169.69 -14.26 -0.28
2002-03 5477.11 5470.74 -6.37 -0.12
2003-04 5787.29 5719.47 -67.82 -1.17
2004-05* 6018.11 5947.58 -70.53 -1.17

12
The unspent balance of 2004-05 is at the same level, percentage
wise, as of the previous year. The amounts unspent were primarily
establishment related cost (Rs. 70.27 crores) due to final expenditure
being lesser than anticipated. Efforts will continue to be made to avoid
unspent balances to the extent possible, as directed by the Committee.
(b) Capital Plan
1. Unlike many other Departments, the Department of Posts,
implements all its Plan schemes as central schemes through its own
subordinate formations, spread across the country. Therefore, funds
exit the budget only after expenditure is incurred and booked. Since
major Plan schemes have long gestation period, the level of fund
utilization and booking of expenditure at the time of finalizing RE is
low. This results in reduction of funds at the RE stage. Therefore,
every year, the Department is compelled to re-adjust its Plan
implementation activities mid-year.
2. In 2002-03, i.e., the first year of the 10th Plan, scheme-wise
outlays were approved by Planning Commission only by end-September
2002, after a detailed zero based budgeting exercise. Approval of the
competent authority for the different schemes could be initiated only
thereafter. This approval process involves multiple agencies, inter-
ministerial consultations, etc., and the pace of progress is not always
within the control of the Department. Therefore, major Plan schemes
like Computerisation, Construction of buildings could be got approved
only after mid-2003. The Computerisation project could not be taken
up for implementation in 2003-04 after it was approved for want of
funds in RE. These factors contributed to the low utilization of Plan
funds in the first 3 years of the Plan.
As far as the budgetary process is concerned, funds are being
provided in the last 3 years to each scheme only after assessing its
capacity to utilize the funds, to avoid surrenders. However, despite
best efforts, under-utilisation occurs when rate contracts are issued
late by DGS&D or suppliers/contractors submit their bills late and
DGS&D furnishes bills to the Department for booking expenditure
beyond the financial year.
Some of the measures introduce to improve the Plan process
include the following:
1. Securing special permission from Ministry of Finance to
place orders on DGS&D for hardware in advance, to give
suppliers and DGS&D adequate time to compete formalities
and furnish the bills.

13
2. Approval process in respect of schemes pending approval
of expedited through fortnightly monitoring. Release of Plan
funds to Circles are also being monitored on fortnightly
basis.
3. Quarterly progress targets (Financial and physical) have been
set, both scheme-wise and Circle-wise and circulated to all
concerned. Circles have been given detailed guidelines on
the need for phasing and timely action to complete
implementation within the given timeframes, so that
expenditure targets (50% by September 2005, 70% by
December 2005) can be achieved. Monthly monitoring of
Plan expenditure and booking is also in place. Case by case
directions are also being issued to sort out specific
implementation issues.
4. A monitoring cell has been created at the Directorate level
to oversee Plan expenditure and its booking by coordinating
with concerned Divisions in the Directorate, Director of
Accounts (Postal), Delhi, DGS&D, suppliers, etc.
5. Funds are strictly allocated only to those schemes which
are ready for implementation.
6. Exercise is underway to rationalize the various Plan heads
of account and to train accountants to understand the special
requirements under Plan.
Working Expenses
Recommendation (Para No. 114)
The Committee note that the working expenses of the Department
have been Rs. 5194.60 crore, Rs. 5476.15 crore, Rs. 5736.06 crore,
Rs. 6027.31 crore, and BE of Rs. 6274.59 crore in the year 2001-02,
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, and 2005-06 respectively, thus registering an
increase of Rs. 281.55 crore in 2002-03, Rs. 259.91 crore in 2003-04,
Rs. 291.25 crore in 2004-05 and Rs. 247.28 crore in 2005-06 (BE stage).
The reasons for hike of working expenses in the BE of the year
2005-06 are stated to be merger of 50 per cent D.A. to the basic pay,
thereby increasing the salaries and pension, adding requirement of
additional funds. The Committee, however, observe that increase of
working expenses of the Department is a regular phenomenon as is
evident from the figures cited above, therefore, the Committee are not

14
convinced with the explanation of the Department that higher BE has
been projected on this count only. The Committee would therefore
desire that the Department should explore the areas where the working
expenses could be reduced without adversely affecting the operations
of the Department particularly when the Department itself admitted
to the scope of controlling the expenditure to the tune of 3 to 5 per
cent.
Action Taken by the Government
Increase in expenditure to the extent of 4.5% to 5.8% each year is
inevitable in any Government organization because of the payments
due to annual increment, increase in DA twice a year (for pay and
pensions), salary increases due to promotions, retirement benefits, etc.
In the case of Department of Posts, this impact is sizeable because
90% working expenses are establishment related. In 2004-05, abnormal
increase occurred in this expenditure due to an enhanced burden of
Rs. 292 crore (approximately) on account of the merger of 50% of DA
in basic pay, which had an impact for pensioners also. There is also
some increase due to costs towards maintenance of technology inducted.
Despite these increases, due to strict monitoring of expenditure
and enforcement of the austerity measures imposed by Ministry of
Finance, the Department has been able to peg expenditure in 2004-05
to Rs. 5964.05 crore, which is only an increase of 3.97% over the
previous year. It also signifies a reduction in overall expenditure, if
the abnormal expenditure of Rs. 292 crore mentioned above is not
taken into account. These efforts will be continued to keep the
expenditure at realistic levels.
Revenue Receipts
Recommendation (Para No. 118)
The Committee also note from the information submitted by the
Department that revenue earned from postal operations constitute
approximately 59 per cent of the total revenue of the Department,
while over 41 per cent of the revenue is earned from commission
from the Ministry of Finance on account of small savings work. In the
case of postal operations, the BD Directorate is making efforts to mop
up the bulk mailers and corporate mailers thereby increasing the
amount despite non-revision of tariff from the year 2002. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for increasing the revenue

15
earnings of the Department and therefore, they would advise the
Department to explore the possibility of venturing into new areas of
operation including selling of non-competing products so that financial
health of the organization could be improved.
Action Taken by the Government
In the context of the advice given by the Committee, it is clarified
that over the last 4-5 years, a number of initiatives have been taken
up by the Department to leverage the reach of its network and to
increase the range of financial services. Circles have been empowered
in 2003 to finalise retail packages so that speedier decisions can be
taken on proposals received. This has resulted in the introduction of
a wide range of retail products to the customers (see annexure) and
the revenues from ‘Retail Post’ has increased from Rs. 2.16 crore in
2001-02 to Rs. 50.50 crore (provisional) by 2004-05. This revenue has
been included as part of revenues from Premium Products.
In the area of financial services, new products introduced include
international money transfer through a tie up with Western Union,
sale of Mutual Funds through tie ups with various leading players in
the Mutual funds Market and sale of non-life products through a tie
up with Oriental Insurance Corporation. While India Post has
established itself as Western union’s largest partner in Asia in the past
3-4 years, with 25% market share, the other products are yet to stabilise.
Efforts are underway to develop Postal Finance Marts which can help
boost the sale of Mutual Funds by leveraging the customer base for
Savings Bank products for cross selling Mutual Funds. In the case of
non-life insurance products also, efforts are underway to expand its
sale to all the Head Post offices and all the States.
The Department continues to explore other options for introducing
non-competing products. These include distribution of micro-credit
through post offices, introduction of e-services in computerised post
offices, etc. It needs to be mentioned that there is a certain time-lag
required for new products to establish themselves with the post offices
customers, as has been seen in the case of international money transfer.
The computerisation of post offices and establishment of the National
Data Centre would help the Department to increase the range of value
added services that the Department can offer to its customers. The
Department is, therefore, currently engaged in inducting technology
into the System in order to, inter-alia, increase its capacity to generate
more revenues.

16
LIST OF RETAIL ACTIVITIES/BUSINESS PACKAGES BEING
OFFERED BY POST OFFICES IN DIFFERENT POSTAL
CIRCLES THROUGH SELECT POST OFFICES
Sl.No. Business Package
 1. Acceptance of countrywide loan application forms and
disbursement of sanctioned loans through select post offices
on behalf of corporates like GE.
 2. Address verification and credit rating of BSNL’s Cell One
customers
 3. Survey on behalf of State Government to identify Cable
Connections
 4. Sale of forms for Universities, UPSC, State PSCs/SSCs,
Engineering exams etc.
 5. Collection of Electricity Bill payments
 6. Delivery of Mobile Bills of BSNL/Air Tel and other private
service providers
 7. Collection of Telephone Revenue Bills
 8. Sale of SIM Card and Recharge Coupons of private Telephone
service providers
 9. Sale of products of private companies like Kodak, Emami
etc.
10. Acceptance of bills of Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai
11. Distribution of Prasadams
12. Sale of milk cards
13. Distribution of spices, Ayurvedic medicines
14. Sale of carton boxes
15. Sale of VCDs of eminent personalities
16. Sale of books of various publishers
17. Collection of tuition fee (on behalf of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
Open University)
18. Sale of educational materials/CD
19. Disbursal of Old age money orders/widow’s pensions
20. Sale of Philately frames Disbursal of Old age money orders/
widow’s pensions
21. Sale of Philately frames.

17
Tenth Five Year Plan:
Recommendation (Para No. 120)
The Committee find that the approved Tenth Plan outlay for the
Department of Posts for Plan Schemes is Rs. 1350 crore, wherein
approved outlays for the first three year of the plan i.e. 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05 was Rs. 350 crore and a provision (BE) of
Rs. 354 crore has now been made for the year 2005-06. Further, out of
total outlay of Rs. 1350 crore for the Xth Five Year Plan,
Rs. 1066.50 crore (79%) is stated to be earmarked for computerization,
up-gradation of technology and modernization of postal network and
its operations. Similarly, out of Rs. 354 crore earmarked for the
2005-06, Rs. 307.05 (86.7%) is earmarked for the above mentioned
activities. However, performance of the Department in respect of fifteen
important activities for which funds were allocated to the extent of
Rs. 103.61 crore in the year 2001-2003 and Rs. 104.31 crore in the year
2003-04 have been abysmally poor as the actual expenditures have
been very less. Surprisingly, the Department failed to utilize the funds
in some of the critical areas like Computerization of Post offices,
Modernisation/Upgradation of VSAT system etc. The main reasons for
poor performance in the first two years of the Tenth Plan are stated
to be the delay in receiving the scheme-wise outlay from the Planning
Commission including the delay in getting the approval of the
competent authority to the plan schemes. The Committee are not
convinced with the reasons for delay as the administrative hurdles
could very well have been overcome had the Department put in
focussed efforts in this direction. The Committee hope that the
Department will at least now make concerted efforts for full and fruitful
utilization of the budgetary allocations for the year 2005-06 so that
implementation of the schemes and completion of activities are not
delayed further.
Action Taken by the Government
The concerns expressed by the Committee are noted. However, the
Department would like to clarify the following issues in this
context:
1. The Department of Posts embarked on a programme to
modernize the postal system from the middle of the Eighth Plan. It
has substantially enhanced the scope of its schemes for modernization
and Upgradation of technology not only in terms of physical and
financial targets, but also in terms of the number of Plan schemes and
activities in the successive Plan schemes. This is clearly reflected in

18
the comparative statement of number of schemes and quantum of
outlays approved in the 8th, 9th and 10th Plan:
Plan Number of Schemes Total Outlay
(Rs. In crore)
8th Plan 10 401.00
9th Plan 12 507.50
10th Plan 21 1350.00
The Department had proposed 24 Plan schemes to the Planning
Commission for providing outlays. They wanted the number of schemes
to be reduced, as part of zero based budgeting, which proved difficult,
as there were implementation issues to be considered. This resulted in
the delay. Due to the consistent efforts made by the Department, it
was finally possible to get outlays approved for 20 schemes by
September/October 2002.
2. As mentioned in response to para 112, the approval process
through EFC/SFC/CCEA, etc., takes time and involves multiple
agencies, sometimes resulting in delays and sometimes due to
circumstances beyond the Department’s control. However, the whole
process was expedited, after the initial delay, through fortnightly
monitoring and reviews at the level of Secretary (P).
Efforts are now being made to fully make up the lost ground in
the first two years and the Department is confident of meeting the
physical targets in almost all its Plan schemes.
Expansion of Postal Network:
Recommendation (Para Nos. 122 & 123)
The Committee feel that with the extensive reach all over the
country, the DoP is very uniquely placed to reposition and re-invent
itself as a one-stop-shop for multiple-services and products including
postal services and products. This strength has to be optimally
leveraged by an innovative and imaginative mix of offerings depending
on the region and the local needs and demands, without diluting the
USO objectives of Postal Services.
and
The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Posts
has the largest Postal Network in the world with 155669 Post Offices

19
as on 31.03.2004. The different categories of Post Offices run by the
Department are-Extra Departmental Branch Offices (EDBOs), Extra
Departmental Sub-offices (EDSOs), Departmental Sub-Offices (DSOs),
Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras (PSSKs), Non-Recoverable Component
(NRC) Post Offices. Although the expansion of the Postal Network
was being undertaken by DoF through opening of Post Offices and
Panchayat Sanchar Sewa Kendras but under the Tenth Plan, Post Offices
are required to be opened only by redeployment of existing manpower
and relocation of existing Post Offices. The Committee learn that an
independent Committee has been set up by the Planning Commission
for review of Postal Network and further physical targets will be fixed
by the Department only after the receipt of the recommendations of
the independent Committee. The Committee further observe that there
are 80 justified proposals pending with the Department for opening
Post Offices comprising 50 proposals for DOs and 30 proposals for
DSOs. The Committee appreciate the constraints of the Department
with regard to cost benefit ratio of opening a Post Office but at the
same time the Department is also expected to discharge its
responsibilities regarding Universal Service obligation (USO) which only
ensures cost effective communication facility to the masses even in far
flung areas of the country. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to explore various options of expansion of Postal Network
including franchising the Postal Services through agents so that the
requirements of Postal Services at various places are met adequately
and effectively.
Action Taken by the Government
Efforts are being continuously made to leverage the reach of the
network to retail more services which are relevant to the needs of the
customers. To facilitate this purpose, HoCs have been delegated powers
to firm up retail packages. The range of retail services being offered
through the network can be seen from the list annexed to response to
para 118.
The Department has also requested Department of Information
Technology to include post office as a nodal point for setting up
Community Service Delivery Centres. Mid Term Appraisal of the 10th
Plan also emphasizes the need to use the post office to disseminate
health education, information and sale of basic health products like
ORS packets, condoms, medicine for burns and antiseptic creams in
rural areas.
The Department is already in the process of relocating, single/
double handed post offices located in urban areas which do not meet

20
distance norms, to other needy areas. Similarly, EDBOs located in close
proximity in norms rural areas and which, therefore, do not meet the
distance norms, are also being relocated to needy places. Last year
approximately 41 sub offices were relocated in this manner, which is
higher than the annual target given for opening sub offices under the
10th Plan in the first two years. As far as franchising is concerned, the
status has been clarified in response to para 111.
NRC Post Offices:
Recommendation (Para No. 124)
The Committee note that Non-Recoverable Component (NRC) Post
offices are opened at the behest of a sponsor, who is willing to meet
the gap between income and revenue from a Post Office that is opened
without complying with the income norm of the Department for
opening Post offices. This NRC scheme has, however, been withdrawn
with effect from 1.4.03 because of the sponsors turning out to be
defaulters in regard to payment of their dues. The Committee find
that as on 31.03.03, when the NRC scheme was withdrawn, there were
1453 post offices in the country of which 1218 were sponsored by the
Government/public sector, 234 were sponsored by the private sector
or individuals and 1 by another Central Government Department. The
total liability pending as on 31.03.03 was Rs. 32.94 crore. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend that immediate necessary steps should
be taken by the Department to recover these dues from the concerned
Departments/Institutions/Individuals on account of their liability in
NRC Post offices opened on their sponsorships.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department has already taken up the matter with the Inter
State Council (ISC) for its consideration. Before the matter is placed
before the council, the comments of the concerned State Governments
have to be mandatorily obtained. A D.O. letter has been sent at the
level of Secretary (P) to the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States.
Responses from some of the States are still awaited. As soon as all the
responses are received, the matter will be placed before the Inter State
Council.
Since 31/3/03, when the scheme was decided to be wound up,
Rs. 1.05 crore has been recovered, out of a total liability of Rs. 32.94
crore, due to the persistent efforts of the Circles. Some State
Governments have, however, refused to meet their commitments on
the grounds that this burden should be the sole responsibility of the
Department of Posts. Hence, a final decision can be taken now only
by the ISC.

21
NRC Post Offices:
Recommendation (Para No. 125)
The Committee further observe that in the NE circle, there are
103 Sub Post Offices and 298 Branch Post Offices which were opened
with the State as sponsor. The State governments are unable to meet
their liabilities which amounted to Rs. 8.13 crore as on 31.3.2003 due
to paucity of funds. The Committee further learn that keeping in view
the need for communication facilities in these remote areas, the
Department decided to provide support for them under Plan from the
NE component rather than closing them down. Accordingly , the
Department has made provisions for BE of Rs. 2.60 crore from Plan
Head for the year 2005-06 to maintain these offices. The Committee
appreciate the initiative taken by the Department to make provision
from Plan head to maintain the NRC Post Offices in the North East
Circle. They also feel that this step of the Department not to close
down 401 Post Offices in the NE circle and to maintain them will
provide great relief to the local inhabitants of that region.
Action Taken by the Government
To meet the recurring expenditure of 103 SOs and 298 BOs in the
NE Circle, the Department has made the proposal of Rs. 2.60 crore in
Annual Plan 2005-06. This proposal has been included in the EFC
proposal. Proposal for consideration of EFC has already been put up
for concurrence of competent authority.
Computerization of Post Offices:
Recommendation (Para No. 127)
The Committee feel that the DoP must approach its necessity to
computerize more from the view of a multi-service and product
provider rather than just Postal Services that would ensure the pace of
computerization and the optimal usage of IT Infrastructure.
Action Taken by the Government
The 10th Plan clearly spells out the fact that upgradation of the
physical network is not only to improve the efficiency of the service
but also to provide a platform for extending value added services
relevant to the needs of the people. Plan schemes approved in the
10th Plan include e-Post, e-Bill Post and New products and services,
including financial services. Additional features like Speednet, Track &

22
Trace and web-based customer handling are also initiatives for which
allocations were provided under Plan. The policy initiatives of the
10th Plan also spoke of the need to make post office into multi-
product/multi-service centres.
Keeping these aspects in mind, the Department has taken up a
number of retail financial and technology based services which cater
to the needs of the customers. Heads of Circles have been delegated
powers to finalise retail packages that are relevant to local needs. It
has been possible to introduce many of these schemes due to the
computerised facilities increasingly available in post offices. The
Department has also requested the Department of Information
Technology to consider post office as one of the nodal points for setting
up Rural Service Delivery Centres. A decision in this matter is awaited.
Meanwhile, the Department has taken up with Planning
Commission the possibility of computerising all the Departmental post
offices. A High Powered Committee has also been constituted to
monitor and advise the implementation of the computerisation
programme. Thus, every effort is being made to increase the pace of
computerisation in the Department and to optimise the use of this
infrastructure.
Computerisation & Networking of Mail Offices:
Recommendation (Para Nos. 128, 129 & 130)
The Committee note that during the Tenth Plan period target fixed
for computerisation of Head Record Offices is 48, setting up of
Computerised Record Sorting Centres (CRC) and Networking of CRC
is 150 and Track and Trace system for accountable articles is 4.
The Committee’s analysis, however, reveal serious shortfalls in the
area of computerisation and networking of Mail offices as the
Department could utilise only 0.82 crore against allocation of
Rs. 13.32 crore in 2002-03, Rs. 0.58 crore against allocation  of
Rs. 0.82 crore in 2003-04 and again only Rs. 1.37 (anticipated) against
allocation of Rs. 5.00 crore in the year 2004-05. The Department’s
performance in the year 2004-05 has been very dismal as no
achievements were made against the target of computerisation of
25 Computerised Registration Sorting Centres (CRC) and Track & Trace
System for accountable articles in 4 metros. The Committee note that
no systematic study was undertaken before initiating the
computerisation process and as a result a decision was to be taken
during mid-term appraisal to form a Core Group to recommend end-

23
to-end solution for management of mail in computerised environment
and integration/upgradation of software in use.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that it is sheer lack of
preparedness on the part of the Department which resulted in failure
in achievement of targets and thus necessitated mid-term revision of
these targets. The Committee while expressing their anguish over the
unsatisfactory performance of the Department, would recommend the
Department to expedite submission of the report of the Core Group,
analyse it and reformulate its policy and targets for computerisation
and Networking of mail offices at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The concern expressed by the Committee is noted. In this context,
it is clarified that no targets were approved for the CRCs in the first
two years of the Plan by the SFC when recommending the scheme in
2003-04. The SFC also desired that a study of the Computerisation of
Registration Centres taken up in the previous 5 year Plan should first
be done before computerisation is taken up in the 10th Plan. Hence,
in 2003-04, action was taken to computerise only HROs. Action was
also initiated to tender for the study, when it was decided at the time
of mid term evaluation of the Plan, to undertake a comprehensive
evaluation of the entire computerised system of handling mails,
including CRCs, the requirements for introducing track and trace for
registered articles, etc. It was also decided that since results of the
study would primarily impact only the software related technical issues,
the Department should go ahead with the computerisation programme
and undertake the necessary Upgradation, if any, after the evaluation
is completed.
Accordingly, 40 CRCs are proposed to be covered in the current
year, and funds to the extent of Rs. 0.60 crore allocated for this activity
has been given to the Circles for undertaking site preparation in
30 offices. Funds for the remaining offices and for purchase of hardware
are proposed to be sought in the RE. The Department hopes to cover
the remaining 35 CRCs in 2006-07 and thereby fulfil the revised target
of 75 offices.
Incidentally, the targets for computerisation of CRCs were reduced
from 100 to 75 not because of lack of preparedness but due to fall in
traffic. Only CRCs having 1500 plus articles were decided to be covered
under the computerisation programme. This necessitated a reduction
in the physical targets for CRCs by 25%.

24
Modernisation and Upgradation of VSAT System:
Recommendation (Para Nos. 131 & 132)
The Committee observe that a Satellite Network for transmission
of money orders between Post offices was established during the Ninth
Plan and an expenditure of Rs. 3 lakh was incurred for setting up of
one VSAT unit which included a Dish antenna, one indoor unit and
one modem for cabling a computer and peripherals like printer, UPS
etc. A money order transmitted through VSAT System gives a saving
of Rs. 10.12 per money order and currently 60,000 money orders per
day are transmitted through the system. The Committee also note that
the physical target of installation 150 VSATs was achieved in the Ninth
Plan period and provisions are made in the Tenth Plan only for meeting
the spill over liabilities. Out of the total liability of Rs. 3.067 crore, the
Department has already paid Rs. 2.709 crore.
and
The Committee appreciate that the Department achieved the target
of installation of 150 VSAT systems in the Ninth Plan period and the
system is running successfully though initially some software related
problems had emerged which were overcome subsequently. The
Committee feel that the VSAT system not only provides efficiency by
optimum utilisation of the available capacity in the barest minimum
time but also provide saving of Rs. 10.12 per money order. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should explore
the possibility of operating VSAT system at a larger scale covering
wider postal network and for this purpose, if required, more VSAT
units may be installed. The Committee would advise the Department
to get a study undertaken in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The existing VSAT system consists of a network of 150 VSAT/
Satellite Money Order (SMO) linked to 1429 Extended Satellite Money
Order (ESMO) stations. The above network of VSAT/ESMO stations
cover all the Post Offices including Branch Post Offices in the rural
areas in the country for the purpose of money order transmission.
Suggestions have already been called for from the Circles for
relocation/setting up of additional VSAT centres. Further, circles are
also adding new Extended Satellite Money Order (ESMO) Stations to
utilize the network optimally. In this way, efforts are already underway
to rationalise and expand the VSAT network based on actual need.

25
Decline in Mail Volume:
Recommendation (Para No. 133)
The Committee observe that the registered mail volume has gone
down from 222.4 million in 2002-03 to 213.6 million in 2003-04 thus
registering decline of 3.96% and similarly unregistered mail volume
has also gone down from 8871.6 million to 8421.6 million registering
decline of 5.07%. The Committee further note that the money order
traffic has also come down by 5.43% in quantity terms and by 20.52%
in value terms. The Committee express their concern over the decline
of Mail volumes as it leads to under-utilisation of resources towards
postal purposes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department should strengthen its postal mechanism, keep close
monitoring over processing and delivery of mails, expand the Track
and Tracing Mechanism so as to bring efficiency in postal services
which could attract more and more business.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department is seized of the concerns expressed by the
Committee about the decline in mail volumes and money order traffic.
It has taken a number of measures to increase the mail volumes. The
focus of the initiatives include the following:
1. Introduce a reliable channel for local mails and inter-metro
and inter district mails, so that they are delivered within
D+1 norms.
2. Set up a reliable machinery to handle greetings/invitations/
corporate mails.
3. Give greater attention to the handling of registered mails to
ensure timely processing and delivery.
4. Improved supervision and monitoring to ensure:
(a) That sorting offices start functioning from 6 a.m. to
ensure that overnight mails received up to 8 a.m. connect
same day delivery. So also the case of letter box
clearances done in the morning.
(b) That accountable articles have been brought back by
postmen only where delivery was unavoidable. Residual
mail to be specially monitored and reasons for non-
delivery to be cross verified.

26
(c) The rationalisation of mail offices is undertaken to ensure
network integration and optimal use of resources.
(d) That Emphasis is placed on computerisation and quality
optimisation as well as productivity.
(e) That complaints handling is prompt and responsive and
(f) That continuous posting of test letters is undertaken to
measure delivery efficiency and of live mail surveys are
conducted regularly to measure traffic and efficiency.
5. Marketing of traditional mail: It has been recognized that
besides premium products/services, traditional mail also
requires proper and sustained marketing efforts to make
public aware of all services/products being offered by the
Department and their special features which can cater to
varying needs of the customers.
6. Targets are now being assigned to Circles for traditional
mail products also. The objective is to try and increase mail
volumes by 20%.
7. A core group has been formed to study and recommend
end-to-end solutions for mail transmission in computerized
environment.
8. The need to increase mail volumes through the
implementation of the above measures has been taken up
with Circles repeatedly not only in letters addressed by
Secretary and Member (Operations & Marketing) but also
through meetings specially convened for this purpose.
In the case of money orders also, the following measures are being
taken to retain the existing market segment for this product and expand
it:
(i) To ensure speedy and efficient transmission of money order
to avoid the delay associated with manual transmission.
Efforts are being made to transmit all the money orders
(except local money orders) through VSAT Network. Almost
all the Post Offices including Branch Offices are either
directly/indirectly connected to VSAT station or Extended
Satellite Money Order Station (ESMO) for the purpose of
money order transmission. Further Postal Circles have also
been asked to increase the number of ESMO stations on
need/demand basis, to utilize the existing capacity optimally.

27
(ii) Increased monitoring of delivery of money orders has been
instituted. In this context, complaint prone areas have been
identified and focussed action is being taken to identify
their special problems and address them.
(iii) An analysis of complaints received relating to money orders
in 2004-05 has been carried out and communicated to Circles
for corrective action.
(iv) The problems faced in transmission of money orders through
VSAT has also been examined and discussed at Heads of
Circles conference to ensure corrective action by those
handling VSAT.
(v) A study of the time take for delivery of money orders all
over the country has been carried out during June 2005 to
validate the norms for payment of money orders. The results
of the study are in the process of being compiled so that
they can be analysed.
(vi) In October 2004, instructions for careful handling of money
order acknowledgements were issued and it resulted in a
reduction in the proportion of such complaints by 8% up to
March 2005.
Training:
Recommendation (Para No. 134)
The Committee recommend that the DoP must approach its
Training and HRD development programme with the firm resolve that
it will earn its recognition as a quality service provider to the Nation.
The Training Programme thus have to be oriented towards ensuring
quality at every stage of interaction with the public. They observe that
it has became imperative for the DoP to impart training to the existing
manpower to handle the new requirements in the wake of induction
of technologies and launching of new value added services. The
Department has, therefore, kept the training in the thrust area with
the allocation of Rs. 61.30 crore in the Tenth Plan. The Committee
note that induction training is given at entry level to all the staff and
offices with a view to familiarising them with the work of the
Department and to enable them to handle the job assigned while in-
service training is imparted to staff and officers for upgradaing their
existing skills/knowledge to handle greater responsibility as well as to
meet the emerging requirements of the organisation. In addition to
these regular training courses, business development programmes are

28
also organised alongwith computer training. Regular Training Courses
are conducted for Group ‘A’ & ‘B’ officers at the Postal Staff College
India, Ghaziabad and for Postal/Sorting Assistants, Supervisory and
Inspectorial Staff at Postal training Centres located in Saharanpur,
Mysore, Vadodara, Darbhanga, Madurai and Guwahati.
Action Taken by Government
In continuance of the initiatives taken in the first three years, during
the next two years also emphasis would be on improving the quality
of training in various fields, as indicated below:
• It is planned to conduct specialized courses on Marketing
Concepts & Practices at PSCI for senior and middle level
officers. For other officers and staff involved in marketing
field special focus is being given at the Postal Training
Centres to strengthen the marketing network. Further,
Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu & West Bengal Circles have been identified to
tie-up with the external training Institutes of repute to
organize courses locally on Marketing Skills and Customer
Care.
•T o familiarize the officers of Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ level with
the legal aspects, it is proposed to organize six courses to
give exposure to 120 officers on Legal Aspects at the
National Law School Bangalore during the Annual Plan
2005-06.
•W ith a view to familiarizing the middle level officers on
Financial Management Concepts, 40 officers are being trained
at National Institute of Financial Management, Faridabad.
• It is proposed to train 40,000 Gramin Dak Sevak Mail
Deliverers during the next two years on the lines of the
training provided to Postmen previously.
• Review of training through internal evaluation is a
continuous process to assess and improve the quality of
training. The process to carry out “Training Need Analysis
(TNA) and Evaluation of Training in Department of Posts”
through some outside organization has also been initiated.
Training
Recommendation (Para No. 135)
The Committee are happy to note that keeping in view the need
to meet the rising customer aspirations and the demand of competing

29
in a highly competitive and commercial environment, the Department
has given thrust during Tenth Five Year Plan to provide qualitative
training covering the areas of customer care, marketing management,
leadership qualities and change management etc. and also the Customer
Care courses of one week duration are offered covering the areas of
customer importance, customer identification, customer delight,
handling different customers and citizens charter.
Action Taken by Government
The initiative to provide training in areas like customer care,
marketing management, leadership qualities, change management, etc.,
are proposed to be continued through specialised courses in external
Training Institutes within the organisation as well as external institutes
of repute like ASCI, Hyderabad, IIMs Lucknow and Indore, etc.
Speed Post
Recommendation (Para No. 140)
The Committee are happy to note that the share of speed post in
express mail market has been constantly increasing from Rs. 77.95
crore in 1997-98 to Rs. 514.29 crore in 2004-05. While appreciating the
efforts made by the Department in this regard, the Committee feel
that there is still a huge potential and ample scope for expansion of
speed post in the express market. The Committee, therefore, feel that
with the computerization of Postal Network and indication of new
Technology the Department should have a larger share of the express
market.
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Standing Committee relating to
expansion of Speed Post network and increasing its market share in
the highly potential express market have been noted and action is
being taken, taken into account these directions. Upgradation of Speed
Post centers into National Speed Post centers is being taken up based
on their volume of business, for which specific criteria have been
specified. 7 States Speed Post centers have been upgraded to National
Speed Post Centres during 2004-05. The network of State Speed Post
Centres has also been increased to 953, covering all important towns/
cities. The Department is also increasing the availability of Track &
Trace facilities, and computerization of booking and delivery offices,
to provide better service to Speed Post Customers.

30
In order to focus on the need to expand the market for Speed
Post articles, annual targets are given to Circles to generate revenues
from this product. In 2004-05, the revenues generated from Speed Post
was approximately Rs. 354.16 crore, while the target for 2005-06 is
Rs. 566.29 crore.
Through these initiatives, efforts are being made to increase the
Department’s share in the express market. Efforts will also be made to
expedite the computerisation of the postal network and to induct new
technology to support the Department’s initiatives to have a larger
share in the Express Market.
New Initiatives by the Department
Recommendation (Para Nos. 141 & 142)
The Committee observe that keeping in view the emerging needs
of the customers, a number of new initiatives is being undertaken by
the Department by introducing various new services targeted to specific
groups such as National Bill Mail services for Corporate Sector, Senior
Citizen Savings Scheme for senior citizens, tie up with UTI mutual
funds, Marketing of non-life products of Oriental Insurance,
International Money Order, Logistics Post, Direct Mail, e-Commerce,
new speed post services i.e. City Express, Post Express, Premium Speed
Post etc. In addition, the Department is also proposing to open
150 Finance Marts, which will be a one point destination for availing
services such as banking, Insurance, mutual funds, securities and money
transfers.
and
The Committee are happy to note that the Department is trying to
sustain itself through venturing into the financial services by
introducing new service and products and by opening Financial Marts.
The Committee, however, observe that differentiation of the same
product under different names may create a little confusion to the
targeted customers and as such they feel that the Department should
categorise their services and products on rational basis so that the
market goodwill of the Department of Post could be encashed
effectively. The Committee would also like to put in a word of caution
that these new financial services being new areas of operation of the
Department should be initiated with utmost care and alertness.

31
Action Taken by Government
The concerns expressed by the Committee are well taken, and care
will be taken in incorporate these directions in the Plan formulated to
implement the scheme to set up Postal Finance Marts. It is clarified
that the Postal Finance Mart is a concept that seeks to make available
all financial/banking services offered by the Department under one
roof, in select outlets, in an ergonomically enhanced environment with
computerized facilities and AMFI trained personnel, who can advice
the customers on the various products which can suit their needs. It
is hope that these enhanced facilities will help the Department to
leverage its large customer base in Savings Bank to cross sell other
financial products and thereby generate more revenues.
Advertising & Publicity:
Recommendation (Para No. 147)
The Committee realize that the DoP enjoys a very familiar bond
and recognition of the common man all over the country. This goodwill
and the association has to be successfully branded and leveraged for
the continuing growth of the organization for its close association of
reliable service by the people of India. The Committee recommend
that a strategic advertising campaign be planned in this direction.
Action Taken by Government
The suggestions of the Committee has been accepted and a strategic
advertising campaign has already been planned for implementation
during the Plan period.
Advertising & Publicity:
Recommendation (Para No. 148)
The Committee note that under the head “Advertising & Publicity”
there has been a financial allocation of Rs. 4.11 crore in 2003-04 and
Rs. 6.29 crore in 2004-05. A sum of Rs. 7.22 crore has however been
earmarked in BE of the year 2005-06. The Committee note that the
Department had initially projected their requirement of funds to the
tune of Rs. 4 to 5 crore for the media plan but the actual allocation
was restricted to substantially lower level and therefore the allocations
happened to be very less in terms of the other competitors who are
coming up with high profile advertisement in respect of their services/
products in the market. While appreciating the fact that the small

32
advertisement of the Department with low cost do not bring the desired
impact on the targeted customers, the Committee strongly recommend
the Department to ensure sufficient allocation of funds under this head
for undertaking vigorous advertising campaign of their various service/
products in electronic as well as print media to expand its market
base.
Action Taken by Government
The PLI Directorate has taken steps to provide substantial allocation
of fund for advertisement and publicity on PLI and RPLI and a
strategic advertising campaign has been planned for the year
2005-2006.
In so far as postal products are concerned, Rs. 4.50 crore has been
allocated for promotion at the BE stage in 2005-06. The allocation in
the last financial year was only Rs. 2 crore. Therefore, the allocation
in this financial year is higher, as per the recommendations of Standing
Committee, and efforts are underway to ensure the full utilization of
these funds in the financial year.
Budgetary allocations for advertising and publicity are made
keeping in mind the overall allocation approved by Planning
Commission for the Department and the inter-se priority accorded by
the Planning Commission to this activity, since the Department is
required to sign an Memorandum of Understanding with them once
the scheme-wise outlays are finalized. The need for greater allocations
to be given to promotional activity and its linkage with the objective
of generating more revenues and creating greater awareness among
the customers has been taken up with the Planning Commission at
the Quarterly Plan Review meeting, and they have agreed to give the
matter favourable consideration.

33
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Proposals and Thrust Areas
Recommendation (Para No. 110)
The Committee find that the budgetary allocation proposed by the
Department of Posts under the Demand no. 14 for the year 2005-06 is
Rs. 6598.05 crore, which comprises of expenditure of Rs. 6279.86 crore
under revenue section and Rs. 218.19 crore under capital section. The
analysis of the gross expenditure of the Department in the past years
reveal the constant increase from Rs. 5476.15 crore in 2002-03 to
Rs. 5736.06 crore in 2003-04 and again from Rs. 6036.59 crore in
2004-05 to BE of Rs. 6274.59 crore in 2005-06. Compared to the previous
year of 2004-05, the gross expenditure at BE stage for 2005-06 is higher
by Rs. 238 crore. The various factors, as stated by the Department,
being responsible for increase are enhanced expenditures on account
of salaries, pension charges, office expenses and office consumable,
supplies and materials, maintenance etc. The Committee also note the
submission of the representative of the Department during the evidence
that the revenue of the Department has increased by 30 per cent but
the expenditure has gone up by 17 per cent, which according to the
Department is a very positive feature. The Department has also
expressed their inability to contain the increasing trend of expenditure
because 90 per cent of the expenditure pertain to the fixed cost like
salaries, where they did not have much of the opportunity to reduce
it and in other areas any effort to squeeze it further will affect the
quality of the services being provided by the Department. While the
Committee do appreciate the constraints being faced by the Department
in controlling the gross expenditure under revenue section for various
compelling reasons, it is still expected that the Department will give
serious consideration to the issue of growing tend of expenditure over
the years and devise some mechanism to monitor the expenditure
being incurred under different heads so as to have effective control
over the total expenditure to the extent possible. The Committee would
also like to caution the Department not to be misled by the comparison
of growth of revenue with the rise of expenditure as both these areas
are to be analysed independently with a view to achieving efficiency
on both the counts. The Committee recommend that efforts should be

34
made to control the overall expenditure on one side and ways and
means should also be explored to increase the revenue of the
Department on the other side.
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee’s concern about the need to devise some mechanism
to monitor the expenditure being incurred under different heads, so as
to have effective control over total expenditure, to the extent possible,
and not to be mislead by comparisons of growth of revenue with rise
of expenditure, (as these have to be analysed independently to achieve
efficiency on both counts), is noted.
The level of flexibility available to the Department to control
expenditure is very limited, given the fact that 90% of the working
expenses are establishment related, and they have an unavoidable
annual increase of 4.5% to 5.8% due to payment of increments, DA (to
pensioners also), etc. Further, the cost on maintenance of technology
inducted into the system has also increased; yet every effort is made
to control expenditure by making realistic budgetary projections and
allocation of funds under various heads of accounts. Expenditure
incurred by Circles is also being monitored on monthly basis at the
level of Secretary (P), and wherever any excess trend in expenditure
is noted, the concerned Circle is alerted.
The expenses cover ratio of each Circle is also being monitored at
the Circle and Directorate levels. Circles, in turn, identify Head Post
Offices that are incurring more expenditure, and initiate action to
streamline their operations.
The Department currently follows the Government accounting
system where activity wise details of revenue and expenditure are not
available. Efforts are underway to have a more commercial system of
accounting so that the administration has more effective management
inputs to streamline its expenditure without affecting the quality of
service.
Revenue Receipt:
Recommendation (Para No. 117)
The Committee find that the revenue receipts of the Department
was Rs. 4256.93 crore in the year 2003-04 which was projected at RE
stage in the year 2004-05 to be Rs. 4455.00 crore. For the year
2005-06, revenue receipt of the Department has been projected (BE) at
Rs. 4713.70 crore, which is 5.81 per cent more than the RE of the
previous year. The Committee however observe that though

35
Rs. 4455.00 crore was estimated for revenue receipts at RE stage in
2004-05, yet the actuals upto January 2005 was stated to be only
Rs. 2091.94 crore which was less than half of the projected RE. The
Committee thus observe that the Department is far behind the target
of achieving the revenue receipts as projected in RE 2004-05 which
clearly indicate that either unrealistic projections were made in this
regard or the Department could not make concerted efforts to actualise
the accruals within the financial year. While expressing their desire to
know the precise reasons for far less realization of revenue receipts
than the projected level, the Committee would advise the Department
to closely monitor the revenue receipts on monthly basis in order to
ensure achievement of targets fixed at the BE stage for the financial
year.
Action Taken by the Government
The revenue targets are projected keeping in mind the trend of
revenue receipts in the past years and the anticipated rate of growth
in receipts during the current year. During the year 2004-05 the actual
revenue realised up to Jan. 2005 was Rs. 2091.94 crores against the
projected Revised Estimates of Rs. 4455.00 crores. This was on the
lower side, not because of unrealistic projections but because these
figures do not include revenues from Savings Bank, Savings Certificates
which constitute approximately 39%-40% of the total revenues.
Reimbursement for Savings Bank/Savings Certificates is given on the
number of live accounts/certificates as on 31st March of the given
year. Hence, this revenue is adjusted only after the financial year is
over, i.e., by May/June.
Therefore, amount of Rs. 1861.00 crores, which constitutes 41.77%
of the total amount of the Revised Estimates 2004-05, was projected as
revenue for the year, but the actuals projected up to January 2005, did
not include any part of the reimbursement due from Savings Bank/
Savings Certificates. Up to March, 2005 supplementary First Batch
figures, the revenue earned is seen to be 96.35% of target projected in
Revised Estimate 2004-05, and is likely to be further revised. In years
2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 too, the Department has achieved the
target to the tune of 98.52%, 101.20%, 97.78% of the targets fixed for
Revised Estimate.
The revenue receipts of the Department are being monitored on a
monthly basis against proportionate targets set Circle-wise/month-wise.
The monitoring is done at the highest level by Secretary (Posts) and
any shortfall in achieving the targets is taken up with the head of
Circle concerned, so that immediate corrective action is taken to make
up the shortfall.

36
Revenue Deficit:
Recommendation (Para No. 119)
The Committee’s analysis reveal that out of 43 services provided
by the Department, only eleven services can recover full cost and
leave some profit margin, whereas 24 services are running in deficit as
their cost of operation is more than the average revenue realised. The
total subsidy during 2003-04 amounted to Rs. 1204.03 crore which range
from 7.09 per cent amounting to Rs. 3.92 crore in respect of ‘book
packets and sample packets’ to 95.28 per cent amounting to Rs. 46.60
crore in respect of ‘Registered Newspaper Single’. Further, the
Committee observe that the revenue deficit of the Department has
been Rs. 1411.51 crore, Rs. 1364.40 crore, Rs. 1375.22 crore and
Rs. 1374.71 crore (RE) during the years 2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04 and
2004-05 respectively. However, the actual revenue deficit up to January
2005 for the year 2004-05 has been Rs. 2723.53 crore which is much
higher than the BE projection of Rs. 1374.71 crore. Moreover, the
Department has again projected revenue deficit of Rs. 1449.64 crore at
BE stage for the year 2005-06. The Committee observe that the
Department of Post has not been able to minimize the revenue deficit
despite the efforts stated to have been made by them. While the
Committee do appreciate the universal service obligation of the
Department to provide efficient and accessible postal services in all
corners of the country, the present day economic scenario, however,
require each and every operating unit to be self-sufficient and therefore,
the Department of Post should also devise ways and means to make
them commercially viable entity in the long run keeping their national
obligation intact.
Action Taken by the Government
While appreciating the concern of the Committee about the need
to make serious efforts to reduce the revenue deficit and to make each
operating unit financially self-sufficient, the following facts are
submitted for consideration:
1. The Department has been able to minimise its deficit over
the last few years, as may be seen from the figures of the
last 5 years, when the deficit has been steadily reducing.
(Rs. in crore)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
(Estimates)
1234 5 6
Revenue 3357.53 3783.09 4111.75 4360.84 4582.18 4824.95
    (provisional)

37
1234 5 6
Working 4907.29 5194.60 5476.15 5736.06 5964.05 6274.59
Expenses     (Provisional)
Deficit 1549.76 1411.51 1364.40 1375.22 1381.87 1449.64
   (Provisional)
In 2004-05, despite the additional burden of approximately
Rs. 290 crore due to merger of 50% of DA with the basic
pay, the overall deficit increased only to the extent of
Rs. 1381.87 crore vis-a-vis Rs. 1375.22 crore in the previous
year. Thus the Department has been able to steadily bring
down its deficit despite the fact that 90% of the working
expenses relate to establishment costs.
2. While it is ideally desirable that every operating unit should
be financially self-sufficient, this directive can be made
applicable only in the case of urban post offices which are
required to be financially self-sufficient from inception and
earn 5% over costs after the first year. The entire rural
network is being deliberately subsidised to the extent of
66
2/3% in normal rural areas and 85% in hilly, tribal,
inaccessible and desert areas. Post offices are opened based
on an assessment of their potential income. However, the
fact is that over 50% of single and double handed post
offices in urban areas are incurring losses, and a majority
of the rural post offices are incurring more than permissible
levels of losses. In the urban areas, competition from private
service providers has resulted in a reduction in mail volumes
while telephones have impacted even the previously
available mail volumes in rural areas.
3. The tariff for some of the postal articles like postcards,
registered newspapers, printed books, etc., are far lower than
the cost involved in processing and delivering them. Some
of these rates have not been changed for years despite the
costs of manpower, transmission, etc., having increased in
the interim.
4. Efforts are being made to improve the viability of post
offices (a) by redeploying manpower from existing post
offices to needy ones (b) by relocating post offices that do
not fulfill the distance norm to needy areas to optimise
resources (c) by identifying new business opportunities to
generate revenues. However, the postal network in India is

38
the largest in the world, with 1,55,669 post offices and 7386
PSSKs. 89% of the post offices are in the rural areas,
requiring subsidy.
5. With even the smaller post offices in urban areas needing
budgetary support, the support that is required to sustain
the USO, as well as the subsidy given for various products
like registered newspapers, printed books, etc., (which are
not really a part of this Department’s USO), is very high.
It is difficult to cross-subsidise this amount when the
Department is not given the agreed remuneration for its
Savings Bank operations, its exclusive privilege over letters
is not being enforced, the Department does not have
adequate commercial flexibility to compete for the creamy
layers of the business, and some of the agency services are
expected to be provided without any cost plus element.
These issues are now being examined and efforts are on to
identify more cost effective means of fulfilling the
Department’s USO. In brief, it would be virtually impossible
to make the post offices self-sufficient, especially in rural
areas, given the existing circumstances, lines of business as
well as the business opportunities currently available in rural
areas.
Budgetary Allocations for North-East Region:
Recommendation (Para No. 121)
The Committee observe that the Department of Posts was required
to utilize Rs. 135 crore in five years period of Tenth Plan in the North
Eastern Region. However, the total allocation in the first three years of
the Plan has been Rs. 33.94 crore, while only a meagre amount of
Rs. 6.94 crore has been spent in the first two years thus leaving
approximately Rs. 128 crore to be spent in the last three years of the
Plan. If the amount of Rs. 15.23 crore allocated at BE stage for
2005-06 is taken into account, the amount left to be spent in the last
year of the Plan i.e. 2006-07 would be approximately Rs. 101 crore. It
is beyond comprehension as to how the Department will be able to
spend such a huge amount of Rs. 101 crore in a single year, when
they could not even utilize the small annual allocation in the previous
years. It is ironical that on one side there is substantial allocation for
the North Eastern Region in the Tenth Plan and on the other side,
admittedly there are no separate plan activities specifically earmarked
for the North East. While expressing their dissatisfaction over the

39
passive role of the Department in this regard, the Committee
recommend that the Department of Posts should formulate, in a time
bound manner, the special schemes for the North East in consultation
with the Department of North Eastern Region (DONER), Planning
Commission and the State Authorities etc., keeping in view the peculiar
geographical terrains of the regions and also giving due regard to the
fact that 10% of total Plan allocation is earmarked for the North East
Regions only because of these specific reasons.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department is required to utilize 10% of its Plan outlay in the
NE. It has not been possible for the Department to comply with this
mandate for a number of reasons:
1. The main requirements in the NE are for basic postal facilities
and connectivity. There is restriction in providing these facilities due
to the following factors (a) the existing post offices/PSSKs are incurring
more than permissible levels of loss ( i.e., more than 85% of costs as
subsidy). Hence, it is difficult to carve out new post offices from them,
which fulfil income norms; (b) Even for post offices opened in the
10th Plan, no Plan support is allowed for recurring costs, which
accounts for over 96% of the cost of the post office. Hence, the
Department is incurring more expenditure under non-Plan to sustain
postal facilities in the NE; (c) Most of the offices, in the category
identified as per parameters fixed for computerization and technology
induction have already been covered. Hence, there is limited scope for
further investments in terms of modernization and computerization
under the existing parameters; (d) The funds provided for construction
activities are limited, and Planning Commission has further stipulated
a condition that no new civil works should be started by the
Department. Hence, new works are being taken up only where they
are unavoidable; (e) Due to the economy orders imposed by Ministry
of Finance, no investment has been possible since 2004-05 to purchase
mail vans for the NE, which is crucial to ensure regular mail processing
in areas where transport facilities are not satisfactory.
Recognising the need for special schemes for NE, the Department
has suggested some special schemes for the area in the Mid Term
appraisal which include the following:
1. Support for NRC post offices opened in Gram Panchayat
villages which are fulfilling 2 norms i.e.  distance &
population.

40
2. Plan support for sustaining 298 branch Offices and
104 Departmental post offices opened on NRC basis for
recovering the arrears due from the North Eastern region.
3. Computerize all double handed post offices in North East
(250 offices), as a special case to improve infrastructure in
that region.
4. Providing mail vans to stabilize mail and cash transmissions
(62 mail vans).
5. Leasing/purchasing of a plane for providing better
connectivity in North East to overcome the problem of
connectivity for all services, including Speed Post.
6. Provision of e-post facilities in 392 post offices.
Approval of Planning Commission is yet to be received for these
projects. However, they have been/are proposed to be posed to
Planning Commission progressively during BE 2005-06 onwards. The
Department has also taken up with DONER the need to relax the
general restrictions placed on certain Plan schemes in regard to NE.
They in turn have taken the matter up with the Planning Commission.
However, despite all these efforts, it is unlikely that the Department
will be able to identify schemes in the NE that can match 10% of its
enhanced total outlay for the following reasons:
1. The investment requirements in the postal sector are
normally low, except for computerization and induction of
technology, and the scope for these activities in the NE are
limited.
2. There are no other capital intensive schemes required in the
NE except construction of post offices, etc., for which there
is a limitation on the levels of investment possible. So this
activity cannot absorb funds to the extent necessary to match
10% of the large outlay provided to modernize and
computerize the vast network in the rest of the country .
3. These facts were already apprised to DONER, CoS, etc.,
and the latter have requested DONER to finalise an
acceptable level of provisioning for such Departments,
including Department of Posts, in consultation with them.
This is yet to be done.

41
It is reiterated that the ‘lower than required’ investment in the NE
is not for want of efforts on the part of the Department, as almost all
Plan activities are being implemented there (annexure*) but the
requirement of funds and/or the capacity to absorb funds in this area
in the postal sector under the existing schemes is low. The Department
is also incurring more than permissible losses under non-Plan only to
sustain the access to postal services in the NE. It will continue to
identify new areas for Plan investment as part of the efforts to enhance
utilization of Plan funds in the NE region.
DETAILS OF PLAN SCHEMES AND STATUS OF
IMPLEMENTATION IN NORTH EAST
Plan Scheme/Activity Implemented or Not
12
Expansion of Postal Network Yes
Computerisation of Post Offices, Postal Yes
Accounts Offices and Administrative Offices
(including software development and refinement)
Computerisation & networking of Mail Offices Yes
Upgradation of Customer Care Centres Yes
Upgradation of VAST system Only spill over expenditure on
Centrally implemented scheme of the
9th Plan.
Modernisation/Upgradation of Yes
operative/working systems (improving
ergonomics)
Automatic Mail Processing Centres Investment in proposed AMPC,
Kolkata to benefit North Eastern
Region also
Mechanisation/Modernisation of mail Yes
movement
Up gradation/Promotion of Premium products Yes
Up gradation/Promotion of Philately Yes
Training Yes
Construction of Buildings Yes

42
12
Modernisation of Circle Stamp Depots Yes
Computerisation of International Mail Investment in Air Mail Centre/Foreign
Processing Post Kolkata serves NER also.
National Data Centre The scheme proposed to be
implemented Centrally Investment in
NIC, Delhi. Impact throughout the
country, including NER.
Research & Development/Studies/Surveys Allocation g iven on basis of proposals
received and approved from any
Circle, including NE.
Establishment of Express Parcel Post Centres To be covered in Phase II.
e-Post Funds given for AMC and software
e-Bill Post modification. Impact throughout the
country, including NER.
New products and services including Yes
development of Financial Products
and Services
Improvement in quality of services Yes
Computerization of Post Offices
Recommendation (Para No. 126)
The Committee observe that the total approved outlay for Tenth
Plan for computerization was Rs. 836.27 crore. The proposal made by
the Department was for Rs. 1193.27 crore for the first three years of
the Plan, but the Planning Commission approved only Rs. 488.28 crore.
The Committee, however, note that the Department have miserably
failed to achieve the target as the actual expenditure by the Department
has been only Rs. 8.38 crore in 2002-03, Rs. 0.48 crore in 2003-04. The
Committee are surprised to note that admittedly no external assessment
or study has been undertaken so far on the feasibility of the
computerisation process of the Post Offices in such a large scale. The
Committee learn that the Department had the target to computerize
all head Post Offices, 5575 large Sub-Post Offices, all 22 Postal Accounts
Offices and 205 important Administrative Offices during the Tenth
Plan and the Department intended to computerize the remaining Post

43
Offices in the subsequent Plans. The Committee observe that the
Computerization and networking of Post Offices will bring efficiency
in providing various services to the public which in turn will fetch
more customers to the Postal units resulting in higher revenue
generation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should take all necessary steps to achieve the targets fixed for the
Tenth Plan and also for early computerisation of the remaining Post
Offices along with interconnecting them through National Network.
Action Taken by the Government
The computerization initiatives taken up in the 8th and 9th Plans
focused on different processes rather than on computerizing and
networking post offices. Based on the benefits that were experienced
from these initiatives, it was realized that they can be further optimised
if the entire post office can be computerized and networked. Prior to
formulating the proposals for the 10th Plan, the Planning Commission
had constituted a Working Group on Postal Sector in April 2001
comprising representatives from Department of Posts, IIT, IIM, Planning
Commission, Telecom, NIRD, Ministry of Railways, Department of
Information Technology etc. They studied the computerization initiatives
carried up to the year 2001 and recommended that the process of
computerization should be continued in the Department, and all the
Head Post Offices and important Departmental Sub-Post Offices should
be covered during the Tenth Plan. The Working Group also suggested
to introduce new services/products for generating additional resources
for the Department. With the computerization efforts made so far, the
Department has been able to introduce value added services such as
e-Post, e-Bill Post, Speed Post Track and Trace and an online customer
grievances redressal system.
The Department has the target to computerize all 845 Head Post
Offices, 6861 large Sub-Post Offices, all 22 Postal Accounts Offices and
205 Administrative Offices during the Tenth Plan. The Department
took up the total computerization and networking of 845 Head Post
Offices and 1200 Sub-Post Offices in 2004-05. By obtaining special
permission from the Ministry of Finance, the Department has already
placed orders for PCs and other hardware to computerize 2860 more
sub-Post Offices as on 31.3.2005. The Department will computerize the
remaining large sub-post offices numbering 5661, as targeted in the
10th Plan, during the remaining period of Tenth Plan. The Department
is also working towards networking of post offices by setting up a
National Data Centre in NIC, which is scheduled to be completed
during the 10th Plan period.

44
Training
Recommendation (Para No. 136)
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that actual
utilisation of funds for training has been constantly much lower than
the allocations at BE/RE stage at least in the first three years of Tenth
Plan and that too when the Department itself has kept the training in
the thrust area in Tenth Plan with allocation of Rs. 61.30 crore. The
Committee’s analysis further reveal that actual expenditure of Rs. 2.37
crore and Rs. 7.34 crore in the year 2002-03, 2003-04, RE of Rs. 8.00
crore for the year 2004-05 and BE of Rs. 8.00 for the year 2005-06
taken together comes to Rs. 25.71 crore for the first four years of the
Plan and thus the Department will be left with huge amount of
Rs. 35.59 for the last one year of the Tenth Plan. The Committee also
observe that due to procedural delays, the building project for PTC,
Guwahati and augmentation of hostel facility at PTC Mysore and
Saharanpur have not been completed.
Action Taken by the Government
It is a fact that there was shortfall in utilization of the funds
during last three years due to the following reasons:
• The amount actually required for training postmen and GDS
BPMs was found to be lesser than what was projected. Only
Rs. 1.44 crore was utilized against the projection of Rs. 3.17
crore.
• Due to reduction in prices of computer hardware and due
to some WCTCs incurring lesser expenditure for site
preparation, etc., the expenditure was limited to Rs. 2.38
crore as against the projected amount of Rs. 3.24 crore.
• Finalisation of Building Projects is a time consuming process
involving obtaining approvals of competent authority at
every stage namely (i) For the Schedule of Accommodation
(ii) Preliminary Drawings/Preliminary Estimates
(iii) Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction etc.
Schedule of Accommodation in respect of building projects
of PTC Guwahati, Mysore, and Saharanpur have already
been approved. The process for construction of hostel at
PTC Vadodara has reached the stage of calling for NIT.
Efforts are being taken to complete the pre-construction
formalities as early as possible to ensure full utilization of
the funds.

45
• During 10th Five Year Plan thrust has been given to training
near the workplace under Distance Learning method, which
is cost effective and time saving. As the training is held at
these nodal points, expenditure under Travel Expenses has
been considerably lesser than previously estimated. Same is
the case in respect of computer training being held at
Workplace Computer Training Centres.
• Incorrect booking of Plan expenditure under non-Plan heads
of account also contribute to the Plan funds appearing to
be under utilized, even after they have been spent.
• It is clarified that although there is lesser utilization of funds
than projected, the physical targets have been exceeded in
respect of each Plan Training Activity fixed during the first
three years of the 10th Five Year Plan.
Training
Recommendation (Para No. 137)
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should
analyse seriously all the causes responsible for the delay in the projects,
constant under-utilisation of allocations in previous years, uneven
annual allocations in the Plan period and other related factors and
thereafter devise a well formulated programme not only to complete
the pending projects but also to augment the facilities/courses available
in different Training Centres so that the Department could, with well
trained personnel, make itself as a strong service organisation to the
fullest satisfaction of the customers particularly when new services or
products are being introduced by the Department in the market. The
thrust assigned in the Tenth Plan for training bestows greater
responsibility on the Department to discharge its obligation especially
when surplus fund on this count is already available. The Committee
trust that the Department will take immediate positive steps in this
regard and keep the Committee apprised of the progress made.
Action Taken by the Government
As already indicated in the replies to Para Nos. 132 to 134, steps
are being taken to optimally utilize funds (a) by reviewing the position
periodically by ensuring that the physical targets are met by providing
funds for new emerging areas of training. For example, training of
GDS Delivery agents was taken up on the lines of the training given
to postmen based on the requirements projected by HOCs is in

46
June 2003, even though this was not part of the original targets fixed
for this scheme; (b) a few Circles were also visited by the officers of
Training Division of Directorate to address the issue of wrong booking
which has resulted in improving the Plan level of booking of Plan
expenditure; (c) with a view to utilize the funds for procurement of
computer hardware for PTCs within the currency of the DGS&D Rate
Contract, advance purchase order was placed for Rs. 0.67 crore with
special permission from Ministry of Finance on 31-03-2005 for incurring
the expenditure during the year 2005-06. Building projects for PTC
Guwahati and for augmentation of hostel facilities at PTC Saharanpur,
Mysore and Vododara are also being pursued vigorously to start the
construction as early as possible and to ensure full utilization of
allocated funds.
National Data Centre
Recommendation (Para Nos. 138 & 139)
The Committee observe that the various activities of the Department
such as public grievances, speed post, track and trace, VSAT money
order transmission and financial service are proposed to be networked
in the central data base which would be accessible to all postal units
facilitating effective access to information and data management. The
National Data Centre which is proposed to be located in the NIC
headquarter at C.G.O. Complex, New Delhi with the disaster recovery
system at NIC Hyderabad, will carry out all the activities for creating
the centralised data base. The Department is also considering providing
online services to customers in the areas such as Track and Trace of
speed post articles, lodging of public grievances etc.
and
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Department
to establish the National Data Centre with the laudable objective of
networking of various activities of the Department in the Central Data
Base. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that no progress
has been made in this matter, as is evident from nil utilization of
budgetary allocation from the year 2002-03 onwards on this project,
simply because the scheme had not got the administrative approval of
the competent authority. The Committee expresses their dissatisfaction
over the apathetic attitude of the Department on account of which the
administrative processes could not be completed within a reasonable
time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
complete all the formalities at a faster pace at least now and complete
the project of setting up of National Data Centre at the earliest in

47
order to facilitate the smooth and effective monitoring of various
activities of the Department as well as fulfil the aspirations of the
customers to have quick and accurate access to the requisite
information. The Committee would also like to advise the Department
to formulate a well-defined programme to provide the facility of online
services to the customers in various areas at the earliest.
Action Taken by the Government
The proposal for setting up the National Data Centre involved the
resolution of a number of technical issues since the project involves
networking of all the initiatives taken till date for computerizing various
postal operations, including financial and banking services. Given the
level of technology involved, advice/opinion of Experts/External
Agencies were required to be obtained. Action was also required to be
taken to provide back up arrangements for the data to be stored in
the data center. These consultations and the decision on the architecture
and technology to support the NDC, has taken time.
The proposal for seeking approval of Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) has been prepared and a final view is likely to be
taken soon. Once the National Data Centre becomes operational this
would provide information for an efficient management information
system to support decision making, and improve the quality of services
offered through Post Office Savings Bank, PLI,  Money Order, Speed
Post Services etc.
New Initiatives by the Department
Recommendation (Para No. 143)
The Committee are happy to note that the Finance Marts, opened
in Tamil Nadu on trial basis are doing quite well and PMO has also
identified the concept of Finance Marts as the thrust areas of the
Department.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to implement this Plan activity and utilize the Plan funds
allocated for it in BE 2005-06, the Department has sought the
concurrence of the Planning Commission, which is awaited. The target
is to set up 150 Postal Finance Marts during the current year.
New Initiatives by the Department
Recommendation (Para No. 144)
However, the Department is selecting second level cities for
identification of 150 locations, which according to them have enormous

48
scope having less competition. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that extra care is needed in identifying the locations, as the success of
Finance Marts would depend on the selection of right location. In this
connection, the Committee desire that the Department should explore
the possibilities of opening up Finance Marts in the precincts of the
Community Information Centres (CICs) established by the Department
of Information Technology (DIT) in consultation with them. The
Committee also advise the Department to examine the feasibility of
expanding the network of Finance Mart Network at maximum locations
in subsequent stages.
Action Taken by the Government
The suggestions of the Committee will be taken into account when
formulating the Plan for setting up Postal Finance Marts (PFMs).
Initially, efforts will be made to set up PFMs in those locations,
including post offices housing Community Information Centres in the
North East, where there is maximum business potential. The target is
to set up 300 PFMs during the last 2 years of the 10th Plan.
Domestic Travel Expenses
Recommendation (Para No. 145)
The Committee note that substantial amount is spent by the
Department of Post on domestic travel year after year i.e. Rs. 30.09
crore in 2001-2002, Rs. 32.31 crore in 2002-03, Rs. 34.61 crore in
2003-04 and Rs. 26.80 crore in 2004-05 (upto January, 2005). The
expenses are stated to be incurred due to travels relating to Inspection
Duty, Trainings, Meetings, Conferences which according to the
Department are essential for the operational functioning of the
Department.
Action Taken by the Government
Some amount of travel expenses are essential on account of
inspections, visit and training given for the upgradation of skills of
the staff. The postal network comprises outlets or post offices which
are located in far flung areas, and supervision over this network is
maintained mainly through regular visits/inspections conducted by
supervisory officers, etc. Postal Department has the most adverse officer
to employee ratio, viz., 1:210 and these officers have to supervise offices
located over a very vast area.
Since many of the operations in post offices involve financial
transactions, regular visits/inspections are mandatory to maintain

49
quality of service and ensure strict adherence to financial propriety.
Therefore, domestic travel expenses are primarily related to operational
requirement.
However, every attempt is being made to restrict travel expenses
on account of meetings, conferences, etc., in keeping with austerity
measures conveyed by the Ministry of Finance.
Domestic Travel Expenses
Recommendation (Para No. 146)
While the Committee do not dispute the necessity of the domestic
travel in the Department of Post being a service oriented organization,
it is however felt that the amount of expenses on this count could be
rationalized by the Department to some extent by using the latest
modes of communication and cyber technology.
Action Taken by the Government
The linkage between travel expenses and operational requirements
have been explained in detail in response to the recommendation in
para 145. While efforts will be made to comply with the
recommendations of the Committee, it needs to be noted that
technology induction is still in its infancy and even by the end of the
10th Plan, only 7700 out of 1,55,669 post offices will be computerized.
Hence, traditional methods of supervision will need to be continued
till all the offices are covered. However, efforts are being made to
reduce travelling expenses related to training by setting up WCTCs
nearer the workplace of the employees. Every effort is also being made
to restrict travel expenses to the extent possible by strictly enforcing
economy measures of Ministry of Finance on conferences/seminars,
etc.

50
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 113)
The Committee find that while on one side the Department has
not been able to spend fully the allocated funds resulting in huge
unspent balances, there have been, on the other side, certain activities
such as modernisation of post offices, modernisation of speed post
centers, modernisation of mail offices, promotion of premium products,
construction of buildings etc., where more funds could have been
utilized, if it had been allocated to the Department. The Committee’s
apprehension about the poor budgetary exercise in the Department,
thus gets reinforced from the above stated contradictory situation with
regard to utilisation of funds. The Committee would, therefore, like
the Department to ensure that the assessment of requirement of funds
under different major, minor and sub-heads of the Grant are made on
realistic anticipations to make the budgetary exercise more meaningful
and accurate.
Action Taken by the Government
The following clarification submitted on the observations made
by the Committee regarding meaningful and accurate budgetary
exercise.
The allocation of funds is not a unilateral exercise undertaken by
the Department. Two basic issues are considered during the budgetary
process while allocating funds for different schemes/activities. They
are: (1) inter-se priority of the Plan activity in the context of 10th Plan
priorities, and (2) capacity for utilization of the proposed Plan
allocation. Higher priority is given to the former if there is potential
to utilize the funds.
The allocations are firmed up in consultation with Planning
Commission with whom each Department has to enter into an MoU

51
regarding scheme-wise outlays and physical targets. Therefore, the
Department is compelled to accede to their conditions regarding
limiting the allocations in some cases, even if there is scope to utilize
more funds under these activities. This is specially so in the case of
construction of buildings, modernization activities, etc. Since the total
outlay received initially , is always far lower than what is projected,
and given the corporate compulsions to speed up the computerization
projects, funds for activities like promotion of premium products,
philately, financial services, etc., are often compelled to be reduced.
This is why there is a mis-match between allocations and capacity to
spend, in respect of certain schemes.
This disparity is ought to be reduced during the budgetary process,
to the extent possible, by carefully assessing the capacity to spend in
priority schemes and providing only token allocations where there is
doubt about spending capacity, and allocating these resources to
schemes which can absorb more funds, even if their inter-se priority is
lower. This fact can be clearly seen from the figures relating to
projection to Planning Commission and trend of allocations made under
BE/RE.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para 1.8 of Chapter-I)
Recoveries
Recommendation (Para No. 115)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts is paid agency
charges for the service rendered by them on behalf of the other
Government Departments and these earnings are accounted for as
recoveries. The Postal Life Insurance and the Rural Life Insurance
constitute 65 per cent of the total recoveries. The Department also
makes pension payment on behalf of a number of Departments,
including the Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Coal, Ministry of Mines,
The EPF organization and agency charges are paid for it. The
Committee also observe that various areas of recoveries to be made
by the Department include (i) Commission of money on Western Union
Money Transfer; (ii) Commission on payment of Military Pension;
(iii) Commission on sale of Non-postal stamps of Delhi Administration;
(iv) Commission for payment of pension under CPFP; (v) Collection
of Custom Duty; (vi) Telegraphs share of combined office charges;
(vii) PLI/RPLI; (viii) APS Accounts and other Government Departments.
According to the Department of Posts, arrears worked out for the job

52
of booking and delivery of telegrams on behalf of the BSNL comes to
Rs. 100 crore. Similarly, huge arrears are stated to be recovered by the
Department of Posts from various Departments for rendering the above
mentioned services. However, the actual details of arrears of recoveries
in respect of each service were to be worked out by the Department.
The Committee therefore, recommend that arrears of recoveries due
on 31st March, 2005 against all the Departments/organizations on
account of different services/agency functions including those pertaining
to disbursement of pension, may be worked out unit/service/
Department-wise and the matter of expeditious recovery of the arrears
may be taken up at the highest level with the concerned Department/
organizations at the earliest. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard with full details within
a period of three months.
Action Taken by the Government
The status of outstanding dues, if any, against various departments/
agencies as on 31st March, 2005 for various agencies services rendered
by the Department of Posts is detailed below:
1. Recoveries in the shape of Fixed Rate of Remuneration (FRR)
related to PLI and RPLI have been recovered and credited
to the Department of Posts up to 31.03.2005 at the rate of
FRR declared up to 31.03.2001. Although there is no arrear
to be recovered, some adjustment is likely to occur with
retrospective effect once the FRR is finalized.
2. BSNL/DoT for delivery of telegrams: Rs. 100 crores is the
progressive total of the outstanding against BSNL/DoT from
1992-93 upto 2002-2003. The rates of agency charges payable
to Department of Posts by BSNL/DoT for booking and
delivery of telegrams in combined offices is under dispute
and the matter is under discussion with DoT and the case
has been sent to Committee of Secretaries (CoS).
3. Ministry of Railways for payments of pensions: There are
no dues outstanding. Adjustment is made through RBI, CAS,
Nagpur.
4. Ministry of Coal & Mines (CMPF) for payment of pensions:
Rs. 9.4 crores are outstanding against Coal & Mines
Provident Fund (CMPF) towards commission for payment
of pension and towards the amount paid as pension. This
matter has also been taken up at Secretary level with the
Secretary (Labour) and Secretary (Coal & Mines) for early
recovery.

53
5. Ministry of Labour (EPF) for payment of pensions: Rs. 15.87
crores are outstanding against EPF towards commission for
payment of pension and towards amount paid as pension.
This matter has also been taken up at Secretary level for
recovery.
6. Western Union for international money transfer service: No
dues are outstanding. All recoveries made up to 31.03.2005.
7. Ministry of Defence for commission on payment of Military
Pension: There are no dues outstanding. Adjustment is made
through RBI, CAS, Nagpur.
8. State Government of Delhi for commission on sale of Non-
Postal stamps: No dues are outstanding.
9. Department of Revenue for collection of Customs duty: No
dues are outstanding.
10. Ministry of Defence APS Accounts: There are no dues
outstanding.
11. Department of Telecom for payment of Pensions: The
amount due is Rs. 23.01 crore (provisional). All Heads of
Circles have been instructed to collect information in respect
of dues recoverable from DoT, to determine total outstanding
due in this regard. The matter has also been taken up with
Member (Finance) of Department of Telecom, who has
agreed to the rates proposed by DoP in this regard. The
matter has also been taken with Ministry of Finance for
concurrence as well as for providing necessary funds in the
Budget of DoT for payment to Department of Posts.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 1.11 of Chapter-I)
Recoveries:
Recommendation (Para No. 116)
The Committee further observe that the Department of Posts
provide agency services to the Ministry of Finance and in this regard
an expert Committee set up by the Ministry of Finance in 1993-94 had
fixed the rates of remuneration for that year. They had also
recommended 10 per cent escalation per year but after the year
2001-02, the increase has been only to the tune of 4.25 per cent and
3.88 per cent during the last two years resulting in revenue deficit.
Surprisingly, the Department did not get any response for the references

54
made to the Ministry of Finance despite the fact that the matter was
taken up with the Secretary (Expenditure). The Committee express
their serious concern over such a state of affairs when the escalation
rate fixed by the Expert Committee was reduced unilaterally by the
Ministry of Finance which has adversely impacted the financial position
of the Department of Posts. The unilateral decision taken by the
Ministry of Finance with regard to reduction of escalation rates without
consulting/involving the service provider/organization i.e. Department
of Posts is, in the opinion of the Committee, highly unreasonable and
needs to be rectified very soon. Taking into account the fact that
working expenses of the Department are steadily rising year after year
while in sharp contrast thereto, the escalation rate of remuneration
have been reduced by the Ministry of Finance resulting in an adverse
financial position to the Department, the Committee are constrained to
recommend that the Department of Posts should seriously take up the
matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission at the
highest level. In case no favourable response is received within a
reasonable period of time, the Department should explore the possibility
of placing the entire matter before the Cabinet.
Action Taken by the Government
The matter continues to be pursued with Ministry of Finance. A
copy of the last reminder sent to the Ministry of Finance in the matter
is enclosed for ready reference. Reply of Ministry is still awaited.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 1.14 of Chapter-I)

55
JYOTSNA DIESH Department of Posts, India
Member (Development) Ministry of Communications & IT
Ph.: (+91-11) 2309 6080 Dak Bhawan, Sansad Marg,
Ph.: (+91-11) 2303 6612 New Delhi-110 001
Ph.: (+91-11) 2309 6081
mail: jyotsna@Indiapost.org
D.O. No. 95-178/95-SB (Pt) Date: 11.05.2005
Dear Ms. Vas,
Kindly refer to DO. No. 20-1/03-BGT (PA) dated 21.4.04 from
Secretary (Posts) to Secretary (Expenditure) followed by reminders dated
14.10.04, 04.11.2004 & 10.01.05 relating to revised estimates 2003-04
and Budget Estimates 2004-05 in respect of Major Head: 8008.03.101-
Payment of remuneration to Department of Posts for Management of
Saving Bank and Savings Certificate work. No reply has so far been
received in this regard.
2. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the
Recommendation No. 116 (Copy enclosed) of the Sixteenth Report of
the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2004-05) on
“Demands for Grants (2005-06)” pertaining to the Department of Posts
wherein the Committee has impressed upon the Ministry of Finance
to abide by its terms of agreement and enhance the per account/per
certificate remuneration by 10% every year. Keeping in view the facts
and figures mentioned in the above mentioned DO letter and the
recommendation of the Committee, it is once again requested to restore
the rates of remuneration based on an annual escalation of 10% for
the financial years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 and provide
arrear payments an account of financial year 2002-03 too. A response
in the matter may kindly be given so that Department of Posts can
furnish reply to Standing Committee in the matter.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Jyotsna Diesh)
MS. L.M. Vas,
Joint Secretary (Budget),
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs,
North Block,
New Delhi-110 001
Copy to:
JS & FA, Dak Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001 for kind information
and necessary action.
Sd/-
(Jyotsna Diesh)


56
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; M. M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

57
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on the 20th December, 2005 from 1600 hrs. to
1730 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Vijay J. Darda
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
11. Shri Dara Singh
12. Shri K. Rama Mohan Rao
13. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri Hoti Lal — Assistant Director

58
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Sixteenth Report on “Demands for Grants
(2005-06)” relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Posts).
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
5. The Committee, then, adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports
at Serial No. (i), and (iii). Draft Report on “Spectrum Management”
relating to Department of Telecommunication was partially discussed.
As some Members requested the Chairman to give them some more
time to go through the Draft Report, the Committee deferred further
consideration of the Draft Report on “Spectrum Management” to
21 December, 2005.
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above mentioned Reports adopted by the Committee to
the House on a dated and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

59
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTEENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total Number of Recommendations/Observations 39
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos.: 111, 112, 114, 118, 120, 122, 123, 124,
125, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 140,
141, 147 and 148
Total: 23
Percentage: 58.97%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Para Nos.: 110, 117, 121, 126, 136, 137, 138,
139, 143, 144, 145, and 146
Total: 13
Percentage: 33.33%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos.: 113, 115 and 116
Total: 3
Percentage: 7.69%
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies are of interim nature:
Para No. Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil