CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Information Technology).
2. The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It
contained 35 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/
observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 11, 17, 19, 21, 23- 28, 30, 31, 34 & 35
Total: 18
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. 18
Total: 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 12
Total: 07
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Para Nos. 13-16, 20, 22, 29, 32 and 33
Total: 09
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee further desire
that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the
recommendations contained in Chapter–V of this Report should be
furnished to them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
I. Plan Outlays and Allocation of Funds for IT
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2, 3 and 4)
(i) Reduction in Plan allocation during Tenth Five year Plan
6. The Committee had in their 46th Report observed drastic cuts
in Plan allocation in each of the year of the Tenth Five Year Plan for
a strategically important and fast growing sector like information
technology. Against the allocations proposed i.e. Rs. 937.19 crore,
Rs. 1146.90 crore, Rs. 1294.38 crore, Rs. 1400.67 crore and Rs. 1516.00
crore for the years 2002-03 to 2006-07 respectively, the allocations made
by the Planning Commission were only Rs. 470.00 crore, Rs. 470.00 crore,
Rs. 650.00 crore, Rs. 882.00 crore and Rs. 1090.00 crore respectively.
Resultantly, the Department had to resort to postponing or slowing
down some of their projects pertaining to important schemes like
e-Governance, R&D, NIC, etc. The Committee had, therefore,
emphasized the need to provide increased Plan support to DIT
particularly in view of the sustained double-digit revenue growth,
steady expansion into newer service lines and an unprecedented rise
in investments by MNCs registered in the IT sector in the recent years.
They had also expressed confidence that the Planning Commission
would take into consideration these factors while finalising the Eleventh
Plan allocation with a view to ensuring that the pace of development
in IT Sector was further encouraged.
7. The Department in their Action Taken replies have stated that
they have proposed Rs. 18160.79 crore for the Eleventh Plan. Approval
of this outlay was requested in the meeting held with Planning
Commission on 26 April, 2007.

3
8. The Committee note that in pursuance of their
recommendations, the Department of Information Technology have
projected an outlay of Rs. 18160.79 crore for the Eleventh Five Year
Plan. As regards the follow up, the Department have in their action
taken note furnished to the Committee on 24 July, 2007 merely stated
that approval of this outlay was requested in the meeting held with
the Planning Commission on 26 April, 2007. The Committee cannot
remain satisfied with this. They strongly feel that DIT ought not
consider their duties fulfilled by merely having one meeting with
the Planning Commission. If the projected outlay has to be got
allocated by the Department they have to untiringly pursue their
case with not only the Planning Commission but other competent
authorities and bodies within the setup. That there has been no
follow-up to report by the Department to the Committee during a
period of three months between their meeting with the Planning
Commission and the submission of action taken replies to the
Committee as well as the period subsequent thereto, is not reflective
of the efforts that the Committee expect from the Department if
they have to get the requisite amount of funds allocated to them for
Eleventh Plan Period. Needless to mention that sufficient financial
resources are key to keeping the IT juggernaut moving at a fast
pace. The Committee therefore, exhort the Department to leave no
stone unturned in order to ensure that none of the Schemes in IT
Sector suffer due to paucity of funds during the Eleventh Plan Period.
(ii) Allocation of Funds at RE Stage
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted the pruning of
the outlay of Department of Information Technology for the Annual
Plan 2007-08 from the proposed Rs. 2092.08 crore to Rs. 1500 crore.
They had also noted the inability of DIT to secure enhancement of
allocation of funds at RE stage in the previous years. The Committee
therefore, had expressed their apprehension that such a pruning will
lead to the Annual Plan being starved of funds. They had, therefore,
desired that the Department should plead their case effectively during
Plan consultations and at the RE stage for enhancing the Plan
allocations to the IT Sector in keeping with the emerging trends.
10. In their Action Taken reply the Department have informed
that they have pleaded their case in their meeting held with the
Planning Commission on 26 April, 2007 for ZBB/Outlays for Annual
Plan 2008-09 and the Eleventh Plan (2007-12) for the enhancement of
funds during Eleventh Plan and also in the Steering Committee meeting
of Communication & Information Technology on 30 May 2007. The

4
report on Steering Committee meeting of Communication & Information
Technology is awaited.
11. At the cost of being repetitive the Committee exhort DIT
not to be content with a meeting with the Planning Commission or
another with the Steering Committee of Communication and
Information Technology. If the Department want to ensure that their
budgeting doesn’t go haywire like in the Tenth Plan and they are
not compelled to stagger or curtail some of their schemes of immense
national importance they should vigorously follow-up their goal of
getting sufficient funds allocated at RE stage for the ongoing fiscal
and for the remaining part of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made and the concrete
achievements of the Department in this regard.
(iii) Delay in Finalisation of Eleventh Plan proposals
12. In their previous Report, the Committee having noted that the
Planning Commission was yet to finalise the Eleventh Plan proposals
of Department of Information Technology had opined that these should
have been finalized well before the commencement of the Plan so that
the Department could have ensured preparedness for the
implementation of Plan Schemes from day one. Since any further delay
in finalisation of Plan proposals was likely to affect the implementation
of major schemes envisaged in the Plan, the Committee had stressed
expeditious finalisation of Eleventh Plan proposals of the Department.
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated that a
meeting was held in Planning Commission on 26 April, 2007 for Zero
Based Budget/Outlays for Annual Plan 2008-09 and Steering Committee
meeting of Communication & Information Technology was held on
30 May 2007 to finalize the Eleventh Plan (2007-12) proposal of the
Department. The report on Steering Committee meeting of
Communication & Information Technology is awaited.
14. In the opinion of the Committee advance planning is a sine
quo non of any developmental activity. In this context the Five Year
Plans, which are the foundation stones of developmental process in
the country, ought to be drawn and finalized well before their
commencement. This would not only enable the executing machinery
to be in preparedness for implementation of Plan goals and targets
but also enable the planners to have a holistic picture of the
developmental requirements of the country. It is unfortunate that,
unlike in the past, the Eleventh Five Year Plan proposals are yet to
be given a concrete shape even when we are several months into

5
the first year of the Plan. The Committee, while reiterating their
recommendation about immediate finalisation of the Eleventh Five
Year Plan for the Department of Information Technology would also
like to know the detailed reasons for the inexplicable delays in the
planning process. They would also like to be apprised of the status
of finalisation of Eleventh Plan proposals.
II. National e-Governance Plan
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8, 9, 10 and 12 )
(i) Delay in Establishing SWAN
15. The Committee on noting the fact that progress in respect of
establishment of SWAN has been lagging far behind in some States/
UTs like Arunachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Jammu and Kashmir, Daman and Diu, Goa and Andhra Pradesh, had
exhorted the Department to make all out efforts so that SWAN project
is operationalised in all States/UTs within the time frame.
16. The Department in their action taken reply have stated that
they have undertaken intensive persuasive actions for accelerating the
SWAN proposals from the remaining States/UTs so that the approval
of proposals and RFP documents from these balance States/UTs are
completed at the DIT level by August, 2007. The State/UT wise scenario
is as under :
The State of Goa has already initiated wide area network project
through a PPP model outside the provisions of the SWAN Scheme.
The SWAN proposal from UT of Lakshadweep has been received
by DIT and are presently under scrutiny. The State of Andhra
Pradesh has intimated that the State would soon submit a revised
proposal with enhanced scope to cover all the Mandals in the
State. Intensive action have been taken to prepare the individual
SWAN proposals for J&K, Arunachal Pradesh, D&NH and D&D.
It is expected that all the remaining proposals would be finalized
and approved by the Empowered Committee by August 2007.
17. The Committee note that the Department of Information
Technology have since undertaken intensive persuasive actions for
accelerating proposals for State Wide Area Network Projects. Since
the Empowered Committee was expected to finalise and approve all
proposals by August, 2007 as stated by DIT in their action taken
note, the Committee would like to have a comprehensive update on
the status of action on proposals of each of the State/UT by the
Empowered Committee.

6
(ii) Setting up of Common Service Centres (CSCs)
18. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that in the
Outcome Budget (2007-2008) of the Department a target of 30,000 ICT
based kiosks at village levels across the Country by March, 2007 and
1,00,000 such kiosks by December, 2007 had been fixed. However, these
targets had been revised to 19000 CSCs by March, 2008 and a total of
84000 CSCs by August, 2008. As the establishment of CSCs is basically
the responsibility of DIT the Committee had stressed upon them to
effectively monitor the implementation of the project and also render
all necessary assistance to the States, wherever required, so that the
CSCs are fully rolled out at least as per the revised schedule.
19. In response the Department have stated in their action taken
reply that they are monitoring and driving the CSC Scheme, being
implemented by the States, on an ongoing basis. To assist the States
in the implementation of the Scheme, they have also appointed a
National Level Service Agency , which is handholding the States and
assisting the States in managing the bid process for the selection of
the Service Center Agencies in States.
20. The Committee note that DIT are monitoring and driving
the CSC Scheme, being implemented by the States on an ongoing
basis. They also note the other measures being taken by the
Department towards making this important scheme a success. The
Committee, however, find the silence of the Department on the issue
of establishing CSCs at least as per revised schedule, intriguing.
The original target of 1,00,000 kiosks by December, 2007 was down-
sized and staggered to 84000 CSCs by August, 2008. However, the
Department, inspite of their claim of monitoring the Scheme and
being the driving force behind it have not furnished a definite
answer to the Committee in this matter. The Committee would,
therefore, like to be apprised of the position in this behalf.
(iii) Establishing State Data Centres
21. In their previous Report, the Committee had expressed their
concern because State Data Centres (SDCs) were being proposed to be
set-up only in 20 States by March, 2008 the time by when SWAN
project would be operational in 28 States/UTs. In order to ensure that
the SWANs and CSCs do not remain idle and their benefit begin to
accrue to the people at the earliest the Committee had desired that
the Department should make serious efforts to establish SDCs at a
faster pace.

7
22. The Department in their action taken reply have stated that
the State Data Centre Scheme is expected to be appraised by
Expenditure Finance Committee in July 2007 and subsequently approval
will be obtained. After approval of the SDC Scheme, individual SDC
proposal of the States will be taken up by the Empowered Committee
for approval. The implementation of the individual SDC would start
immediately thereafter and is expected to take about nine – twelve
months
23. From the reply of the Department it is but clear that now
even March, 2008 time line for setting up of SDCs in 20 States
cannot be adhered to by the Department, which is, to say the least,
unfortunate. Such slippages cannot be condoned particularly when
they are affecting Projects and Schemes of immense national
importance. The Committee would like the Department to atleast
now come up with a definite road map in the matter.
(iv) Difficulties in Implementation of NeGP
24. In their previous Report, when being given to understand that
DIT had been facing difficulties in dealing with issues relating to Project
Conceptualization and Capacity Building the Committee had asked
the Department to highlight and sort out difficulties being experienced
by them in relation to various agencies of the Government in the next
review meeting of e-Governance projects by the High Level Body
chaired by the Prime Minister with a view to facilitating speedier
implementation of the National e-Governance Plan.
25. The Department in their action taken reply while noting the
recommendation of the Committee have stated that Capacity Building
Scheme for an amount of Rs. 313.00 crore has been appraised by
Expenditure Finance Committee. The process of obtaining Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approval is currently
underway.
26. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 313.00 crore has
been appraised by the Expenditure Finance Committee for Project
Conceptualisation and Capacity Building and CCEA approval is also
under process. The Committee, however, regret to point out that the
action taken reply is completely silent about the action taken by the
Department in highlighting the difficulties in the implementation of
National e-Governance Plan before the High Level Body and the
outcome thereof. The Committee expect a comprehensive reply from
the Department in the matter.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
On scrutiny on Demand No. 15 in respect of the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Information Technology), the Committee observe that the total
Budgetary allocation for fiscal 2007-08 is Rs. 1536 crore with the Plan
section accounting for Rs. 1500 crore and the Non-Plan section
for Rs 36 crore. As compared to the Budgetary Support for the
year 2006-2007 which was Rs. 1126 crore, consisting of Rs. 1090 crore
in Plan section and Rs. 36 crore in the Non-Plan section, the Committee
note that the overall budget for the year 2007-2008 has been increased
by Rs. 410 crore which marks an increase of 36.41%. The Committee
also note with satisfaction that the Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) ahve been able to almost fully utilise the funds
allocated to them in all the five years of the Tenth Plan. Out of
the Plan Outlay of Rs. 470 crore, Rs. 470 crore, Rs. 750 crore,
Rs. 929.30 crore and Rs. 1090 crore during the years from 2002-2003
to 2006-2007 respectively, the corresponding utilization had been
Rs. 465.35 crore, Rs. 492.88 crore, Rs. 644.74 crore, Rs. 880.10 crore and
Rs. 1090.00 crore (expected). Having seen a steady upward trend both
in Plan allocation and utilization, the Committee are hopeful that DoIT
will leave no stone unturned to ensure optimum utilization of the
funds allocated to them in fiscal 2007-2008.
Action taken by the Government
Optimum utilization of the funds will be made during the year
2007-08.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that Manufacturing, Software Exports,
Domestic Software, Human Resource Development and Research &
Development are the major thrust areas of the Department of IT for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan and accordingly for the year 2007-2008
Manufacturing, Software Exports, Domestic Software are covered under
the major head, Infrastructure Development. After downsizing the

9
annual Outlay for 2007-2008 by the Planning Commission, the schemes
for Research & Development, Infrastructure Development and Human
Resource Development were provided only Rs. 238 crore, Rs. 884.70
crore and Rs. 44.50 crore respectively as compared to the corresponding
proposed allocation of Rs. 410.92 crore, Rs. 1120.16 crore and Rs. 122.00
crore. In the Committee’s opinion, sufficient funds need to be made
available to these schemes if electronics Industry has to be given a
boost for India’s long-term global competitiveness. This is also required
to sustain the country’s global leadership in software exports, to
increase domestic software production and most importantly to meet
the gap of demand and supply of IT skilled professionals as per the
requirement of the IT industry. besides, India’s expenditure on R&D
ought to be increased, as at present it is merely 0.8% of the GDP .
Needless to say, DoIT have a significant role to play in supplementing
the efforts of the IT Industry in all the above mentioned areas. The
Committee trust that the Department would effectively project the
above demand sat RE stage for obtaining additional funds so that
their targets in these areas do not remain illusory.
Action taken by the government
DIT would project a suitable demand at RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the Department has taken the initiative
quite recently to undertake comprehensive, in-depth and independent
evaluation of Plan schemes and programmes under implementation in
order to measure their developmental outcomes, cost effectiveness and
efficiency so as to provide vital inputs for finalising programmes for
the Eleventh Plan. The Plan Schemes selected for Impact Evaluation
Studies (IES) in 2006-07 on the basis of their importance and implication
for the growth of the sector were Software Technology Parks in India,
Convergence, Communication, Broadband Technologies and Strategic
Electronics, Telemedicine and Technology Development in Indian
Languages. The Committee feel that such an exercise should have
been done much earlier. With the Plan period having commenced, the
Impact Evaluation Studies in respect of the above mentioned schemes
should be completed expeditiously so that the findings of the studies
could serve as valuable inputs while formulating Plan strategies and
allocations for the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like to
be informed of the findings of Impact Evaluation Studies (IES)
conducted on the schemes/programmes during 2006-07. They also
desire that the DoIT should continue to conduct such studies

10
periodically and take corrective measures in the areas found wanting
in order to improve upon the process of effective implementation of
the Plan Schemes.
Action taken by the Government
Status of:
(a) Impact Evaluation Studies (IES)
(i) Software Technology Parks in India: A Draft report has been
made by M/s. Frost & Sullivan.
Recommendations made:
• Continuation of 10a and 10b of the Income Tax Act 1961
has a significant effect on IT development.
• Deduction under 10a and 10b should be extended for
Tier II and Tier III cities till 2011-12 to ensure de-congested
development of IT industry.
• STPI would move to facilitator role for SME, Tier II and
Tier III city companies. Its incubation, certification,
manpower development role needs to be accentuated.
• Investments from Central, State and STPI are require to
ensure IT development is realized in different States.
Budgetary support in DIT Scheme, especially R&D,
infrastructure development, HRD and Export market
development should be targeted at Rs. 1500 crore each year
realize the IT export and domestic market growth.
• 10% of Educational cess collected needs to be targeted for
S&T infrastructure development including software,
hardware including ASIC level courses both at graduate and
undergraduate level.
• Advanced instates such as IIIT needs to be promoted across
state.
• IT education standardization bodies such as BITES need
replication and special grant may be made from Central
Government export development fund.
(ii) Convergence, Communication, Broadband Technologies and
Strategies Electronics:
A Request for Proposal (RFP) is prepared.

11
(iii) Telemedicine: Media Lab Asia has advertised in the press
for IES. They have received proposals/offers from 15
different parties. The Bid Evaluation Committee has been
constituted.
(iv) Technology Development in Indian Languages: RFP have
been finalized. Call for proposal is to be initiated.
(b) Major Findings of IES of Schemes mentioned above will be
forwarded to the Standing Committee as soon as they are
available.
(c) A decision has also been taken to make IES a regular feature
of DIT. Towards this end all Plan Schemes which require
SFC/EFC approval will have IES as an integrated part of
the Scheme.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee find that one of the critical areas in implementation
of national e-Governance Programme is the provision of core and
support infrastructure, which will be common for all the projects across
the board, and it is the responsibility of DoIT to provide it by March,
2008. Core and support infrastructure include State Wide Area Network
(SWAN), State Data Centres (SDCs) and Common Service Centres
(CSCs). The Committee hope that the infrastructure, on which the
timely implementation of National e-Governance Programme depends
would be ready in all the States by the middle of 2008 as indicated
by the DoIT.
Action taken by the Government
DIT is striving its utmost in coordination with the States to adhere
to the above timelines.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that the role of the DoIT, as stated in the
Cabinet approval for NeGP , is to be the facilitator and catalyst for the
implementation of NeGP by various Ministries and State Governments
and also to provide technical assistance to them either directly or in
collaboration with external professional consultants. They would serve
as a Secretariat to the Apex Committee and assist it in managing the
programme. In addition, they would implement pilot/infrastructure/
technical/special projects and support components. DoIT would also
prepare a suitable template for preparing project document, which could

12
be used by individual Departments for preparing their detailed project
reports. The Committee have been informed that for timely and
effective roll out, it is necessary that the programme is undertaken in
a mission mode where each initiative should state clear and well
defined timelines, goals and deliverables. Proper conceptualization,
preparation of detailed project documents and mechanisms to ensure
aspects of change management, awareness, process reengineering, etc.
would speed up the implementation schedule of the programme. Issues
of capacity building, setting up of project and programme management
and monitoring mechanisms are also certain key requirements for timely
and effective roll out of NeGP . The Committee note that timely
implementation of NeGP would, to a great extent, depend on attending
to these basic responsibilities by DoIT. The Committee trust that DoIT
would explore all ways and means to ensure timely and effective
implementation of the NeGP for meeting all the e-Governance
requirements so that there would not be any delay in rolling out the
electronic services to the people of the country.
Action taken by the Government
DIT is monitoring the implementation of the various directions/
decisions of the Apex Committee on an ongoing basis and is placing
the status of the implementations of these decisions before the apex
Committee, so that the Committee can take a view on the matter. The
DIT has prepared a DPR template and is working in close coordination
with the various departments with the aim of assisting these
departments in better conceptualizing, developing and implementing
their respective Mission Mode Project (MMPs).
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee express their concern over the drastic cut that has
been made in the allocation for STPI. Out of the proposed allocation
of Rs. 12 crore, the Planning Commission has approved only Rs. 0.50
crore. However, the Committee hope that the projects planned under
the Scheme will not suffer, as assured by DoIT that STPI would carry
out their programmes with their internal accruals and will not restrict
their activities to the amount provided to them in the budget for the
year 2007-2008.
Action taken by the Government
The annual plan of STPI for the financial year 2007-08 will be
taken care of through internal accruals.

13
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note with satisfaction that through the efforts of
STPI, software exports in 2006-2007 would be to the tune of Rs. 131,255
crore (estimated). Significantly, STPI accounts for over 92.56 percent of
India’s software exports with total exports being to the tune of
Rs. 141,800 crore (estimated). However, it is a matter of serious concern
that the percentage of growth of software exports through STPI units
has been on a declining trend. The percentage of growth registered
was 44 percent, 36 percent and 30 percent (estimated) in the years,
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively. Needless to mention that
with an ambitious target of achieving software export of US$ 50 billion
by 2008-2009 and US $60 billion by 2009-2010, STPI will have to devise
innovative strategies for stepping up software exports by its units. It
is in this context that the Committee do not find any justification for
reduction of Plan Allocation for STPI. Instead, they feel that STPI should
receive support form the Government in terms of financial allocation
and a hassle-free environment congenial for its growth.
Action taken by the Government
The plans of STPI are supported through internal accruals.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee observe that the export revenue earned by
Information Technology (IT) Software and Related Services have grown
from Rs. 6,723 crore in 1997-1998 to Rs 104,500 crore in 2005-2006 and
are estimated to reach Rs. 141,800 crore in 2006-2007. India now
accounts for 65 percent of the global market in offshore IT and
46 percent of the ITES market. The growth of the sector has led to
tremendous pay-offs in terms of wealth creation and generation of
high quality employment. In addition to the direct economic impact,
the growth of this sector has also indirectly contributed to economic
and employment development in other parts of the economy such as
the increased demand for commercial and residential real estate,
catalyzing urban development, and playing a significant role in driving
demand for other commercial services such as retail, hospitality and
transportation, etc. Looking at the tremendous prospects of this sector,
the Committee consider the reduction in the Annual Plan allocation
for the Scheme, Infrastructure Development which includes software
export, domestic software production and hardware manufacturing,
from the proposed amount of Rs. 1120.16 crore to Rs. 884.70 crore to
be unfortunate. Even out of Rs. 884.70 crore provision made for
infrastructure Development, Rs. 800 crore has been earmarked for the

14
e-Governance programme, practically leaving only a meagre allocation
for schemes meant for software production and hardware
manufacturing. The Committee urge that the Department should pay
focused attention to the area of software production and hardware
manufacturing.
Action taken by the Government
DIT acts as facilitator for IT Industry and to ensure speedy IT led
development. As regard hardware manufacturing, inputs have been
provided under Recommendation No. 24.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee further note that the Working Group on IT sector
constituted by the Planning Commission to formulate the Eleventh
Five Year Plan has set-up Study Teams to make recommendations in
their respective sectors. A Study Team thus constituted for “the Exports
of Computer software and services” had inter alia recommended some
measures like improving the supply of suitable talent, building adequate
basic, business and social infrastructure, ensuring a favourable business
policy and regulatory environment with a special focus on encouraging
SMEs and new ventures, global trade development and promoting
global free trade in services and fostering a sustainable ecosystem for
innovation and R&D for further growth of IT sector. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the DoIT’s plan on the recommendations
made by the Study Team.
Action taken by the Government
DIT is in the process of setting up a Working/Expert  Group on
HRD in IT for evolving pilot projects during the 11th Five Year Plan
in the areas of (a) Capacity building in selected areas to address the
requirement of emerging knowledge economy; (b) Technology
Incubation Centres and Hardware Infrastructure facility for entrepreneur
development; (c) Integration of new courses in ITI and support to
Women’s Polytechnics; and (d) Spreading the concept of Finishing
School-teachers training by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc.
The proposed Working/Expert Group on HRD in IT will assess
the need of the sector, evolve/finalise and prioritize various activities
to be initiated during the 11th Plan period.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) is in the
process of launching Finishing Schools to enhance the employability

15
of engineering graduates, on a pilot scale at seven NITs (at Surathkal,
Durgapur, Warangal, Jaipur, Calicut, Trichi and Kurukshetra) and IIT
Roorkee. The recommendations of the Standing Committee on IT at
para 25 have been forwarded to MHRD for further action.
• One of the major recommendations for R&D is to set-up
Advance Project Agency (APA)—through a PPP model. A
committee has been set up in this regard constitution of
this committee is given in Annexure.
• So far as the matter relating to building adequate basic,
business and social infrastructure are concerned the Principal
Secretary to Prime Minister has set up a Group in Nov,
2006 comprising Secretary, IT, Secretary, Urban Development,
Secretary, Industrial Policy & Promotion and JS, PMO to
formulate a scheme on “Initiative for Setting up Integrated
Moden  Townships for Sunrise Industries including IT and
BPO” in consultation with NASSCOM. A Draft Policy on
“Creating Information Technology Investment Regions (ITIR)
for Setting up Integrated Modern Townships for Sunrise
industries including IT/ITES/Electronic hardware in the
country”, is under preparation which will be referred to
concerned Ministries for comments. Thereafter a draft
Cabinet Note would be prepared for submission to the
CCEA for approval.
• Matter relating to the extension of tax benefits under Section
10A and 10B of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is under
consideration of DIT.
The National Venture Fund for Software and IT Industry
(NFSIT) was set up in association with Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and IDBI with the
objective of making venture capital investments in software
and IT companies in SME segment. The fund was set up
with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore contributed by SIDBI (Rs. 50
crore), Department of Information Technology (Rs. 30 crore)
and IDBI (Rs. 20 crore). It was launched by the Hon’ble
Prime Minister on December 10, 1999.
• The issue of liberal visa regime in countries like France,
Germany & Japan etc. enabling Indian IT professional to
work in these countries has been taken up aggressively
under the on-going GATS services negotiations in WTO.
The issue of “full commitment” by countries such as France,
Germany, Japan etc. (Movement of natural person-Model-4)

16
is also part of the on-going GATS services negotiation. The
negotiations are still going on and are expected to conclude
soon. The entire matter is being coordinated by Deptt. of
Commerce as they are the nodal agency for this matter.
•A  proposal for “free trade in services” has been initiated by
the Department of Commerce. A  Working Group
coordinated by Commerce Secretary is looking into the
possibilities of having such an agreement with US and EC.
• The amendments to Information Technology Act has been
finalized and the Bill was already been introduced in
Parliament in December 2006. The matter is under
consideration by the Standing Committee of the Parliament.
• The data protection/privacy are covered under sections 43,
66, 72 of the Information Technology Act. It is also proposed
to introduce sections 43A and 72A as penal provisions
relating to privacy/data protection.
• The respective Ministries are taking necessary steps in that
direction. It may not be advisable and also proper to
mandate such activities through Act.
•P rovision has been proposed in the Indian Penal Code
through the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill. A
separate new section is proposed for punishment of Identity
theft and identity theft has been proposed to be made as a
criminal offence.
•A  proposal for setting up of Regional Cyber Forensic
Research and Training Centres evolved jointly with
Directorate of Forensic Science (DFS) under Ministry of
Home Affairs, is being pursued.
• Adjudicating Officers have been nominated and Cyber
Regulations Appellate Tribunal has been set up under the
IT Act 2000 to resolve computer related crimes.
• For protection of critical infrastructure of national
importance, it has been proposed to amend section 70 of
the Information Technology Act. It is proposed to declare
any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects
the facility of critical information infrastructure to be a
protected system. The penal provisions are quite stringent
under section 70 of the Information Technology Act.
• Department of Bio-technology has drafted and circulated
public funded R&D projects (Protection of Intellectual

17
Propriety Bill) 2007. This bill was discussed in a meeting
held under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister for S&T
and ES. This is likely to be introduced in the Parliament
shortly. This bill proposed sharing of Intellectual Propriety
Rights as per the Bayh Dole Act. Regarding exploitation of
commercial potential of any research, and setting up a
separate entity, views of all groups involved in technology
development should be obtained.
• DIT is involved in conducting IPR awareness clinics in the
institutes as per their specific requirements. Regarding lack
of well qualified patent examiners in the country it is
understood that DIPP is in the process of setting up a
National Institute for managing IPRs so as to train patent
examiners as per international standards.
•A  scheme is under preparation in DIT to provide assistance
to SMEs in filing patents. Incubations and start up units
will also be eligible to apply under this scheme. For setting
up of incubators, inputs may be obtained from R&D
division.

18
ANNEXURE
No. DIT/R&D/Coord./1(11)/2007
IT Emerging Areas & Coordination Division
Department of Information Technology
Government of India
Electronics Niketan 6, C.G.O. Complex, New Delhi
Office Memorandum
Subject: Constitution of the Committee to develop “Scheme(s) for
Promoting Innovation in Electronics & IT”
1. The undersigned is directed to convey the approval for setting-
up of a Committee to discuss and develop a Scheme(s) for Promoting
Innovation in Electronics & IT.
Composition:
(a) Shri Vinay L. Deshpande, Chairman & Eco, : Chairman
Encore Software Ltd., Bangalore
(b) Dr. A.K. Chakravarti, Adviser, DIT : Co-Chairman
(c) Dr. U.P . Phadke, Adviser, DIT : Member
(d) Shri S. Basu, Scientist-‘G’, DIT : Member
(e) President, NASSCOM : Member
(f) Shri Vinnie Mehta, Executive Director, MAIT : Member
(g) Prof. M. Balakrishnan, CSE Dept., IIT, Delhi : Member
(h) Prof. H.P . Khincha, Elect. Engg. Deptt. IISc, : Member
Bangalore
(i) Nominee of CSIR (NIMITLI) : Member
(j) Nominee of DBT (SBIRI) : Member
(k) Director General, STPI : Member
(l) Shri V .B. Taneja, Scientist-‘G’ & HoD : Member
Convener
Terms of Reference:
(i) To consider feasibility of implementing PPP models for
research with committed funding from industry;

19
(ii) To examine the existing schemes in the Government;
(iii) To consider the Recommendations of different Groups/
Committees on this subject:
(a) The Group to promote the Growth of the Electronics/
IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry;
(b) The Working Group on Fostering Innovation and
sustaining competitiveness; and
(c) The DIT Study team on R&D for the 11th Five Year
Plan; and
(iv) To take an integrated view and recommend “Technology
Innovation Promotion Scheme(s) (TIPS)” for implementation
in DIT.
2. The Committee shall submit its recommendations by August 31,
2007.
3. TA/DA of non-official members will be governed by the
prevailing norms laid down by the Ministry of Finance, Government
of India.
Sd-
(Smt. Kiran Gulati)
Joint Director
29.6.2007
To: As per mailing List Enclosed
1. The Chairman and Members of the Committee.
2. Sr. PPS to the Secretary.

20
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee note that the Government have identified growth
of Electronics and IT hardware manufacturing sector as a thrust area.
However, they are at loss to understand the delay in finalization of a
hardware Policy when the discussions and the process for formulating
the Policy had started way back in 2003. India has the potential to
develop and manufacture Electronics/IT Hardware for the global
markets and gain higher global share besides meeting the country’s
future requirement in the covering areas of information, communication
and entertainment. The Committee are informed that the IT industry
suffers disability factors on account of high incidence of duties/taxes,
inadequate infrastructure, high cost of finance, transaction cost, freight
and power, low volume of production and inverted custom duties
structure in some products, etc. While examining the Demands for
Grants of DoIT for 2006-2007, the Committee were informed that the
Department had prepared a paper on “The Conceptual Policy
Framework to promote growth of Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing Industry” in consultation with the industry associations.
The Committee were subsequently informed that a Task Force set up
by the Prime Minister’s Office had submitted its recommendations on
6th March, 2007. Prior to that while examining the Demands for Grants
for the year 2003-2004, they were informed about a similar exercise
undertaken by the Government when another Task Force had gone
into the entire issue and given its report. It is distressing to note that
despite having identified Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing
sector as a thrust area, the Government have been dragging their feet
on formulation of a policy in this regard. The Committee urge that at
least now the report submitted by the Task Force should be taken up
for serious consideration leading to formulation of policy initiatives
for promoting growth of electronics/IT hardware manufacturing
industry.
Action taken by the Government
The approach of the Discussion Paper on “The Conceptual Policy
Framework to promote growth of Electronics/IT hardware
Manufacturing Industry” has been pursued and in the last few years,
the Government has taken a number of fiscal and Foreign Trade Policy
measures to promote the growth of domestic Electronics/IT Hardware
Manufacturing industry. These are briefly enumerated below:
• The foreign Trade Policy for Electronics & IT products has
been liberalized.

21
• Customs & Excise procedures have been simplified.
• Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) of WTO has been
implemented.
• EDI has been implemented by customs and is under
implementation by central excise.
• The Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) and
Special Economic Zones (SEZ) Schemes have been tailored
to boost manufacturing in the country.
• The peak rate of customs duty has been reduced from 35%
in 2001-02 to 10% in 2007-08.
• Customs duty on specified capital goods and raw materials
has been brought down to 0%.
• The customs duty on basic chemicals, non-ferrous metals
and capital goods is @ 5-7.5%.
Thus, the customs duty level in India is nearing the ASEAN levels.
Incentives provided by the Government for promotion of Electronics/
IT Hardware Manufacturing are given in Annexure. This is an ongoing
process and has resulted in prices of Electronics/IT products showing
a continuous declining trend, leading to increase in demand. Further,
the time gap between introduction of latest products in the world and
domestic market has come down significantly. The above initiatives
have also addressed the problem related to inverted tariff structure to
a great extent. The National manufacturing Competitiveness Council
(NMCC) has been set up by the Government to provide a continuing
forum for policy dialogue to energise and sustain the growth of
manufacturing industries in India, including IT Hardware.
Sale of Personal Computers (PC) in the country has gone up from
5 million nos. in 2005-2006 to 6.5 million nos. in 2006-07, representing
a growth of 30%. PC penetration has gone up from 18 per thousand
population in 2005-06 to 22 per thousand population in 2006-07. The
subscriber base for telephony services continued its growth, with a
total of 66.51 millions subscribers added during the year 2006-07, as
compared to 41.91 million in 2005-06, registering an increase of 58% in
annual growth. The gross subscriber base reached 206.83 million at
the end of March 2007. The teledensity is 18.31% at the end of March
2007 as compared to 12.80% at end of the March 2006, registering an
increase of 43%.
The production of Electronics/IT hardware in the country has
grown from Rs. 56,000 crore in 2005-06 to Rs. 66,000 crore in 2006-07,

22
registering a growth of 16.6%, as compared to a growth rate of 12%
in 2005-06. Although, this growth rate is less than that achieved by
the software sector, however, it is higher than the growth rate of 12.3%
achieved by the manufacturing sector in the country during 2006-07.
In order to encourage investments for setting up Semiconductor
Fabrication and other micro and nano technology manufacture
industries in India, a Special Incentive Package Scheme, has been
announced by the Government vide Gazette Notification No. 78,
Part I, Section I dated 21st March, 2007.
As a result of various steps taken by the Government on a
continuing basis to make India a manufacturing destination, as brought
out above, India is now very high on the agenda of several leading
global Electronics and IT hardware manufacturers. To capitalize on the
growth potential, a number of reputed companies in Electronics/IT/
Telecom hardware manufacturing have either set up their units or are
coming forward to invest in the country. These include world renowned
companies like Nokia, Motorola, Foxconn, Flextronics, Aspocomp,
Samsung, LG, Elcoteq, Ericsson, Alcatel, Tessolve and DELL. Investment
of around US$ 2 billion has already been made in hardware
manufacturing sector in the last 2 years. Foreign Direct Investment of
the order of US$ 25 billion is in the pipeline.
The Member Secretary, Planning Commission has submitted the
report of the group set up by the PMO Task Force to promote growth
of Electronics/IT Hardware Manufacturing Industry, to the Task Force
on 6.3.2007. The second meeting of the Task Force was held on
18.5.2007, wherein the report of the group was considered.

23
ANNEXURE
INCENTIVES PROVIDED BY THE GOVERNMENT FOR
PROMOTION OF ELECTRONICS/IT HARDWARE
MANUFACTURING
1. Approvals for all foreign direct investment upto 100% in
the Hardware manufacturing sector are under the automatic
route.
2. Peak rate of customs duty has been reduced to 10%.
Customs duty on ITA-1 items (217 items) has been abolished
from 1.3.2005. All goods required in the manufacture of
ITA-1 items have been exempted from customs duty subject
to Actual user condition. Customs Duty on specified raw
materials/inputs used for manufacture of electronic
components or optical fibres/cables is 0%. Customs duty
on specified capital goods used for manufacture of electronic
goods is 0%.
3. Excise duty on computers is 12%. Microprocessors, Hard
Disc Drives, Floppy Disc Drives, CD ROM Drives, DVD
Drives/DVD Writers, Flash Memory and Combo-Drives have
been exempted from excise duty. Parts, components and
accessories of mobile handsets including cellular phones are
exempted from excise duty.
4. Export Promotion Capital Goods Scheme (EPCG) allows
import of capital goods on payment of 5% customs duty.
The export obligation under EPCG Scheme can also be
fulfilled by the supply of Information Technology Agreement
(ITA-1) items to the DTA provided the realization is in free
foreign exchange.
5. Supplies of Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) items
and notified zero duty telecom/electronic items in the
Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) by Electronics Hardware
Technology Park (EHTP)/Export Oriented Unit (EOU) units
are counted for the purpose of fulfilment of positive Net
Foreign Exchange Earnings (NFE).
6. Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are being set up to enable
hassle free manufacturing and trading for export purposes.
Sales from Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) to SEZs are being
treated as physical export. This entitles domestic suppliers
to Drawback/DEPB benefits, CST exemption and Service
Tax exemption. 100% Income Tax exemption on export

24
profits available to SEZ units for 5 years, 50% for next 5
years and 50% of ploughed back profits for 5 years
thereafter.
7. Second hand capital goods are freely importable.
8. Weighted deduction of 150% of expenditure incurred on in
house R&D in case of a company engaged in the business
of electronic equipment, computers and telecommunication
equipment is available under clause (1) of sub-section (2AB)
of Section 35 of the Income Tax Act.

25
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
Manpower Development in IT sector has been engaging the
attention of the Committee year after year. The Committee note that
the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) has projected a
considerable gap of about 0.26 million between the demand and supply
of IT manpower by 2012 which calls for increasing the enrolment in
the colleges and opening of new colleges. AICTE is reportedly taking
steps to speed up the enrolment to engineering stream to touch the
figure of about 1 million by 2010-11 from the current level of about
0.50 million. Admittedly another major challenge in this sphere is to
make the existing engineering graduates employable. To cope with the
requirement, the Ministry of HRD are in the process of launching
Finishing School courses in seven NITs at Surathkal, Durgapur,
Warangal, Jaipur, Calicut, Trichi and Kurukshetra from May 2007 on a
pilot scale. These pilot Finishing Schools would formulate model
curriculum and syllabus which in future could be made part of the
engineering curriculum so as to make it compatible with industry
needs. The Committee note that DoIT have also proposed to spread
the concept of Finishing Schools for ITS/ITES sector by way of
launching pilot projects in the areas of teacher’s training/courseware
development/conducting Master Trainers’ Training Programmes/bridge
courses, etc. The Committee consider it a step in the right direction.
At the same time, they are of the strong view that after assessing the
utility of the Finishing Schools being started on a pilot scale, the
concept should be replicated on an urgent basis and on a large scale.
They further stress that much more is required to be done to develop
skilled workforce for the IT industry and, therefore, it calls for the
focused attention and concerted efforts on the part of the Department.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow up action
taken in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) is in the
process of launching Finishing Schools to enhance the employability
of engineering graduates, on a pilot scale at seven NITs (at Surathkal,
Durgapur, Warangal, Jaipur, Calicut, Trichi and Kurukshetra) and IIT
Roorkee. The recommendations of the Standing Committee on IT have
been forwarded to MHRD for further action.
DIT is in the process of setting up a Working/Expert Group on
HRD in IT for evolving pilot projects during the 11th Five Year Plan
in the areas of (a) Capacity building in selected areas to address the

26
requirement of emerging knowledge economy; (b) Technology
Incubation Centres and Hardware Infrastructure facility for entrepreneur
development; (c) Integration of new courses in ITI and support to
Women’s Polytechnics; and (d) Spreading the concept of Finishing
School-teachers training by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc.
The proposed Working/Expert Group on HRD in IT will assess
the need of the sector, evolve/finalise and prioritize various activities
to be initiated during the 11th Plan period.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee are informed that DoIT’s HRD activities are aimed
towards generation of trained human resources for the manufacturing
& service sectors of electronics and IT industry. Projects have been
initiated for generation of quality and skilled manpower in the area of
Information Security, VLSI Design and Computer Science/IT and setting
up of a Regional Institute for e-Learning and Information Technology
(RIELIT) at Kohima, Nagaland and ITEs/BPO training facilities in
Jammu & Kashmir and in the North-East region. They have also
engaged C-DAC and DOEACC for conducting industry oriented
education programme both in formal and non-formal sectors. DOEACC
is implementing ITEs-BPO courses in the North East and Jammu &
Kashmir region and would initiate this course in its other centres and
accredited institutes spread cross the country. Besides this, NASSCOM
and the Department of Information Technology & Communication,
Government of Rajasthan have launched an employment benchmarking
test called NASSCOM Assessment of Competence (NAC) as pilot phase
for ITEs-BPO Sector during November, 2006. The NAC would create
a continuous pipeline of talent through continuous assessment of
candidates on key skills by a national standard assessment. DOEACC
would reportedly assess the progress of NAC and its’ impact on the
industry for initiating complimentary training efforts in other areas.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the findings of DOEACC
specifically with regard to the effectiveness of NAC. They recommend
that DoIT should review the situation and draw up a comprehensive
action plan in consultation with the Ministry of HRD for capacity
building with a view to bridging the gap between the demand and
supply of IT skilled workforce. There is also a need to extend the
training programmes undertaken by C-DAC and DOEACC to more
centers across the country.
Action taken by the Government
DOEACC has observed that NASSCOM has so far conducted two
NAC pilot testing in August 2005 and November 2006 in Rajasthan.

27
More than 6000 candidates had appeared in the test. A job fair was
held in Rajasthan in April 2007 for candidates who had appeared in
the aforesaid test and about 1200 NAC candidates were interviewed.
The NAC pilot test is being rolled out in Gujarat, West Bengal,
Chandigarh and some other States.
In the meantime, DOEACC Society had launched ITEs-BPO
(Customer Support) courses at its various centres through which over
4450 candidates have been trained so far. The Society has also finalized
the ITEs-BPO courses in Banking and Insurance verticals and these
courses are expected to be launched during 2007-08.
The Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) had
constituted a Working Group under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Department of Higher Education on improving the supply of suitable
talent in the IT & BPO Sectors. The Working Group has members
drawn from the Department of Information Technology (DIT), AICTE,
Industry and the academia. The Working Group has recommended
setting up of Finishing Schools to enhance the employability of
engineering graduates. In line with the recommendations of the
Working Group, MHRD is in the process of launching Finishing Schools
on a pilot scale at seven NITs and IIT-Roorkee.
DIT is in the process of setting up a Working/Expert Group on
HRD in IT for evolving pilot projects during the 11th Five Year Plan
in the areas of (a) Capacity building in selected areas to address the
requirement of emerging knowledge economy; (b) Technology
Incubation centres and Hardware Infrastructure facility for entrepreneur
development; (c) Integration of new courses in ITI and support to
Women’s Polytechnics; and (d) Spreading the concept of Finishing
School-teachers training by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc. The proposed
Working Group would have members from MHRD, Industry and
academia.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee further note that DoIT are in the process of setting
up a Working/Expert Group on HRD for evolving pilot projects during
the 11th Five Year Plan in the areas of capacity building in selected
areas like Nanotechnology, Power and Communication, Computer
Science, Biotechnology, Infrastructure, Energy, Manufacturing and
Mechatronics to address the requirement of emerging knowledge
economy; Technology Incubation Centres and Hardware Infrastructure
facility for entrepreneur development; Integration of new courses in
ITI and support to Women’s Polytechnics and Spreading the concept

28
of Finishing School teachers training by DOEACC/C-DAC, etc.
Although it is a move in the right direction, the Committee feel that
the allocation of Rs. 43 crore in the Annual Plan for Manpower
Development is quite inadequate to meet the vast requirements in the
sphere. The concern about the need for funds for DOEACC to start
course on generic skills in States other than the North East and J&K
was also voiced by the Secretary, DoIT during evidence, In fact,
DOEACC was provided only Rs. 50 lakh against the proposed sum of
Rs. 22 crore which is quite unfortunate. The Committee trust that the
Pilot projects taken up by DoIT will go a long way in bridging the
gap between demand and supply of IT skilled workforce at present
and also for meeting the projected requirements in the future. In view
of the pressing needs in the sphere of manpower development, the
Committee would impress upon DoIT to pursue with the Planning
Commission the need for allocation of more funds during the Eleventh
Plan for HRD schemes in the IT sector. The Committee would await
the outcome in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
As part of the exercise of formulation of the 11th Five Year Plan
(2007-12) and Annual Plan 2008-09, the Department of Information
Technology (DIT) has taken up with the Planning Commission the
budgetary requirement for the 11th Five Year Plan and annual Plan
2008-09.
National Informatics Centre (NIC)
General
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee note that DoIT have proposed an allocation of
Rs. 427 crore for implementation of various projects/programmes
during the year 2007-2008 against which the Planning Commission
has approved only Rs. 320 crore. They have learnt that on account of
the reduced outlay, NIC would have to carry out the following activities
in a reduced scale, viz. Cyber Security, business continuity planning,
Disaster Recovery centres, E-Governance Standards, land records
computerisation, knowledge management and training, strengthening
of districts, upgradation of video conferencing facility, geographic
information system, Data Centres, last mile solution, etc. The urgent
need for investing more on business continuity plan, protection to the
system, higher bandwidth, etc. for enhancing and stabilizing the
operations of NIC was forcefully brought out before the Committee

29
during evidence. The Committee have a strong conviction that with
NIC having been entrusted with the unique role of providing network
backbone and e-Governance solutions to all the Government institutions,
should not be starved of funds for its key operations. It is crucial that
NIC should make a steady progress in the pursuit of developing state-
of-the art application software related to various sectors and also for
providing cyber security to its network by incorporating security
systems. The Committee would urge that the requirement of additional
funds by NIC should be taken up forcefully with the Planning
Commission while finalising the Eleventh Plan proposals as well as at
the 2007-08 RE stage and the Committee be apprised of the outcome
thereof.
Action taken by the Government
Noted for compliance. For the financial year 2007-08 the additional
requirement will be projected at RE stage.
Government Informatics Training Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee note that NIC is responsible for organising various
courses for Government employees under the sponsorship of the
Department of Personnel & Training (DoP&T). It is seen that during
the year 2006-2007, the total number of workshops on e-Governance
projects held were only three with one held at NIC, Chennai and two
at NIC, Delhi. During the year 2007-2008, also only two such workshops
are proposed to be organised; one at NIC, Chennai and another at
NIC, Delhi. According to NIC such programmes would be conducted
on demand basis for the States on e-Governance Projects. In view of
the ambitious e-Governance programme under implementation in the
country, there is a growing need to organise more such workshops at
various levels to promote the concept of e-Governance. The Committee,
therefore, stress that NIC should devise more number of workshops
and training programmes on e-Governance and also take the initiative
of offering its services to the State Governments for creating better
awareness about the e-Governance programme among the people at
large.
Action taken by the Government
NIC proposes to undertake the following steps:
•T wo additional workshops at two different States.

30
• Conduction of Orientation programme for Senior NIC
Officers from Delhi and State Centres, who would in turn
be ready to conduct Workshops on e-Governance in
collaboration with State IT departments and State
Administrative Training Institutes in coming years.
•C reation of a multimedia CD of about one hour duration,
about Government’s initiatives in e-Governance, and its
expected impact on the people at large. This CD can be
distributed to Training Institutes all over India for
distribution in various programmes and also to different
State Departments of IT.
Video Conferencing
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee note with satisfaction that NIC has set up
videoconferencing facility in 490 locations in the country using cost
effective solutions. This facility is extensively being used for monitoring
of various projects and discussions. The facility has been provided in
21 States up to District level so far. Remaining States and Union
territories have at least one Videoconferencing location. The Committee,
however, are not satisfied with the rate of utilisation of multi-point
videoconferencing facility provided in many of the States. The
Committee find that whereas in States like Madhya Pradesh and
Chattisgarh the facility was used for 8720 hours and 3039 hours
respectively, in States like Maharashtra and Jammu & Kashmir where
the videoconferencing facility is available up to district level, the facility
was used only for 84 hours and 95 hours respectively. Therefore, it
highlights the need to back up the provision of infrastructure with
imparting of awareness programmes and training sessions. While the
committee would like to encourage NIC to network more number of
stations in all the States and UT in the country with videoconferencing
facilities, they would also urge that NIC should devise the package
for setting up infrastructure for videoconferencing by combining it
with training programmes targeting the users in order that the facility
provided is made optimum use of.
Action taken by the Government
DG (NIC) has sent letter to State IT Secretaries requesting them to
use the videoconferencing services by the State Government effectively.
They may issue official notification to their Departments to use video
conferencing for their regular official work and project monitoring.

31
A website (satcom.nic.in) on the utilization of videoconferencing
facility has been made available to State Governments so that they
can directly monitor the same.
Nano-Technology Development Programmes
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee observe that Nano-technology is an emerging,
disruptive and interdisciplinary technology widely recognised as the
next technological revolution that has attracted the attention of scientists
and engineers all over the world. Realizing the potential of Nano-
technology, governments in the developed countries have been funding
R&D in this area for quite some time. Despite the trends elsewhere, it
surprises the Committee that although Rs. 40.43 crore was spent in
the year 2005-2006, an outlay of Rs. 40 crore provided in 2006-2007
was reduced to Rs. 34 crore at RE stage. Against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 40 crore in 2007-08 only Rs. 29 crore has been provided.
According to DoIT against an allocation of Rs. 10 crore sought in
2007-2008 under the Semi Conductor Integrated Circuit Lay Out Design
(SICLD) Act activities, only Rs. 0.75 crore has been provided on account
of which only routine SICLD Registry activities could be carried out
and DoIT would be forced to shelve the proposal for setting up of a
National IPR Institute for Semiconductor Layout Design in the current
year. The trend of Budget allocation for Nano-technology , widely
recognised as the next technological revolution, has been, to say the
least, disappointing. The fact that the planning process which has not
been able to keep itself abreast with technological advancement the
world over calls for a reversal of the trend. The Committee, therefore,
expect the DoIT to accord highest priority for encouraging Nano-
technology development programmes and, as assured, to pursue the
issue of adequate funding for it at the RE stage. The Committee would
like to be apprised of further developments in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The Nano-technology Development Programme of DIT is oriented
towards nano-electronics and related areas. As electronics is all
pervading having applications in Information Technology, healthcare,
avionics, defence, education, communication, computing etc. It is
expected to bring benefits in good measure. The challenge before
researchers is to discover and develop nano-devices and nano-processes
to integrate these devices for fabricating the chips. It also presents
another challenge to design giga scale systems/chips i.e. the chips
using large number of nano-devices/translators (say one billion

32
transistors in a single chip) alongwith Computer-Aids for doing chip
designs (also called CAD tools or EDA tools for VLSI design). In last
two decades or so, substantial strength has been built in the country
in the area of chip/VLSI design. Today, besides many indigenous
companies, almost all the big global players in these areas (chip design
& EDA tool development) have set up their R&D/Design Centres in
India. Due to requirement of prohibitively large investment, the chip
fabrication activity in India has lagged behind. Recently on DIT
initiative, Government has announced a policy measure “Special
Incentive Package Scheme to encourage Investments for setting up
Semiconductor Fabrication and other micro and nano-technology
manufacture industries in India” to provide incentives to attract
fabrication facilities in the country. Further, in comparison to funding
provided to micro-electronics research in the past an increased level of
funding for nano-technology research is being provided by the
Government.
This declining quantity and quality of manpower in these
institutions coupled with shortage of S&T manpower in DIT is a major
difficulty in speedy evolution and implementation of a major nano-
technology R&D projects. Notwithstanding the above, all efforts are
being put to evolve sponsored R&D projects in new challenging of
nano-technology.
Technology Development for Indian Languages
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee note that during 2007-08, DoIT had proposed an
allocation of Rs. 30 crore for Technology Development for Indian
Languages (TDIL) in order to carry out various on-going projects and
also take up new projects to be initiated in the area of speech
technology in Indian languages, viz. (i) Linguistic resources and capacity
building and (ii) Localization and basic R&D projects in language
computing against which the approved Plan outlay is Rs. 11 crore
only. The Committee learn that under the ‘National Roll-Out Plan’
projects of TDIL, software tools and fonts for 10 Indian languages
namely Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Assamese, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi,
Oriya, Punjabi and Urdu languages have been released in public
domain. Software tools and fonts for remaining official Indian languages
are being developed/consolidated. The Committee believe that in a
multilingual and multi script society like ours where e-Governance
programme is being implemented on an extensive sale, there is an
urgent need to develop tools for information processing in the local

33
languages, applications and contents and be made available for wider
use of ICT to benefit the people at large. The Committee, therefore,
feel that availability of funds should not become a hindrance in the
implementation for projects under Technology Development for Indian
Languages Scheme.
Action taken by the Government
Additional requirement of Rs. 19 crore will be met from the R&D
budget of e-Governance as localization is also one of the priority areas
of e-Governance Programme. If there are any shortfalls, it will be
projected at RE stage.

34
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that at present there are 45 STPI centres across
the country and 5 more are in the pipeline. The department have
commissioned a study to find out the potential sites or setting up of
STPI centres as they have a plan to set up at least one STPI in each
State. The Committee desire that the possibility of setting up more
STPI centres should be explored, particularly in smaller cities, in order
to generate employment opportunities for the youth and also promote
IT exports from across the country.
Action taken by the Government
STPI has set up 48 centers across the country and about 11 more
centers are in pipeline. Out of 48 centers, 7 centers are in Metros and
41 centers in Tier-II and Tier-III cities.
A feasibility study has to be conducted by STPI jointly with the
State Government to evaluate the export potential and commercial
viability of the proposal.
As per the current policy for setting up a new STPI Centre, the
State Government has to provide 3 acres of land, 10,000 sq. ft. of built
up space and a grant-in-aid of Rs. 1 crore to STPI and for the Northeast
States, the State Government has to provide 3 acres of land and 3000
sq. ft. built up space.

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Over the years, the Committee have been closely observing that
drastic cuts continue to be made in the Plan Allocation for a strategic
and fast growing sector like information technology as compared to
the proposed allocations by the DoIT. During the Tenth Plan, the
allocations proposed were Rs. 937.19 crore, Rs. 1146.90 crore, Rs. 1294.38
crore, Rs. 1400.67 crore and Rs. 1516.00 crore for the years 2002-2003
to 2006-2007 respectively, against which the allocations made by the
Planning Commission were only Rs. 470.00 crore, Rs. 470.00 crore,
Rs. 650.00 crore, Rs. 882.00 crore and Rs. 1090.00 crore respectively.
The DoIT have conceded that as a result of the reduced allocations,
the Department have resort to postponement or slowing down of some
of their projects pertaining to important schemes like E-Governance,
R&D, NIC, etc. In this context, the Committee would like to emphasise
the need to provide increased Plan support to DoIT keeping in view
the sustained double-digit revenue growth, steady expansion into newer
service-lines and an unprecedented rise in investments by MNCs
registered in the IT sector in the recent years. They trust that Planning
Commission will take into consideration these factors while finalising
the Eleventh Plan allocations with a view to ensuring that the current
pace of development in the IT sector is further encouraged.
Action taken by the Government
DIT has proposed Rs. 18160.79 crore for the Eleventh Plan.
Approval of this outlay was requested in the meeting held with
Planning Commission on 26.4.2007.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I)
Eleventh Plan & Demands for Grants 2007-2008
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
Having closely scrutinised the scheme-wise details of Annual Plan
allocations for 2007-2008, the Committee note that with the actual

36
allocation being only Rs. 1500 crore as against the proposed amount
of Rs. 2092.08 crore, there has been a cut of Rs. 592.08 crore. Out of
the allocation of Rs. 1500 crore to DoIT, Rs. 800 crore is meant for
e-Governance and Rs. 320 crore for NIC with only the remaining
Rs. 380 crore available for other schemes/programmes of DoIT. The
Committee sense that this will result in some of the crucial schemes
proposed in the Annual Plan being starved of funds. They are, however,
not inclined to go by the routine plea of DoIT that the Plan Allocation
will be reviewed during consultations with the Planning Commission
at the time of finalization of the Eleventh Plan considering the past
experience. They find that the allocation was revised upward only
once in the year 2003-2004 from Rs. 470 crore to Rs. 495 crore. During
2002-2003 and 2006-07 the allocation remained unchanged at RE stage
at Rs. 470 crore and Rs. 1090 crore respectively. During 2004-2005 and
2005-2006, the allocations were in fact reduced at RE stage
from Rs. 750 crore to Rs. 650 crore and from Rs. 929.30 crore to
Rs. 882 crore respectively notwithstanding the good track record of
utilization of allocated funds by the Department in the previous years.
The Committee, therefore, desire that DoIT should plead their case
effectively during the Plan consultations and at the RE stage for
enhancing the Plan allocations to the IT sector in keeping with the
emerging trends.
Action taken by the Government
DIT has pleaded its case in meeting held in Planning Commission
on 26.4.2007 for ZBB/Outlays for Annual Plan 2008-09 and the Eleventh
Plan (2007-12) for the enhancement of funds during Eleventh Plan and
also in the Steering Committee meeting of Communication &
Information Technology on 30th May 2007. The report on Steering
Committee meeting of Communication & Information Technology is
awaited.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee also note that the Planning Commission has not
yet finalised the Eleventh Plan proposals of DoIT though an allocation
of Rs. 1500 crore has been made for the Annual Plan 2007-2008. In the
Committee’s opinion, the Eleventh Plan proposals should have been
finalised well before the commencement of the Plan period so that the
Department could have ensured their preparedness for implementation

37
of the Plan schemes right from day one of the Plan period. As any
further delay in finalisation of the Plan proposals is likely to affect the
implementation of the major schemes envisaged in the Plan, the
Committee stress that the Eleventh Plan proposals in respect of the
Department of Information Technology be finalised expeditiously.
Action taken by the Government
A meeting was held in Planning Commission on 26.4.2007 for Zero
Based Budget/Outlays for Annual Plan 2008-09 and Steering Committee
meeting of Communication & Information Technology on 30th May
2007 to finalize the Eleventh Plan (2007-12) proposal of the DIT. The
report on Steering Committee meeting of Communication & Information
Technology is awaited.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee take a serious note that in some States/Union
Territories, namely Arunachal Pradesh, Lakshadweep, Dadra and Nagar
Haveli, Jammu and Kashmir, Daman and Diu, Goa and Andhra
Pradesh, the progress in respect of establishment of SWAN has been
lagging far behind the schedule. With the preparatory work having
not been completed by these States/Union Territories, the SWAN
proposals, as felt by the Department, might not be ready even by the
middle of 2008. In fact, the progress has been extremely slow even
thought he scheme for the establishment of SWAN at a total outlay of
Rs. 3334 crore was approved by the Government on 28th March, 2005.
While taking serious note of the inordinate delay in submission of
SWAN proposals by these States, the Committee desire that the
Department should pursue the matter with the remaining States/UTs
and make all out efforts to operationalise the SWAN project in all the
States/UTs with the time frame.
Action taken by the Government
Department of IT has undertaken intensive persuasive actions for
accelerating the SWAN proposals from the remaining States/UTs so
that the approval of proposals and RFP documents from these balance
States/UTs are completed at the DoIT level by August, 2007. The State/
UT-wise scenario is as under:
The State of Goa has already initiated wide area network project
through a PPP model outside the provisions of the SWAN Scheme.

38
The SWAN proposal from UT of Lakshadweep has been received by
DIT and presently under scrutiny. The State of Andhra Pradesh has
intimated that the State would soon submit a revised proposal with
enhanced scope to cover all the Mandals in the State. Intensive actions
have been taken to prepare the individual SWAN proposals for J&K,
Arunachal Pradesh, D&NH and D&D. It is expected that all the
remaining proposals would be finalized and approved by the
Empowered Committee by August 2007.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
As per the outcome Budget (2007-08), a target had been fixed to
set up 30,000 ICT based kiosks at village levels across the country by
March, 2007 and 1,00,000 kiosks by December, 2007. However, as of
now only 19000 CSCs are likely to be established by March, 2008 and
a total of 84000 CSCs would be set up by August, 2008. By the end
of October 2008, the Scheme is expected to be completely rolled out
in the country, subject to the speed with which the State Governments
implement the Scheme. As establishment of CSCs is basically the
responsibility of the Department, the Committee stress that they should
effectively monitor the implementation of the project and also render
necessary assistance to the States, wherever required, so that CSCs are
fully rolled out at least as per the revised schedule.
Action taken by the Government
DIT is monitoring and driving the CSC Scheme, being implemented
by the States, on an ongoing basis. To assist the States in the
implementation of the Scheme, DIT has also appointed a National
Level Service Agency , which is handholding the States and assisting
the States in managing the bid process for the selection of the Service
Center Agencies in States.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee were earlier given to understand that as part of
core and support infrastructure of NeGP , DoIT have considered it

39
necessary to first complete the establishment of State Wide Area
Network (SWAN) and Common Service Centres (CSC) as these projects
require longer time frame for implementation as compared to the State
Data Centres. However, they feel concerned to learn that State Data
Centres are proposed to be set up only in 20 States by March, 2008,
the time by when SWAN project would be operational in 28 States/
UTs, as assured by DoIT. The Committee desire that the Department
should make serious efforts to establish the SDCs at a faster speed so
that the SWANs and CSCs do not remain idle and their benefits begin
to accrue to the common people at the earliest.
Action taken by the Government
The State Data Centre scheme is expected to be appraised by EFC
in July 2007 and subsequently approval will be obtained. After approval
of the SDC scheme, individual SDC proposal of the States will be
taken up by the Empowered Committee for approval. The
implementation of the individual SDC would start immediately
thereafter and is expected to take about 9-12 months.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee are given to understand that DoIT have been facing
difficulties in dealing with issues relating to Project Conceptualization
and capacity Building. In order to accelerate the implementation of
various e-Governance projects, a review meeting of e-Governance is
proposed to be held soon by a high level body, chaired by the Prime
Minister. The Committee desire that  DoIT should utilise this
opportunity to highlight and sort out the difficulties being experienced
by them in relation to various agencies of the Government with a
view to facilitating speedier implementation of the programme.
Action taken by the Government
Noted. Capacity Building Scheme for an amount of Rs. 313.00 crore
has been appraised by EFC. The process of obtaining CCEA approval
is currently underway.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I)

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee observe that Programme Management Unit (PMU)
set up in the DoIT is to provide Secretarial support for the NeGP and
technical cum managerial support to line Ministries/Departments. A
report prepared by PMU on the status of implementation of NeGP is
also being constantly updated based on inputs mainly through the
concerned line Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like to
be informed of the periodicity of receiving these inputs from the line
Ministries/Departments and the mode of receiving them in the PMU.
They recommend that inputs in respect of projects implemented/to be
implemented by the States/UTs should also be obtained from them
and used as the basis of the report prepared by PMU. The Committee
further welcome the move by PMU officials to organise field visits to
the concerned Ministries/States.
Action taken by the Government
As of now there is no formal mechanism through which Line
Ministries/Departments send inputs regarding status of their respective
Mission Mode Projects on a periodic basis to DIT/PMU. Information
is collected by the PMU through interaction with officials and field
visits to Line Ministries and States. Status report is updated
continuously and is circulated on a fortnightly basis. To formalize this
process, a Monitoring and Evaluation Framework ahs been developed
by DIT and implementation process is about to start shortly. This
Framework proposes to procure a web enabled application which is to
be hosted on the internet. Login id and passwords would be given to
key people in various central line Ministries and States, who would
directly enter the status information of their projects in the application.
This would then be analyzed by the PMU for providing programme
level status and feedback to implementing agencies along with meeting
out other reporting requirements.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that 11 market Research agencies empanelled
by DoIT have been detailed to carry out impact assessment of

41
e-Governance initiatives across different States and the Centre. In
Phase I of the assessment, about 40 projects covering 10 States and
four nationwide projects have been taken up. The Committee
recommend that specific time target for completion of the assessment
should be fixed so that the assessment reports would be available at
the earliest. The shortcomings in the implementation of the programme
on the basis of the assessments should be communicated to the
concerned Departments/States so that corrective measures thereon could
be initiated and the pace of implementation of e-Governance
programme speeded up.
Action taken by the Government
Phase-I of the Impact Assessment exercise is likely to be completed
by September/October, 2007. Thereafter, the assessment reports shall
be made available to all stakeholders, specially implementers of
e-Governance projects at State and Central line Ministry/Department
to share learnings from this exercise and provide feedback & caveats
to enable a more end-user oriented project development and
implementation methodology.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
As informed, the report submitted by PMU would provide a key
snapshot of the implementation status of Mission Mode Projects under
NeGP . DoIT is reportedly exploring the option of placing the status of
implementation of MMPs in the public domain. The Committee believe
that this step would play a meaningful role in the implementation of
NeGP as all the stakeholders will have acess to the status of
implementation of MMPs bringing in transparency in the system. They
desire that the possibility of making the public aware of the status of
MMPs and inviting their feedback and suggestions to facilitate their
cooperation and participation, should also be looked into.
Action taken by the Government
A Monitoring and Evaluation Framework has already been
developed by DIT and work on development of application for the
same is also in progress. In the meantime, PMU has started collecting
information about various projects and it has also been published on
the website of DIT at www.mit.gov.in. Though this information is not
updated on a real time basis, it is envisaged that once M&E framework
is implemented, continuous updating of status information would be
possible. As far as making public aware of the status of Mission Mode
Projects (MMPs) and inviting feedback and suggestions is concerned,

42
that is the basic idea with which status has been published on the
website and this would be publicized in various e-Governance
workshops and forums.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that in order to spread awareness and promote
usage of e-Governance amongst common man, the DoIT have adopted
a multi-pronged strategy involving multi-media approach such as use
of mass media, advocacy seminars and workshops for implementers,
sensitization workshops for implementing agencies, and on ground
activities specific to the context for rural audience. Currently the
Department are in the process of selecting and empanelling advertising
agencies to carry out these tasks. The Committee suggest that the
mobilization process should primarily target the common people who
would ultimately be the users and the strategy and the medium of
advertising e-Governance should be chosen keeping them in mind.
Action taken by the Government
While the multi pronged strategy does target the different
stakeholders of NeGP , the primary focus of the awareness strategy is
the common man and the advertising campaign shall be designed
keeping the same in mind.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
In their 29th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) relating to
the Department, the Committee had expressed their serious concern
about the sustainability of STP Scheme after the emergence of Special
Economic Zones (SEZs). The SEZs Scheme in its present form did not
meet the objective of spreading the growth of software industry and
the companies under STP Scheme had expressed their concern about
the sustainability of the STP Scheme. Although the STP Scheme is a
standing scheme, the tax holiday would be available to STPI units
only upto 31st March, 2009 with the move to restrict corporate tax
exemption to only new units of SEZ. however, a Committee chaired
by Member Secretary, Planning Commission with Secretaries from
Departments of Commerce, Information Technology, Revenue and
Economic Affairs as members had recommended further extension of
fiscal benefits to STPI units as there is no intrinsic merit in forcing
existing STPI units to move to SEZs for availing the fiscal benefits.
The Committee have been informed that based on the recommendations
of the Committee, DoIT have taken up with concerned Ministries a
proposal for extension of tax benefits under Sections 10A and 10B of

43
the Income Tax Act, 1961 to STPI units for 10 years and granting to
STPI units the same facilities that are available to SEZs. The Committee
trust that the matter would be pursued to its logical conclusion and
STPI units would be provided with the same tax concessions that are
available to SEZs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
final decision taken in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
DIT has taken up this matter with Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee are informed that as only 10 percent of the US$
300 billion market potential in IT and IT Enabled Services (IT-ITES)
has been addressed so far, there is significant headroom for growth.
Moreover, India is fundamentally advantaged and uniquely positioned
to sustain its global leadership position, grow its offshore IT-ITES
industries at an annual rate of 24-25 percent, sustain nearly 10 million
jobs, and generate export revenues of about US$ 86 billion by 2012.
They also note that the Hon’ble President in his address at the special
session of NASSCOM-2006 had asked the industry to aspire to increase
its market share to $200 billion in the IT services, ITES and BPO
sector. He had also called for the required policy initiatives in the area
of concerns and challenges needed to be addressed in the IT Industry
and proposed to constitute a Committee to conduct mid term review
of the progress on the recommended policy action and their impact.
The Committee would like to be informed of the status in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The Working Group on IT for the Eleventh Five Year Plan had
noted that the targets of about US$ 86 billion by 2012 and US$ 60
billion by 2010 are relatively modest compared to US$ 200 billion; and
indicated that the certain concerns and challenges need to be addressed
urgently for the industry to even achieve these targets. The required
policy actions for achieving the same have been recommended by the
Working Group, which are listed under the recommendation No. 23 of
the Standing Committee on IT. Further, it has been proposed by the
above Working Group that a Committee be re-constituted to conduct
a mid term review of the progress on recommended policy action and
their impacts and may consider an upwards revision of the industry
revenue targets, based on the observed success.

44
Information Kiosks in all the High Courts
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee observe that a target had been fixed for NIC to
set up Information Kiosks in all the High Courts and their Benches.
Upgrade LAN and Servers to the High Courts and to develop digital
signature and related software in the High Courts by September, 2006
which has not been executed. However, it has been stated that approval
was given subsequently for computerization of 13000 district and
subordinate courts throughout the country and upgradation of the
computer/IT facilities at the Supreme Court and 21 High Courts at a
cost of Rs. 442.00 crore for which NIC has been made the implementing
agency. As a result of this, all activities connected with provision of IT
facilities to the judiciary would be undertaken as part of this project.
In view of the importance of the project at hand meant to provide IT
backup to the entire judicial system in the country, the Committee
trust that NIC will rise to the occasion and execute the project well
within the timeline.
Action taken by the Government
The Government has given approval for computerization of 13,000
District & Subordinate Courts and upgradation of computer/IT facilities
at Supreme Court & 21 High Courts. NIC being the implementing
agency is to executive the project in coordination with E-Committee.
NIC and E-Committee would work out the action plan for the timely
implementation of the project.
Media Lab Asia
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee observe that Media Lab Asia was set up as a non-
profit organization with a vision of leveraging the information and
communication technologies and other advanced technologies for the
benefit of the common man. In their 29th Report on Demands for
Grants (2006-2007) of DoIT, the Committee had expressed their serious
concern that although a sum of Rs. 65 crore was released during the
first two years of its operation, nothing substantial had been done for
four years up to 2005-2006. With an allocation of Rs. 10 crore to MLA
in fiscal 2006-2007, the Committee had also expressed hopes that its
restructuring process would be completed expeditiously. However, the
Committee were further informed that although a full time MD/CEO
had joined on 16th October, 2006 the full team in  MLA is expected

45
to be in position only by 30th June, 2007 as the process of selection
of officers and staff has been initiated. The Committee express their
serious displeasure about the manner in which MLA, set up to take
the benefits of new technologies to the common masses, has been
functioning since its inception. They fail to comprehend as to why the
process of selection of officers and staff should take such a long time
on account of which its operations are practically on a standstill. They,
therefore, stress that the restructuring of MLA should be completed
within the shortest possible time and the Committee be apprised of
the status thereon.
Action taken by the Government
MD & CEO, Media Lab Asia (MLA) after his joining in October,
2006 initiated the action of recruitment of Officers and Staff for MLA
during the month from January to March 2007. Some Staff and Officers
at lower levels have joined, while others are going to join in next
couple of months. The Officers at senior levels have been selected by
a Selection Committee and the process of their appointment has been
initiated. A Senior level Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.
Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to Government of India has
been also set up to review Media Lab Asia Programme. The Committee
is expected to give their recommendations by end of October-November,
2007.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee observe that the Sub-Committee on Research &
Development on IT constituted for making recommendations for the
Eleventh Plan had recommended an allocation of Rs. 150 crore per
annum for each year of the Plan period which amount to a total of
Rs. 750 in five years to MLA for achieving the massive task of reaching
out to 6.5 lakh villages in the country with ICT based personalised
services. Against this, the Plan outlay for 2007-2008 has been only
Rs. 10 crore. However, DoIT have informed that an Evaluation
Committee has been constituted to review the activities of MLA as
per the Cabinet decision and allocation of additional funds would be
taken up subsequently. While welcoming the move to review the
functioning of MLA, the Committee only hope that this process would
be completed expeditiously. The Committee recommend MLA should
be revamped on the basis of the findings of the Evaluation Committee
so that it could become an effective agent for embarking upon the
ambitious mission of reaching the information and communication
technologies to the common man. Soon after this process is completed,

46
allocation of additional outlay for funding the projects envisaged should
also be taken up for serious consideration.
Action Taken by the Government
A Committee of experts has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to
Government of India. The first meeting of the Committee was held on
11.7.2007 and second is fixed in middle of the August, 2007. The
Committee is expected to give its recommendations by end October—
November, 2007.
   N EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

47
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-08)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th November, 2007 from
1630 hrs. to 1815 hrs. in Committee Room No. G-074, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered and
adopted the following Draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained
in their Forty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Information Technology).
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above said Draft Reports and present the same to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

48
APPENDIX II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 11, 17, 19, 21, 23—28, 30, 31, 34 & 35
Total: 18
Percentage: 51.43%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Sl. No. 18
Total: 01
Percentage: 2.86%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10 and 12
Total: 07
Percentage: 20%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are
of interim nature:
Sl. Nos. 13—16, 20, 22, 29, 32 and 33
Total: 09
Percentage: 25.71%

FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.12.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 05.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 176
Price : Rs. 56.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
replies of the Government ..................................... 34
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 35
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 40
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2007-08)
held on 30.11.2007 .................................................... 47
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Forty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee...................................................... 48

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
13. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
**15. Prof. Prem Kumar Dhumal
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
27. Shri Motiur Rahman
28. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
*31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
* Nominated w.e.f. 24 August, 2007.
** Nominated w.e.f. 5 October, 2007 vice Vishnu Deo Sai ceased to the member of this
Committee w.e.f. 30 August, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology,
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifty-Fourth Report on Action Taken
by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Demands for Grants (2007-2008)’ relating to the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Information Technology).
2. The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April,
2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The
Department furnished Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report on 24 July, 2007.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 30 November, 2007.
4. For facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
 3 December, 2007 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

54
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2007-2008)
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)
