STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Limited Mobility through WLL for Fixed Service Providers’]
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
35

THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLGY
(2006-2007)
( FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Limited Mobility through WLL for Fixed Service Providers’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006 / Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

CIT No. 157
Price : Rs. 29.00
© 2006 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by National Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government ............................................................................. 4
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government ...... 17
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration .............................................................. 18
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of the which
Replies are interim in nature ....................................................... 19
APPENDICES
I Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held on
06.12.2006 ..................................................................................... 20
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventeenth
Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee ..................... 22

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
15. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
16. Shri P.C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri Narahari Mahato
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri M.Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Executive Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology (2006-07) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this
Thirty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Limited Mobility through WLL for Fixed Service Providers’ relating to
the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Telecommunications).
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 8 March, 2001
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Department furnished updated
Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Report on
18 October, 2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting
held on 06.12.2006.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee is given at Annexure-ll.
N
EW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
8 December, 2006 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in their Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Limited Mobility
through WLL for Fixed Service Providers (FSPs)” pertaining to the Department of
Telecommunications (DoT).
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 08th March, 2001
and laid on the table of the Rajya Sabha the same day. It contained 8 recommendations/
observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/observations
contained in the Report have been received and categorized as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:—
Para Nos. : 62 to 69 Chapter - II
Total - 8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:—
Para Nos. : Nil Chapter - III
Total - Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:—
Para Nos. : Nil Chapter - IV
Total - Nil
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim
nature:—
Para Nos. : Nil Chapter - V
Total - Nil
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by Government on their
recommendations/observations.

2
5. In their Seventeenth Report on “Limited Mobility’, the Committee had
observed that the Wireless in Local Loop (WLL) technology, at the beginning provided
for a Fixed Wireless Terminal (FWT) to be installed in the subscribers’ premises, but
with the advancement of technology, it was proposed to supplement the FWTs with
mobile handsets capable of limited mobility within a radius of 50 kms. Introduction of
Limited mobility was vehemently opposed by the Cellular Operators Association of
India (COAI) for various reasons which include alleged violation of the terms and
conditions of the licence agreement for Fixed Service Providers (FSPs), sub optimal
utilization of spectrum, equitable, cost based and non-discriminatory inter-connection
access charges etc. According to the then Association of Basic Telecom Operators
(ABTO) now rechristened as Association of Unified Service Providers of India (AUSPI),
if some new services arising out of technological innovations which were not permitted
in the licence conditions of the cellular operators could be enjoyed by the Cellular
Mobile Service Operators (CMSOs) they should not grudge if some benefits, which
were not originally envisaged in the Basic Service Operators (BSO) licenses, were
accorded to them in the interest of the consumers. Similarly, on the spectrum scarcity
and usage issue, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) had clarified that
introduction of a service could not be restrained only because in the initial stages the
demand was likely to outstrip the supply. The Department of Telecommunications (DoT)
were also of the view that ‘limited mobility’ service should be introduced especially for
the benefit of the consumers who could not afford full mobility services. The Committee
after considering the views of COAI, AUSPI (the then ABTO), TRAI as well as DoT
were of the opinion that when the development in technology permitted a new and an
affordable facility, it should not be denied to the consumers including those in rural,
remote and inaccessible areas. The Committee also recommended that every possible
care should be taken to see that advantages accorded to the Basic Service Operators
(BSOs) in the form of “limited mobility’ did not act as a deterrent to the expansion of
Global System for Mobile (GSM) cellular operations. The Committee further desired
that continuous review should be made towards the effect of the decision taken to
introduce limited mobility, consistent with the interest of the consumers and faster
expansion of the telecom network at affordable tariff.
6. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Notes have
stated that the issue of limited mobility has been settled with the dismissal of the petition
of the cellular operators by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as withdrawn. Moreover,
consequent upon the issue of Addendum to NTP-99 in November 2003, Unified Access
Service Licence Regime (UASL) has been put in place. Under this licence, a service
provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services and fully mobile services.
Thus, the existing Basic and Cellular Operators have been allowed to migrate to UASL
regime.
7. The Department have also stated that direct connectivity with international
long distance operators has been permitted to the Access Service Providers since 1st
April, 2002. Further, revenue sharing arrangement has also been revised in forms of
origination, termination and Access Deficit Charges (ADC) from 1st May, 2003. At

3
present, the termination charges for all Cellular as well as basic services are the same.
8. The Department have further pointed out that introduction of limited mobility
has not acted as a deterrent to the expansion of the cellular operations as consistent
growth has been observed in the number of subscribers in Basic as well as Cellular
services.
9. The Committee while concurring with the introduction of ‘limited
mobility’ had observed that it would enable the citizens to avail mobile phone
facilities at reasonable and affordable prices. The Committee were of the view
that Wireless in Local Loop (WLL) would substantially facilitate the roll out in
rural and Technically Non-Feasible (TNF) urban areas. In their opinion, where
technology allowed an expanded service at an affordable price to the advantage of
consumers, especially in rural areas, maximum competition should be permitted
in the telecom sector consistent with the need for a level playing field and keeping
in view the ambitious teledensity target set in New Telecom Policy (NTP), 1999.
Since then, the subsequent developments in the telecom sector which inter-alia
include introduction of the convergent licensing system, the phenomenal increase
in the number of mobile telephone subscribers which have in fact outnumbered
the landline subscribers and the substantial reduction in cellular phone tariffs
have vindicated the stance of the Committee in recommending the introduction of
limited mobility. The Committee find that most of the apprehensions of the cellular
operators, against the introduction of limited mobility, have been put to rest with
the introduction of the Unified Access Service Licence (UASL) regime wherein a
telecom service provider can provide fixed, limited and fully mobile services. The
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) had also upheld
the decision of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) to allow limited
mobility. The appeal filed by the Cellular Operators before the Hon’ble Supreme
Court was dismissed as withdrawn in January, 2004. Thus, the contentious issue
of ‘limited mobility’ has been settled once and for all. However, despite the
introduction of such an innovative service primarily meant to boost rural telephony,
the Committee are still much concerned to note that the rural teledensity stood at
1.86 as on April, 2006, whereas the urban teledensity, spearheaded by mobile
telephony, has reached almost 40 as on the same date. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department should take all appropriate measures to ensure that
the telecom service providers perform better and adequately in rural and remote
areas in order to bridge the urban-rural divide to a greater extent so that the
purpose for which limited mobility was introduced is well served, especially in the
expansion of mobile telephone services in the rural and remote areas.

4
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 62)
The New Telecom Policy (NTP), 1999 proclaims as one of its objectives,
the transformation in a time bound manner, of the Telecom sector to a creative
competitive environment in both urban and rural areas providing legal opportunities
of a level playing field for all players. It states that convergence of both markets
and technologies is a reality i.e. “forcing realignment of the industry”. It also mentions
that this convergence now allows the Operators to use their facilities to deliver
some services reserved for other operators necessitating a re-look into the existing
policy framework. Thus, the thrust of NTP-99 is to increase tele-density,
provide competition while ensuring level playing field as well as means for quicker
roll out with the induction of new technologies providing cheaper communications.
Pursuant to these objectives of the NTP-99, Department of Telecommunications (DoT)
has been following a policy of unrestricted entry in all the Sectors as far as possible.
In this context, the Committee notes that Wireless in Local Loop (WLL) technology
which was allowed in the Fixed Service Providers (FSPs) licence itself has been
given a new thrust. Earlier, this technology provided for a Fixed Wireless Terminal
(FWT) to be installed in the subscribers’ premises, but with the advancement of
technology now it is proposed to supplement the FWTs with mobile handsets capable
of “Limited Mobility” within a radius of 50 Kms. This concept of “limited mobility”
has become a bone of contention for the cellular operators for various reasons as
brought out in the preceding paragraphs. On the other hand, Department
of Telecommunications (DoT), Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and
Association of Basic Telecom Operators (ABTO) have been vigorously advocating
the introduction of limited mobility through WLL for Fixed Service Provider (FSPs).
The Committee, after considering the views of COAI, ABTO, DoT as well as TRAI,
feels that when the development in technology permits new and an affordable facility
to the consumers, such facility should not be denied to the consumers including those
in rural and inaccessible areas. However, any likely adverse impact on the
proper operation of the entire system and particularly so far as existing operators
are concerned who are entitled to conditions which provide for level playing field is
to be kept in view and means found out toy mitigate the same, if necessary.

5
Action Taken by Government
The petition filed by the Cellular Operators was dismissed as withdrawn by
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jan. 2004. Consequent upon the issue of Addendum to NTP’99
in Nov.’03 Unified Access Service License Regime has been put into place. Under this
license, a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services and fully
mobile services, the existing Basic and Cellular Operators were allowed to migrate into
Unified Access Service License regime. A copy of the guidelines for migration to Unified
Access Service License regime is enclosed as Annexure-I. The entry fee and other terms
and conditions are as that for the Fourth Cellular Operators for the service area.
(Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Praragraph No. 63)
The first and foremost reservation that the COAI has expressed relates to the
licence agreement of FSPs. According to the Association, the licence awarded to FSPs
is only to provide fixed services and if FSPs are permitted to provide mobile services
also, then unlimited number of players will be able to enter mobile services without
even holding a valid mobile licence. Therefore, the Association is of the opinion that if
FSPs want to provide any form of mobile services, they should do so by applying for the
Fourth Mobile licence which has currently been recommended by the TRAI, otherwise
bidding for the Fourth licence would be in jeopardy as the backdoor entry of FSPs into
Cellular services would largely depress the business potential of cellular projects.
NTP-99 allows the operators to use their facilities to deliver some services reserved for
other operators. TRAI has clarified that with the acceptance of migration to NTP-99,
the Cellular Mobile Service Operators (CMSOs) have agreed that their markets will no
more be protected for them by the terms of their licences. It has been pointed out by the
ABTO that several benefits such as use of Cellular services for providing fixed services,
carnage of intra-circle long distance traffic, multiple points of interconnect, higher rentals
on account of Calling Party Pays (CPP), charge for calling line identification, e-mail on
phone, short messaging, internet etc., which have been envisaged neither in the licence
of the CMSOs nor been permitted by the Regulator are being enjoyed by the Cellular
Operators. Therefore, according to ABTO, if some new services arising out of
technological innovations which are not permitted in the licence or for which the Cellular
Operators are not paying anything extra, can be enjoyed by the CMSOs, they should not
grudge if some benefits, which were not original envisaged in the BSO licences are
accorded to them in the interest of the consumers. In view of the above conflicting
interests, the Committee urges upon the Department to take every possible care in
consultation with TRAI to see that advantages accorded to BSOs in the form of “limited
mobility” should not act as deterrent to the expansion of cellular operations and

6
continuous review should be made of the effect of the decisions taken, consistent of
course with the interest of the consumers and faster expansion of the telecom network at
affordable tariff.
Action Taken by Government
TRAI had introduced revenue sharing arrangement for limited mobile services
at par with fully mobile cellular services vide Telecommunication Interconnection
(Charges) and Revenue Sharing Regulation (5/2001) dated 14th Dec. 2001 and effective
from 31st Jan. 2002.
Further, new interconnection usage charge regime has been put into place from
1st May 2003 whereby revenue is shared in terms of origination, carriage and termination
apart from Access Deficit Charge. Review of Interconnection Usage Charges including
access deficit charge is a continuous process and TRAI has revised the amount of ADC
with effect from 1st Feb. 2004 and 1st Feb. 2005.
Further, TRAI has allowed forbearance in respect of tariffs for Cellular/Limited
Mobility. For Basic Services also tariffs are under forbearance except in rural areas.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 64)
The Committee observes that, as stated by the COAI, in the guidelines recently
announced by the Government for introduction of fourth operator in cellular services, it
has been clearly reiterated that any digital technology which can be used to offer mobile
services will come within the purview of mobile licence and be subject to the terms and
conditions as applicable in Access (CDMA) technology which will be used to offer
limited mobility, is a digital technology and therefore, come under the purview of a
mobile licence; if it is so, is not understandable how without a mobile licence BSOs will
be able to offer mobility, even if a limited one. No doubt consumer interest should have
all the priorities but no section of the operators should be provided special facilities at
the expense of the other. The Committee is of the view that more in depth study should
have been made, so that consistent with the interest of the consumers, no special or
unusual decisions are taken which raise questions about providing level playing field to
the operators.
Action Taken by Government
Limited Mobility has not acted as a deterrent to the expansion of the Cellular
operations as consistent growth has been observed in the number of subscribers of
Basic as well as Cellular Services.

7
Further, in Nov. 2003, Unified Access Service License regime was introduced
whereby a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services and
fully mobile services under this license.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 65)
The Cellular Operators have pointed out that the Licence Agreement for BSOs
provides for use of WLL, which does not permit mobility and therefore, the BSOs
should not be permitted to offer mobility. The Committee is of the view that in view of
the new technology when the WLL systems are capable of being used to provide mobility
within a specified area using the same frequency spectrum at a much cheaper rate which
will be for the benefit of the consumers, such technological development can not be
ignored but use thereof should not create any controversy which may affect consumer
interest.
Action Taken by Government
TDSAT has upheld the decision of the Department to allow limited mobility. The
cellular operators had filed an appeal before Hon’ble Supreme Court which was dismissed
as withdrawn.
Further, the Government has introduced Unified Access Service License regime
in Nov. 2003 wherein a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile
services and fully mobile services.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 66)
The COAI has alleged that provision of mobility in WLL CDMA utilizes much
more spectrum, which is a scarce natural resource, per subscriber than the provision of
Fixed Wireless Terminals (FWTs) and thus FSPs will use this scarce resource in a sub-
optimal manner under the preferential fixed service licence terms. The ABTO, on the
other hand, has stated that WLL CDMA technology uses the existing spectrum already
available for BSOs for which spectrum charges are also being paid and hence does not
encroach upon the spectrum allocated for Cellular mobile service which use Global
System for Mobile (GSM) technology. On the spectrum scarcity issue, TRAI on its part,

8
has clarified that introduction of a service cannot be restrained only because in the
initial stages the demand is likely to outstrip the supply. The Regulator has recommended
that the frequency spectrum made available to both BSOs and CMOs should be very
reasonably priced and the basis of such allotment and pricing should be the same for
both the operators so as not to create a serious pressure on their revenues. In this context,
the Committee is of the opinion that availability of frequency spectrum and the price at
which it is available to the service provider is going to be the most critical factor in the
growth of telecom services. The Committee would like that the Department should
examine carefully the COAI’s apprehensions of the sub-optimal use of the frequency
spectrum by FSPs under the preferential fixed service licence terms and all other issues
that have been or may be raised so that the interest of the consumers can be protected by
reasoned decision and in a transparent manner.
Action Taken by Government
The issue of limited mobility has been settled with the dismissal of petition of
Cellular Operators by Hon’ble Supreme Court as withdrawn.
The Government has introduced Unified Access Service License regime in
Nov. 2003 wherein a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services
and fully mobile services.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII (Vol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 67)
The CMSOs have claimed that if they are provided with identical level of Licence
Entry Fee and Annual Revenue Share, equitable cost-based and non-discriminatory
interconnection access charges for CMSPs in line with as provided to FSPs, direct inter
circle connectivity and direct connectivity to VSNL international gateways as mandated
by NTP-99, they would be able to provide GSM Mobile services at a much cheaper rate
to the consumers. Here, it may be mentioned that the CMSOs have stressed the point
that they are willing to face competition but are concerned with the comparability of the
two services, their pricing and the “preferential treatment’ meted out to the BSOs. The
Committee is of the view that this aspect should also be duly considered by DoT and
TRAI, specially as there is a scope of providing level playing field to all classes of
operators.
Action Taken by Government
The Government has introduced Unified Access Service License regime in
Nov. 2003 wherein a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services
and fully mobile services.

9
Direct connectivity with International Long Distance Operators has been permitted
to the Access Providers from 1st April 2002.
Revenue Sharing arrangements has also been revised in terms of origination,
termination and access deficit charge from 1st May 2003.
The various Cellular Operators appealed in Supreme Court against the judgment
of TDSAT upholding the decision of Government for allowing Limited Mobile services
of Basic Service Operators which was dismissed as withdrawn in Jan. 2004.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 68)
In this context, the Committee observes that TRAI has recently recommended
that revenue share as licence for the CMSOs may be prescribed at 12% of the Annual
Revenue (previous it was 17%) which will be the same as prescribed for BSOs in Metros
and category-A circles. It may seem that it provides CMSOs inadequate compensation
for loss of market to “limited mobility” and consequential loss of revenue. In this respect,
the Committee recommends that the concerns of CMSOs like equitable, cost-based and
non-discriminatory inter-connection access charges etc., as mentioned above, should
be considered and the decisions taken with reasons may be forwarded to the Committee
in due course.
Action Taken by Government
TRAI has prescribed sharing of interconnection charges in terms of origination,
carriage, termination and access deficit charge from 1st May 2003. The tariffs have
been revised from time to time. At present termination charges for all cellular as well as
basis services are same.
[Ministry of Communications and Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 69)
Subject to the above, the Committee is of the view that if the extent of mobility
under the two systems i.e. GSM and CDMA is not identical and as long as there is
noticeable difference in the scope of the two services and that the imbalance apprehended
in the level playing field by the BSOs introducing the new service can be corrected by

10
making some necessary policy changes, provision of limited mobility through WLL
may help faster roll out of the network, increase tele-density and greatly benefit the
consumers provided the system, as envisaged, operates fairly in the interest of consumers.
Action Taken by Government
The Government has introduced Unified Access Service License regime in Nov.
2003 wherein a service provider can provide fixed services, limited mobile services
and fully mobile services.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/ Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 15-2/2000-BSII(V ol. III) dated 18th Oct. 2005]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I

11
ANNEXURE I
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SANCHAR BHAWAN, 20 ASHOKA ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 001.
No.808-26/2003-VAS Dated the 11th Nov., 2003.
SUB: GUIDELINES FOR UNIFIED ACCESS (BASIC & CELLULAR)
SERVICES LICENCE.
Given the central aim of NTP-99 to ensure rapid expansion of teledensity; given
the unprecedented expansion of telecom services that competition has brought about;
given the steep reductions in tariffs that competition has ensured; given the fact that
advances in technologies erase distinctions imposed by earlier licensing systems; given
the fact that even more rapid advances in technologies are imminent; given the steep
reduction in costs of providing telecom services; given the rapid convergence of tariffs
for wireless services; given the fact that the provision of such services at the cheapest
possible rates and by the most reliable mode is the sine qua non for India to consolidate
its position as a leading hub of Communications systems, Information Technology, IT
enabled services, and of establishing itself as a leader in new disciplines such as
bioinformatics and biotechnology; given the recommendations of TRAI in this regard;
Government, in the public interest in general and consumer interest in particular and for
the proper conduct of telegraphs and telecommunications services, has decided to move
towards a Unified Access Services Licensing regime. As a first step, as recommended
by TRAI, Basic and Cellular services shall be unified within the service area. In pursuance
of this decision, the following shall be the broad Guidelines for the Unified Access
Services License.
(i) The existing operators shall have an option to continue under the present
licensing regime (with present terms & conditions) or migrate to new
Unified Access Services Licence (UASL) in the existing service areas,
with the existing allocated/ contracted spectrum.
(ii) The license fee, service area, rollout obligations and performance bank
guarantee under the Unified Access Services Licence will be the same as
for Fourth Cellular Mobile Service Providers (CMSPs).
(iii) The service providers migrating to Unified Access Services Licence will
continue to provide wireless services in already allocated/contracted

12
spectrum and no additional spectrum will be allotted under the migration
process for Unified Access Services Licence.
(iv) In addition to services permissible under current licences, Cellular Mobile
Service Providers (CMSPs) may also offer limited mobility facility existing
within Short Distance Charging Area (SDCA) as permitted to Basic Service
Providers at appropriate tariffs through concepts such as home-zone
operations, etc.
(v) The Unified Access service providers are free to use any technology without
any restriction.
(vi) No additional entry fee shall be charged from CMSPs for migration to
UASL. For Basic Service Operators (BSOs), the entry fee for migration
to the Unified Access Services Licence for a Service Area shall be equal
to the entry fee paid by the Fourth Cellular Operator for that Service Area,
or the entry fee paid by the BSO itself, whichever is higher. While applying
for migration to UASL, the BSO will pay the difference between the said
entry fee for UASL and the entry fee already paid by it.
(vii) Notwithstanding anything stated in para (vi) above, no additional entry
fee will be paid by the existing Basic Service Providers where no Fourth
CMSP had bid despite repeated attempts.
(viii) Those Basic Service Operators who do not wish to migrate to the full
mobility regime, would only be required to pay the additional fee for
Wireless in Local Loop (M), with mobility confined strictly within Short
Distance Charging Area, as prescribed separately.
(ix) Some of the Basic Service Licensees have provided following features/
facilities to their subscribers:
(a) Over the air activation/authentication of the subscriber wireless access
terminal outside one SDCA by pressing/punching certain keys/numbers
such as *444N;
(b) Use of the same subscriber wireless access terminal in more than one
SDCA;
(c) Multiple registration or temporary subscription facilities in more than
one SDCA using the same subscriber terminal in wireless access systems.
In such cases of migration to Unified Access Services Licence, the Basic
Service Licensees shall in addition to the Entry Fee based on the principles
stated in para (vi) and (vii) above, pay till the date of payment from the
date of their having signed the Basic Service Licence agreement, a penal
interest @ 5% above Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India
prevalent on the day the payment became due, i.e. the date they signed the
Licence Agreement. The interest shall be compounded monthly and a part

13
of the month shall be reckoned as a full month for the purposes of
calculation of interest.
(x) The Service Areas for Unified Access Services Licence will be as per the
existing Cellular Mobile Telephone Service Licences. BSO wishing to
migrate to UASL will be permitted to operate in the service area in which
it is already operating. It is, however, clarified that BSOs in Delhi, Haryana
and UP (West) service areas, on migration to UASL, will have service
area as that of CMSP in Delhi, Haryana and UP (West) service areas
respectively. Since the service area for the Unified Access Service
Licensees will be as per existing CMSPs, existing BSOs in Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal service areas will be required to hold two
unified licenses (one for Mumbai Metro city and the other for the rest of
Maharashtra and so on).
(xi) The existing BSOs after migration to Unified Access Licensing Regime
may offer full mobility; however, they will be required to offer limited
mobility service also for such customers who so desire.
(xii) A total of additional Entry Fee to be paid by existing Basic Service
Operators in respect of each of its service area for migration to USAL is
given at Annexure-I.
(xiii) Request for migration to UASL shall be made in writing by the concerned
service provider. The payment of additional Entry Fee and penal interest,
if any, is to be made along with and not later than the date of such request
in writing for migration to Unified Access Services Licence.
(xiv) If on verification Department of Telecommunications comes to the
conclusion that the entire amount due for migration to UASL has not been
paid by the applicant, it shall be intimated to the applicant to pay the
difference. The concerned applicant will be bound to pay the said difference
in full within 3 working days from the date of receipt of the demand;
failing this the application will be rejected and the amounts paid by the
applicant, if any, shall be refunded within a period of 15 days from the
date of receipt of the demand from DoT. However, no interest shall be
payable by DoT for the amounts deposited for migration to UASL. While
applying for migration to UASL the existing licensee shall also certify as
hereunder:
“I have carefully read the guidelines for providing Unified Access Services
Licence. I have complied and/ or agree to fully comply with the terms and
conditions therein”.
(xv) Consequent upon migration, the Licence will be termed as Unified Access
Services Licence. The relevant applicable conditions of the existing licence

14
agreements will get modified to the extent of the conditions stated above.
The amended Licence shall be set out in detail separately.
(xvi) The LICENSOR reserves the right to modify these Guidelines or
incorporate new Guidelines considered necessary in the interest of national
security, public interest, consumer interest and for the proper conduct of
telegraph/services.
(xvii) With the issue of these Guidelines, all applications for new Access Services
Licence shall be in the category of Unified Access Services Licence.

ANNEXURE II
Additional Entry fee to be paid by the existing Basic Service Operators for
migration to Unified Access Service Licence.
S. Name of the Operator Service Date of Entry Fee Entry Fee Additional
No. Area of signing of paid by paid by Entry Fee
BSO licence BSO (in 4th Cellular to be paid
agreements Rs. Crores) Operator for
(in Rs. migration
Crores) to UASL
(in Rs.
crores)
1 2 34567
1. Reliance Infocom Ltd. Rajasthan 20.7.2001 20 32.25 12.25
UP (East) 20.7.2001 15 45.25 30.25
Maharashtra 20.7.2001 189+203.66*
115 392.66 277.66
Karnataka 20.7.2001 35 206.83 171.83
Punjab 20.7.2001 20 151.75 131.75
AP 20.7.2001 35 103.01 68.01
Haryana 20.7.2001 10 21.46 11.46
Kerala 20.7.2001 20 40.54 20.54
UP (West) 20.7.2001 15 30.55 15.55
West Bengal 20.7.2001 0+78.01*
25 78.01 53.01
MP 20.7.2001 20 17.4501 0
Bihar 20.7.2001 10
H.P. 20.7.2001 2 1.1 0
Orissa 20.7.2001 5
Tamil Nadu 26.9.2001 79+154*
50 233 183
Delhi 20.7.2001 50 170.7 120.7
A & N** 20.7.2001 1 0
2. RTL Gujarat 18.3.1997 179.0859030 109.01 0
15

16
1 2 34567
3. Tata Teleservices Ltd. Gujarat 31.8.2001 40 109.01 69.01
Karnataka 31.8.2001 35 206.83 171.83
AP 4.11.1997 161.47(old) 103.01 0
Tamil Nadu i 31.8.2001 79+154*
50 233 183
Delhi 31.8.2001 50 170.7 120.7
4. TTL(Mah.)Ltd. Maharashtra 31.8.2001 189+203.66* –
532.55(old) 392.66 0
5. Bharti Telenet Ltd. Karnataka 29.10.2001 35 206.33 171.83
Haryana 8.10.2001 10 21.46 11.46
MP 28.2.1997 35.33 (old) 17.4501 0
Tamil Nadu 29.10.2001 50 79+154*
233 183
Delhi 29.10.2001 50 170.7 120.7
6. Shyam Telelink Rajasthan 4.3.1998 29.29(old) 32.25 2.96
7. HFCL Infotel Ltd. Punjab 7.11.1997 177.59(old) 151.75 0
* For BSOs in MH, WB and TN the entry fee of fourth cellular MH+Mumbai, WB + Kolkata and TN +
Chennai has been taken.
** Now A&N is a part of WB service area for cellular.

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
– NIL –

18
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
– NIL –

19
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH THE REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
– NIL –
NEW DELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
8 December, 2006 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6th December, 2006 in Committee Room
No,. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
5. Shri Lalmani Prasad
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Vijay J. Darda
8. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
9. Shri Motiur Rahman
10. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
11. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Under Secretary
WITNESS
Smt. Aruna Sundararajan — Chief Executive Officer
(Community Service Centre)
Infrastructure Leasing & Financial
Services Limited.
20

21
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** **
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witness, then, withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same :—
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their
Seventeenth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Limited Mobility
through WLL for Fixed Service Providers.’
(ii) ** ** ** ** **
6. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and present the
above mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time conveneint to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

22
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
SEVENTEENTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government :
Paragraph Nos.: 62 to 69
Total : 08
Percentage : 100%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of interim
nature :
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil