8
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of National Informatics Centre (NIC)’
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)
EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Working of National Informatics Centre (NIC)’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2004
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 14.12.2004


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations  which  have
been accepted by the Government. ..................... 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations / Observations  which  the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of replies of the Government. ............................... 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which  replies  of  the  Government  have
not  been  accepted  by the Committee and
which require reiteration ........................................ 26
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature. .................. 28
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE I Information Technology (IT) Security Guidelines .... 29
ANNEXURE II Minutes of the fourteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2004-05)
held on 25.11.2004 .................................................... 60
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations  contained
in the Fifty-Sixth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee) .................................................... 62

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Charenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi*
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
*Nominated w.e.f. 20.8.2004.

(iv)
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Information
Technology (2004-05) having been authorised by the Committee to
submit the Report on its behalf, present this Eighth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on “Working of National Informatics Centre (NIC)” relating to the
Department of Information Technology.
2. The Fifty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2003
and was laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2003. The Department furnished
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations contained in the Report
on 3 June, 2004.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
its sitting held on 25.11.2004.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its
Fifty-Sixth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Working of National
Informatics Centre (NIC)” relating to the Department of Information
Technology.
2. The Fifty Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2003
and was also laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2003. It
contained 23 Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under :
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. : 8, 9, 15, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 48, 49, 50, 54,
55, 61, 62, 66, 80
Total : 17
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government :
Paragraph Nos.: 42, 43, 69, 81
Total : 4
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. : 77
Total : 1
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph Nos. : 41
Total : 1
Chapter-V

2
4. The Committee trusts that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, for any reason it is not possible for the
Ministry to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the
matter should be reported to the committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee further desires that Action Taken
Notes on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to it urgently and in no case later than
six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with Action Taken by the
Government on some of its recommendations.
A. E-GOVERNANCE
(Recommendation Para No. 28)
6. The Committee had desired to know the outcome of e-readiness
assessment exercise which was conducted by the Ministry to see up
to what extent, the State Governments could provide co-operations
for implementing e-governance.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as
under :
“The DIT has brought out the India : E-Readiness Assessment
Report 2003. It is intended to make this exercise an annual effort.
The Report for 2004 is expected to be ready shortly. State
Governments have provided the necessary information for
compiling the Report.”
8. The Committee desires that copies of the report on e-readiness
may be made available to them on a continuous basis.
B. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SMART GOVERNANCE (NISG)
(Recommendation Para No. 41)
9. The Committee had noted that the National Institute of Smart
Governance (NISG)—a joint venture of government, National
Association of Software Companies (NASSCOM) and the private sector
had been created to play a pivotal role in channelising private
resources and competencies into national e-governance efforts and

3
supplementing the initiatives of National Informatics Centre. The
Committee had also noted that out of total shareholding of NISG-
entities prescribed holding did not exceed 49% of over all paid up
capital of the company. Initial promoters of the company consisted of
the Ministry of Information Technology, Ministry of Administrative
Reforms, Government of Andhra Pradesh and the NASSCOM. Only
nine percent paid up capital was reserved for, other States, which
was inadequate and inequitable. The Committee had been given to
understand that NISG had been formed at the initiative of Government
of Andhra Pradesh and that State had provided ten percent of the
equity capital of the Company. The Committee appreciated the
initiative of the State Government. However the Committee was at
loss to understand why the DoIT did not consult the other State
Governments at the stage of the incorporation of the Company and
why only nine percent of the equity capital had been earmarked for
all of them put together. The Committee had desired that fair share
of equity should be reserves for these States and all should
be consulted to play a meaningful role for the spread of
E-Governance.
10. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“Various formalities and actions connected with the establishment
of the NISG are underway. As soon as these are completed, all
States would be invited to participate in the equity of the company.
The DIT is already a stakeholder. The NIC, being an attached
office of DIT does not have to be an independent stakeholder.
The NIC and the NISG would be appropriately associated in each
other’s activities. The NISG is primarily intended to facilitate
implementation of Govt. projects involving private sector financial
and/or technical resources. Thus there is a complementarity
between the roles of the NIC and the NISG.”
11. The Committee note that various formalities and actions
connected with the establishment of the NISG were underway. On
their completion, as per the DIT, all States would be invited to
participate in the equity of the company. The Committee would
like to be informed about the final outcome of the whole exercise
at the earliest.

4
C. COURT INFORMATION SYSTEM
(Recommendation Para Nos. 48 & 49)
12. The Committee had expressed their happiness over the
successful implementation of applications developed for Supreme Court
and the High Courts and NIC’s proposal to create e-Courts. It would
help filing of cases in electronic form, without actually visiting the
Supreme Court. The Committee, however, were constrained to note
that due to insufficient funds, e-Courts and electronic filing project
were yet to be initiated. The Committee were unhappy to note that
due to lack of technical manpower, non-replacement of existing
Hardware and Software facilities in High Courts, non-availability of
good infrastructure at District level, projects at High Courts and
District Courts were not taken up by the NIC, thereby delaying the
process of timely delivery of justice and access of information to the
people.
13. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that
sufficient funds be provided on priority basis for serving the legal
community through Information Technology . The Committee had
further desired to be apprised of the expeditious steps taken by the
Government in this regard.
14. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
“The NIC took up the computerization of the Supreme Court and
all 18 High Courts (now 21) in 1990 and provided the necessary
computer hardware, software and established Local Area Networks.
Most of the court officials have been given operational training.
The NIC has also worked with the Courts to implement many
decision making and decision support systems over the last 13
years. The hardware provided in 1990 has extensively been used
and now it requires up-gradation and replacement. Considering
the importance of the applications implemented in the Courts, the
Government provided an allocation of Rs. 4 crore to the Supreme
Court of India. The High Courts of Delhi, Gujarat, A.P . and
Karnataka have received funds from the respective State
Governments for up-gradation/replacement of obsolete hardware
and software.
The NIC has provided the hardware and IT tools in the newly
created High Courts of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand & Uttaranchal

5
and implemented several computerized applications. The cost of
the project in all the three High Courts was about Rs. 75 lakh.
The Department of Justice, Government of India has, on the basis
of the technical proposal submitted by the NIC proposed to
upgrade the obsolete hardware and software in the remaining
High Courts during 2004-2005. The projected cost of the project is
Rs. 35 crore.
The Department of Justice has also taken up the computerization
of the City Civil Courts of four Metros, namely: Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai at a cost of Rs. 15 crore. The project in
Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai city courts has been implemented.
The Kolkata City Civil Courts project is under implementation.
During 2004-2005, the Department of Justice has, on the basis of
technical proposals submitted by the NIC, proposed to take up
the computerization of all the 31 city Civil Courts at State Capitals.
The cost of the project is Rs. 25 crore”.
15. The Committee note that the Government have provided an
allocation of Rs. 4 crore to the Supreme Court of India for up-
gradation and replacement of hardware of 1990 vintage. Also
adequate funds have been provided for upgrading the obsolete
hardware and software in various High Courts during 2004-2005 by
the Department of Justice, Government of India, wherever required.
The Department of Justice, Government of India have taken up the
computerization of the City Civil Courts of four Metros viz. Delhi,
Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai at a cost of Rs. 15 crore and have
also proposed to take up the computerization of all the 31 City
Civil Courts at State Capitals at a cost of Rs. 25 crore. In this
connection, the Committee would like to be apprised of the latest
position on different stages of computerization in various courts of
the country.
D. LAND RECORDS COMPUTERIZATION PROGRAMME
(Recommendations Paragraph Nos. 61 & 62)
16. The Committee expressed their happiness that the Ministry of
Rural development and National Informatics Centre in collaboration,
had undertaken computerisation of land records in 586 out of 600

6
districts in the country. The Committee, however, was perturbed to
note that inspite of the fact that the Ministry of Rural development
had released assistance of Rs. 264 crore for computerization of land
records and installation of hardware and software in 2,782 Tehsil/
Talukas in the country, there had been delay in some States, in
completing data entry work due to delay in release of funds by the
States to be implementing agencies. The other bottlenecks had been
lack of awareness, shortage of manpower and low voltage etc.
17. The Committee had desired that the Ministry should take up
the matter with the concerned State Governments at the highest level
for timely release of funds to the implementing agencies. The other
bottlenecks viz., creation of awareness about the scheme, provision of
adequate manpower and low voltage should also be taken up with
the States so that the scheme which was lagging behind in some
States could be completed as early as possible and yield desired
benefits to the people.
18. The Ministry in their Action taken reply have stated as
under:
“The NIC role in Land Records Computerization mainly relates to
providing computer hardware and software, training and technical
support at all districts. Necessary application software with
provision of user-friendly data entry, validation, mutation, and
backup with in built security mechanism has been designed and
developed by NIC as per user requirements in each state.
Necessary training on application software is being done regularly
by NIC to expedite the implementation. So far NIC has trained
more than 6000 revenue officials.
Ministry of Rural Development, which is responsible for this
project, has been advised to take-up the matter with the states
concerned”.
19. The Committee feel that the Ministry of Rural Development
which have been provided with such a huge sum of money, should
set up an effective monitoring mechanism to oversee the effective
utilization of the computer hardware and software to their fullest
capacity and towards the intended purpose and objectives. The
Committee would like to be continuously apprised of the progress
made in the lands record computerization programme.

7
E. TRAINING OF STAFF
(Recommendation Para No. 77)
20. The Committee were of the considered view that in order to
bring about the computer culture in Government offices and assist
the user in accepting computer, it was necessary to provide proper
and qualitative training to all levels of Government employees. The
Committee were given to understand that training/retraining needs
of Government officials were so large that the present training
resources at various NIC centres, might not be adequate. The
Committee, accordingly, keeping in view the importance of training,
had desired that Ministry should not only enhance training resources
by setting up learning centres at Ministries/Departments with
permanent training faculty and computer resources but also increase
duration of training courses. The Committee was at loss to understand
how much useful training can be imparted in short courses of 2-3
days. The Committee had also desired that Ministry should ensure
proper quality of training and its integration with applications in a
coordinated manner.
21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies have stated as
under:
“All General and Awareness Programmes, Customised Programmes
and skill development programmes of NIC are usually for a period
of 5 days. However, the short programmes like network basic
concepts, Network security, specific product etc. which are of a
duration of 2 to 3 days are mostly for those officials who already
have basic knowledge and are required to update themselves with
latest developments.
The training programmes have been designed and developed by
experienced and professional trainers. These programmes have
proven to be quite effective.
Technical infrastructure at the NIC State Training Centres is being
upgraded in a phased manner beginning from 2003-2004. They
are being provided with latest computers and other training tools.
For hands-on practice, NIC provides computers to trainees in a
1 : 1 ratio. The project cost is Rs. 4.90 crore.
NIC has also tied up with other agencies for outsourcing specific
project based training”.

8
22. The NIC true to its mandate is presently engaged in
providing computer communication support to various Central
Government Ministries/Departments, High Courts, State
Governments, District Headquarters and possibly upto the village
panchayat level for various uses. An extension Network NICNET
has been spread over 586 Districts linking the Central Government
Ministries and Departments with District Administrations, State
Secretariats, NCT/UT administrations. In its effort to see that the
entire network is utilized, NIC is also providing necessary training
which runs in short one time courses of 2-3 days and 5 days. These
training programmes cater to specific areas of need thereby exposing
the Government staff to a set area of operation/utilization of the
computer. Regrettably, the staff is not conversant with the
comprehensive use of the computer i.e. for analysis and storing of
data etc.
23. Training is a continuous process and updating of the
knowledge towards optimum use of the computer requires frequent
training. Larger organizations in the private sector are spending upto
5% of the time of an employee on training. A large task force of
these organizations is engaged in training so as to keep the staff
updated.
24. The Committee feel that considerable time have elapsed since
computerization of Government offices was slated and that NIC
needs to give a more serious thought to the training aspect so as to
be able to get the maximum advantage from the existing
infrastructure which has been generated over the years. In order to
do so, it has to reconsider its priorities, training content and
schedules. The Committee also opine that NIC should concentrate
on the higher end needs of the Government in training and it should
also play a pivotal role on setting the curriculum of training and
decide the training institutes to where most of the training of the
Government officials and employees could be outsourced.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
10th Five Year Plan Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee finds that the proposed Tenth Plan Outlay of
Rs. 705 crore on ‘Sustaining on-going activities’ of National Informatic
Centre has been drastically reduced to Rs. 573 crores. Upgradation/
Expansion schemes have been allocated only Rs. 172 crore against the
proposed outlay of Rs. 745 crores. The proposed scheme of
E-Infrastructure for e-Governance at Block level which was to cost
Rs. 1,500 crore has been completely abandoned. Financial outlay has
been thinly spread on Upgradation and Expansion schemes with
extension of NICNET getting only Rs. 4,25 crore against the proposal
of Rs. 38 crore; e-Governance—Applications and solutions Rs. One
crore against the proposal of Rs. 14.50 crores; Development of
Multimedia Teleconferencing facility has been allocated Rs. 370 crore
against the proposal of Rs. 40 crore recommended by the Department
of Information Technology. Again, the ASP Services got only
Rs. 2.60 crore, Development Geographic Information System
Rs. 2.70 crore and High Speed Terrestrial System Rs. 10 crore against
the Departments proposals for Rs. 40 crore, 15 crore and Rs. 100 crore.
Thus against an outlay Rs. 3,179.80 crore proposed by the NIC, for
Tenth Five Year Plan, Rs. 975 crores have been approved by the
Planning Commission. Due to the drastic reduction, various important
new schemes envisaged by NIC and ongoing activities including
upgradation/extension of NICNET to new districts, e-Governance
project, Information Development Programme for North-Eastern States,
Info Highway project, computerization projects of Supreme Court, High
Court and lower courts etc., will be affected adversely.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee is of the opinion that if the National Informatics
Centre (NIC) being the premier organization in Government to provide
computer based informatics services, for decision support to
9

10
Government offices/Bodies at national, State, district and block level,
is starved of funds required for execution of its proposed and ongoing
schemes, then its basic objectives for which, it has been set up, will
be defeated. The Committee is of the considered view that NIC must
be provided adequate funds to implement its schemes as envisaged.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Ministry should
take up the matter with Planning Commission at the highest level to
get the funds released as proposed by the NIC for execution of its
ongoing and proposed schemes. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the effective steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Action T aken Note
The Department of Information Technology took up the
requirement of additional funds at the RE stage. The budget of the
NIC was increased from Rs. 181.70 crore to Rs. 201.70 crore in the RE
for 2003-2004.
In addition to the above, DIT has released about Rs. 79 crores to
the NICSI/NIC during 2003-04 for the implementation of the CIC
project (at NE States and J&K State) and for various e-Governance
projects.
For the year 2004-05, the Planning Commission has approved an
outlay of Rs. 210 crore for the NIC. It has been found adequate for
pursuing the various projects of NIC during the current year.
A number of meetings were held with the Planning Commission
for provisioning of enhanced budgetary support for the National
e-Governance Plan.
The Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 215 crore to DIT for
the e-Governance programme for the year 2004-05. One of the major
components of this programme is creation of crore infrastructure,
including State Wide Area Networks, State Data Centres, National
Data Centre and extension/expansion of NICNET.
National Informatics Centre Services Inc. (NICSI)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee notes that National Informatics Centre Inc. (NICSI)
was set up to promote the economic, scientific, technical, social and

11
cultural development of India by promoting the utilization of
Information Technology, Computer Communication network,
informatics etc. The Committee recognize the fact that NICSI is setup
to supplement the efforts of NIC in providing a mechanism for
enhancing the support to NIC for execution of the projects and
managing the infrastructure with flexibility which NIC as a
conventional government organisation does not have. Also Committee
recognizes that NICSI is intimately linked to NIC both in regard to
securing of the projects and providing requisite manpower for
execution of projects. Therefore, NICSI cannot be considered as any
other section 25 company rather it should be seen as an integral
wing of NIC who must be authorized to exercise all conceivable
control over NICSI seamlessly. The Committee also notes that NICSI
which was headed by DG, NIC, is now headed by the Joint Secretary
(E-Governance), Department of Information Technology. The Committee
is also of the view that for strengthening of NIC and to avoid
overlapping of work it is very important that NICSI is fully integrated
with NIC as was planned during its creation. NICSI should not only
be under the control of NIC but also the Chairman of NICSI be
appointed by the NIC as it was before September, 2002.
Action T aken Note
The Articles of Association of NICSI were amended in December
2002 with the concurrence of the Government of India through the
NIC, as provided in the Memorandum of Association. As per
Article 58 of the revised Articles of Association, the ex-officio directors
of the company are:
(1) Shri R. Chandrashekhar, Joint Secretary, Department of
Information Technology (DIT)—Chairman.
(2) Dr. Gulshan Rai, Executive Director, ERNET India—Member.
(3) Shri J.K. Tyagi, Deputy Financial Adviser, DIT—Member.
(4) Six Officers from NIC—Members.
Accordingly, in March, 2003, DG, NIC nominated 6 senior officers
of the NIC as directors of the Board of NICSI.
Further, as per Article 59 of the revised Articles of Association,
the DG, NIC is empowered to appoint and remove the MD,
NICSI.

12
As such, no difficulty is anticipated in integration of NICSI
activities with the NIC.
The scope of the National e-Governance Action Plan is very vast
and hence requires a quantum increase in the implementation effort.
It necessitates the involvement of multiple agencies and harnessing of
all competencies available in the country, including those in the public
and private sector, to supplement the effort and capacity of the NIC.
Some of the activities involving agencies other than the NIC may still
require the services of NICSI. Hence, a broader role is envisaged for
NICSI extending beyond a supporting function for NIC activities. The
reconstitution of the Board of Directors of NICSI has also to be seen
in this context.
E-Governance:
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee fully recognizes the e-Governance in one of the
pivotal steps to take India to Information Age. The Committee also
recognizes that this is a complex, time consuming, multidisciplinary
and multi stakeholder activity. It is therefore very easy to loose track
and land up in large investment without commensurating returns. At
the same time India has to take calculated initiatives to move forward.
The “change management” i.e., from the prevailing practice of physical
paper management to management by digital record and from present
closed-door information to open information regime, becomes very
important issue especially when a nation like India, having large
legacy-issues to be handled in migration of Information age. NIC
provides the common IT infrastructure, wealth of sustained domain
and knowledge through out the country as the basic e-Governance
vehicle. The Committee is of the view that various e-Governance
initiatives either by Central Government like e-Governance of DIT,
other line ministry department of Central Government where the funds
from Central Government are provided for should be integrated by
NIC into their initiatives so that a common e-Governance infrastructure
and common applications can be rolled out for effective sustenance in
the long run. Involving State Governments is equally important in
this initiative, specially States which are lagging behind, to minimize
the fast growing digital gap among different States within the country.
This digital gap is leading to gap in almost all sectors like economic,
education, health, employment etc.

13
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee notes that e-Governance is the use of Information
and Communications Technology to improve efficiency, convenience,
accessibility and transparency in Government and is expected to
become a backbone structure once all Central and State Government
Departments are inter-connected for providing unified/single window
services and citizen have access to information anytime, anywhere
without any hassle. The Committee appreciates the work being done
by the Government for achieving the objectives of e-Governance. The
State Governments have also been found to be very active in adopting
and implementing applications of e-Governance successfully.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
However, the Committee is constrained to find that many of the
States are still lacking in the application of hardware and there is an
urgent need to create e-Governance infrastructure by the State
Governments for implementation of e-Governance programmes, in
most of the States, only some computer applications are being run in
specific areas viz. Land records, driving licence etc. and not in all
areas of e-Governance. The Committee, therefore, agrees with the
Ministry that State Governments should atleast earmark 3 per cent of
their budget for IT related applications on the lines of Central
Government ministries for strengthening of e-Governance and its
infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, desires that the views of the
Committee may be conveyed to all the concerned State Governments.
Action T aken Note
In this regard, the NIC has already taken up many initiative as
noted below:
(a) NICNET has been strengthened up to the level of State
Capitals by adding fibre-optic based terrestrial links to the
existing satellite connectivity. In addition, connectivity to the
district level for various Central Government and State
Governments applications has been initiated.
(b) A Data Centre has been established at the NIC Headquarters.
A disaster recovery facility has been established at

14
Hyderabad. Steps are being taken to establish similar
facilities at State Headquarters in consultation with State
Governments. The objective is to establish a common data
storage facility for various applications planned for
e-Governance. The first batch of State data centres is at an
advanced stage of implementation.
(c) The Planning Commission has effected a substantial increase
in the budget of the DIT for 2004-05 for various
e-Governance projects, including extension of network
connectivity upto block level. Enhanced provisions have also
been made in the NIC budget for its activities including
strengthening and augmentation of NICNET.
The NIC has been approached by various Central Government
Departments to provide network facilities for their applications. Such
facilities may be provided by supplementing the existing network
(NICNET) with investments by the respective departments, or
alternatively by additional provisions in the NIC budget. This is being
taken up with the Planning Commission.
Similarly, some State Governments have requested the NIC to
establish a network backbone infrastructure, for which States are ready
to provide bandwidth, which has been committed to them by the
basic telecom service providers in exchange for Right of Way. The
NIC is geared up to respond to such requests to establish an extended
backbone network for catering to various e-Governance initiatives.
Discussions are being held with State Governments to formalize
the policy guidelines for supporting the State Governments in creation
of State Wide Area Networks and State Data Centres in an appropriate
collaborative mode.
Secretary, DIT has advised Chief Secretaries of all States to allocate
at least 3% of the State budget for e-Governance applications and
infrastructure in line with the observations of the Standing Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee also desires to know the outcome of e-readiness
assessment exercise which has been conducted by the Ministry to see
up to what extent, the State Governments can provide cooperations
for implementing e-Governance.

15
Action T aken Note
The DIT has brought out the India: E-Readiness Assessment Report
2003. It is intended to make this exercise an annual effort. The Report
for 2004 is expected to be ready shortly. State Governments have
provided the necessary information for compiling the Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee notes that a Wide Area Network Infrastructure
has been proposed by the State Government of Orissa for
computerisation at district, block and Panchayat levels so as to provide
benefits of e-Governance applications like Data basic, e-mail, voice-
over-IP , work flow automation Video conferencing etc., to its people.
The Committee appreciates the dedicated initiatives taken by the State
Government of Orissa in building e-Governance infrastructure in the
State with a view to have transparent, efficient and employment
oriented administrative set up. The Committee desires the Government
to consider the requests of the State Government sympathetically and
render all possible assistance—financial and technical to the State
Governments with a view to expedite implementation of infrastructure
and hardware development schemes down below upto Block level.
The Committee desires that as early as possible, the State of Orissa
be connected with area network for the purpose and sufficient funds
as proposed by the State of Orissa to Twelfth Finance Commission be
made available so that schemes as envisaged by the State Government
can be executed.
Action T aken Note
NIC Orissa unit has been involved in developing & implementing
various e-Governance applications at State, District, Block/Tehsil levels
as part of its objectives. NICNET has been strengthened in all the
30 districts of Orissa through VSATs, Video facility at 6 locations and
RF connectivity at State Secretariat.
The Department of Space had approached NIC (in 2002) to prepare
a proposal for connecting all districts and blocks with some of the
departments which interact with the districts/blocks for citizen centric
applications under the GRAMSAT project. The total estimated cost
for this project is Rs. 14.16 crores. On the basis of this proposal,

16
Government of Orissa had released funds to NICSI for implementing
the project in association with NIC. This project is under
implementation.
Court Information System
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
The Committee is happy to note that NIC has successfully
implemented the applications developed for Supreme Court, High
Courts and also proposes to create e-Court. It will help filing of cases
in electronic form, without actually visiting the Supreme Court. The
Committee, however, is constrained to note that due to insufficient
funds, e-Courts and electronic filing project are yet to be initiated.
The Committee is further unhappy to note that due to lack of technical
manpower, non-replacement of existing Hardware and Software
facilities in High Courts, non-availability of good infrastructure at
District level, projects at High Courts and District Courts are not
taken up by the NIC, thereby delaying the process of timely delivery
of justice and access of information to the people.
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that sufficient
funds be provided on priority basis for serving the legal community
through Information Technology. The Committee would like to be
appraised of the expeditious steps taken by the Government in this
regard.
Action T aken Note
The NIC took up the computerization of the Supreme Court and
all 18 High Courts (now 21) in 1990 and provided the necessary
computer hardware, software and established Local Area Networks.
Most of the court officials have been given operational training. The
NIC has also worked with the Courts to implement many decision
making and decision support systems over the last 13 years. The
hardware provided in 1990 has extensively been used and now it
requires up-gradation and replacement. Considering the importance
of the applications implemented in the Courts, the Government
provided an allocation of Rs. 4 crore to the Supreme Court of India.
The High Courts of Delhi, Gujarat, A.P . and Karnataka have received

17
funds from the respective State Governments for up-gradation/
replacement of obsolete hardware and software.
The NIC has provided the hardware and IT tools in the newly
created High Courts of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand & Uttaranchal and
implemented several computerized applications. The cost of the project
in all the three High Courts was about Rs. 75 lakh.
The Department of Justice, Government of India has, on the basis
of the technical proposal submitted by the NIC proposed to upgrade
the obsolete hardware and software in the remaining High Courts
during 2004-05. The projected cost of the project is Rs. 35 crore.
The Department of Justice has also taken up the computerization
of the City Civil Courts of four Metros, namely: Delhi, Mumbai,
Kolkata and Chennai at a cost of Rs. 15 crore. The project in Delhi,
Mumbai and Chennai city courts has been implemented. The Kolkata
City Civil Courts project is under implementation.
During 2004-05, the Department of Justice has, on the basis of
technical proposals submitted by the NIC, proposed to take up the
computerization of all the 31 City Civil Courts at State Capitals. The
cost of the project is Rs. 25 crore.
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee understands that the NIC has established a video
conferencing facility between a District Court and a jail in Bihar for
hearing the case of an under trial without actually bringing him/her
to the court premises. The Committee does appreciate the performance
of NIC, for establishing a VC facility between a District Court and
jail, which helped not only the many under trials but also the judiciary
in delivering justice to the desired persons in time. The Committee,
therefore desires that video conferencing facilities be developed
between District Court and jail, wherever proper police escort and
transport facility are not available, in the States/Union Territories at
a faster rate so that no under trial prisoner is detained in prison due
to non disposal of the case. The Committee also desires that Ministry
should make proper study for exploring avenues of possibility, where
this video conferencing facility could be extended for reducing the
expenditure of public exchequer of the Government. The Committee
would like NIC to be asked to examine and submit its report and the

18
Committee to be apprised about the steps taken by the Ministry in
this regard.
Action T aken Note
The Video Conferencing (VC) facility between a Jail and a Court
for recording the statements of the under trials has been successfully
implemented by the NIC in the State of Bihar. The VC facility obviates
the need to bring the undertrials from the jail to the court.
The Department of Justice, Government of India requested the
NIC to submit a project proposal for taking up the computerization
of four Metros City Civil Courts namely : Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Chennai. This project proposal includes VC facilities. At the time
of project implementation, it has been pointed out by the Hon’ble
judges of the High Courts, who are the Chairmen of the Project
Monitoring Committees, that for effective implementation of the VC
facility for the said purpose, the Act concerned needs to be changed
for allowing the courts to record the statements of the undertrials
and accepting them as recorded in their presence. In case of Delhi
City Civil Courts, the matter has been referred to the State Govt. for
initiating necessary action. In all the four Metros, the Jail authorities
have come forward to implement the VC facilities in their respective
State capitals.
Extension of NIC Network
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
The Committee notes that out of 586 Districts covered under
NICNET, 21 districts are not provided with NIC NETWORK facility
due to lack of infrastructure, site not being ready or NIC staff not
being posted. The Committee, keeping in view that NICNET links
the Central Government Ministries and Departments with District
Administrations, State Secretaries and NCT/UT, Administrations,
strongly feels that remaining districts be connected with NICNET
expeditiously.
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
The Committee therefore desires that Department of Information
Technology should take up the matter with the concerned State
Government at the highest level to facilitate the process of availability

19
of the required infrastructure and sites so that required manpower
can be provided by the NIC to run the NETWORK at Districts Centre.
Action T aken Note
Out of the 21 new districts reported to the Committee, 11 districts
(5 in Jharkhand, 3 in Madhya Pradesh, 1 in Bihar and 2 in Uttaranchal)
have been operationalised with required ICT infrastructure.
For the remaining districts, the NIC has requested the District
Collectors to allocate adequate space for setting up of NIC District
Centres. As soon as the required space is made available, the NIC
will release funds for site preparation and also provide Computers
and Computer Communication infrastructure. The NIC has also
advised the District Collectors to nominate a computer savvy officer
of the district collectorate to be trained for supervising the centre
until NIC technical manpower is recruited for the district.
Land Records Computerization Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 61)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Rural
Development and National Informatics Centre in collaboration, have
undertaken computerization of land records in 586 out of 600 districts
in the country. The Committee, however, is perturbed to note that
inspite of the fact that the Ministry of Rural Development has released
assistance of Rs. 264 crore for computerization of land records and
installation of hardware and software in 2,872 Tehsil/Talukas in the
country, there has been delay in some States, completing data entry
work due to delay in release of funds by the States to the
implementing agencies. The other bottlenecks have been lack of
awareness, shortage of manpower and low voltage etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 62)
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take up the matter
with the concerned State Governments at the highest level for timely
release of funds to the implementing agencies. The other bottlenecks
viz., creation of awareness about the scheme, provision of adequate
manpower and low voltage should also be taken up with the States
so that the scheme which is lagging behind in some States could be
completed as early as possible and yield desired benefits to the people.

20
Action T aken Note
The NIC role in Land Records Computerization mainly relates to
providing computer hardware and software, training and technical
support at all districts. Necessary application software with provision
of user-friendly data entry, validation, mutation, and backup with in
built security mechanism has been designed and developed by NIC
as per user requirements in each State. Necessary training on
application software is being done regularly by NIC to expedite the
implementation. So far NIC has trained more than 6000 revenue
officials.
Ministry of Rural Development, which is responsible for this project,
has been advised to take up the matter with the States concerned.
Safety of Secret Files
Recommendation (Para No. 66)
The Committee notes that NIC has adopted all protective
mechanism to ensure safety of official websites/files. However, in view
of the value of security of these websites/files, the Committee desires
that security of the confidential files be reviewed from time to time.
The guidelines issued to various Departments be also repeated
periodically, so that the same is not lost sight of by them. The
Committee also desires that Encryption Policy, which is to be declared,
by the Committee set up by Department of Information Technology,
be followed strictly by the NIC and users departments to upgrade its
security system.
Action T aken Note
The security guidelines issued by the Department of Information
Technology will be followed by NIC. Relevant extracts from
Information Technology Security guidelines contained in Schedule II
to the Rule 19(2) of the IT Act, 2000, are annexed.
DOEACC Centre, Kolkata
Recommendation (Para No. 80)
The Committee is perturbed to note precarious financial health of
the erstwhile Regional Computer Centre, Kolkata which has been

21
re-christened as DOEACC Centre. It is pity that DOEACC Centres
could not pay their staff salaries regularly. The Committee learnt that
erstwhile Centres for Electronics Design and Technology Centres are
also running in deficit. The Committee will like to be apprised of the
reasons for stoppage of Grant-in-Aid since 1999-2000 and the steps
proposed to be undertaken by the Department of Information
Technology to restore the financial health of DOEACC Centres. The
Committee also desires that besides the adequate funding of RCCs,
the infrastructure built there be properly made use of to generate
additional resources.
Action T aken Note
After the merger of RCC, Kolkata with DOEACC Society, the
following steps have been taken to restore the financial health of the
Centre:—
— The scope of activities of the Centre has been extended by
including IT Services and Consultancy Projects, apart from
IT Education & Training, in their overall activities so that
the Centre may get benefits from executing various IT
projects of NIC.
— The Centre has been encouraged to introduce new courses
in emerging areas. New courses in Bio-informatics have been
launched at the Centre which are likely to generate Rs. 30
lakhs per annum. The revenue generation from these courses
are likely to increase in the coming years. The Centre is
also being facilitated to commence IT  Enabled Services-
BPO Training Programmes.
— A Project on Training of Trainers in e-Learning is being
awarded to the Centre, for which GIA of Rs. 42 lakhs has
been allocated to the Centre, of which Rs. 30 lakhs will be
released shortly.
— A grant-in-aid of Rs. 50 lakhs has been released to Kolkata
Centre during the year 2003-04 and the same amount is
likely to be allocated next year.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLY
National Institute of Smart Government (NISG)
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The Committee recognize the importance of private investment
also in e-Governance initiatives. This issue is very closely linked to
the Government policy of out sourcing a service. NIC as the primary
agency for e-Governance should have been closely associated with
the NISG from the very outset. It is surprising to note that NIC is
not even in the; board of directors of NISG. The Committee
recommends that for effective coordination of the e-Governance NIC
be asked to participate in NISG as a stakeholder. As clarified during
the meetings NISG should be restricted to work only in the projects
where private participation funding is contemplated, and not to be
involved it for projects funded by the Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee also desires that Ministry should make a study
on the possibility of NIC/NISG becoming an effective bridge for
private participation, in Government project so that their services can
be exploited. Keeping in view the rapid changes in Communications
Technology, it has become imperative that NIC/NISG should redefine
its role.
Action T aken Note
The DIT is already a stakeholder. The NIC, being an attached
office of DIT does not have to be an independent stakeholder.
The NIC and the NISG would be appropriately associated in each
other’s activities.
The NISG is primarily intended to facilitate implementation of
Govt. projects involving private sector financial and/or technical
resources. Thus there is a complementarity between the roles of the
NIC and the NISG.
22

23
Shortage of Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 69)
The Committee is concerned to note that there is a shortage of
183 computer engineers with the NIC and proposal for filling up
these vacancies is pending with Ministry of Finance. Because of the
same, many of the Engineers’ posts at district level are lying vacant.
The Committee desires that the Department of Information Technology
should expedite the redeployment exercise and then take the matter
with the Ministry of Finance to fill up the remaining vacancies, so
that overall working of NIC including providing communication
computer support to the newly created districts may not suffer. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the
Ministry in this regard.
Action T aken Note
The request of the NIC for filling up vacant posts and creating
additional posts for newly created administrative units was considered
in the DIT. It has been decided to adopt a four pronged approach,
detailed below:
(i) Vacancies that have arisen within one year may be filled at
the entry level.
(ii) In regard to posts which have remained vacant for more
than one year, the applicability of the economy instructions
of 1993 for automatic abolition of such posts may be
examined in respect of a scientific establishment such as
NIC. If these instructions apply, the procedure prescribed
for revival of posts that have been abolished may be
followed.
(iii) Additional posts required for manning new administrative
units as per the MoUs entered by NIC with the State
Govts. may be created in accordance with the prescribed
procedure.
(iv) An exercise is being undertaken to ascertain possibilities of
re-deploying existing work-force within the NIC and from
amongst its erstwhile units, namely RCC Kolkata and RCC
Chandigarh.

24
Recommendation (Para No. 81)
NIC was created way back in September, 1976 with an allocation
of a meagre Rs. 3.44 crores plus a UNDP contribution of US $4.4
million for funding the activities set for it. Over the last about two
and a half decades of its existence, NIC has crossed various landmarks
towards providing common IT infrastructure, creating vast wealth of
sustained domain and IT knowledge, spanned throughout the country
and has built-up wherewithal except financial strength, to provide the
basic e-governance vehicle. The Committee feels that the requirements
and expectations have grown substantially for moving to new
Information age. Therefore, NIC as the nodal organization for e-
Governance, has to gear up itself to face the challenges. This includes
upgrading of NICNET upto each block level and ultimately upto the
Village Panchayat levels with a view to provide reliable and safe
information backbone, sustain different applications, interface with
industry for building their effective participation and lead the e-
governance through R & D initiatives. These tasks for NIC to usher
in new Information Age will not be easy unless it is given the
flexibility and freedom as provided to some of the other organizations
in scientific departments like ISRO, BARC, DRDO etc.
Action T aken Note
NIC is expanding the common infrastructure to support the
growing e-governance activities and programmes. The demands on
NIC for building and supporting various applications have increased
manifold. Against this background, it needs skilled manpower to face
the various challenges ahead.
Technology has also grown very rapidly. New issues like Cyber
security have emerged as concerns and have impacted the service
delivery paradigm. Such developments require induction of fresh
professionals in NIC with new skills.
Flexibility in a Govt. set up would need to be related to
achievement of specific goals/targets (like in the cases of ISRO, BARC
etc.). In the case of NIC, almost all its activities address and are
closely enmeshed with the needs and activities of various Government
departments and organizations at central, state and local government
level. This necessarily entails close, continuous engagement with other
organizations, as per the latters requirements, rather than the other

25
way around. As such, an autonomous structure may not be suited to
the NIC set up having regard to the nature and scope of its activities.
However, flexibility and freedom could be provided within a
commercial framework for some of the activities that are akin to
normal commercial activities of IT companies that provide various
kinds of IT-related services including network services, data centers,
technical manpower support, etc.
The role of NIC is being reviewed with reference to the current
environment, to enable it to focus on those areas and needs that
cannot be met by others, and to work in conjunction with other
agencies in areas where there are other options, so that the skills of
the premier government in-house IT organization are optimally
directed.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Training of Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 77)
The Committee is of the considered view that in order to bring
about the computer culture in Government offices and assist the user
in accepting computer, it is necessary to provide proper and qualitative
training to all levels of Government employees. The Committee is
given to understand that training/retraining needs of Government
official are so large that the present training resources at various NIC
centres, may not be adequate. The Committee, accordingly, keeping
in view the importance of training, desires that Ministry should not
only enhance training resources by setting up learning centres at
Ministries/Departments with permanent training faculty and computer
resources but also increase duration of training courses. The Committee
is at loss to understand how much useful training can be imparted
in short courses of 2-3 days. The Committee also desires that Ministry
should ensure proper quality of training and its integration with
applications in a coordinated manner.
Action Taken Report on Para 77
All General and Awareness Programmes, Customised Programmes
and skill development programmes of NIC are usually for a period
of 5 days. However, the short programmes like network basic concepts,
Network security, specific product etc. which are of a duration of 2
to 3 days are mostly for those officials who already have basic
knowledge and are required to update themselves with latest
developments.
The training programmes have been designed and developed by
experienced and professional trainers. These programmes have proven
to be quite effective.
26

27
Technical infrastructure at the NIC State Training Centers is being
upgraded in a phased manner beginning from 2003-04. They are being
provided with latest computers and other training tools. For hands-
on practice, NIC provides computers to trainees in a 1 : 1 ratio. The
project cost is Rs. 4.90 crore.
NIC has also tied up with other agencies for outsourcing specific
project based training.

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
National Institute of Smart Government (NISG)
Recommendation (Para No 41)
The Committee notes that the National Institute of Smart
Government (NISG)—a joint venture of Government, National
Association of Software Companies (NASSCOM) and the private sector
has been created to play a pivotal role in channelising private resources
and competencies into national e-governance efforts and supplementing
the initiatives of National Informatics Centre. The Committee also
notes that out of total shareholding of NISG, entitles prescribed holding
does not exceed 49% of over all paid up capital of the company.
Initial promoters of the company consists of the Ministry of
information Technology, Ministry of Administrative Reforms,
Government of Andhra Pradesh and the NASSCOM. Only nine percent
paid up capital is reserved for, other States, which is inadequate and
inequitable. The Committee understands that NISG has been formed
at the initiative of Government of Andhra Pradesh and that State has
provided ten percent of the equity capital of the Company. The
Committee appreciates the initiative of the State Government. However,
the Committee is at loss to understand why the DoIT did not consult
the other State Government at the stage of the incorporation of the
Company and why only nine percent of the equity capital has been
earmarked for all of them put together. The Committee desires that
fair share of equity should be reserved for these States and all should
be consulted to play a meaningful role for the spread of e-Governance.
Action T aken Note
Various formalities and actions connected with the establishment
of the NISG are underway. As soon as these are completed, all states
would be invited to participate in the equity of the company.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
7 December, 2004 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
28

ANNEXURE I
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT) SECURITY GUIDELINES
1. Introduction
This document provides guidelines for the implementation and
management of Information Technology Security. Due to the inherent
dynamism of the security requirements, this document does not
provide an exact template for the organizations to follow. However,
appropriate suitable samples of security process are provided for
guidelines. It is the responsibility of the organizations to develop
internal processes that meet the guidelines set forth in this document.
The following words used in the Information Technology Security
Guidelines shall be interpreted as follows:
• shall: The guideline defined is a mandatory requirement, and
therefore must be complied with.
• should : The guideline defined is a recommended requirement.
Non-compliance shall be documented and approved by
the management. Where appropriate, compensating
controls shall be implemented.
• must: The guideline defined is a mandatory requirement, and
therefore must be complied with.
• may : The guideline defined is an optional requirement. The
implementation of this guideline is determined by the
organisation’s requirement.
2. Implementation of an Information Security Programme
Successful implementation of a meaningful Information Security
Programme rests with the support of the top management. Until and
unless the senior managers of the organization understand and concur
with the objectives of the information security programme its ultimate
success is in question.
29

30
The Information Security Programme should be broken down into
specific stages as follows:
(a) Adoption of a security policy;
(b) Security risk analysis;
(c) Development and implementation of an information
classification system;
(d) Development and implementation of the security standards
manual;
(e) Implementation of the management security self-assessment
process;
(f) On-going security programme maintenance and enforcement;
and
(g) Training.
The principal task of the security implementation is to define the
responsibilities of persons within the organization. The implementation
should be based on the general principle that the person who is
generating the information is also responsible for its security. However,
in order to enable him to carry out his responsibilities in this regard,
proper tools, and environment need to be established.
When different pieces of information at one level are integrated
to form high value information, the responsibility for its security needs
also should go up in the hierarchy to the integrator and should require
higher level of authority for its access it should be absolutely clear
with respect to each information as to who is its owner, its custodian,
and its users. It is the duty of the owner to assign the right
classification to the information so that the required level of security
can be enforced. The custodian of information is responsible for the
proper implementation of security guidelines and making the
information available to the users on a need to know basis.
3. Information Classification
Information assets must be classified according to their sensitivity
and their importance to the organization. Since it is unrealistic to
expect managers and employees to maintain absolute control over all
information within the boundariesof the or ganization, it is necessary

to advise them on which types of information are considered more
sensitive, and how the organization would like the sensitive
information handled and protected. Classification, declassification,
labeling, storage, access, destruction and reproduction of classified
data and the administrative overhead this process will create must be
considered. Failure to maintain a balance between the value of the
information classified and the administrative burden the classification
system places on the organization will result in long-term difficulties
in achieiving success.
Confidential is that classification of information of which
unauthorised disclosure use could cause serious damage to the
organization, e.g. strategies planning documents.
Restricted is that classification of information of which
unauthorized disclosure/use would not be in the best interest of the
organization and/or its customers,  e.g.  design details, computer
software (programs, utilities), documentation, organization personnel
data, budget information.
Internal use is that classification of information that does not
require any degree of protection against disclosure within the company,
e.g. operating procedures, policies and standards inter office
memorandums.
Unclassified is that classification of information that requires no
protection against disclosure e.g. published annual reports, periodicals.
While the above classifications are appropriate for a general
organization view point, the following classifications may be
considered:
Top Secret: It shall be applied to information unauthorized
disclosure of which could be expected to cause exceptionally grave
damage to the national security or national interest. This category is
reserved for Nation’s closest secrets and to be used with great reserve.
Secret: This shall be applied to information unauthorized disclosure
of which could be expected to cause serious damage to the national
security or national interest or cause serious embarrassment in its
functioning. This classification should be used for highly important
information and is the highest classification normally used.

32
Confidentiality: This shall be applied to information unauthorized
disclosure of which could be expected to cause damage to the security
of the organisation or could be prejudicial to the interest of the
organisation, or could affect the organisation in its functioning. Most
information will on proper analysis be classified no higher than
confidential.
Restricted: This shall be applied to information which is essentially
meant for official use only and which would not be published or
communicated to anyone except for official purpose.
Unclassified: This is the classification of information that requires
no protection against disclosure.
4. Physical and Operational Security
4.1 Site Design
(1) The site shall not be in locations that are prone to natural
or man-made disasters, like flood, fire, chemical
contamination and explosions.
(2) As per nature of the operations, suitable floor structuring,
lighting, power and water damage protection requirements
shall be provided.
(3) Construction shall comply with all applicable building and
safety regulations as laid down by the relevant Government
agencies. Further, the construction must be tamper-evident.
(4) Materials used for the construction of the operational site
shall be fire resistant and free of toxic chemicals.
(5) External walls shall be constructed of brick or reinforced
concrete of sufficient thickness to resist forcible attack.
Ground level windows shall be fortified will study mild
steel grills or impact-resistant laminated security glass. All
internal walls must be from the floor to the ceiling and
must be tamper-evident.
(6) Air-conditioning system, power supply system and
uninterrupted power supply unit with proper backup shall
be installed depending upon the nature of operation. All
ducting holes of the air-conditioning system must be
designed so as to prevent intrusion of any kind.

33
(7) Automatic fire detection, fire suppression systems and
equipment in compliance with requirement specified by the
Fire Brigade or any other agencies of the Central or State
Government shall be installed at the operational site.
(8) Media library, electrical and mechanical control rooms shall
be housed in separate isolated areas, with access granted
only to specific, named individuals on a need basis.
(9) Any facility that supports mission-critical and sensitive
applications must be located and designed for repairability,
relocation and reconfiguration. The ability to relocate,
reconstitute and reconfigure these applications must be
tested as part of the business continuity/disaster recovery
plan.
4.2 Fire Protection
(1) Combustible materials shall not be stored within hundred
meters of the operational site.
(2) Automatic fire detection, fire suppression systems and
audible alarms as prescribed by the Fire Brigade or any
other agency of the Central or State Government shall be
installed at the operational site.
(3) Fire extinguishers shall be installed at the operational site
and their locations clearly marked with appropriate signs.
(4) Periodic testing, inspection and maintenance of the fire
equipment and fire suppression systems shall be carried
out.
(5) Procedures for the safe evacuation of personnel in an
emergency shall be visibly pasted/displayed at prominent
places at the operational site. Periodic training and fire drills
shall be conducted.
(6) There shall be no eating, drinking or smoking in the
operational site. The work areas shall be kept clean at all
times.
4.3 Environmental Protection
(1) Water detectors shall be installed under the raised floors
throughout the operational site and shall be connected to
audible alarms.

34
(2) The temperature and humidity condition in the operational
site shall be monitored and controlled periodically.
(3) Personnel at the operational site shall be trained to monitor
and control the various equipments and devices installed at
the operational site for the purpose of fire and environment
protection.
(4) Periodic inspection, testing and maintenance of the
equipment and systems shall be scheduled.
4.4 Physical Access
(1) Responsibilities round the clock, seven days a week, three
hundred sixty five days a year for physical security of the
systems used for operation and also actual physical layout
at the site of operation shall be defined and assigned to
named individuals.
(2) Biometric physical access security systems shall be installed
to control and audit access to the operational site.
(3) Physical access to the operational site at all times shall be
controlled and restricted to authorised personnel only .
Personnel authorized for limited physical access shall not
be allowed to gain unauthorized access to restricted area
within operational site.
(4) Dual control over the inventory and issue of access cards/
keys during normal business hours to the Data Centre shall
be in place. An up-to-date list of personnel who possess
the cards/keys shall be regularly maintained and archived
for a period of three years.
(5) Loss of access cards/keys must be immediately reported to
the security supervisor of the operational site who shall
take appropriate action to prevent unauthorised access.
(6) All individuals, other than operations staff, shall sign in
and sign out of the operational site and shall be
accompanied by operations staff.
(7) Emergency exists shall be tested periodically to ensure that
the access security systems are operational.
(8) All opening of the Data Centre should be monitored round
the clock by surveillance video cameras.

35
5. Information Management
5.1 System Administration
(1) Each organization shall designate a properly trained “System
Administration who will ensure that the protective security
measures of the system are functional and who will maintain
its security posture. Depending upon the complexity and
security needs of a system or application, the system
Administrator may have a designated System Security
Administrator who will assume security responsibilities and
provide physical, logical and procedural safeguards for
information.
(2) Organisations shall ensure that only a properly trained
System Security Administrator is assigned the system
security responsibilities.
(3) The responsibility to create, classify, retrieve, modify, delete
or archived information must rest only with the System
Administrator.
(4) Any password used for the system administration and
operation of trustee services must not be written down (in
paper or electronic form) or share with any one. A system
for password management should be put in place to cover
the eventualities such as forgotten password or changeover
to another person in case of System Administrator (or
System Security Administrator) leaving the organization.
Every instance of usage of administrator’s passwords must
be documented.
(5) Periodic review of the access rights of all users must be
performed.
(6) The System Administrator must promptly disable access to
a user’s account if the user is identified as having left the
Data Centre, changed assignments or is no longer requiring
system access. Reactivation of the user’s account must be
authorized in writing by the System Administrator (Digitally
signed e-mail may be acceptable).
(7) The System Administrator must take steps to safeguards
classified information as prescribed by its owner.

36
(8) The System Administrator must authorize privileged access
to users only on a need-to-know and need-to-do basis and
also only after the authorization is documented.
(9) Criteria for the review of audit trails/access logs, reporting
of access violations and procedures to ensure timely
management action/response shall be established and
documented.
(10) All security violations must be recorded, investigated, and
periodic status reports compiled for review by the
management.
(11) The System Administrator together with the system support
staff, shall conduct a regular analysis of problems reported
to and identify any weaknesses in protection of the
information.
(12) The System Administrator shall ensure that the data, file
and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) servers are not left
unmonitored while these systems are powered on.
(13) The System Administrator should ensure that no generic
user is enabled or active on the system.
5.2 Sensitive Information Control
(1) Information assets shall be classified and protected according
to their sensitivity and criticality to the organizations.
(2) Procedures in accordance with para 8.3 of these Guidelines
must be in place to handle the storage media, which has
sensitive and classified information.
(3) All sensitive information stored in any media shall bear or
be assigned an appropriate security classification.
(4) All sensitive material shall be stamped or labeled
accordingly.
(5) Storage media ( i.e. floppy diskettes, magnetic tapes, portable
hard disks, optical disks, etc.) containing sensitive
information shall be secured according to their classification.
(6) Electronic communication systems, such as router, switches,
network device and computers, used for transmission of

37
sensitive information should be equipped or installed with
suitable security software and if necessary with an encryptor
or encryption software. The appropriate procedure in this
regard should be documented.
(7) Procedures shall be in place to ensure the secure disposal
of sensitive information assets on all corrupted/damaged
or affected media both internal (e.g. hard disk/optical disk)
and external (e.g. diskette, disk drive, tapes etc.) to the
system. Preferably such affected/corrupted/damaged media
both internal and external to the system shall be destroyed.
5.3 Sensitive Information Security
(1) Highly sensitive information assets shall be stored on secure
removable media and should be in an encrypted format to
avoid compromise by unauthorized persons.
(2) Highly sensitive information shall be classified in accordance
with para 3.
(3) Sensitive information and data, which are stored on the
fixed disk of a computer shared by more than one person,
must be protected by access control software (e.g.,
password). Security packages must be installed which
partition or provide authorization to segregated directories/
files.
(4) Removable electronic storage media must be removed from
the computer and properly secured at the end of the work
session or workday.
(5) Removable electronic storage media containing sensitive
information and data must be clearly labeled and secured.
(6) Hard disks containing sensitive information and data must
be securely erased prior to giving the computer system to
another internal or external department or for maintenance.
5.4 Third Party Access
(1) Access to the computer systems by other organisations shall
be subjected to a similar level of security protection and
controls as in these Information Technology security
guidelines.

38
(2) In case the Data Centre uses the facilities of external service/
facility (outsourcer) for any of their operations, the use of
external service/facility providers (e.g. outsourcer) shall be
evaluated in light of the possible security exposures and
risks involved and all such agreements shall be approved
by the information asset owner. The external service or
facility provider shall also sign non-disclosure agreements
with the management of the Data Centre/operational site.
(3) The external service/facility provider (e.g. outsourcer) shall
provide an equivalent level of security controls as required
by these Information Technology Security Guidelines.
5.5 Prevention of Computer Misuse
(1) Prevention, detection and deterrence measures shall be
implemented to safeguard the security of computers and
computer information from misuse. The measures taken shall
be properly documented and reviewed regularly.
(2) Each organization shall provide adequate information to all
persons, including management, systems developers and
programmes, end-users, and third party users warning them
against misuse of computers.
(3) Effective measures to deal expeditiously with breaches of
security shall be established within each organisation. Such
measures shall include:
(i) Prompt reporting of suspected breach;
(ii) Proper investigation and assessment of the nature of
suspected breach;
(iii) Secure evidence and preserve integrity of such material
as relates to the discovery of any breach;
(iv) Remedial measures.
(4) All incidents related to breaches shall be reported to the
System Administrator or System Security Administrator for
appropriate action to prevent future occurrence.
(5) Procedure shall be set-up to establish the nature of any
alleged abuse and determine the subsequent action required

39
to be taken to prevent its future occurrence. Such procedures
shall include:
(i) The role of the System Administrator, System Security
Administrator and management;
(ii) Procedure for investigation;
(iii) Areas for security review; and
(iv) Subsequent follow-up action.
6. System integrity and security measures
6.1 Use of Security Systems or Facilities
(1) Security controls shall be installed and maintained on each
computer system or computer node to prevent unauthorised
users from gaining entry to the information system and to
prevent unauthorised access to data.
(2) Any system software or resource of the computer system
should only be accessible after being authenticated by access
control system.
6.2 System Access Control
(1) Access control software and system software security features
shall be implemented to protect resources. Management
approval is required to authorise issuance of user
identification (ID) and resource privileges.
(2) Access to information system resources like memory, storage
devices etc. sensitive utilities and data resources and
programme files shall be controlled and restricted based on
a “need-to-use” basis with proper segregation of duties.
(3) The access control software or operating system of the
computer system shall provide features to restrict access to
the system and data resources. The use of common
passwords such as “administrator” or “president” or “game”
etc. to protect access to the system and data resources
represent a security exposure and shall be avoided. All
passwords used must be resistant to dictionary attacks.

40
(4) Appropriate approval for the request to access system
resources shall be obtained from the System Administrator.
Guidelines and procedures government access authorisations
shall be developed, documented and implemented.
(5) An Access Control System manual documenting the access
granted to different level of users shall be prepared to
provide guidance to the System Administrator for grant of
access.
(6) Each user shall be assigned a unique user ID. Adequate
user education shall be provided to help users in password
choice and password protection. Sharing of user IDs shall
not be allowed.
(7) Stored passwords shall be encrypted using internationally
proven encryption techniques to prevent unauthorised
disclosure and modification.
(8) Stored passwords shall be protected by access controls from
unauthorised disclosure and modification.
(9) Automatic time-out for terminal inactivity should be
implemented.
(10) Audit trail of security-sensitive access and actions taken shall
be logged.
(11) All forms of audit trail shall be appropriately protected
against unauthorised modification or deletion.
(12) Where a second level access control is implemented through
the application system, password controls similar to those
implemented for the computer system shall be in place.
(13) Activities of all remote users shall be logged and monitored
closely.
(14) The facility to login as another user from one user’s login
shall be denied. However, the system should prohibit direct
login as a trusted user (e.g. root in Unix, administrator in
Windows NT or Windows 2000). This means that there must
be a user account configured for the trusted administrator.
The system requires trusted users to change their effective
user name to gain access to root and to re-authenticate
themselves before requesting access to privileged functions.

41
(15) The startup and shutdown procedure of the security software
must be automated.
(16) Sensitive Operating System files, which are more prone to
hackers must be protected against all known attacks using
proven tools and techniques. That is to say no user will be
able to modify them except with the permission of System
Administrator.
6.3 Password Management
(1) Certain minimum quality standards for password shall be
enforced. The quality level shall be increased progressively.
The following control features shall be implemented for
passwords:
(i) Minimum of eight characters without leading or trailing
blanks;
(ii) Shall be different from the existing password and the
two previous ones;
(iii) Shall be changed at least once every ninety days; for
sensitive system, password shall be changed at least
once every thirty days; and
(iv) Shall not be shared, displayed or printed.
(2) Password retries shall be limited to a maximum of three
attempted logons after which the user ID shall then be
revoked; for sensitive systems. The number of password
retries should be limited to a maximum of two.
(3) Passwords which are easy-to-guess (e.g. user name, birth
date, month, standard words etc.) should be avoided.
(4) Initial or reset passwords must be changed by the user upon
first use.
(5) Passwords shall always be encrypted in storage to prevent
unauthorized disclosure;
(6) All passwords used must be resistant to dictionary attacks
and all known password cracking algorithms.

42
6.4 Privileged User’s Management
(1) System privileges shall be granted to users only on a need-
to-use basis.
(2) Login privileges for highly privileged accounts should be
available only from Console and terminals situated with
Console room.
(3) An audit trail of activities conducted by highly privileged
users shall be maintained for two years and reviewed
periodically at least every week by operator who is
independent of System Administrator.
(4) Privileged user shall not be allowed to log in to the
computer system from remote terminal. The usage of the
computer system by the privilege user shall be allowed
during a certain time period.
(5) Separate user IDs shall be allowed to the user for performing
privileged and normal (non-privileged) activities.
(6) The use of user IDs for emergency use shall be recorded
and approved. The passwords shall be reset after use.
6.5 User’s Account Management
(1) Procedure for user account management shall be established
to cord access to application systems and data. The
procedures shall include following:
(i) Users shall be authorised by the computer system
owner to access computer services.
(ii) A written statement of access rights shall be given to
all users.
(iii) All users shall be required to sign an undertaking to
acknowledge that they understand the conditions of
access.
(iv) Where access to computer services is administered by
service providers, ensure that the service providers do
not provide access until the authorization procedures
have been completed. This includes the
acknowledgment of receipt of the accounts by the users.

43
(v) A formal record of all registered users of the computer
services shall be maintained.
(vi) Access rights of users who have been transferred, or
left the organisation shall be removed immediately.
(vii) A periodic check shall be carried out for redundant
user accounts and access rights that are not longer
required.
(viii) Ensure that redundant user accounts are not re-issued
to another user.
(2) User accounts shall be suspended under the following
conditions:
(i) when an individual is on extended leave or inactive
use of over thirty days. In case of protected computer
system, the limit of thirty days may be reduced to
fifteen days by the System Administrator.
(ii) immediately upon the termination of the services of
an individual.
(iii) suspended or inactive accounts shall be deleted after a
two months period. In case of protected computer
systems, the limit of two months may be reduced to
one month.
6.6 Data and Resource Protection
(1) All information assets shall be assigned an “owner”
responsible for the integrity of that data/resource.
Custodians shall be assigned and shall be jointly responsible
for information assets by providing computer controls to
assist owners.
(2) The operating system or security system of the computer
system shall:
(i) Define user authority and enforce access control to data
within the computer system;
(ii) Be capable of specifying, for each named individual, a
list of named data objects (e.g. file, programme) or
groups of named objects, and the type of access
allowed.

44
(3) For networked or shared computer systems, system users
shall be limited to a profile of data objects required to
perform their nadded tastes.
(4) Access controls for any data and/or resources shall be
determined as per of the systems analysis and design
process.
(5) Application Programmer shall not be allowed to access the
productive system.
7. Sensitive System Protection
(1) Secure/tokens/smart cards/bio-metric technologies such as
Iris recognition finger .... verification technologies etc. shall
be used to complement usage of passwords to access the
computer system.
(2) For computer system processing sensitive data, access by
other arrangement shall be prohibited or strictly controlled.
(3) For sensitive data, encryption of data in storage shall be
considered to protect the confidentiality and integrity.
8. Data Centre Operations Security
8.1 Job Scheduling
(1) Procedures shall be established to ensure that all changes
to the job securities are appropriately approved. The
authority to approve changes to job schedules shall be
clearly assigned.
(2) As far as possible, automated job scheduling should be used.
Manual job scheduling should require prior approval from
the competent authority.
8.2 System Operations Procedure
(1) Procedures shall be established to ensure that only
authorised and correct job system and parameter changes
are made.
(2) Procedures shall be established to maintain logs of system
activities. Such logs shall be reviewed by a competent

45
independent party for indication of dubious activities.
Appropriate retention periods shall be set for such logs.
(3) Procedures shall be established to ensure that people other
than well trained computer operators are prohibited from
operating the computer equipment.
(4) Procedures shall be implemented to ensure the secure
storage or distribution of all outputs/reports, in accordance
with procedures defined by the owner for each system.
8.3 Media Management
(1) Responsibilities for media library management and
protection shall be clearly defined and assigned.
(2) All media containing sensitive data shall be stored in a
locked room or cabinets, which must be fire resistant and
free of topic chemicals.
(3) Access to the media library (both on-site and off-site) shall
be restricted to the authorized persons only. A list of
personnel authorised to enter the library shall be maintained.
(4) The media containing sensitive and back up data must be
stored at three different physical locations in the country,
which can be reached in few hours.
(5) A media management system shall be in place to account
for all media stored on-site and off-site.
(6) All incoming/outgoing media transfers shall be authorised
by management and users.
(7) An independent physical inventory check of all media shall
be conducted at least every six months.
(8) All media shall have external volume identification. Internal
labels shall be fixed, where available.
(9) Procedures shall be in place to ensure that only authorised
addition/removal of media from the library is allowed.
(10) Media retention periods shall be established and approved
by management in accordance with legal/regulatory and
user requirements.

46
8.4 Media Movement
(1) Proper records of all movements of computer tapes/disks
between on-site and off-site media library must be
maintained.
(2) There shall be procedures to ensure the authorized and
secure transfer to media to/form external parties and the
off-site location. A means to authenticate the receipt shall
be in place.
(3) Computer media that are being transported to off-site data
backup locations should be stored in locked carrying cases
that provide magnetic field protection and protection from
impact while loading and unloading and during
transportation.
9. Data Backup and Off-site Retention
(1) Back up procedures shall be documented, scheduled and
monitored.
(2) Up-to-date backups of all critical items shall be maintained
to ensure the continued provision of the minimum essential
level of service. These item include:—
(i) Data files;
(ii) Utilities programmes;
(iii) Databases;
(iv) Operating system software;
(v) Applications system software;
(vi) Encryption keys;
(vii) Pre-printed forms; and
(viii) Documentation (including a copy of the business
continuity plans).
(3) One set of the original disks for all operating system and
application software must be maintained to ensure that a
valid, virus-free backup exists and available for use at any
time.

47
(4) Backups of the system, application and data shall be
performed on a regular basis. Backups should also be made
for application under development are data conversion
efforts.
(5) Data backup is required for all systems including personal
computers, server and distributed systems and databases.
(6) Critical system data and file server software must have full
backups take weekly.
(7) The backups must be kept in an area physically separate
from the server. Its critical system data on the LAN
represents unique versions of the information assets, then
the information backups must be rotated on periodic basis
to an off-site storage location.
(8) Critical system data and the file server software must have
incremental backup taken daily.
(9) Systems that are completely static may not require periodic
backup but should be backed up after changes or updates
in the information.
(10) Each LAN/system should have a primary and backup
operator to ensure continuity of business operations.
(11) The business recovery plan should be prepared and tested
on an annual basis.
10. Audit Trials and Verification
(1) Transactions that meet exception criteria shall be completely
and accurately highlighted and reviewed by personnel
independent of those that initiate the transaction.
(2) Adequate audit trials shall be captured and certain
information needed to determine sensitive events and pattern
analysis that would indicate possible fraudulent use of the
system ( e.g. repeated unsuccessful logons, access attempts
over a series of days) shall be analyzed. This information
includes such information as who, what, when, where, and
any special information such as:
(i) Success or failure of the event.

48
(ii) Use of authentication keys, where applicable.
(3) Automated or manual procedures shall be used to monitor
and promptly report all significant security events, such as
accesses, which are out-of-pattern relative to time, volume,
frequency, type of information asset, and redundancy. Other
areas of analysis include:
(i) Significant computer system events ( e.g. configuration
updates, system crashes);
(ii) Security profile changes; and
(iii) Actions taken by computer operations, system
administrator, system programmes, and/or security
administrators
(4) The real time clock of the computer system shall be set
accurately to ensure the accuracy of audit logs, which may
be required for investigations or as evidence in legal or
disciplinary cases.
(5) The real time clock of the computer or communications
device shall be set to Indian Standard Time (IST). Further
there shall be a procedure that checks and corrects drift in
the real time clock.
(6) Computer system access records shall be kept for a
minimum of two years, in either hard copy or electronic
form. Records, which are of legal nature and necessary for
any legal or regulation requirement or investigation of
criminal behaviour, shall be retained as per laws of the
land.
(7) Computer records of applications transaction and significant
events must be retained or a minimum period of two years
or longer depending on specific record retention
requirements.
11. Measures to Handle Computer Virus
(1) Responsibilities and duties shall be assigned to ensure that
all file servers and personal computers are equipped with
up-to-date virus protection and detection software.

49
(2) Virus detection software must be used to check storage
drives both internal and external to the system on a periodic
basis.
(3) All diskettes and software shall be screened and verified by
virus detection software before being loaded onto the
computer system. No magnetic media like tape cartridge,
floppies etc. brought from outside shall be used on the data
file PKI or computer server or personal computer on Intranet
and Internet without proper screening and verification by
virus detection software.
(4) A team shall be designated to deal with reported or
suspected incidents of computer virus. The designated team
shall ensure that latest version of anti virus software is
loaded on all data, file, PKI servers and personal computers.
(5) Procedures shall be established to limit the spread of viruses
to other organization information assets. Such procedures
inter-alia shall include:
(i) Communication to other business partners and users
who may be a risk from an infected resource.
(ii) Eradication and recovery procedures.
(iii) Incident report must be documented and communicated
as per established procedures.
(6) An awareness and training programme shall be established
to communicate virus protection practices, available
controls, areas of high risk to virus infection and
responsibilities.
12. Relocation of Hardware and Software
Whenever computers or computer peripherals are relocated (e.g.
for maintenance, installation at different sites or storage), the following
guidelines shall apply:
(i) All removable media will be removed from the computer
system and kept at secure location.
(ii) Internal drivers will be overwritten, reformatted or removed
as the situation may be.

50
(iii) If applicable, ribbons will be removed from printers.
(iv) All paper will be removed from printers.
13. Hardware and Software Maintenance
Whenever, the hardware and software maintenance of the computer
or computer network is being carried out, the following should be
considered:
(1) Proper placement and installation of Information Technology
equipment to reduce the effects of interference due to
electromagnetic emanations.
(2) Maintenance of an inventory and configuration chart of
hardware.
(3) Identification and use of security features implemented
within hardware.
(4) Authorization, documentation and control of change made
to the hardware.
(5) Identification of support facilities including power and air
conditioning.
(6) Provision of an uninterruptibe power supply.
(7) Maintenance of equipment and services.
(8) Organisation must make proper arrangements for
maintenance of computer hardware, software (both system
and application) and firmware installed and used by them.
It shall be the responsibility of the officer in charge of the
operational site to ensure that contract for annual
maintenance of hardware is always in place.
(9) Organisation must enter into maintenance agreements, if
necessary, with the supplier of computer and communication
hardware, software (both system and application) and
firmware.
(10) Maintenance personnel will sign non-disclosure agreements.
(11) The identities of all hardware and software vendor
maintenance staff should be verified before allowing them
to carry out maintenance work.

51
(12) All maintenance personnel should be escorted within the
operational site/computer system and network installation
room by the authorized personnel of the organisation.
(13) After maintenance, any exposed security parameters such
as passwords, use IDs, and accounts will be changed or
reset to eliminate any potential security exposures.
(14) If the computer system, computer network or any of its
devices is vulnerable to computer viruses as a result of
performing maintenance, system, manager or users shall scan
the computer system and its devices and any media affected
for viruses as a result of maintenance.
14. Purchase and Licensing of Hardware and Software
(i) Hardware and software products that contain or are to be
used to enforce security, and intended for use or interface
into any organisation system of network, must be verified
to comply with these Information Technology Security
Guidelines prior to the signing of any contract, purchase or
lease.
(2) Software, which is capable of bypassing or modifying the
security system or operating system, integrity features, must
be verified to determine that they conform to these
Information Technology Security Guidelines. Where such
compliance is not possible, then procedures shall be in place
to ensure that the implementation and operation of that
software does not compromise the security of the system.
(3) There shall be procedures to identify, select, implement and
control software (system and application software)
acquisition and installation to ensure compliance with the
Indian Copyright Act and Information Technology Security
Guidelines.
(4) It is prohibited to knowingly instal on any system whether
test or production, any software which is not licensed for
use on the specific systems or networks.
(5) No software will be installed and used on the system when
appropriate licensing agreements do not exist, except during
evaluation periods for which the user has documented
permission to instal and test the software under evaluation.

52
(6) Illegally acquired or unauthorized software must not be used
on any computer, computer network or data communication
equipment. In the event that any illegally acquired or
unauthorized software is detected by the System
Administrator or Network Administrator, the same must be
removed immediately.
15. System Software
(1) All system software options and parameters shall be
reviewed and approved by the management.
(2) System software shall be comprehensively tested and its
security functionality validated prior to implementation.
(3) All vendor supplied default user IDs shall be deleted or
password changed before allowing users to access the
computer system.
(4) Versions of system software installed on the computer
system and communication devices shall be regularly
updated.
(5) All changes  proposed in the system software must be
appropriately justified and approved by an authorised party.
(6) A log of all changes to system software shall be maintained,
completely documented and tested to ensure the desired
results.
(7) Procedures to control changes initiated by vendors shall be
in accordance with para 21 pertaining to “Change
Management”.
(8) There shall be no standing “Write” access to the system
libraries. All “Write” access shall be logged and reviewed
by the System Administrator for dubious activities.
(9) System Programmes shall not be allowed to have access to
the application system’s data and programme files in the
production environment.
(10) Procedures to control the use of sensitive system utilities
and system programmes that could bypass intended security
controls shall be in place and documented. All usage shall
be logged and reviewed by the System Administrator and
another person independent of System Administrator for
dubious activities.

53
16. Documentation Security
(1) All documentation pertaining to application software and
sensitive system software and changes made therein shall
be updated to the current time, accurately and stored
securely. An up-to-date inventory list of all documentation
shall be maintained to ensure control and accountability.
(2) All documentation and subsequent changes shall be
reviewed and approved by an independent authorised party
prior to issue.
(3) Access to application software documentation and sensitive
system software documentation shall be restricted to
authorised personnel on a “need-to-use” basis only.
(4) Adequate backups of all documentation shall be maintained
and a copy of all critical documentation and manuals shall
be stored off-site.
(5) Documentation shall be classified according to the sensitivity
of its contents/implications.
(6) Organisations shall adopt a clean desk policy for papers,
diskettes and other documentation in order to reduce the risks
of unauthorised access, loss of and damage to information
outside normal working hours.
17. Network Communication Security
(1) All sensitive information on the network shall be protected
by using appropriate techniques. The critical network devices
such as routers, switches and modems, should be protected
from physical damage.
(2) The network configuration and inventories shall be
documented and maintained.
(3) Prior authorization of the Network Administrator shall be
obtained for making any changes to network configuration.
The changes made in the network configuration shall be
documented. The threat and risk assessment of the network
after changes in the network configuration shall be reviewed.
The network operation shall be monitored for any security
irregularity. A formal procedure should be in place for
identifying and resolving security problems.

54
(4) Physical access to communications and network sites shall
be controlled and restricted to authorized individuals only
in accordance with para 4.4 pertaining to “Physical Access”.
(5) Communication and network systems shall be controlled
and restricted to authorize individuals only in accordance
with para 6.2—System Access Control.
(6) As far as possible, transmission medium within the
Certifying Authority’s operational site should be secured
against electro magnetic transmission. In this regard, use of
Optical Fibre Cable and armoured cable may be preferred
as transmission media as the case may be.
(7) Network diagnostic tools, e.g., spectrum analyzer, protocol
analyzer should be used on a need basis.
18. Firewalls
(1) Intelligent devices generally known as “Firewalls” shall be
used to isolate organisation’s data network with the external
network. Firewall device should also be used to limit
network connectivity for unauthorized use.
(2) Networks that operate at varying security levels should be
isolated from each other by appropriate firewalls. The
internal network of the organization shall be physically and
logically isolated from the Internet and any other external
connection by a firewall.
(3) All firewalls shall be subjected to thorough test for
vulnerability prior to being put to use and at least half-
yearly thereafter.
(4) All web servers for access by Internet users shall be isolated
from other data and host servers.
19. Connectivity
(1) Organisation shall establish procedure for allowing
connectivity of their computer network or computer system
to non-organisation computer system or networks. The
permission to connect other networks and computer system
shall be approved by the Network Administrator and
documented.

55
(2) All unused connections and network segments should be
disconnected from active networks. The computer system/
personal computer or outside terminal accessing an
organisation’s host system must adhere to the general system
security and access control guidelines.
(3) The suitability of new hardware/software particularly the
protocol compatibility should be assessed before connecting
the same to the organisation’s network.
(4) As far as possible, no Internet access should be allowed to
database server/file server or server hosting sensitive data.
(5) The level of protection for communication and network
resources should be commensurate with the criticality and
sensitivity of the data transmitted.
20. Network Administrator
(1) Each organization shall designate a properly trained
“Network Administrator” who will be responsible for
operation, monitoring security and functioning of the
network.
(2) Network Administrator shall regularly undertake the review
of network and also take adequate measures to provide
physical, logical and procedural safeguards for its security.
Appropriate follow-up of any unusual activity or pattern of
access on the computer network shall be investigated
promptly by the Network Administrator.
(3) System must include a mechanism for alerting the Network
Administrator of possible breaches in security, e.g.,
unauthorized access, virus infection and hacking.
(4) Secure Network Management System should be
implemented to monitor functioning of the computer
network. Broadcast of network traffic should be minimized.
(5) Only authorized and legal software shall be used on the
network.
(6) Shared computer systems, network devices used for business
applications shall comply with the requirement established
in para 6—System Integrity and Security Measures.

56
21. Change Management
21.1 Change Control
(1) Procedures for tracking and managing changes in application
software, system software, hardware and data in the
production system shall be established. Organisational
responsibilities for the change management process shall be
defined and assigned.
(2) A risk and impact analysis, classification and prioritisation
process shall be established.
(3) No changes to a production system shall be implemented
until such changes have been formally authorised.
Authorisation procedures for change control shall be defined
and documented.
(4) Owners/Users shall be notified of all changes made to
production system which may affect the processing of
information on the said production system.
(5) Fall-back procedures in the event of a failure in the
implementation of the change process shall be established
and documented.
(6) Procedures to protect, control access and changes to
production source code, data, execution statements and
relevant system documentation shall be documented and
implemented.
(7) Version changes of application software and all system software
installed on the computer systems and all communication
devices shall be documented. Different versions of application
software and system software must be kept in safe custody.
21.2 Testing of Changes to Production System
(1) All changes in computer resource proposed in the production
system shall be tested and the test results shall be reviewed
and accepted by all concerned parities prior to
implementation.

57
(2) All user acceptance tests in respect of changes in computer
resource in production system shall be performed in a
controlled environment which includes: (i) Test objectives,
(ii) A documented test plan, and (iii) acceptance criteria.
21.3 Review of Changes
(1) Procedures shall be established for an independent review
of programme changes before they are moved into a
production environment to detect unauthorised or malicious
codes.
(2) Procedures shall be established to schedule and review the
implementation of the changes in computer resource in the
production system so as to ensure proper functioning.
(3) All emergency changes/fixes in computer resource in the
production system shall be reviewed and approved.
(4) Periodic management reports on the status of the changes
implemented in the computer resource in the production system
shall be submitted for management review.
22. Problem Management and Reporting
(1) Procedures for identifying, reporting and resolving problems,
such as non-functioning of Certifying Authority’s system;
breaches in Information Technology security; and hacking,
shall be established and communicated to all personnel
concerned. It shall include emergency procedures. Periodic
reports shall be submitted for management review.
(2) A help desk shall be set up to assist users in the resolution
of problems.
(3) A system for recording, tracking and reporting the status of
reported problems shall be established to ensure that they are
promptly managed and resolved with minimal impact on the
user of the computing resources.
23. Emergency Preparedness
(1) Emergency response procedures for all activities connected
with computer operation shall be developed and
documented. These procedures should be reviewed
periodically.

58
(2) Emergency drills should be help periodically to ensure that
the documented emergency procedures are effective.
24. Contingency Recovery Equipment and Services
(1) Commitment shall be obtained in writing from computer
equipment and supplies vendors to replace critical
equipment and supplies within a specified period of time
following a destruction of the computing facility.
(2) The business continuity plan shall be developed which inter
alia include the procedures for emergency ordering of the
equipment and availability of the services.
(3) The need for backup hardware and other peripherals should
be evaluated in accordance to business needs.
25. Security Incident Reporting and Response
(1) All security related incidents must be reported to central
coordinator, appointed by the management to coordinate
and handle security related incidents. This central
coordinator shall be the single point of contact at the
organization.
(2) All incidents reported, actions taken, follow-up actions, and
other related information shall be documented.
(3) Procedures shall be defined for dealing with all security
related incidents, including malicious software, break-ins
from networks, software bugs which compromised the
security of the system.
26. Disaster Recovery/Management
(1) Disaster recovery plan shall be developed, properly
documented, tested and maintained to ensure that in the
event to a failure of the information system or destruction
of the facility, essential level of service will be provided.
The disaster recovery framework should include:
(a) emergency procedures, describing the immediate action
to be taken in case of a major incident.
(b) fall back procedure describing the actions to be taken
to relocate essential activities or support services to a
backup site.

59
(c) restoration procedure, describing the action to be taken
to return to normal operation at the original site.
(2) The documentation should include:
(a) definition of disaster;
(b) condition for activating the plan;
(c) stages of crisis;
(d) who will make decisions in the crisis;
(e) role of individuals for each component of the plan;
(f) composition of the recovery team; and
(g) decision making process for return to normal operation.
(3) Specific disaster management plan for critical applications
shall be developed, documented, tested and maintained on
a regular basis.
(4) Responsibilities and reporting structure shall be clearly
defined which will take effect immediately on the declaration
of a disaster.
(5) Each component/aspect of the plan should have a person
and a backup assigned to its execution.
(6) Periodic training of personnel and users associated with
computer system and network should be conducted defining
their roles and responsibilities in the event of a disaster.
(7) Test plan shall be developed, documented and maintained.
Periodic tests shall be carried out to test the effectiveness of
the procedures in the plan. The results of the tests shall be
documented for management review.
(8) Disaster recovery plan should be updated regularly to ensure
its continuing effectiveness.

ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 25 November, 2004 from
1100 hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room No. ‘G-074, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Col. G. Nizamuddin
8. Shri Sohan Potai
9. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Sarla Maheshwari
12. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
13. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
14. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Assistant Director
60

61
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following Draft Reports and adopted the same with certain
amendments/modifications:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its Fifty-Sixth Report on “Working of National Informatics
Centre (NIC)” relating to Department of Information
Technology.
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Reports to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT (THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 8, 9, 15, 25-29, 48-50, 54-55, 61-62 & 80
Total 17
Percentage 73.91%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 42-43, 69 & 81
Total 4
Percentage 17.39%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No. 77
Total 1
Percentage 4.35%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph No. 41
Total 1
Percentage 4.35%
62