28
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 23.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 150
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
ANNEXURES
I. Spectrum allotted to operators using GSM based
systems in different service areas ..................................... 28
II. Spectrum allotted to operators using CDMA based
systems in different service areas ..................................... 32
III. Minutes of the Twenty-First Sitting of the Committee
held on 9.2.2005..................................................................... 45
IV. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee
held on 24.10.2005................................................................. 47
V. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee
held on 24.10.2005................................................................. 51
VI. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee
held on 25.10.2005................................................................. 54
VII. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 20.12.2005................................................................. 57
VIII. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 21.12.2005................................................................. 59
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
12. Smt. Jayaprada
13. Shri G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chandra Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
(iii)

26. Shri Dara Singh
*27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 27.9.2005.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-06) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Eighth Report on ‘Spectrum
Management’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications).
2. The Committee obtained written information from the Ministry
of Defence, Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications), the Cellular Associations/
Operators on Spectrum Management and related issues.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) on 9 February, 2005 and
25 October, 2005 and that of Ministry of Defence on 24 October, 2005.
They also took non-official evidence of the representatives of the
Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), Association of Unified
Service Providers of India (AUSPI) and individual GSM and CDMA
service providers on 24th and 25th October, 2005. The Committee had
the benefit of being presented with various technical and related
submissions with respect to the issues relating to Spectrum
Management. The Committee record that their recommendations do
not represent on contain a definite conclusion relating to the technical
aspects presented before the Committee.
4. In this Report, the Committee have highlighted amongst other
aspects the urgent spectrum requirement of the GSM and CDMA
operators in urban areas and Metros; vacation of spectrum from
Defence; Creation of ‘Defence Band’ and formalization of Defence
Interest Zone; deployment of spectrum efficient equipment by both
Defence and non-Defence sectors; early allocation of spectrum for roll
out of 3G and emerging services; utilization of spectrum in an efficient,
optimum and rational manner; co-existence of both GSM and CDMA
technologies and a noticeable penetration of the mobile operators in
rural areas. The Committee have urged the Department to come out
with a comprehensive and transparent Spectrum Policy, taking into
consideration all the above issues and catering to the requirement of
both Defence and non-Defence sectors.
5. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 21 December, 2005.

6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Defence,
the Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), the Association of
Unified Service Providers of India (AUSPI) and the individual GSM
and CDMA operators for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing information in connection with the examination of the
subject.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(vi)

REPORT
SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTORY
In markets worldwide, wireless is replacing fixed lines as the
de facto communication service that is perceived as a public utility.
Mobile connections have overtaken fixed lines across all regions from
emerging markets to developed markets. In developed markets, this is
driven by fixed to mobile substitution, fixed to mobile number
portability etc. In emerging markets, the weak fixed line infrastructure
has created an opportunity for mobile to leap frog over fixed
connection. In India, proper regulatory and policy environment coupled
with intense competition has led to an explosion in growth in the
mobile sector in addition to substantial reduction in tariffs. At the end
of March, 2005 the total mobile subscriber base was around
52.17 million, out of which GSM and CDMA subscriber base was
around 41.07 million and 11.10 million respectively. During the year
2004, about 19.50 million mobile subscribers were added and thus the
mobile subscriber base crossed the fixed line subscriber base. Similarly,
mobile tariffs were reduced from the level of about Rs. 16 per minute
in 1995-96 for both incoming and outgoing calls to levels comparable
with fixed line tariffs at the calling party end and free for incoming
calls in 2005.
2. Thus, it is apparent that the growth of telecom services is
synonymous with the growth of wireless services. As a matter of fact,
wireless is giving impetus to future growth in telecommunications, be
it increase in rural tele-density or growth in least developed countries.
In wireless communication, the signal is transmitted from one point to
another without any wire and it requires use of radio frequency
spectrum. The radio frequency spectrum is generally from 3 KHz to
3000 GHz.
3. To put it simply, telecom operators send and receive signals at
various frequencies to enable communication, through what is known
as radio spectrum frequencies, which are electromagnetic waves and
are natural phenomena governed by laws of physics. This radio
spectrum only contains a limited number of frequencies due to various
factors such as propagation characteristics of different bands, equipment
availability for different types of allocations and suitability of different

2
frequency bands for specific allocations. It is also used by the Defence
Services, Railways etc.
4. Thus, Radio Frequency Spectrum is a limited natural resource.
It can only be shared amongst various countries, services, users,
technologies etc. It is susceptible to harmful interference. Assignment
of Spectrum is governed by National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP)
and the International Radio Regulations of the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU).
5. The Spectrum Management functions in India are performed by
the Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) wing of the Department
of Telecommunications (DoT). WPC is the national nodal agency for
all matters related to radio communication aspects of the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Asia Pacific Tele-community and
is responsible for treaty obligations on behalf of the Government. Broad
functions of WPC wing include Spectrum Management Policy and
Planning; frequency authorization/assignment, spectrum charging and
licensing; standards, specifications and equipment authorization;
notification and registration with ITU for international recognition and
protection; international cooperation/coordination; Spectrum Control,
monitoring and Enforcement and Secretarial assistance for Standing
Advisory Committee on Frequency Allocations (SACFA).
6. The broad functions of SACFA are to formulate/review the
National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP): to clear sites of all wireless
installations in the country; to evolve technical criteria equipment
standards, channeling plans, introduction of new technologies etc; and
to formulate national proposals for international conferences/meetings.
7. Besides, there is the National Radio Spectrum Management and
Monitoring System (NRSMMS). The two important NRSMMS
components are (i) Automated  Spectrum Management System (ASMs)
which include licensing, billing, technical analysis, frequency
assignment, coordination and planning, digital terrain model etc. and
(ii) National Spectrum Monitoring System (NSMS) which include fixed,
mobile and satellite monitoring; Spectrum bands like HF, VHF, UHF,
SHF, EHF (partial); Direction finding; spectrum occupancy; signal
characterization; monitoring task plans etc.
8. Historically, Spectrum was allotted on need based where higher
commercial requirement was not envisaged. This was allotted mostly
to Government Organisations, Defence being the largest users of it in
India. However, due to an unprecedented growth of telecommunication

3
services and increase in the number of radio users all along the
international border, requirement of spectrum by both the telecom and
defence sectors has increased manifold.
9. In India, wireless telecommunication service are provided through
three technologies i.e. Global System of Mobile (GSM), Code Division
Multiple Access (CDMA) and CorDECT. The frequency Bands allocated
to these technologies are as follows:
(i) GSM 900 — 890-915 MHz paired with 935-960 MHz
(ii) GSM 1800 — 1710-1785 MHz paired with 1805-1880 MHz
(iii) CDMA 800 — 824-844 MHz paired with 869-889 MHz
(iv) CorDECT — 1880-1990 MHz (TDD-unpaired)
10. As per the New Telecom Policy 1999 (NTP-99), availability of
adequate frequency spectrum is essential not only for providing optimal
bandwidth to every operator but also for entry of additional operators.
NTP’99 further mentioned that it is proposed to review the spectrum
utilization from time-to-time keeping in view the emerging scenario of
spectrum availability, optimal use of spectrum, requirements of market,
competition and other interest of public. It also states that the entry of
more operators in a service area shall be based on the recommendations
of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), which will review
this as and when required and not later than every two years.
11. With the proliferation of new technologies and the growing
demand for telecommunication services, the demand on spectrum has
increased manifold for which it has become essential that ‘Spectrum’
be utilized efficiently, economically, rationally and optimally. Moreover,
in view of the growing, conflicting and competing demand on
spectrum, there is a need for a transparent process of allocation of
frequency spectrum for use by a service and making it available to
various users under specific conditions.
12. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject for
detailed examination and in the process received numerous write ups
from and heard the valuable views of the Ministry of Defence, the
Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), the Association of
Unified Telecom Service Providers of India (AUSPI), individual GSM
and CDMA Service Providers besides getting clarifications from the
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) and consulting TRAI’s
Recommendations on Spectrum Related Issues. Such views, counter
views, clarifications and consultations have been broached upon in the

4
succeeding paragraphs followed by the Committee’s own Conclusions/
Observations/Recommendations.
Defence as a major user of Spectrum
13. Defence has always been the major user of Spectrum in India.
Through a written note the Committee have been informed that prior
to 1999, Defence had exclusive rights over its spectrum since the
allocated spectrum was categorized as the Defence Band. Spectrum is
a primary requirement for warfare and normal day-to-day operations
for the Defence services. All Defence requirements of spectrum go
through the process of vetting and detailed technical analysis by the
Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) wing, before assignment.
Hence there is no spare capacity with the defence. The nature and
peculiarities of Defence usage of spectrum are as under:
Defence operations are mobile in nature, due to which wireless is
the main means of communication.
(a) Defence services need a large amount of spectrum for
ensuring information and weapon superiority. These
requirements will increase to a great extent in network
centric operations as the requirements of situational
awareness, precision targeting and remote guidance will
increase.
(b) Defence forces need to use systems with special
characteristics such as frequency hopping, to survive in the
electronic warfare environment. Frequency hopping sets
require more spectrum as compared to any other radio set.
Therefore, the spectrum utilized by Defence appears to be
large.
(c) Due to the nature of operations, the density of radio sets in
an area of approx. 100 km. X 100 km. during operations
work out to be approx. 10,000. This requires considerable
spectrum and degrades re-use capability.
14. On the availability of Spectrum the Committee were informed
during evidence that the Defence did not occupy anything in the
824-844/869-889 MHz band. In 890-915/935-960 MHz band, Defence
has been occupying 4.8+4.8 MHz. Similarly, in 1710-1785/1805-
1880 MHz. Defence has been occupying 60+60 MHz in Metros and
65 + 65 MHz in other areas. The balance of 15 + 15 MHz in Metros
and 10 + 10 MHz in other places had been coordinated by Defence.
In 1920-1980/2110-2170 MHz Defence has been holding 60+60 MHz.

5
15. The Committee were anxious to know how the Defence needed
more spectrum although it had the maximum spectrum. The
representative explained:
“For the Defence forces also there is an additional requirement of
spectrum as it is for the commercial world because the Defence
forces also have to keep pace with the technology and have an
edge over the adversaries to fight successful combat operations.”
16. He further explained that the defence is now switching over to
spectrum efficient technology and frequency hopping. The Bharat
Electronics makes equipment to give Defence 250 to 300 hops. They
are migrating to 500 hops per second and they will soon go to 1000
hops per second. In future Defence will be requiring more spectrum
as frequency hops increase to 1000. The requirement of spectrum will
go up and not come down.
Influence of NATO equipment on frequency requirements
17. The Committee have been informed that  Europe and other
Western Countries separated their military bands for NATO Forces &
civilian bands based on EUROCOM standards. Soviet Union also did
the same, but interchanged the bands so that their military band does
not operate in the same band as that of NATO forces. India’s present
military equipment is of erstwhile Soviet origin while civilian
equipment is of Western origin leading to direct clashes of the two
types of users. Presently, the world order in this respect is fast changing
with the breaking up of the Eastern block and many a countries of
this block joining the European Union, the shift to NATO specification
the world over is on its way including that of Russia. Defence’s own
procurement of present telecom equipment, therefore, by default is
drifting to the NATO Defence band.
18. Giving information on the equipment profile through a written
note that presently owing to the large size of the Indian armed forces,
it is not possible to modernize it all at once, due to budgetary
constraints, as five generations of equipment are always concurrently
in service. Re-framing of spectrum will, therefore, be a slow process
keeping a long time perspective in mind.
19. Trying to clarify the plan process of replacing equipment and
the cost of doing so, the representative clarified during evidence stating:
“……We are doing a 15 year Plan. We have plan to replace but I
think as a country with limited resources, this will have to be

6
done very deliberately…… we are actually looking forward to using
equipment as much as we can till it become functionally obsolete
and not technologically obsolete. If you want to have state-of-the-
art best in the world, the American Defence Budget is 500 billion
dollars and we are working on a defence budget of 14 to 17 billion
dollars.”
20. The Committee were interested to know whether there was
any clear cut plan for phasing out some of the older technologies and
what was the priority of the Defence in phasing out the older
technologies for a better usage of spectrum. The representatives have
clarified stating that Defence have five generations of equipment. If
one compares the fifth generation with the first generation equipment,
it will be inefficient use of spectrum. But when the fifth generation
equipment was procured, that was the best spectrum efficient
equipment during that period. So, if defence phases that out and gets
to the first one, the first one which is replacing the fifth one will
again be the best spectrum efficient equipment.
21. It was further stated that an internal study could be done.
However, the Defence cannot keep buying and spreading equipment
and that the Defence does try to look into more spectrum efficient
technology at the time it is inducted. But thereafter, the Defence has
to live with it for 20 to 25 years.
Spectrum Co-ordination
22. The Committee were informed through a written note that the
National Frequency Allocation Policy (NFAP-81) was based on the
concept of major users and the general users of spectrum. In the year
1999, the National Telecom Policy under went a change and
Telecommunication Industry was allowed to establish its communication
infrastructure in the country in a big way. In order to achieve this, a
need was thus felt to reallocate the entire spectrum from the concept
of major and general users to the concept of “types of services”. Now
as the Defence and industry are sharing a common band, there was
a requirement of shedding certain spectrum from the erstwhile Defence
Band for the Industry.
23. In connection with the release of spectrum the representatives
of Ministry of Defence during evidence stated:
“Notwithstanding the constraints which I talk about,
notwithstanding the numerous systems which operate in the battle
fields, the central theme of our strategy for spectrum management

7
has been though of cooperating, co-existing with the commercial
world being proactive and making spectrum available for the
growth of telecom industry. ……The Committee on whose
recommendation the spectrum is being made available are; the
first Committee was constituted under the PMO in 1998, the Group
of Telecom; the second Committee was the Group of Ministers
which was constituted in 2003, for additional requirement of
spectrum. In addition to that, we keep on getting it as and when
the requirement of spectrum arises. …… There are further demands
in the same very band which, by the  Spectrum Management
Committee of the GOT, was given that the defence will be
compensated by alternate spectrum in 2000-2300 MHz band; as
also the financial compensation will be given for migration. I would
like to bring to the notice of the Committee that both these
recommendations have not yet been implemented.”
24. The Committee enquired about the estimated compensation at
that time for migration. The representative replied as under:
“It was Rs. 345 crore and that was in the year 1998-1999.”
25. Based on the requirement projected from time-to-time, a
substantial part of the requirement of the cellular industry has already
been coordinated or is under the process of coordination except the
areas where the coordination cannot be done without adversely
affecting the requirement of Defence Forces. The spectrum that has
been coordinated is as under:
(a) 800 MHz (20 + 20 MHz) for CDMA operators is already
coordinated.
(b) 900 MHz (25 + 25 MHz) for GSM operators and Railways
already coordinated less 4.8 + 4.8 MHz.
(c) 1800 MHz (25 + 25 MHz) for GSM operators has been partly
coordinated.
(d) 1900 MHz (20 MHz) for CDMA operators has not been
agreed to by the Defence forces due to overriding defence
considerations.
(e) 2000 MHz Band for IMT 2000 under coordination process
with Ministry of Communication & IT.
26. Clarifying the position on the 1900 MHz band, the
representative during evidence stated that 1900-1910 MHz paired with

8
1980-1990 MHz had been requested for coordination, as an additional
band for CDMA services. This requirement was never brought either
by the Group of Ministers or Group of Telecom. It was not possible
to coordinate the required spectrum in this band as it was being utilized
for the Air Defence Network. The representative further submitted
that the demand in this case was not justified as the already available
band in 800 MHz had not yet been fully utilized by the CDMA
operators.
27. The representatives of the M/o Defence had a very open view
on sharing of spectrum between the Defence and the civil usages. In
this connection they stated:
“In so far as sharing of the spectrum is concerned, we fully agree
that we need to share the spectrum because we have finite resource.
So, towards that end, we have a Committee which is working out
the requirement about migrating wherever we can to spare the
spectrum in 1800 MHz and 2000 MHz band so that the requirement
of the  civilians also are being met. The Committee is working out
the details.”
28. Showing their concern towards the defence requirement of
spectrum during war/national crisis of the civilian operators stated:
“I am going to step further to say that if there is a national crisis,
we would be bound to release on first demand without any
contest.”
Creation of an exclusive Defence Band
29. In the course of evidence on spectrum management on
24.10.2005 the representatives of the Ministry of Defence touched upon
the need of earmarking spectrum in every Band, thus forming a
separate band for defence purposes in place of the interspersed spreads
of spectrum. The representative stated:
“For defence operations in all the service and in the interest of
national security, there is a need to earmark spectrum in every
band for defence, depending on its justified needs. The spectrum
thus earmarked shall form the Defence Band. This shall be different
from the erstwhile major user band and shall not hinder in the
launch of any service in future. Almost all the countries, like USA,
China, United Kingdom, France, Germany follow this pattern to
earmark their Defence Band.”

9
30. Stating the benefits from such a Band they stated:
“Formation of the Defence Band would enable adequate spectrum
for the service providers as well as for the Defence services and
would have additional benefits by better planning for procurement
and development of equipment by both Defence and the industry.
Moreover, waiting period for assignment of frequencies will reduce
considerably and there will be no need for regular coordination,
vacation and migration which is time consuming.”
31. Informing the Committee on how Defence Band will help in
avoiding delay in clearance the representative stated:
“For the defence forces also there is an additional requirement of
spectrum as it is for the commercial world because the Defence
forces also have to keep pace with the technology and have an
edge over the adversaries to fight successful combat operations.
We are also getting ready for the network centering operations.
Delay in assignment of spectrum; hon. Chairman it takes Defence
cases nearly two to three years for clearance from the Wireless
Planning and Coordination Cell, whenever we have to induct new
equipment, a new technology or we develop a new technology or
equipment.  This requirement can be met if we form the Defence
Band.”
32. Agreeing to the proposal of having a separate Defence Band,
the private operators stated that as in the case of USA where the
entire spectrum whether it was in 800 or 900 or 1800 or in the latest
2000 MHz band was entirely vacated by the private operators and
released to Defence for use in their new equipments, the operators in
India were also willing to do the same. They clarified:
“If the Defence, over a period of next few years was to vacate the
commercially required spectrum for the benefit of the commercial
needs of the nation, it would be in the interest of the country to
have a secured and dedicated spectrum allocation for the Defence.
It would be ideal to do so.”
33. The Committee put forth the proposal of having a Defence
Band to the representatives of Department of Telecommunications and
asked for their views. The DoT stated that the technical experts of
DoT and the Defence should sit together and examine the proposal
thoroughly.

10
Defence Interest Zone
34. In the course of evidence the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence stated that there was a necessity of having a defence interest
zone. The defence interest zone would be an area of 100 km. contiguous
to the international boundary as defined by spectrum Management
Committee (GoT) the representatives requested for inclusion of the
provision in the next National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP) which
is under revision.
Growth of Mobile Services in India
35. The country is witnessing an unprecedented growth in the
mobile sector. At the end of March 2005, the total mobile subscriber
base was around 52.17 million, out of which GSM and CDMA
subscriber base was around 41.07 million and 11.10 million respectively.
A target to achieve around 200 million mobile phones by 2007 has
been set.
36. According to TRAI, today, the mobile coverage in rural areas
is very small and almost incidental. Though there is no spectrum
constraint in such areas but mobile coverage is yet to reach in such
areas. The major operators in the GSM mobile services are Bharti,
Hutch, MTNL, Idea and those in the CDMA mobile services are MTNL,
BSNL, Reliance Infocom and Tata Tele Services. The Association
representing the GSM mobile operators is the Cellular Operators
Association of India (COAI) and that representing the CDMA mobile
operators is the Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of
India (AUSPI). Both the Associations and some of the individual mobile
operators were called by the Committee to get their views on issues
pertaining to spectrum allocation, co-ordination, efficiency etc. and the
problems before them.
Spectrum allocation
37. The Committee were informed by DoT that originally when
the mobile services were started there was no expectation of the type
of growth which has happened lately and there were limitations in
the availability of spectrum. Accordingly, spectrum in small quantities
was allocated to GSM and CDMA operators in comparison to
international average allocation which are of the order of 2 x 20 mHz
for GSM and 2 x 14 MHz for CDMA. Currently, spectrum varying
from 2 x 4.4 MHz to 2 x 10 MHz has been allocated to service
providers using GSM technology, while 2  x 2.5 MHz to 2 x 5 MHz
has been allocated to service providers using CDMA technology.

11
38. In the course of examination the Committee were informed
that the policy of allotment of spectrum in the GSM category is
subscriber based. 4.4 MHz is allotted immediately on successful
consideration of application. 6.2 MHz is allotted when the need is felt
by the service provider. Additional spectrum after 6.2 MHz to the
tune of 8 MHz is given to the service provider after he attains a
subscriber base of 5 lakh. A further allocation of 2.0 MHz after
8.0 MHz is given to the provider on attaining a subscriber base of
10 lakh. Thus, 10 MHz is the maximum given to an operator in this
technology. However, further allocation beyond 2 x 10 MHz could be
considered on achieving a subscriber base of 12 lakh.
39. The Committee were further informed that under the Unified
Access Services Licence (UASL) an initial spectrum of 2.5 MHz is
given to CDMA operators on case by case basis subject to availability.
Additional spectrum beyond 2.5 MHz is to be considered for allocation
after ensuring optimal and efficient utilization of the already allocated
spectrum taking into account all types of traffic and guidelines/criteria
prescribed from time to time. The criteria for allocation/release of 3rd
and 4th CDMA carrier is as under:
Criteria for release of 3rd CDMA carrier:
Service area The minimum subscriber base required
for allotment of 3rd carrier
12
Metro Service Area
Delhi & Mumbai 3 Lakhs
Chennai & Kolkata 2 Lakhs
Telecom Circle Service Area
Category “A” Circle 4 Lakhs
Category “B” Circle 3 Lakhs
Category “Subscriber” Circle 1.5 Lakhs
Criteria for release of 4th CDMA carrier:
Metro Service Area
Delhi & Mumbai 10 Lakhs
Chennai & Kolkata 6 Lakhs

12
12
Telecom Circle Service Area
Category “A” Circle 12 Lakhs
Category “B” Circle 10 Lakhs
Category “Subscriber” Circle 5 lakhs
Note: The SDCA wise assignment of 3rd carrier will continue, in case of any specific
operator who may establish technical reasons for not achieved the revised norms but
having at least achieve the earlier prescribed norms i.e. 2 lakh subscriber in a SDCA,
on the basis of which other operators have been given 3rd CDMA carrier.
Similarly, the SDCA wise assignment of 4th carrier will continue,
where customer base has surpassed 3 lakhs. However, in addition to
the subscriber base criteria, it shall also be ensured that the density of
BTS by the Service Provider should be more than 16 BTS per hundred
square Kms. For the largest (area-wise) city of the SDCA where the
4th CDMA carrier is requested.
40. The spectrum that has been allotted to the GSM based system
and the CDMA based systems in different service areas is as given in
Annexures 1 & 2.
Spectrum Efficiency and Spectrum Utilization
41. Spectrum efficiency is a complex issue. To make the point on
complexity clear the representative of the Department of
Telecommunication during evidence on 9th February, 2005 stated:
“In case of GSM, one carrier which carries the signals, the minimum
width of the carrier is 200 KH. You cannot carry signals less than
200 KH. In case of CDMA carrier, the width is 1.23 MH, that is
1230 KH, which is much higher. For a single operator, you could
allot multiple of 200 KH for GSM. You could allot any amount.
The whole of 25 KH can be allotted. 25 MH divided into 200 KH
can be allotted to any number of operators depending on your
choice. There is no limitation. Whereas, in case of CDMA you
have to divide 1.23 MH and then allot it to as many operators as
you want. That is one aspect.
The second aspect is how much is the traffic a single carrier can
carry. In 200 KH how much is the traffic that a carrier can carry
in terms of the number of users and how much they can talk. We
define the traffic in Arlancs. Now, in 200 KH verses 1.23 MH, if

13
you join is multiplied by 200 KH and make it 1.2 MH GSM, then
the comparison is that 1.2 MH of CDMA can carry more traffic
than the GSM. Therefore, to that extent, CDMA is more efficient
for carrying traffic. That is the second aspect.
The third aspect is that the development of GSM somehow took
place earlier. GSM was the early technology and it has spread
very fast. Basically it is Europe based. It was certain advantages.
Roaming was one great advantage of GSM. With that frequency of
890 MH and also 1710 MH dual band telephone mobiles are
available. It can operate in that frequency as well as that frequency.
Anywhere one goes with these two frequencies it will operate
anywhere if the signals are available because it can roam. That
advantage was not here in case of CDMA. The world over today,
both technologies are moving very fast. The CDMA technology
came later. It also is a propriety technology of an American
company. There was that difficulty also with regard to CDMA.
Today, the world over about 1.5 billion total mobile telephones are
available of which about 1.2 billion are still GSM. So, you can see
that a very large percentage is of GSM even though GSM had
started much earlier and CDMA started much later, they are trying
to catch up. The number has gone up substantially, but not too
much. In our country likewise you will find that out of 46 million,
which was told earlier, about 36 million are GSM and about
10 million is CDMA. That is the kind of comparison we have.”
42. TRAI in their recommendations have stated that a methodology
for bench marking for efficient utilization of spectrum in terms of
Erlang/MHz/Sq. Km. was discussed. It has emerged that on account
of dependence of benchmarking on large number of variables like
technology used, the pattern of traffic (voice, data, video etc.) and
various other demographic factors etc., this methodology is not very
practical. All these parameters may have different values in different
situations which really increases in size of benchmarking matrix.
43. TRAI have come to the conclusion that while the concept of
efficient utilization of spectrum is a must, actual implementation
through measurements is somewhat impractical. Very considerable effort
and analysis will be needed to carry out such measurements and even
after doing so, they could easily be questioned.
44. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence commenting
upon the efficiency in utilization of spectrum in Defence Services stated
during evidence that avenues were there for improvement and they

14
could do some internal studies to find out the extent of efficient
utilization of spectrum by Defence forces. They, however, clarified that
the efficiency could be measured generation-wise of the five generations
of equipment that they have at present. They, however, clarified that
if comparison is made globally just in regard to spectrum and not
going into individual bands, then it may be 32 to 33 per cent being
used by the US and around 11 to 12 per cent being used by India. But
approximately that is the difference.
45. The representatives of Ministry of Defence further giving their
views on efficient usage of spectrum by civil bodies stated that the
equipment deployed by the operators is one of the lowest in the world.
They expressed that spectrum efficient technologies must be
encouraged, which do come at a cost, but, it will improve quality of
service and availability of spectrum.
46. To make the point clear, if we consider two operators A & B,
who have been allocated 2 MHz each, having 10 subscribers each
with the following calculations can be arrived at:
Operator Spectrum Subscribers Minute of Total Subscriber Minutes
Usage Minutes (per MHz) (per MHz)
(per 4 = 2x3 5=2/1 6=4/1
subscr.)
A2  MHz 10 20 200 5 100
B2  MHz 10 50 500 5 250
It is observed that operator ‘A’ appears to be equally efficient as
operator ‘B’, using the parameter of subscriber per MHz. However,
operator ‘B’ may also be more efficient, from the minutes/MHz matrix.
Therefore, unless the parameter is fixed efficiency cannot be gauged
and is a complex issue as informed to the Committee by an operator.
47. The representatives have put forth that efficiency assessment
must be holistic, comprising technical, commercial and functional
parameters and not just limit efficiency to technical matters which
varies according to the assumptions made and the circumstances
applied.
GSM V/s. CDMA—efficiency
48. The Associations of both the GSM services and CDMA services
deposed before the Committee on 24th October, 2005. Operators from
both the services were also present during the evidence.

15
49. The GSM Association informed the Committee that when
cellular services were first introduced in 1995, GSM was the mandated
technology. The technology choice was made by the Government after
a critical examination of all possible technology options. According to
COAI, India has benefited from this far-seeing decision of the
Government as GSM continues to be the predominant technology both
worldwide and in India. The Committee were also apprised that the
global GSM subscriber base has crossed 150 crore (1.5 billion) mobile
consumers by September, 2005. GSM presently accounts for over
75 per cent of all digital mobile subscribers in the world and 80 per
cent of all new subscriber additions. Some of the reasons for GSM’s
overwhelming predominance were stated to be GSM’s commitment to
open standards and interoperability, economies of scale, global roaming,
technology innovations and the like.
50. As regards the spectrum related issues, the Committee were
informed that given India’s enormous teledensity responsibilities, which
will primarily be met through mobile services, it was crutical that
each MHz of spectrum was most optimally and efficiently utilized by
all mobile operators. Similarly, Government’s policy on important issues
related to spectrum i.e. its allotment, pricing, efficient usage etc. will
play a crucial role in deciding the future role of the Indian wireless
sector in contributing to the country’s national telecom objectives. For
GSM to play a predominant role in achieving India’s teledensity
objectives, it is important that spectrum policies and practices are fair
and equitable to GSM operators.
51. The representatives of COAI further stated that as per the
licensing conditions GSM operators signed the licence starting with
4.4 MHz of spectrum, CDMA started with 2.5 MHz. It is a well
established fact that the spectral characteristic of CDMA gave it a five
times higher subscriber (Erlang) capacity vis-a-vis GSM (Erlang is a
unit of voice traffic that is generated by mobile networks using the
raw material of spectrum. The higher the Erlangs generated, the greater
is the number of subscribers that can be served). 5 MHz spectrum
allotted to CDMA is equivalent to 25 MHz of GSM spectrum. They
submitted that in India GSM operators are given inadequate spectrum
vis-a-vis CDMA. It is because when GSM operators sign the licence,
they start with 4.4 MHz whereas CDMA operators start with 2.5 Mhz,
which is equal to 12.5 MHz of GSM equivalent spectrum.
52. The Committee enquired, why should not the system support
only CDMA technology given the fact that CDMA technology is
utilized better. In reply, the representative of COAI submitted:
“That is a fair question. In fact, that is the prerogative of the
people of India or the Parliament to decide that if we want only

16
CDMA technology, then yes, so be it. But when we have two
technologies, I would submit that the world is going the GSM
way. GSM is the only one which goes everywhere and  America
is, therefore, completely isolated from the rest of the world as far
as this is concerned.”
53. On the issue of allocation of spectrum the representative
Association of Unified Service Providers of India (AUSPI) had the
following views:
“……CDMA has really brought the mobile revolution in the last
few years when we were given the Unified Access Licence. Before
that form 1996 to 2003, the growth was only 11 million customers
whereas the entry of CDMA changed the scenario with 18 million
mobile subscribers added in one year.”
54. The Committee then specifically desired to know whether
CDMA was more efficient than GSM in terms of spectrum management
and utilization. In reply, the representative of AUSPI stated that
undoubtedly CDMA was an efficient technology, but such efficiency
had to be measured with economic, functional and technical aspects.
Asked to elaborate, the representative of AUSPI submitted:
“As regards the economic efficiency , we are slightly at a
disadvantage as compared to the GSM operators world over
because they have a large infrastructure and handset vendors which
give advantage in terms of prices and certain other commercial
aspects. In addition, innovations like a single-chip handset are
available in GSM, but we are yet to have it. They have a low
priced handset because of the large availability of handsets from
secondary market and they have widespread sales and distribution.
The GSM operators have a formidable alliance among them for a
common cause. They also have superior financial performance and
high profitability.
……Unfortunately, CDMA today does not have a widest choice of
handsets, and the price segments vary from very low to very high.
On the other hand, easy subscription process is there for them
because of the SIM card available in the handsets, but CDMA
today does not have SIM card availability in India. They have a
seamless interoperability which makes them much more popular
and they have seamless international roaming. If one takes all
these points into account, then we would find that they have a
preferential economic and financial advantage over CDMA.

17
As regards technical efficiency , we are spectrally more efficient if
we are given at least 10 MHz, which is possible to be allotted to
us……”
55. The representative of AUSPI further stated:
“……If you give us 10 MHz, we are more efficient than GSM of
10 MHz. You cannot call for 2.5 MHz and stop it and say that
since you are more efficient, it is enough…… If a technology is
spectrally efficient, you cannot punish it.”
56. Citing GSM operators argument that 2.5 MHz of spectrum
allocated to the CDMA operators was equivalent to 12.5 MHz of
spectrum allotted to GSM operators and that CDMA would not become
competitive at 10 MHz spectrum, the Committee desired to know the
authenticity of the statement made by the GSM lobby. In reply, the
representative of the AUSPI stated:
“Sir, there is no basis for this statement and this statement is only
made to kill competition…… There is no theoretical, practical and
technical aspect to say that 2.5 MHz is equivalent to something
much more given to GSM…… On the other hand, a technical
document is available to support our spectral efficiency at 10 MHz.
We have also given an affidavit in this respect in the court in one
of the cases where we have tried to show the efficiency of CDMA
at 10+10 MHz.”
57. On the question of discrimination of allocation of spectrum,
the CDMA operators stated:
“……It is because we pay the same licence fee, the same entry
fee, the same spectrum charge and the same roll out obligations.
Now, the spectrum allocation is not the same. When in all other
areas we are same and not equitable, why the spectrum allocation
should also not be the same and equal?”
58. The Committee were informed by the operators that not even
a single spectrum practice discriminated against the GSM operators.
Rather, the CDMA operators were discriminated so far as licensing
condition was concerned because licence mandated 4.4 MHz to GSM
and 5 MHz to CDMA whereas actual allocation has been 2.5 MHz to
CDMA and 4.4 MHz to GSM. It was further stated that for GSM there
was no roll out obligations for additional allocation, no mention of
effective or efficient utilization and no subscriber base or any criteria
for additional allocation. Still, spectrum beyond 4 + 4 MHz and up to

18
10 + 10 MHz  was allocated to them and no question was asked to
them about effective/efficient utilization of spectrum or installation of
BTS sites and number of subscribers served.
59. On the same issue, the Department of Telecommunications
stated:
“The problem is that over a period of time we have allocated
spectrum in different bands depending on the needs of the situation
and perhaps one did not realize that one would require the
spectrum in a very cogent manner. Naturally, like any other
resource, this was treated as if it were available and now we are
having a situation where different band shave been occupied by
different people and so that is not at one place. We need that
spectrum in a comprehensive manner.…… We can say that the
planning has not been good…… We have given away spectrum as
and when anybody asked at different placed in different bands
whereas in case of other developed countries, be it USA or
European countries, they have developed their standards in such
a way that it did not interfere with their defence needs. With the
result, they had a spectrum available to them in a block as
compared to our country.”
Mobile Telephony by 2007
60. In order to achieve a target of 200 million mobile customers,
by 2007, the Department of Telecommunications, in a note to the
Committee have stated that the share of GSM mobile subscriber and
CDMA mobile subscriber is estimated to be in the ratio of 65% and
35%. The number of GSM subscribers will be to the tune of 130 million
and those of CDMA will be around 70 million. The Department has
further informed that for the GSM systems in 900/1800 MHz band the
estimated spectrum requirement in the Metros and other cities will be
as under:
Area/State Total estimated spectrum Additional estimated
spectrum
Metro Cities 40-55 MHz 10-25 MHz each
Other Cities 40-65 MHz 15-40 MHz each
61. According to the Department and as per the National Frequency
Allocation Plan NFAP-2002, CDMA based operators have been
permitted to operate in the frequency band of 824-844 MHz/869-889
MHz. A total of fourteen CDMA carries each of 1.23 MHz bandwidth
are possible in this band. However, due to other existing operators at
Kolkata Metro area, Gujarat, Rajasthan and West Bengal Telecom Circle,
all possible 14 CDMA carries are not available.

19
62. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) in its
recommendation to the spectrum requirement in the four Metropolitan
cities has given the following figures for additional requirement of
spectrum by GSM services to achieve the target of 200 million by
2007.
Projected Subscriber Base and Total Spectrum Requirement in
Four Metropolitan Cities for GSM services
Sl. Circle Spectrum Subscriber Subscriber Additional Additional Total Total
No. Allotted Base as Base as on Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum Spectrum
(in MHz) on 28.2.05 Dec. 2007 Req. Req. Req. Req.
(In lakhs) (In lakhs) (In MHz) (In MHz) (In MHz) (In MHz)
Max.* Min.** Max. Min.
1. Delhi 32.40 40.25 104.90 64.60 28.12 97.00 60.52
2. Mumbai 34.20 38.46 87.02 45.80 20.20 80.00 54.76
3. Chennai 24.80 15.15 33.62 8.40 7.76 33.20 32.63
4. Kolkata 28.40 13.26 59.56 26.60 15.72 55.00 44.12
*2x1 MHz for every one lakh additional subscriber
**2x0.36 MHz for every one lakh additional subscriber.
63. The projected subscriber base and the total spectrum
requirement in the four Metropolitan cities for CDMA services as given
by TRAI is as under:
Projected Subscriber Base and Total Spectrum Requirement in
Four Metropolitan Cities for CDMA services
Sl. Circle Spectrum Subscriber Subscriber CDMA Additional Total
No. Allotted Base as Base as on Spectrum Req. Spectrum Req.
(In MHz) on 28.2.05 Dec. 2007 (In MHz) (In MHz)
CDMA (In Lakhs)
(In Lakhs) Max. Min. Max. Min
1. Delhi 12.50 15.95 41.57 17.50 3.75 30.00 16.25
2. Mumbai 15.00 12.18 27.55 10.00 1.25 25.00 16.25
3. Chennai 11.25 5.31 11.79 5.00 1.25 16.25 12.50
4. Kolkata 10.00 5.27 22.66 12.50 1.25 22.50 12.50
PS: The present spectrum allocation criteria is different for CDMA and
GSM operators. However, we are of the opinion that efforts should be

20
made to gradually move in the direction wherein the spectrum
allocation criterion is technology neutral. It is, therefore, recommended
that the present spectrum allocation criterion may be reviewed such
that while retaining the subscriber base approach, the quantum and
steps for additional spectrum allocation are technology neutral. If the
GSM spectrum allocation criterion is applied to the projected CDMA
subscriber base than the maximum and minimum additional spectrum
requirement in Delhi would be in the range of 2x9 MHz and 2x26
MHz.
Merger of operators
64. The Committee were informed that in China there are only
two operators who are providing service to a subscriber base of over
300 million with a spectrum of approximately 65 MHz. In India there
are 18 mobile service providers and there is a tendency to rise. India
has consumed 55 MHz of bandwidth and are still far from the vision
of 200 million subscribers. The statistics given was to suggest to the
Committee to encourage the merger of operators.
65. The Committee while going through the recommendations of
TRAI on the ‘level of competition and entry to new mobile service
Providers’ found that TRAI had conducted an HHI (Herfindhal-
Hrischman Index) analysis to show the level of competition in different
service areas, because in India licenses are given circle-wise. HHI-1
represents monopoly and HHI=0 represents perfect competition.
66. It was noted from this analysis that maximum spectrum
requirement is in Metro, Category ‘A’ and ‘B’ circles wherein the
competition level is very high because HHI in these service areas is
below 0.24. This factor discourages the further entry of new service
providers. New operators can come if there are mergers.
67. Mergers and acquisitions can currently happen between
operators in the same geographic service area subject to Government
guidelines on merger of licences in a service dated 21st  February,
2004. As per the guidelines:
“Consequent upon the merger of licences, the merged entity shall
be entitled to the total amount of spectrum held by the merging
entities, subject to the condition that after merger, the amount of
spectrum shall not exceed 15 MHz per operator per service area
for Metros and category ‘A’ Service Areas, and 12.4 MHz per
operator per service area in category ‘B’ and category ‘C’ Service
Areas. Subject to these limits, the merged spectrum will remain

21
with the merged entity and would be treated as a starting point
for further allocation and revision, as per the detailed Spectrum
Guidelines to be issued separately. The guidelines on efficient
utilization of spectrum and its pricing shall be applicable.”
Spectrum Pricing
68. During evidence on 9.2.2005 the Committee were informed by
the representatives of DoT:
“At that time the GSM was the main technology as I said earlier.
It was in fact evolving the world over. Europe had started the
GSM. We were not sure whether people will be taking mobile.
Immediately after 1991 liberalisation, the first tender was issued
on 31st December 1991 and it was opened in 1991. There were
litigations and it took almost two years. Only in 1994 the licences
could be given. The initial trial was only for the four metros,
Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai. Circles were not opened at
that time. It was thought that mobile is going to be very costly.
Calculations were made. It was expected that about Rs. 30,000 will
be revenue per mobile per annum. The Government thought that
about one-sixth of that should come as revenue to the Government.
So, Rs. 5,000 was fixed as licence fee per customer. That is how
the licence fee became very high. By 1994 when licences were
given for these metros, a lot of developments took place in Europe.
That was the time mobiles were becoming very popular.
Immediately, thereafter the circles were opened. At that time, it
was thought that two operators will be enough for competition.
People will have the choice and if it is considered necessary at a
later point of time, the Government will also start the service. So,
three operators will be there. So, customers will get the choice.
The spectrum is also limited. Not many takers may be there. That
was the scheme of things at that time. Subsequently, we saw there
were problems. Licence fee was very high. Then the Government
thought about fee competition, unrestricted entry and revenue
sharing regime. That is how things came about.”
69. In the existing provisions of licensing the spectrum charge has
two components:
(a) an entry fee which includes one time spectrum charge; and
(b) an annual spectrum charge in terms of percentage of AGR
(Annual Gross Revenue).

22
As per this policy the annual spectrum charges for GSM services
is as under:
2% of AGR for spectrum usage upto 2x4.4 MHz
3% of AGR for spectrum usage upto 2x6.2 MHz
4% of AGR for spectrum usage upto 2x10 MHz
5% of AGR for spectrum usage upto 2x12.5 MHz
6% of AGR for spectrum usage upto 2x15 MHz
70. In addition, charges have to be paid separately in respect of
spectrum used for point to point and point to multi-point radio links.
71. For CDMA operators upto 2x5 MHz annual spectrum charges
are 2% of AGR.
72. On 24.10.2005 during evidence the GSM operators claimed that
they were disadvantaged in the matter of spectrum usage charges as
they have to pay double the usage charges vis-a-vis CDMA operators
for the same subscriber base. The furnished the following information
to prove their point before the Committee:
Spectrum Subscriber     Usage Charges
Assignment Base (in lakhs) in %
GSM CDMA GSM CDMA GSM CDMA
Entry Level 2x4.4 MHz 2.x2.5 MHz xx xx 2% 2%
Current Level 2x10 MHz 2x5 MHz 10 10 4% 2%
73. The representatives explained that for the same subscriber base
of 10 lakh subscribers GSM operators pay double the usage charges
compared to CDMA. They further stated that in 2005-06 alone, GSM
operators would pay additional spectrum usage charges of
approximately Rs. 300 crores.
74. The CDMA operators claimed that they were requested to pay
2% of AGR for 2x5 MHz. However, the actual allocation varies from
2x2.5 MHz to 2x5 MHz. They pay 2% of AGR even in those areas
where the allocation is not 2x5 MHz. They said that they wanted a
level playing field in terms of capacity utilization.

23
3G Services Controversy
75. The Committee have been informed that 3G services is the
3rd generation services in telecommunication. The 3rd generation deals
with advanced services that can be made available to the consumer
through the same wireless connection. Presently in the 2G service a
consumer can get voice and video on his wireless connection. In the
3G service he will be getting voice, video and data transmission
through the same connection but not without a cost.
76. They have been further informed that currently in India both
the technologies i.e. GSM and CDMA which are primarily working in
the 900 MHz and the 800 MHz spectrum bandwidth respectively are
providing services through the EDGE and the EVDO platforms which
have internationally been recognized and identified by ITU as 3G
services.
77. During the course of discussions, the Committee learnt that 3G
services need additional bandwidth which is more than that normally
required by 2G services. In case GSM and CDMA are already providing
such services they are utilizing some of the bandwidth available to
them in the 900 and 800 MHz bands respectively. The operators
admitted the fact that they are providing services through the EDGE
and the EVDO platforms. On requirement of additional spectrum by
CDMA operators in the 800 MHz band the Committee, during the
discussion with the operators, have been repeatedly informed that the
spectrum available to them is only 2x20 MHz in the 800 MHz band
whereas GSM operators have around 2x100 MHz in the 900 MHz and
the 1800 MHz bands.
78. The CDMA operators, in their written submission have stated
that in the 800 MHz band they have been provided 20+20 MHz and
taking into account the need for guard band, the actual spectrum
available for allocation is only about 17 + 17 or 18 + 18 MHz for
3 to 4  operators in each circle. Even the licence mandated 5+5 MHz
cannot be given to all the operators where 4 operators have been
operating. Whenever, there are 3 operators, after allocation of 5+5 MHz
to each operator, the only additional spectrum available is 2 to 3 MHz.
This is the additional spectrum that the CDMA desire to be given to
them in the 800 MHz band and which the GSM operators claim to be
a backdoor entry for CDMA operators.

24
79. In the above connection the GSM operators stated on 24.10.2005
as under:
“Just to conclude and summarize, we would wish to say that this
was to repeat the US method of 1900 MHz which is completely
out of line with the rest of the world. We would not recommend
that for India. It gives severe interference that will become  a very
big problem of customers. Equipment is available in 2.1 GHz……
They are trying to get back door entry into 3G which is obviously
not fair. So, what is clearly important is migration to 3G must be
equitable and concurrent for both. You cannot allow one a backdoor
entry. That way, it is a disregard to the dominant operators.
80. Replying to a query on the allotment of 2.1 GHz band for 3G
services, the CDMA operators stated:
“If we are talking about the service, the advantage is that in the
2.1 GHz band GSM equipment is available, but CDMA equipment
is not available today in the band.”
81. Explaining the point on 3G Services the representative of CDMA
further stated:
“Coming back to the 3G question, as far as the 3G part is
concerned, it is true that though we provide 3G services in 800
MHz band, we can provide the services in 1900 MHz band.
Similarly, the GSM operators can provide 3G services in 900 MHz
band: they can provide in 1800 MHz band; they can provide in
2.1 GHz band also. TRAI recommended that spectrum for 3G
should be only in 2.1 GHz band.”
82. The DoT was asked to give their clarification on the 3G
controversy. The representatives of DoT explained during evidence:
“The spectrum band in which technology development has taken
place in case of GSM 900 is 890 MHz to 915 MHz which is
25 MHz of spectrum. Thus, in the case of GSM, 100 MHz of
spectrum is available. On the other hand, in the case of CDMA it
is 824 MHz to 844 MHz, which is only 20 MHz. The problem is
arising because the technology development that has taken place
and the equipment that are available for GSM are available for
about 100 MHz. On the contrary, generally speaking the CDMA
equipment is available for about 20 MHz only. Therefore, the
problem is of satisfying four GSM operators with 100 MHz of
spectrum and satisfying three CDMA operators with much lesser
band width i.e. only 20 MHz of spectrum.”

25
83. Asked to specify the measure taken by the Department to
satisfy both the operators in terms of spectrum allocation, the
representative, DoT submitted:
“……Spectrum is being allocated depending on what is available
and also on all that is laid down in the license.”
International Mobile Telecommunication (IMT)-2000
84. TRAI in their recommendations on spectrum related issues has
stated:
“ITU has identified various frequency bands for IMT-2000 services.
WARC-92 identified the bands:
- 1882-2025 MHz
-2 110-2200 MHz
And WRC-2000 identified the bands:
- 806-960 MHz**
- 1710-1885 MHz
- 2500-2690 MHz
**The whole band 806-960 MHz is not identified on a global basis for IMT-2000
due to variation in the primary mobile service allocation and uses across the three
ITU Regions.
One of the key objectives of IMT 2000 services was inter-operability
of various mobile systems. While selecting the frequency band for
IMT-2000 services it is to be ensured that the frequency bands
should be such that it helps in achieving the international roaming
objective and also inter-operability among various systems.
Since vacation of spectrum in existing bands (GSM-900 and GSM-
1800) may take some time, the new frequency bands which are
immediately available and in which the equipment is also available
in the market are to be identified. Allocation of spectrum in IMT-
2000 bands is being considered not only for 3G services but also
because there is a problem of additional spectrum availability to
existing mobile operators.
For additional allocation of spectrum while considering the
availability of new frequency band and also availability of

26
equipment, one has to look into the spectrum identified for 3G
services. While considering additional allocation of spectrum,
Authority has to consider whether for 3G services spectrum
allocation is to be considered an extension of 2G services or it is
to be dealt separately.”
85. TRAI has further stated that:
“The necessity of allocation of additional spectrum in which IMT-
2000 equipment is available may arise in the following situation:
(1) It is expected there shall be a need of high-speed data
services in the market which cannot be fulfilled by existing
service available through EDGE. (As per an article in
financial times dated 7th April 2005, the mobile phone will
replace TV as most important medium for advertisers to
reach technology-savy consumers. The article mentioned that
the spread of digital video recorders are giving consumers
the ability to avoid TV commercials and therefore the way
forward for advertisers to reach consumers would be to
use wireless devices).
(2) The voice traffic increases to a limit that the existing 2G
spectrum may not cater to this requirement and since the
IMT 2000 technology is more spectrally efficient for voice
services, therefore, operator may feel the need of allocation
of IMT-2000 spectrum even for voice traffic.
(3) Where 2G spectrum is not available in the time frame in
which it is required and the possibility of getting additional
spectrum in IMT-2000 band are better in the same time
frame.”
86. The Committee were informed that in accordance with the
national Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP) 2002, the core IMT 2000
(3G) band 1920-1980 MHz paired with 2110-2170 MHz was earmarked
for Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) Mode and 2010-2025 MHz for
Time Division Duplex (TDD) mode.
87. Giving his views on IMT-2000, the Member (Technology) DoT
submitted on 9th February, 2005:
“……As regards the 3G IMT 2000 band, we definitely feel that in
the next three years, 3G is going to come in a very big way and
internationally this is the band reserved where we have a lot of
dispute between CDMA and GSM…… This is the disputed band,

27
that is 1920 to 1980 MHz. It means 60 MHz is available there. If
more requirement is there, definitely internationally we have to
meet and try to get vacated other frequencies available and
manufacturers will have to produce equipment. It is not only that.
Those equipment should be able to work within those frequencies
now.”
Spread of Mobile Services in Cities and Rural Areas
88. Regarding the requirement of additional spectrum in the Metro
cities particularly Delhi and Mumbai, the representatives of DoT stated
in evidence:
“It is true that in urban areas, in metropolitan areas, particularly
Mumbai and Delhi, these are the two places where we need to
give more and notwithstanding a very high teledensity today, still
the teledensity will increase and all of us do experience a certain
degree of call droppings and things like that. Now, here is a case
where the issue is in terms of making additional spectrum available,
as making the operators actually put in more towers and use that
spectrum much more efficiently that what they are using. So, this
is the issue in the metropolitan areas.”
The private operators have also accepted the fact during evidence
that more spectrum must be allotted especially in the big cities as
early as possible.
89. Discussing about the scanty and erratic mobile services in rural
areas the Committee queries the mobile operators on their insensitivity
towards the rural population and desired to know their future plans
on this point. The representative of the CDMA Association informed:
“The CDMA technology people are presently available in 3,900
locations. We are planning to go to 5,700 locations. While going to
these 5,700 locations we are the people who are going to cover the
semi-rural and rural areas. When we expand the networks on the
Highways, the network expansion will cover up the villages which
will come on both sides of the Highways.”
90. In the same context, CMD, Bharati Cellular stated:
“Just our company alone, installed about 10,000 base stations this
year and by the end of this financial year, that is, March 2006, we
would cover all the census towns, which is 5,200 and at least
100,000 villages and almost all the National and State Highways.”

28
ANNEXURE I
SPECTRUM ALLOTTED TO OPERATORS USING GSM BASED
SYSTEMS IN DIFFERENT SERVICE AREA
(As on 31.7.2005)
Sl.No. Service Operator Frequency allotted
Area
12 3 4
1. Delhi-Metro Bharati Cellular Ltd. 10+10 MHz
Hutchison Essar Mobile 10+10 MHz
Services Ltd.
MTNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Idea Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
2. Mumbai Metro BPL Mobile Commn. 10+10 MHz
Hutchison Max 10+10 MHz
MTNL 8+8 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 8+8 MHz
3. Kolkata Metro Bharti Mobitel Ltd. 8+8 MHz
Hutchison Essar 8+8 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Reliable Internet 6.2+6.2 MHz
4. Chennai Metro Aircel Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Mobinet Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Hutch Essar  South 6.2+6.2 MHz
5. Andhra Pradesh Idea Cellular Ltd. 8+8 MHz
Bharti Mobile Ltd. 8+8 MHz
BSNL 8+8 MHz
Hutch Essar South 6.2+6.2 MHz

29
12 3 4
6. Assam Dishnet DSL (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
Reliance Telecom 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti-Televenture 4.4+4.4 MHz
7. Bihar Reliance Telecom 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular (UASL) 6.2+6.2 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) Yet to be
allotted
8. Gujarat Fascel Ltd. 9.8+9.8 MHz
Idea Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 7.4+7.4 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
9. Haryana IDEA Mobile 6.2+6.2 MHz
Aircel Digilink 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
10. Himachal Pradesh Bharti Telenet Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
Reliance Telecom 4.4+4.4 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Escorts Telecom. 4.4+4.4 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) Yet to be
allotted
11. Jammu & Kashmir Bharti Cellular (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
12. Karnataka Spice Commn. 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Mobiles Ltd. 10+10 MHz
BSNL 8+8 MHz
Hutch Essar 8+8 MHz

30
12 3 4
13. Kerala BPL Mobile 6.2+6.2 MHz
IDEA 8+8 MHz
BSNL 8+8 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
14. Maharashtra BPL Mobile Cellular 6.2+6.2 MHz
Idea Cellular Ltd. 10+10 MHz
BSNL 8+8 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
15. Madhya Pradesh BTA Celcom. 6.2+6.2 MHz
Reliance Telecom. 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
16. North East Reliance Telecom. 4.4+4.4 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
Bharti 4.4+4.4 MHz
17. Orissa Reliance Telecom. 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular (UASL) 6.2+6.2 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
18. Punjab Spice Commn. 8+8 MHz
Bharti Mobile Ltd. 8+8 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Hutch Telecom. 6.2+6.2 MHz
19. Rajasthan Aircel Digilink 6.2+6.2 MHz
Hexacom India Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Escorts Telecomm. 4.4+4.4 MHz

31
12 3 4
20. Tamil Nadu BPL Mobile Cellular 6.2+6.2 MHz
Aircel Ltd. 10+10 MHz
BSNL 8+8 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
21. Uttar Pradesh (W) IDEA 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Hutchison Essar (UASL) 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular Ltd. 6.2+6.2 MHz
22. Uttar Pradesh (E) Aircel Digilink 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular (UASL) 6.2+6.2 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Escorts Telecom. 4.4+4.4 MHz
23. West Bengal Reliance Telecom. 6.2+6.2 MHz
Bharti Cellular (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
Hutchison Essar (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
BSNL 6.2+6.2 MHz
Dishnet DSL (UASL) 4.4+4.4 MHz
Spectrum beyond 6.2+6.2 MHz is allotted for specific cities in the
service area, except Metro service area.

32
ANNEXURE II
SPECTRUM ALLOTTED TO OPERATORS USING CDMA
BASED SYSTEMS IN DIFFERENT SERVICE AREAS
(As on 31.7.2005)
Sl.No. Service Name of Amount of Spectrum
Area the Operator Allocated in CDMA Band*
12 3 4
1. Delhi Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz (Delhi SDCA)
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 5+5 MHz (Delhi SDCA)
3.75+3.75 Mhz
(Delhi NCR)
2. Mumbai Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. 5+5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz
Hughes Telecom(I) Ltd./Tata 5+5 MHz, out of which
Teleservices (Mah.) Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz are
earmarked for CDMA
based system in Mumbai
& 5 + 5 MHz for DAMP-
TDMA based technology.
3. Kolkata Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz (Kolkata
SDCA)
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
4. Chennai Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
5. A.P . Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz

33
12 3 4
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz in Hyderabad
SDCA
3.75+3.75 MHz for rest of
circle
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 5+5 MHz in Guntur,
Hyderabad, Vijayawada
& Vishakhapatnam
SDCAs 2.5 + 2.5 MHz in
rest of circle
6. Bihar Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 Mhz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
7. Gujarat Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75 + 3.75 in Baroda &
Surat SDCAS
2.5+2.5 MHz in other
SDCAs
Tata Teleservices ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
8. Haryana Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
9. H.P . Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
10. J&K Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
11. Kerala Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz

34
12 3 4
12. Karnataka Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 5+5 MHz in Bangalore
SDCA
3.75+3.75 MHz in rest of
the circle
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz in
Bangalore SDCA &
2.5+2.5 MHz rest of the
circle
13. Maharashtra Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Hughes Telecom (I) Ltd./Tata 5+5 MHz in Pune for
Teleservices (Mah.) Ltd. DAMP—TDMA based
technology, out of which
2.5+2.5 MHz for CDMA
based system in circle
including Pune.
14. M.P . Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Bharti Telenet Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
(Surender Licence w.e.f. 1.10.04)
allowed to reatain two CDMA
carriers (2.5+2.5 MHz) for one
year ( i.e. up to 30.9.2005) in the
name M/s Bharati Cellular
Limited)
15. Orissa Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz

35
12 3 4
16. Punjab Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Himachal Futurastic Co. Ltd. 5+5 MHz in Ludhiana
SDCAS
3.75+3.75 MHz in
Jallandhar & Chandigarh
SDCAs.
2.5+2.5 MHz in other
SDCAs
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
17. Rajasthan Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Shyam Telelink Ltd. 5+5 MHz in Jaipur,
Jodhpur and Udaipur
SDCAs
3.75+3.75 MHz at Kota
2.5+2.5 MHz in other
SDCAs
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
18. Tamil Nadu Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
19. U.P . (East) Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
20. U.P . (West) Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 3.75+3.75 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
21. West Bengal Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Reliance Infocomm. Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
Tata Teleservices Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
22. Assam & N.E. Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. 2.5+2.5 MHz
*CorDECT system are also used by various service providers at different locations in
their service areas.

36
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
The Committee observe that the growth of telecom services is
synonymous with the growth of wireless services. In wireless
communication, the signal is transmitted from one point to another
without any wire and it requires use of Radio Frequency Spectrum.
This Radio Frequency Spectrum is a limited natural resource available
in one form only and it can only be shared amongst various
countries, services, users, technologies, etc.  In India, Spectrum is
shared amongst Defence, Railways, ONGC, etc. and the two streams
of Cellular Mobile Service Providers i.e. Global System of Mobile
(GSM) and Code Vision Multiple Access (CDMA). Another
technology, namely, Digital Enhanced Cordless Telecommunications
(CorDECT) also shares spectrum, but as its reach is less, it is basically
not substituable for GSM & CDMA technologies. Amongst all the
users of spectrum in India, Defence occupies a large portion because
initially it was the sole major user. Assignment of Spectrum in India
is governed by the National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP), 2002
and the international radio regulations of the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU). The Committee find that in India,
historically, apart from Defence, spectrum was allocated on need
base, in bits, mostly to Government Organisations. However, due to
the unprecedented growth of the telecommunication sector, especially
mobile services in the non-Defence areas, requirement of spectrum
by the telecom sector has increased manifold making spectrum
management a critical issue. The position is no better with the
Defence either, whose requirement has also grown enormously due
to a substantial increase in the number of radio users all along the
international border, hopping and network centric operations. There
was basically no policy envisaging a higher requirement and use of
the scarce commodity for the future. The Committee feel that the
lack of foresighted planning on the part of the Department has led
to ad hoc and injudicious allocation of spectrum which in turn has
caused non-availability of this scarce resource to the telecom operators
when they need it the most for faster expansion of telecom services
throughout the country. Needless to say, lack of anticipated demand
for spectrum and haphazard planning over a period of time has
given birth to a horde of problems. The Committee feel that it is
very important to move ahead, in a coordinated and planned manner,
rather than in an adhoc way, and there is a dire need to have a clear
cut road map for the country in order to cater to the short term

37
spectrum requirements upto 2007 to meet the Government objectives
in addition to the long term requirements beyond 2007. It is, therefore
imperative that the Department come out with a comprehensive and
transparent spectrum policy, dispensing with all earlier loopholes
and keeping in mind the requirement of both Defence and non-
Defence sectors.
2. The Committee note that Defence has always been amongst
the largest users of spectrum in India and all Defence requirements
of spectrum go through the process of vetting and technical analysis
by the Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) Wing of the
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) before assignment. But the
Committee are deeply concerned to hear the statement of the Defence
Ministry that in the process of the assignment of spectrum to the
Defence, WPC takes almost two to three years to give its clearance
which obviously results in a lot of inconvenience for the Defence
forces. While the responsibility of defending the nation is bestowed
upon the Defence, the Committee feel that any delay in assigning
the spectrum to them will certainly have numerous adverse
implications. In order to avoid that, the Committee impress upon
the Department to ensure timely release of spectrum to Defence to
counter the adversary and there should not be slightest scope for
any aberrations in this regard.
3. The Committee find that the Defence at present is holding
4.8+4.8 Mhz spectrum in 890-915/935-960 MHz band, 60+60 MHz in
Metros and 65+65 Mhz in other areas in 1710-1785/1805-1880 MHz
band and 60+60 Mhz in 1920-1980/2110-2170 Mhz band. So far, 20+20
MHz in 800 MHz band for the CDMA operators and 25+25 MHz in
900 MHz band for the GSM operators have already been coordinated
by the Defence. Similarly, 25+25 MHz in the 1800 MHz band has
been partly coordinated in favour of the GSM operators. The
Committee also find that for coordination of IMT-2000 band for 3G
services consultations are going on between Defence and the Ministry
of Communications and Information Technology. The Defence has
advocated optimal utilization of spectrum and deployment of
spectrum efficient technology to improve quality of service and
availability of spectrum in India where the spectrum efficiency,
according to them, is one of the lowest in the world. The Committee
agree with the views/suggestions of the Defence, but would
simultaneously emphasize that optimal utilization of spectrum and
deployment of spectrum efficient equipment is applicable to Defence
also.

38
4. It is true that commercial norms to measure spectrum efficiency
cannot be applied to Defence forces as they look for thousand hops
on different frequencies on the same band, the electro magnetic
interference and compatibility as well at the time of planning. It is
also true that today, Defence possess generations of Soviet equipment
in their inventory which are not spectrally as efficient as equipment
on NATO pattern and the migration to that pattern, as explained by
Defence is a 15 year Plan. The Committee were further informed
that the Defence always tried to look into more spectrum efficient
technology at the time it is inducted. However, because of the
financial limitations, Defence was looking forward to using
equipment till it becomes functionally obsolete and not
technologically obsolete. Keeping in view the need for Defence
preparedness of the nation, the Committee consider it important for
the Defence to keep pace with the State-of-the-art technology and
hence, those old technologies should be phased out. In doing so,
not only will the country be better prepared for any eventuality but
it would also have a lot of spectrum in its hands for utilization for
other non-Defence purposes. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
detailed study be carried out by the Defence to evaluate the exact
requirement of funds to phase out the technologically obsolete
equipments within a reasonable time frame. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the findings of the study.
5. So far as vacation of spectrum by Defence is concerned, the
Committee find that in 2003, the Group of Ministers were of the
opinion that Defence should be given full freedom to map their
changeover and wherever they find that their equipment have become
obsolete or inefficient they should replace it immediately and vacate
spectrum. Pursuant to that, the DoT, as reported by them in  February
2005, meet and interact every month with the Defence Ministry.
However, the Committee note that even after 10 months the
Department has not arrived at any final view on the requirement of
Defence and the vacation of spectrum including IMT-2000 band. Not
only that, several recommendations of TRAI related to the spectrum
issues are still under consideration of the Department. The Committee
agree that decisions on spectrum related issues, being very critical
and sensitive in nature are to be handled very carefully and decision
taken judiciously, but they feel that such issues cannot be kept
pending for ever. The Committee, therefore, would urge DoT to make
their decision making process quicker and in keeping with the
technological developments and the immediate requirement of the
industry.

39
6. The Committee note that as per the recommendations made
by the Spectrum Management Committee, the Defence were promised
reframing for the portion of spectrum that they would coordinate.
They were also promised a financial compensation estimated at
Rs. 345 crore in 1998-1999 for migration. Till date, neither has the
refarming been carried out nor have they been paid any amount as
compensation for migration. The Committee further note that an
amount of Rs. 900 crore has been earmarked for Defence to enable
them to switch over to new and spectrum efficient equipment which
has not yet been disbursed to them. The Committee appreciate the
views of the Defence that they are prepared to share and vacate
additionals spectrum with the telecom service providers, if the
compensation promised is awarded to them. The Committee feel
that without a major reworking of the Defence networks and
applications involving major spectral and financial compensation and
alternate spectrum, it may be very difficult on the part of Defence
to release additional spectrum. The Committee, therefore, urge the
DoT to take up the matter at the appropriate level with a sense of
utmost urgency for giving financial and spectral compensation to
Defence.
7. The Committee observe that prior to 1999, Defence had
exclusive rights over its spectrum since the allocated spectrum was
categorized as the ‘Defence Band’. In the year 1999, the telecom
industry was allowed to establish its communication infrastructure
in the country in a big way and in order to achieve that, a need was
felt to reallocate the entire spectrum from the concept of major and
general users to the concept of ‘types of services’ which resulted in
sharing a common band by both the Defence and the Telecom
Industry and necessitated the requirement of shedding certain
spectrum from the erstwhile Defence Band for the Industry. As this
arrangement has resulted in some operational inconvenience for the
Defence, they have suggested that a ‘Defence Band’, as was in vogue
prior to 1999, should be formed on the pattern of USA, UK, France,
Germany etc. According to them, the formation of such a band will
enable provision of adequate spectrum for the service providers and
for the Defence as well besides having additional benefits of better
planning for procurement and development of equipment by both
Defence and the Industry. The representatives of the Industry in
their deposition before the Committee have welcomed the formation
of a Defence Band and the Secretary, DoT has also assured the
Committee to look into the matter in consultation with the Defence
Authorities.  Since there is unanimity of opinion, Government should
create conditions for the formulation of a Defence Band. The

40
Committee are of the opinion that once such a band is formed,
besides other benefits, the waiting period for assignment of
frequencies will reduce considerably as there will be no need for
continuous coordination, vacation and migration which is obviously
time consuming. The Committee would also like the Department to
act upon the suggestion of the Defence and the recommendation of
the Spectrum Management Committee by taking up the issue of
formalization of a Defence Interest Zone (DIZ).
8. The Committee observe that at present wireless
telecommunication services in India are mainly provided through
Global System of Mobile (GSM) and Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA) technologies, the former coming from Europe and the latter
from America and both of them competing in India. GSM operates
in India in 900 & 1800 MHz band and CDMA in 800 MHz band.
The frequency bands that are available to be allocated to GSM 900
& 1800 are 890-915 MHz paired with 935-960 MHz and 1710-1785
paired with 1805-1880 MHz. Similarly, 824-844 MHz paired with
869-889 MHz has been allocated to CDMA operators in the 800 MHz
band. Thus, in the case of GSM, 100 MHz of spectrum is available
whereas in the case of CDMA it is only 20 MHz. The task before
the Government is, therefore, to satisfy four GSM operators with
100 MHz of spectrum and three CDMA operators with 20 MHz. The
Committee find that against the availability, the Indian GSM
operators have been allotted only 2x4.4 to 2x10 MHz and CDMA
operators only 2x2.5 to 2x5 MHz whereas the international averages
for GSM & CDMA spectrum allocation are 2x20 MHz and 2x14 MHz
respectively, as revealed by TRAI in their Recommendations on
Spectrum related issues. In other words, India’s highest allocation of
spectrum for GSM operators is 2x10 MHz and for CDMA operators
it is 2x5 MHz against an international average of 2x20 MHz and
2x14 MHz respectively. Keeping in view the immediate and short
term requirements, which will provide relief to the operators in
meeting the Government objectives set for them, the Committee
recommend that whatever spectrum is currently available or which
will become available after vacation by Defence, may be provided
in a time bound manner to the GSM and CDMA operators. The
Committee desire that this exercise should be completed within a
definite time frame. All efforts should be made to allot as much
spectrum as the Government can in the 800/1900 MHz for the CDMA
operators and the 900/1800 MHz for the GSM operators for the
expansion of the telecom services.
9. The Committee find that one issue that is a cause of concern
to the operators, irrespective of the usage of any particular technology,

41
is the methodology of allocation of spectrum to them. The Committee
recommend that subject to availability of adequate spectrum, efforts
should be made to address the concern with respect to the quantum
of spectrum allocation in such a manner that the interest of the
consumers, operators and the overall national interest is subserved
keeping in view the imperatives of technological choices. The
Government may consider incorporating suitable clauses in the
licence agreement and the relevant legislation to ensure the optimal
utilization and prevention of hoarding of spectrum.
10. The Committee note that under the Unified Access Services
Licence (UASL), there is benchmarking for the allocation of additional
spectrum to CDMA operators who require spectrum beyond 2.5 MHz.
This benchmarking refers to ensuring optimal and efficient utilization
of the already allocated spectrum taking into account all types of
traffic and guidelines/criteria prescribed from time to time. However,
additional spectrum beyond 4.4 MHz upto 10 MHz is allocated to
the GSM operators on fulfilling the subscriber criteria. The
Committee also observe that there are competing claims regarding
the efficiency of utilization of spectrum by GSM and CDMA
operators. Each in its anxiety for getting more spectrum has put up
various contentions to establish their claim to additional spectrum.
By way of illustration, the GSM operators maintain that the efficiency
of CDMA operators is five times that of GSM for the same allocated
spectrum. On the other hand, the CDMA operators feel that the
GSM operators have a larger infrastructure and handset vendors
which give advantage in terms of prices and certain other commercial
aspects. The Committee are informed that the exact scope of efficiency
factor of one technology over the other in relation to the number of
subscribers for an allotted spectrum is yet to be worked out finally
by DoT. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in the light of
the DoTs comprehensive evaluation of the above, Spectrum may be
released keeping in view the need for eventual harmonization of
the spectrum allocation policy in accordance with the international
norms.
11. The Committee are particular about the achievement of the
target of 200 million mobile customers by 2007, especially in these
trying situations when spectrum is so scarce that each and every
MHz has to be eked out of a finite resource. The Committee observe
that the DoT has estimated a requirement of an allocation of 10-25
MHz to each operator in the Metro cities and 15-40 MHz to each
operator in the other cities. On the other hand, TRAI in their
recommendations have estimated a minimum requirement of

42
28.1 MHz to 64.60 MHz in Delhi circle, 20.2 MHz to 45.80 MHz in
Mumbai, 7.76 MHz to 8.40 MHz in Chennai and 15.7 MHz, to
26.6 MHz in Kolkata for the GSM services and 3.75 to 17.5 MHz,
1.25 to 10 MHz, 1.25 to 5.00 MHz and 1.25 to 12.50  MHz respectively
in the CDMA services. However, according to the operators,
additional spectrum of over 20 MHz in the major cities would
essentially be required in the GSM services and around 10 MHz in
the CDMA services. Thus, the Committee find that there is a
substantial variation in the estimate of requirement of additional
spectrum in urban areas. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
DoT alongwith the Defence take immediate steps to identify the
available spectrum towards a coordinated release thereof to the
operators to meet the growing demand in urban areas, particularly
the Metros. The Committee also desire that while releasing the
spectrum adequate opportunity should be given to both the
technologies to expand in a balanced manner.
12. As pointed out by the Defence, the Committee also recognize
that the optimum utilization of spectrum is hampered due to a higher
number of operators as a buffer band has to be made available
between the allocation of spectrum to each of these operators. This,
however, should not be a factor for restricting the entry of new
operators. Eventually, consolidation of operators may happen
depending on the market forces. While accepting the principle and
the logic of encouraging competition and thereby offering multiple
choices to the consumer, the Committee recommend that  Government
should take into consideration the legitimate spectrum needs of the
existing operators.
13. The Committee have been informed that the existing
provisions contain the payment of an entry fee which includes a
one time spectrum charge and an annual spectrum charge in terms
of percentage of the annual Gross Revenue (AGR) by operators who
get and operate a licence for mobile operations. Recognizing the
scarce and invaluable nature of spectrum, the Committee feel that
the Government should be able to realize adequate revenue from
the allocation of spectrum. The Government should also consider
creating suitable conditions for entry of small and local players.
14. In the course of the discussions on spectrum management
and the detailed study, the Committee have come to learn that
whereas efforts are being made for the coordination of the 2.1 GHz
band to enable the introduction of 3G services i.e. voice, data and
data transmission by the GSM and the CDMA operators in India,
the 3G services are already available through the EDGE and the
EVDO platforms of the GSM and the CDMA operators respectively.

43
The Committee also learn that the EDGE and the EVDO platforms
have been internationally recognized and identified by the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) as 3G services. Until
such time the 2.1 GHz band is coordinated and spectrum and
equipment made available in that band, the Committee feel that the
nation and the users should not be denied access to the 3G and
emerging services. In view of the fact that 3G and other emerging
services can be provided in the 800 MHz and the 900 MHz/1800
MHz bands, the Committee desire that the Government should create
conditions and provide simultaneous opportunities to both GSM and
CDMA operators for roll out of 3G services.
15. The Committee learn that one of the key objectives of
selecting the IMT-2000 band was inter-operability of various mobile
systems through use of such frequency bands that help in achieving
international roaming and inter-operability. The Committee have been
informed that in the next three years 3G services will be widely
available. The Committee feel that DoT should take all necessary
steps to allocate the spectrum in this band fairly, judiciously and in
a planned framework so that the experiences of the 2G allocation
are not repeated. The Committee desire that they may be kept
informed of the road map to the allocation of IMT-2000 band.
16. The Committee are pained to observe that whereas there has
been no constraint of spectrium for the operators in rural areas, the
mobile coverage in such areas is very small and almost incidental.
This fact has been admitted by the operators themselves and the
Secretary, DoT also. However, the Committee are comforted by the
assurance given by the GSM operators that they will establish 5000
cell sites this year in the rural areas. The CDMA Association also
has promised to cover the semi urban and rural areas when they
expand their network on the Highways by setting up cell sites at
5700 locations. The Committee would like to see the fruits of such
efforts in the very near future. They also desire that in the long run
much more will be done in such areas to boost the teledensity in
the country. The Committee feel that the Department on its part
should structure their policies in such a way that noticeable
penetration of mobile services in rural and remote areas is facilitated
and operators penalized for deliberately neglecting such areas on
flimsy grounds.
17. The Committee’s attention has been drawn to a report about
a new technology being developed whereby telephone exchanges
could be set up for interconnecting mobile telephone operations.

44
Under this technology an operator could route calls from and to
mobile networks within a building to a fixed network. It has been
reported that since about that 60 per cent of mobile calls originate
and terminate within a building and if, for the “last mile” the call
could travel on fixed line, it would relieve a lot of scarce spectrum.
The Committee feel that the Department of Telecommunications
should examine this issue in detail and formulate a long term policy
keeping in view the above mentioned developments. The Committee
may be kept informed.
18. To sum up, the Committee find that spectrum requirement
for both GSM and CDMA operators is urgent especially in urban
areas and Metros; portions of spectrum is to be vacated from Defence
without compromising the national security and by compensating
them adequately; Defence Band and Defence Interest Zone (DIZ)
need to be formalised; spectrum efficient equipment need to be
deployed by Defence as well as the operators; rural areas require to
be given due attention; penal provision for inefficient utilization of
spectrum as well as for neglecting rural areas; best returns for
spectrum allocation to be ensured; early allocation of spectrum to be
made for commencement of 3G services, spectrum should not be
kept idle and has to be used in an efficient, optimum and rational
manner, both GSM and CDMA technologies have to co-exist, and a
long term planning to identify new cellular bands (2500 MHz/2600
MHz) that are aligned to global developments needs to be framed.
Taking all the above factors into account, the Department of
Telecommunications (DoT) should come out with a comprehensive
and transparent spectrum policy at the earliest catering to the
requirement of both Defence and non-Defence sectors.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

45
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2004-2005)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 9 February, 2005 from
1100 hours to 1320 hours in Committee Room ‘G074’, K-Block,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. P .P . Koya
3. Shri G. Nizamuddin
4. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
5. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Ashwani Kumar
7. Shri Dara Singh
8. Shri N.R. Govindarajar
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Telecommunications
1. Shri Nripendra Misra — Chairman, Telecom
Commission and Secretary,
DoT

46
2. Shri K.L. Jain — Member (Technology)
3. Shri Yashwant Bhave — Additional Secretary
4. Shri P .K. Garg — Wireless Advisor
5. Shri J.R. Gupta — Sr. DDG (TEC)
6. Shri Ashok Kumar — Jt. Wireless Advisor
7. Shri R.J.S. Kushwaha — Jt. Wireless Advisor (NT)
8. Dr. Ashok Chandra — Project Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Department of Telecommunications to the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Member (Technology), DoT, gave a brief
presentation on the subject ‘Spectrum Management’. The Members also
sought certain clarifications on the issues relating to Spectrum
Management. The representatives of the Department responded to the
same. A brief presentation was also made on ‘Provision of Virtual
Private Network (VPN) by Internet Service Providers (ISPs)’.
4. The Chairman, then, thanked the witnesses for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing valuable information that the Committee
desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee, then adjourned.

47
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 24th October, 2005 from
1100 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Cherenamei
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
5. Shri P . Karunakaran
6. Dr. P .P . Koya
7. Shri Ajay Maken
8. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
9. Smt. P . Jayaprada
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Chandra Shekhar Sahu
12. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Vijay J. Darda
14. Shri Ashwani Kumar
15. Shri Balbir K. Punj
16. Shri Dara  Singh
17. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
18. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

48
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Vice Admiral Raman Puri, — ADC, CISC
PVSM, AVSM, VSM
2. Shri Bimal Julka — Joint Secretary (9G/Air)
3. Maj. Gen. AJS Lamba, VSM — ADGTC
4. Cmde. A.R. Vardhan — NM Bar, Principal
Director Naval Signals
5. Air Cmde. P . Basu — Principal Director (Signals
Air)
6. Lt. Col. Pankaj Narayan — GSO-1, JCES
7. Col. Dinesh Kumar — JCES
Representatives of Cellular Operators
Association of India (COAI)
1. Mr. Anil Nayar — Chairman
2. Mr. T.V . Ramachandran — Director General
Representatives of Association of Unified Telecom Service
Providers of India (AUSPI)
1. Shri S.C. Khanna — Secretary
2. Shri Dilip Sahay — Advisor
3. Shri Arun K. Sur — Member
4. Shri B.B. Anand — Member
5. Dr. Rakesh Mehrotra — Member
6. Shri Greg Young — Member
7. Shri Rajesh Ballal — Member
2. At the outset, the Committee noted that the Defence Secretary
had sought leave of absence from the sitting due to some pressing
engagements and the Additional Secretary was to represent the Ministry.
However, on being informed that the Additional Secretary, Defence
was busy with some discussions and thus was not present, the
Committee expressed their displeasure over his absence in the
Committee meeting.

49
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcoming the representatives of the
Ministry stated that the Committee are aware that spectrum is a
primary requirement for the operations of Defence but with the
unprecedented growth of telecom usage in the civil side there was a
need to strike a fair balance between the national security concerns
and the telecom requirements. The Committee, therefore, wanted to
hear the valuable views and suggestions of the representatives of the
Defence in this context.
4. The representatives of the Defence Ministry made a presentation
before the Committee covering important spectrum related issues like
spectral efficiency, forming of a Defence band, restricting the number
of mobile players, difference between the Civil Communication and
Military Communication, delay in allotment of spectrum, striking a
fair balance between the national security and economic development
etc. They also attended to the specific queries of the Members on
different aspects of spectrum. However, the representatives were not
able to clarify the members on the efficient usage of spectrum by the
defence services.
5. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Defence
Ministry for appearing before the Committee.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, adjourned for a tea-break.
6. The Committee reassembled after the tea-break. The Chairman,
then, welcomed the representatives of the Cellular Operators Association
of India (COAI) and apprised them that an understanding of spectrum
related issues directly from the mobile service providers and their
Associations would be of great help to the Committee in coming to
meaningful conclusions and to give fruitful recommendations.
7. The representatives of COAI made a presentation before the
Committee advocating the causes of the GSM service providers, their
requirement of spectrum, constraints etc. They also responded to the
queries of the Members on various issues relating to Spectrum
Management.
8. The Chairman thanked the representatives of COAI for appearing
before the Committee and expressing their views in a very free and
frank manner.
The witnesses, then withdrew.

50
9. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India (AUSPI) to
the sitting of the Committee and apprised them that the views of the
body representing the CDMA Operators on Spectrum related issues
would be as useful as that of the GSM Operators and therefore the
Committee were keen to get their views.
10. The representatives of AUSPI made a presentation before the
Committee covering various aspects of spectrum like requirement of
additional spectrum for CDMA Operators to facilitate easy roll out,
boost competition, increase tele-density , provide more value added
services etc. They also responded to the queries of the Members on
various issues relating to Spectrum Management.
11. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the AUSPI for
appearing and providing valuable inputs on Spectrum Management.
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting was kept.
The witness withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

51
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 24th October, 2005 from
1540 hours to 1740 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Cherenamie
3. Kanwar Jitin Prasad
4. Shri P . Karunakaran
5. Dr. P .P . Koya
6. Shri Ajay Maken
7. Smt. P . Jayaprada
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Chandra Shekhar Sahu
10. Shri P .C. Thomas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Vijay J. Dadra
12. Shri Ashwani Kumar
13. Shri Dara Singh
14. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
15. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

52
WITNESSES
Representative of Bharti Cellular
1. Shri Sunil Bharti Mittal — CMD
Representative of Hutchison Essar
1. Mr. Asim Ghosh — Managing Director
Representative of Idea Cellular
1. Shri Vikram Mehmi — CEO
Representative of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL)
1. Shri A.K. Sinha — CMD
Representatives of Reliance Infocomm
1. Mr. B.B. Anand — President
2. Mr. B.D. Khurana — Group President
Representatives of Tata Teleservices
1. Shri K.A. Chaukar — Director
2. Mr. Greg Young — Chief Technical Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Bharti Cellular, Hutchison Essar, Idea Cellular and Bharat Sanchar
Nigam Ltd. to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The representatives of these GSM service providers made a
presentation on Spectrum requirement and management. They also
attended tot he queries of the Members of the subject.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the GSM service
providers for appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing
valuable information.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee adjourned for a tea-break.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman, welcomed the representatives of
Reliance Infocomm and Tata Teleservices to the sitting of the Committee
and requested them to give their individual suggestions/opinions on
spectrum requirement and management.

53
6. The representatives of these CDMA service providers made a
presentation before the Committee and attended to the queries of the
members on various aspects of Spectrum Management.
7. As some points still remained to be clarified the meeting
remained inconclusive and the Chairman, therefore, requested the
CDMA service providers to attend a sitting next day for further
clarification.
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting was kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

54
ANNEXURE VI
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 25th October, 2005 from
1100 hours to 1430 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Cherenamei
3. Shri P . Karunakaran
4. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
5. Smt. P . Jayaprada
6. Shri G. Nizamuddin
7. Shri Chandra Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Vijay J. Dadra
10. Shri Balbir K. Punj
11. Shri Dara  Singh
12. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

55
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Telecommunications
1. Dr. J.S. Sarma, Secretary , DOT
2. Shri B. Svaramakrishnan, Member (T)
3. Shri A.K. Sawhney, Member (F)
4. Shri Y.S. Bhave, Additional Secretary (T)
5. Shri P .K. Garg, Wireless Adviser to GOI
6. Shri J.R. Gupta, Senior DDG, TEC
7. Shri A.C. Padhi, DDG (WPF)
Representatives of the CDMA Service Providers
1. Shri K.A. Chaukar, Director, Tata Teleservices
2. Mr. Greg Young, Member, AUSP
3. Shri B.B. Anand, President, Reliance Infocom
4. Shri B.D. Khurana, Group President, Reliance Infocom
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Department of Telecommunications (DoT) to the sitting of the
Committee and apprised them that the previous day the Committee
heard the views of the Ministry of Defence, Cellular Operators
Association of India (COAI), Association of Unified  Telecom Service
Providers of India (AUSPI) and individual GSM and CDMA service
providers, on Spectrum requirement and management. The Chairman
further stated that the Committee thought it prudent to get the views
of the Department of Telecom, it being the nodal Ministry, before
arriving at any conclusion/recommendation.
3. The representatives of the Department of Telecom made a
presentation before the Committee and attended to various queries of
the Members on the subject.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department of
Telecommunications for appearing before the Committee and for
furnishing valuable information as well.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee adjourned for a tea-break.

56
5. The Committee reassembled after tea-break. The Chairman
welcomed the representatives of the CMDA service providers to the
sitting of the Committee and requested them to attend to further
queries of the Members on Spectrum Management.
6. The representatives of the CDMA service providers made another
presentation before the Committee besides attending to further queries
of the Members.
7. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and providing valuable inputs on various aspects of
Spectrum Management.
The witness then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting was kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

57
ANNEXURE VII
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2005 from
1600 hours to 1730 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Vijay J. Darda
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
11. Shri Dara Singh
12. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
13. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary

58
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on “Spectrum Management” relating to the
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications).
(v) The Committee, then, adopted the Draft Action Taken
Reports at Serial No. (i), (ii) and (iii). Draft Report on
“Spectrum Management” relating to Department of
Telecommunications was partially discussed. As some
Members requested the Chairman to give them some more
time to go through the Draft Report, the Committee deferred
further consideration of the Draft Report on “Spectrum
Management” to 21 December, 2005.
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize and
present the above mentioned Reports adopted by the Committee to
the House on a date and time convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

59
ANNEXURE VIII
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st December, 2005 from
1500 hours to 1840 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Mani Cherenamei
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Dr. P .P . Koya
5. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
6. Shri Sohan Patel
7. Shri Chandra Shekhar Sahu
8. Shri Vishnu Sai
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Vijay Darda
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee considered the
Draft Report on ‘Spectrum Management’ and adopted the same with
some modifications/amendments as indicated in the Appendix.

60
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and
present the above-mentioned Report to the House on a date and time
convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

61
APPENDIX
MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS AS CARRIED OUT BY
THE COMMITTEE IN THE DRAFT REPORT ON
‘SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT’
Sl. Page Para Line                  Amendments/Modifications
No. No. No. No.
For Read
12 34 5 6
1. 40 01 08 “factions” “streams”
2. 41 01 02 “an improper planning “the lack of
lacking in foresight” foresighted planning”
3. 41 01 07 “such” “lack of anticipated
demand for spectrum
and”
4. 43 04 10 & 11 Delete: “and at the same time Defence could acquire
funds by releasing those bands no more required
by them”
5. 43 04 16-18 Delete: “Defence may also take into consideration
the funds that they could receive from the civil
side for the release of spectrum while calculating
the requirement of funds”
6. 44 05 Last Add at the end “and the immediate requirement of
the Industry”
7. 45 07 17-23 “The Committee feel “Since there is
that when there is no unanimity of opinion,
reservation the Government
whatsoever amongst should create
the stake holders in conditions for the
the creation of an formulation of the
exclusive Defence Defence Band”.
Band, the Department,
taking into
consideration the
particular band to

62
12 34 5 6
which Defence wishes
to migrate, the time
they will take to
migrate and the cost
involved therein,
should initiate
consultation with the
Defence Authorities
forthwith to chalk out
the modalities for the
creation of a Defence
Band.”
8. 46 08 Last Add at the end: “All efforts should be made to allot
as much spectrum as the Government can in the
800/1900 MHz for the CDMA operators and the
900/1800 MHz for the GSM operators for the
expansion of the telecom services.”
9. 47 09 01 “principle” “issue”
10. 47 09 1&2 “causing great “is a cause of
inconvenience” concern”
11.4 70 90 2 “affiliation to” “the usage of”
12. 47 09 03 “piecemeal” “methodology of”
13. 47 09 4-17 “Whereas such droplet “The Committee
allocation of spectrum r ecommend that
causes inconvenience subject to availability
to the operators in of adequate spectrum,
advance network ef forts should be
planning and made to address the
infrastructure set up, it concern with respect
ensures that the to the quantum of
operators harness the spectrum allocation in
allotted spectrum to such a manner that
the fullest capacity the interest of the
before additional consumers, operators
spectrum is granted to and the overall
them. While national interest is
appreciating the subserved keeping in

63
12 34 5 6
Department ’s view the imperatives
management of of technological
spectrum, the choices. The
Committee, however, Government may
feel that allocation of consider incorporating
spectrum to the suitable clauses in the
operators in bigger licence agreement
chunks will certainly and the relevant
result in a better legislation to ensure
planning and the optimal utilization
coordinated growth of and prevention of
telecom services. hoarding of spectrum.”
However, suitable
legal provision needs
to be contemplated for
penal action against
those operators who
fail to optimally utilise
the scarce resource.
The Committee,
therefore, desire that
the Department
examine the issue and
if they find it plausible
to allocate spectrum in
one go to each of the
operators, they should
ensure that the
operators who do not
use the spectrum
optimally and do not
have the
demonstrative ability
or plan to use
spectrum, should not
be allowed to hold that
spectrum and prevent
other capable
operators from moving
forward and deploying
innovative services for
the benefit of the
consumers.”

64
12 34 5 6
14. 48 10 03 “is a great controversy “are competing claims
arising” regarding”
15. 48 10 4-6 “Each in their anxiety “Each in its anxiety for
for getting more getting more spectrum
spectrum has put up has put up various
some alibi or the other contentions to
to prove that he is the establish their claim to
rightful claimant for additional spectrum.
additional spectrum By way of illustration”.
e.g.,”
16. 48 10 11 to last “whereas CDMA is “The Committee are
devoid of such informed that the
advantages. The exact scope of
Committee had the efficiency factor of one
opportunity to discuss technology over the
the matter of efficiency other in relation to the
in utilization of number of subscribers
spectrum with the for an allotted
Defence. The spectrum is yet to be
Committee learnt that worked out finally by
the needs of spectrum DoT. The Committee,
in the Defence were therefore, recommend
so varied that that in the light of the
efficiency could not be DoTs comprehensive
measure through any evaluation of the
scale/formula. TRAI above, Spectrum may
in their report has also be released keeping in
opined that view the need
benchmarking at this for eventual
stage may not be harmonization of the
appropriate because spectrum allocation
the allocations to policy in accordance
both the major with the international
technologies are below norms.”
the international
standards. The
Department of
Telecommunications
also do not accept the
concept of efficient

65
12 34 5 6
utilization in direct
terms but mince
words to say that it
is not practicable. The
operators would be
too glad to have no
restrictions. In spite
of all these opinions
every organization/
entity feels that there
should be some
method to check
misuse and idling of
precious spectrum. In
the light of all these
factors, the
Committee are of the
opinion that, in the
present circumstances,
spectrum may be
released to operators
as and when they
demand, subject to
availability and that
this should not debar
the Department from
imposing any
conditions in the
course of operations.”
17. 49 11 Full Delete: “During interactions with various
Organisations/Associations, the Committee were
given to understand that there is a lot of
controversy with regard to the ‘equal’ and
‘equitable’ allocation of spectrum. While the CDMA
lobby is advocating ‘equal’ allocation of spectrum
on the ground of same entry fee, spectrum charges
and roll out obligations, the GSM operators are in
favour of ‘equitable’ allocation on the plea of level
playing field in terms of capacity utilization,
revenue share etc. The Department in their papers

66
12 34 5 6
submitted to the Committee have used the word
‘equitable’ whereas TRAI has used the word at par,
namely equal. The Committee recognize that such
kind of dichotomy of views is difficult to reconcile.
Owing to the constraint in spectrum availability
and the ever growing demand for it, the Committee
feel, as has already been expressed earlier, that it
will be the interest of all if spectrum is allocated
to the operators based on their needs. However,
the Committee intricately understand the issues
concerning the desire of CDMA operators of getting
equal amount of spectrum as allocated to the GSM
operators and also the higher subscriber base that
the CDMA operators can achieve out of 2.5 MHz
as compared to the GSM’s 5 MHz. The Committee
are of the opinion that if CDMA operators are able
to make use of spectrum allocated to them to the
fullest capacity and get the subscriber base which
makes them eligible for an allocation equal to that
of the GSM operators, they should not be denied
such allocation.”
18. 49 12 01 “very anxious” “particular”
19. 50 12 10 “great” “substantial”
20. 50 12 12 “that can be “towards a
coordinated and coordinated release
released” thereof”
21. 50 12 15 & 16 “equal and ample “adequate opportunity”
opportunities.”
22. 50 13 Full “The Committee are “As pointed out by the
not inclined to buy the Defence, the
Defence suggestion Committee also
that the number of r ecognize that the
mobile operators optimum utilization of
should be restricted to spectrum is hampered
enhance efficient due to a higher
utilization of spectrum. number of operators
As pointed out by the as a buf fer band has
Secretary DoT, the to be made available

67
12 34 5 6
operators may not between the allocation
meet the spectrum of spectrum to each of
norms in terms of these operators. This,
demand, subscriber however, should not
limit, etc. once the be a factor
meger is effected. for restricting the
The Committee also entry  of new
feel that restricting the operators. Eventually,
number of operators consolidation of
will be a retrograde operators may happen
step and will prove depending on the
detrimental to market forces. While
consumer interest as it accepting the principle
will kill competition. and the logic
However, as per the of encouraging
guidelines, there is no competition and
restriction on mergers thereby offering
and hence the multiple choices to
Committee would like the consumer,
to leave it to the the Committee
market forces to r ecommend that
decide on mergers. Government should
The Committee would take into consideration
like to suggest that the legitimate
before any new player spectrum needs of the
is allowed into the existing operators.”
arena, the existing
players should be
assured of adequate
spectrum for their roll
out plan. The
Committee desire that
such adequacy of
spectrum has to
be seen in the
context of short
term requirements
upto 2007 to
meet the Gover-
nment objectives,
the spectrum

68
12 34 5 6
requirements beyond
2007 and the existing
spectrum allocation
criterion.”
23. 51 14 5 to last “The licence to “Recognizing the
operate within the scarce and invaluable
allocated spectrum is nature of spectrum,
thereafter a the Committee feel
permanent asset of that the Government
the licence holder for should be able to
all times to come. The r ealize adequate
Committee are of the r evenue from the
opinion that whereas allocation of spectrum.
an entry fee is a The Government
source of income to should also consider
the Government, its cr eating suitable
high value may not be conditions for entry of
affordable to many small and local
serious but small players.”
players who may like
to enter the field. On
the other had, the
Committee feel that
since the operation of
this business is wide-
spread and would
require continuity
and high levels of
investment, it may
not be proper to
allow entry to
individual operators
who do not have that
kind of resources. The
heavy entry fee
therefore, acts as an
automatic deterrent
for small business.
The Committee are of
the opinion that

69
12 34 5 6
through the payment
of an entry fee and
the annual spectrum
charge, the
entrepreneur should
not become a
permanent holder of
such spectrum usage
and therefore they
suggest that there
could be a provision
for leasing out the
spectrum through an
agreement. The
agreement may have
a clause of heavy
penalty through
attachment or
otherwise and the
withdrawal of licence.
The Committee also
feel that in view of
the latest upsurge in
mobile technology
and its usage the
percentage of AGR
may be
reconsidered.”
24. 52 15   7 to end “The Committee are, “Until such time the
however, pained to 2.1 GHz band is
know that even though coordinated and
the CDMA and the spectrum and
GSM operators are equipment made
providing such available in that band,
services in the 800 the Committee feel
MHz and the 900 MHz that the nation and the
bands respectively, users should not be
they have been denied access to the
accusing each other of 3G and emerging
backdoor entry. The services. In view of

70
12 34 5 6
very fact that these the fact that 3G and
services are provided other emerging
in the 800 MHz and services can be
the 900 MHz/1800 pr ovided in the 800
MHz bands establish MHz and the 900 MHz
the fact that enough /1800 MHz bands, the
spectrum is available Committee desire that
with the operators to the Government
afford the luxury. On should create
the contrary, the conditions and
Committee are bound pr ovide simultaneous
to accept that this is opportunities to both
being done at the cost GSM and CDMA
of providing ef ficient operators for roll out of
2G services to the 3G services.”
users. The Committee
are aware that the
clamour for
additional spectrum
is the backbone of
such controversy.
However, the
Committee feel that,
till such time the
2GHz band is
coordinated and
spectrum made
available the
Department should
release available
spectrum on need
base and as such
there should be no
hesitation to release
the 2-3 MHz
spectrum to the
CDMA operators in
the 800 MHz band.”
25. 52 16    5 to end “are going to come in “will be widely
a big way alongwith a available. The
lot of dispute. The Committee feel that
Committee feel that DoT should take all

71
12 34 5 6
DoT will take all necessary steps to
necessary steps to allocate the spectrum
allocate the spectrum in this band fairly,
in this band judiciously judiciously and in a
and in a planned planned framework so
framework so that the that the experiences
experiences of the 2G of the 2G allocation
allocation are not are not repeated. The
repeated. The Committee desire that
Committee desire that they may be kept
they may be kept informed of the road
informed of the road map to the allocation
map to the allocation of IMT-2000 band.”
of IMT-2000 band.”
26. 53 17 Full Add a new paragraph: “The Committee’s attention
has been drawn to a report about a new technology
being developed whereby telephone exchanges
could be set up for interconnecting mobile
telephone operations. Under this technology an
operator could route calls from and to mobile
networks within a building to a fixed network. It
has been reported that since about that 60 per cent
of mobile calls originate and terminate within a
building and if, for the “last mile” the call could
travel on fixed line, it would relieve a lot of scarce
spectrum. The Committee feel that the Department
of Telecommunications should examine this issue
in detail and formulate a long term policy keeping
in view the above mentioned developments. The
Committee may be kept informed.”
27. 54 18 02 Add after “co-exist”: “and a long term planning to
identify new cellular bands (2500 MHz/2600 MHz)
that are aligned to global developments needs to
be framed.”