21
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Second Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on Conditional Access System (CAS)
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)


TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
[Action taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-Second Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on Conditional Access System (CAS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on ………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on ………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.I.T. No. 143
Price : Rs. 19.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE .......................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 18
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government ........................ 23
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration ..................................................... 24
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies are interim in nature ................... 31
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2005-06)
held on 6.9.2005 ........................................................ 38
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Second Report (Thirteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee ............................... 40
(i)

*Nominated w.e.f. 27 September, 2005.
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
6. Shri Kailash Joshi
7. Shri P . Karunakaran
8. Dr. P .P . Koya
9. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
10. Shri Ajay Maken
11. Smt. Nivedita S. Mane
12. Smt. P . Jayaprada Nahata
13. Col. G. Nizamuddin
14. Shri Sohan Potai
15. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
16. Shri Chander Shekhar Sahu
17. Shri Vishnu Sai
18. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Ashwani Kumar
24. Dr. Akhilesh Das
25. Shri Balbir K. Punj
26. Shri Dara Singh
27. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
(iii)

28. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
29. Shri K. Rama Mohana Rao
30. Shri Motiur Rahman
31. Shri Ekanath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
4. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2005-2006) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty First Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty Second Report (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha) on Conditional Access System (CAS) relating to the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting.
2. The Fifty Second Report was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker
on 16 July, 2003. The Report was also presented to the Lok Sabha and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 July, 2003. The Ministry furnished Action
Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Report on 13 October, 2004 and status reports on 15 June, 2004 &
29 March, 2005.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 6 September, 2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifty Second Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
27 September, 2005 Chairman,
5 Asvina, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology
deals with action taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee contained in their Fifty Second Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Conditional Access System (CAS)”
pertaining to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
2. As the House was not in Session, the Fifty Second Report was
presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 16 July, 2003. Subsequently, the
Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 22 July, 2003 and was also
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. It contained 11
Recommendations/Observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Report have been received and
categorised as under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 39, 43, 44, 45, 48
Total: 5
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 40, 41, 42, 46 & 47
Total: 5
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
are of interim nature:
Paragraph No.: 49
Total: 1
Chapter-V

2
4. Subsequent to the receipt of Action Taken Replies from the
Government, several changes had taken place in the field of
“Conditional Access System”. Hence, to update the replies, the
Ministry and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India were asked
to furnish status report on “Conditional Access System”, which was
initially received on 15 June, 2004 and subsequently on 29 March,
2005.
5. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In case, where it is not possible for the Department to
implement the recommendation in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that Action Taken
Notes on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I
and final action taken notes on the recommendations/observations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them
at an early date.
6. The Committee will deal with action taken by the Government
on some of their recommendations:
Availability of Set Top Boxes
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40 & 42)
7. The Committee had noted that according to the Ministry’s
estimates only one-third of the cable TV Subscribers would opt for
CAS/Set Top Boxes (STBs), as the rest would be satisfied with the
Free to Air channels available within the basic tier. Therefore, the initial
requirement of STBs as estimated would only be 20 lakhs against the
total viewership of 56 lakhs in 4 metros. The Multi-System Operators
(MSOs) had assured the Ministry of having placed orders for import
of 27 lakh STBs. The Committee noted that the contention was based
upon the guess work of the MSOs who had vested interests in the
issue and had not been independently verified by the Ministry through
any survey of its own. On the other hand, IBF had estimated that the
availability of STBs would only be to the tune of four to five percent
of the requirement and according to them, it would lead to a black
out of pay channels in the four metros. The Committee further noted
that there appeared to be no credible data available with the Ministry
as regards the arrival of STBs into the country, and it was after sensing
the serious concern of the Committee that the Ministry had assured to
monitor weekly arrival of STBs.

3
In view of the aforementioned, the Committee failed to share the
optimism of the Ministry that a smooth roll out of CAS would be
possible. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Ministry
of I & B meticulously monitor the availability of STBs so as to avoid
any black out of pay channels and also make all out efforts to ensure
expeditious indigenous manufacture of STBs.
8. The Ministry, in its reply, has stated as follows:
“The Ministry has been constantly in touch with the Multi-System
Operators (MSOs) and the Ministry of Finance (Central Board of
Excise and Customs) to monitor the arrival of imported Set Top
Boxes (STBs). As per the information furnished by the Central
Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), as on 16th August, 2003,
159, 580 STBs had been imported. Experience has now shown that
the requirement of STBs will pick up only at a later stage. The
initial demand for STBs may not be as anticipated due to
multifarious factors (for e.g., in Chennai, with the implementation
of the CAS w.e.f. 1.9.2003, the consumers appear to be satisfied
with the free-to-air channels being presently received for which no
STB is required and more so, some of the popular pay channels
have also switched over to free-to-air category) which has had the
slow off take of STBs. Therefore, the initial demand may be
relatively at a slow pace. Besides, in Mumbai and Kolkata, due to
the ensuing festival season on account of which the law enforcing
officers are being over stretched, the State Government has been
apprehending law and order problems if the CAS is implemented
immediately.
However, as stated above, the effective implementation of the
roll out in the metros will depend on the co-operation that will be
extended by the State nodal authorities concerned, who are notified
as authorized officers under section 2 (a) of the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. This Ministry had, in fact,
convened a meeting of the State authorities of the four metros on
15th September to chalk out the future course of action on the roll
out of the addressability. During the course of deliberations, it
was suggested that State level Committees be set up by the State
Governments comprising representatives of the various
stakeholders/consumer groups besides the representatives of the
State and of this Ministry in order to facilitate smooth roll out of
the CAS. It was agreed, in principle, in the said meeting that the
recommendations of the Committee so set up after consideration
of the State Government, would be forwarded to this Ministry for

4
notifying the areas and dates for the roll out of the CAS in different
parts of the State.
Consequent to the above decision, the State Governments of
the four metros have recently been requested by this Ministry to
set up the Committee and to convene its meeting at the earliest.”
The Ministry, in their reply, have further stated:
“An Implementation Committee, comprising various stakeholders
has been set up for effective coordination and monitoring of
preparedness to implement Conditional Access System in the metro
cities w.e.f. 1.9.2003. In order to ensure the smooth roll-out of CAS
in the metros, the Government, in consultation with the MSOs has
staggered the implementation of the CAS in a phased zone-wise
manner in the metros of Kolkata and Mumbai w.e.f. 1 September,
2003 instead of 15th July, 2003. As per the information furnished
by the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), as on
16th August, 2003, 1,59,580 STBs had been imported. Moreover,
orders have also been placed by the MSOs for import of adequate
quantity of the same. Experience has now shown that the
requirement of STBs will pick up only at a later stage. The initial
demand for STBs may not be as anticipated due to multifarious
factors (for e.g., in Chennai, with the implementation of the CAS
w.e.f. 1.9.2003, the consumers appear to be satisfied with the Free-
to-Air channels being presently received for which no STB is
required and more so, some of the popular pay channels have
also switched over to free-to-air category) which has subscribed to
the slow off take of STBs. Therefore, the initial demand may be
relatively at a slow pace. Besides, in Mumbai and Kolkata, due to
the ensuing festival season on account of which the law enforcing
officers are being over stretched, the State Government has been
apprehending law and order problems if the CAS is implemented
immediately.
In the meeting taken by the Secretary of this Ministry on
15th September, 2003 with the representatives of the four State
Governments, it was decided to set up State level Committees
consisting of representatives of Ministry and based on the
recommendations of the said Committee, after consideration with
the State Governments, the same would be forwarded to this
Ministry for notifying the fresh areas and date for the roll out of
the CAS in different parts of the State. Accordingly, the State
Governments of the four metros have been requested recently by
this Ministry to initiate appropriate further action in this regard.”

5
The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu in her letter dated
06.01.2004 addressed to the Union Minister of Information and
Broadcasting had mentioned, inter alia , as follows:
“With regard to Chennai, I would like to mention that though
CAS is under implementation since the 1st of September, 2003, it
has not proved to be popular. ….. The common public are deprived
of the opportunity of viewing popular programmes on pay channels
due to the advent of set top boxes. However, in the absence of
any regulatory mechanism, the monthly rates fixed by broadcasters
are too high for the consumers to bear after investing in set top
boxes. The set top boxes are also highly priced and made available
on very rigid terms by Multi Service Operators. Thus the
introduction of set top boxes is not at all consumer friendly and
there seems to be no reason why the TV viewers of Chennai alone
should suffer consequences of CAS experiment in the whole of
India.
I therefore request you to withdraw CAS with immediate effect.”
9. The Committee note that the Conditional Access System (CAS)
was implemented in Chennai w.e.f. 1.9.2003 and in the rest of the
metros, the system has been kept in abeyance by the Government
by means of a notification. At present, the system is operational in
Chennai only, that too because of the order passed by the Madras
High Court.
10. The Committee observe that the implementation of CAS in
Chennai has evoked lukewarm response from the viewers towards
the system as most of them appear to be satisfied with Free-to-Air
Channels, which do not require Set Top Boxes (STBs) for viewing.
This obviously manifests the very rigid terms of Multi System
Operators, the prohibitive cost of STBs, the complexities involved in
the use of STBs and the additional burden of pay channels that had
forced the consumers to refrain themselves from purchasing STBs
and viewing pay channels. In short, the introduction of CAS appears
not at all to be consumer friendly.
11. The Committee feel that failure on the part of Government
to undertake a comprehensive study of the ground realities in the
four metros before introducing this technological innovation has
resulted in a complete rejection of the implementation of CAS by
the metros. The Committee also feel that a lack of trust between the
Multi System Operators and Cable TV Operators (who have not

6
given the exact number of users) has been the main cause for a
high rate for pay channels.
12. The Committee find that the successful implementation of
CAS in four metros depends upon the co-ordination of authorities
of State Government concerned as under the Cable TV Network
Act, they alone are vested with the powers to enforce and take
remedial measures. Formation of State Level Implementation
Committee comprising representatives of the various stakeholders/
consumer groups and of the State Government and Central
Government is a step in the right direction. Further, in order to
make the system consumer friendly and transparent with regard to
cost and other aspects of STBs and pricing of pay channels, the
Committee recommend the Government to evolve a comprehensive
policy on the availability, price and conditions of STBs.
13. The Government should fix the rates of pay channels after
consultation with the Broadcasters/Multi System Operators and Cable
TV Operators instead of leaving the price fixation to the market
forces. The Government should also ensure that the rates so fixed
remain unaltered for a considerable period of time and the
Broadcasters/Multi System operators and Cable TV Operators should
not resort to frequent revision of prices of pay channels to the
detriment of Cable TV viewers. This would instill confidence in the
minds of the public about the Conditional Access System and
encourage them to view pay channels rather than opting out of it.
14. Further, the Government should keep in perspective the
technological status of STBs with the emergence of multiple
technologies in future. With the permission being accorded to start
Direct to Home (DTH) telecast in our country, the Committee opine
that Government has to redefine clearly the status of STBs as
otherwise the system will become redundant.
Indigenous manufacture of STBs
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
15. The Committee were seriously concerned to find that the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting arbitrarily decided the cut
off date for introduction of Conditional Access System without making
any indepth study about the availability and price of Set Top Boxes.
No efforts were made to explore the possibilities of its indigenous
production even though the CAS is a simple device and many of the
public sector institutions could and were willing to manufacture them.

7
The import of Set Top Boxes in such a large number would result in
avoidable drain on the foreign exchange reserves of the country. Even
the modest estimates put the figure of 20 lakh Set Top Boxes which
would amount to outgo of Rs. 600 crores. Prudence required that after
assessing the genuine demand Government should explore possibilities
of indigenous manufacture in a given time frame.
16. During the course of evidence, the Secretary had assured the
Committee that the Ministry would get in touch with C-DAC, which
has the technology and capacity to manufacture STBs.
17. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has stated as follows:
“The observation made to the effect that, “no efforts were made to
explore the possibilities of its indigenous production even though
the CAS is a simple device” is denied. The Ministry has left no
stones unturned in its endeavour of exploring the possibilities of
indigenous manufacture. A series of meetings were held for the
purpose with the indigenous manufacturers. It was, inter alia ,
indicated by the Consumer Electronics and T.V . Manufacturers’
Association (CETMA) that the indigenous industry would be able
to make the STBs available, in about sixty days from the date
CAS is implemented. Thus, the indigenous industry was, in fact,
not prepared fully to gear up to the situation.
It was decided to implement the CAS in a phased zone-wise
manner in the metros of Mumbai and Kolkata and at one go in
Chennal w.e.f. 1.9.2003, with the intention of using intervening
period to step up the preparedness on CAS, to educate the
consumers and to closely monitor the procurement and availability
of STBs. Officers of the Ministry of I&B have visited the metro
cities to assess the preparedness for CAS and have inter alia ,
observed that the demand of Set Top Boxes at the first stage would
be met by imports and through the procurement of STBs by MSOs/
cable operators is in progress. The representative of Consumer
Electronics and Television Manufacturers’ Association (CETMA),
who represented the indigenous industry, were consulted at
different times. CETMA and some other manufacturers had made
an appeal for reduction of custom duty on the import of
components, required for manufacturers of Set Top Boxes (STBs).
The Central Excise duty of 16% on crucial components required in
the manufacture of Set Top Boxes indigenously has been dispensed
with by the Ministry of Finance so as to give a boost to the
indigenous industry. The reduction of customs duty on import of

8
Set Top Boxes from 50.8% to 5% is a temporary measure till such
time the indigenous industry is geared up fully to meet the
demands of the consumers”.
18. The Committee take note of the efforts of the Ministry for
getting tax sops from the Ministry of Finance to boost the indigenous
manufacture of Set Top Boxes (STBs) and for consulting Consumer
Electronics and TV Manufacturers’ Association (CETMA), an
organization of electronics to manufacture indigenous production of
STBs. They are, however, distressed to note that despite the assurance
given by the Secretary during the evidence before the Committee,
the Ministry has not contacted C-DAC, a public sector undertaking,
which is stated to have the requisite technology and capacity to
manufacture STBs. The Committee are of the view that if the
Government intend to go ahead with the proposal for implementation
of Conditional Access System (CAS), the Ministry in addition to
consultation with CETMA should also keep in touch with C-DAC
in order to manufacture indigenous production of STBs without
further delay. The Committee also hope that the State Level
Committees proposed to be set up by the State Governments to
ensure smooth roll out of CAS, will be constituted expeditiously
and hold purposeful meetings regularly. The Committee would like
to be apprised about the progress made by the Ministry in this
regard.
Enhancing Minimum Number of Free-to-Air Channels
Recommendation (Para Nos. 46 & 47)
19. The Committee had noted that the task force had worked out
subscription rate of Rs. 72 for 60 channels on the basis of cost plus
reasonable profits of the cable operators and only marginal cost was
required if the channels were increased upto 80 or 90 channels. The
Committee failed to understand when the Free to Air broadcasters
were ready to provide upto 60 channels, and in the aftermath of
introduction of CAS, a large number of subscribers would opt for the
basic bouquet, then why the basic tier had been kept at 30 channels.
The Committee was also concerned that the consumer would have no
choice with regard to channels to be provided in the basic tier.
The Committee also urged the Ministry to reconsider the issue of
basic tier with a view to enhancing the number of the channels to be
made available. The Committee further urged the Ministry to ensure
that the subscriber was able to exercise choice in matters of channels
to be available within the basic tier and make suitable amendments in
the law, if required.

9
20. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have submitted the
reply as follows:
“Pursuant to the recommendations of the Task Force, the
Government has, through issue of a Notification on 7th May 2003,
specified the minimum number of free-to-air channels to the
included in the package of channels forming the basic System tier,
as thirty, in the four metros. As per the study conducted by the
Cost Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance, it has been
worked out that the cost of the cable operator to show free-to-air
channels would be Rs. 71.33 for 60 channels and a very nominal
increase in cost is required, if the number of channels is increased
upto 80 or 90 channels. Though the number of free-to-air channels
may be 70 to 80 on an average in each metro, yet only 35 such
channels on an average were being shown. If a minimum number
was not prescribed, then the cable operators would not be bound
by any such requirement. In fact, free-to-air channels over and
above this number, provided by the cable operators will also be at
no extra cost. Some of the MSO, e.g. Incable have indicated that
they would be in a position to show nearly 70 free-to-air channels
while Siti Cable has indicated that they would be able to carry
60 free-to-air channels. Thus, the consumer would be benefited as
he would get a large number of free-to-air channels at a cost of
Rs. 72/-only (exclusive of local taxes). The package of channels
forming the basic System tier includes the compulsory transmission
of three Doordarshan channels notified under Section 8 of the Cable
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, the genres of
entertainment, news, sports, children’s programmes and music and
must be in English, Hindi and regional languages depending on
the availability of such channels in the metros”.
The Ministry in their reply have also stated that:
“The package of channels forming the basic System tier include
the compulsory transmission of three Doordarshan Channel notified
under section 8 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995, the genres of entertainment, news, sports, children’s
programmes and music and must be in English, Hindi or regional
languages depending on the availability of such channels in the
Metros. Transmission of various channels in certain area through
cable networks depends on the popularity and demand of majority
of people, residing in such area. In fact, some of the MSO, e.g.
Incable have indicated that they would be in a position to show
nearly 70 free-to-air channels while Siti cable have indicated that

10
they would be able to carry 60 free-to-air channels. Thus, the
consumer would be benefited as he would get a large number of
free-to-air channels at a cost of Rs. 72/-only (exclusive of local
taxes). Subscribers will thus have control over the content that is
being viewed in their homes”.
21. The Committee are not convinced with the arguments given
by the Government for keeping the minimum number of free-to-air
channels at 35 when it actually works out to 60 channels at a price
of Rs. 71.33. The Committee, therefore, feel that the minimum number
of free-to-air channels should be 60 instead of 35.
Implementation of Conditional Access System
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
22. Summing up their Original Report, the Committee had
expressed their considered view that Conditional Access System should
be implemented systematically in a given time frame by deferring the
date fixed, if necessary keeping in view the interests of the people
without disrupting telecast of quality programmes and dissemination
of information in any manner. In any case, cable subscribers should
not be put into worse position after introduction of CAS.
23. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have responded as
follows:
“The Government has noted the concern expressed by the
Committee and therefore, after consultations with the MSOs decided
to implement the zone-wise phased roll-out w.e.f. 1.9.2003 in the
metros of Kolkata and Mumbai and at one go at Chennai. In
Delhi the same will be implemented immediately after the ensuing
Assembly elections”.
Status notes from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
(a) Dated 15.06.2004 from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
24. The Ministry in their note dated 15 June, 2004 on Conditional
Access System have stated as follows:
“The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment, Act 2002
was passed by the Lok Sabha on 15.05.2002 and by the Rajya
Sabha on 10.12.2002.The Bill received the assent of the President
on 31.12.2002. The said amendment introduced a concept of

11
‘Addressability’ in the Cable Television Network (CAS), which
could be mandated in a specific area and from a specific date, to
be notified by the Government. Initially, it was introduced in the
four metros w.e.f. 15th July, 2003. Later, CAS was notified for
implementation w.e.f 1st September, 2003 in the three metros in a
phased zone-wise manner and at one go in Chennai. Through a
notification issued on 29th August, 2003, the implementation of
CAS was, however, withdrawn in the NCT of Delhi. This was
challenged before the Delhi High Court, which quashed the said
notification by its order dated 04.12.03.
In a batch of writ petitions filed, through its order dated 26.12.03,
the Delhi High Court had, inter alia , observed that “there has to
be some regulatory body in terms of the synopsis of the comments
which have been filed by the Respondents to see the
implementation”. The High Court, therefore, directed that it be
enlightened of the steps taken in this direction before 05.04.2004.
On 9th January, 2004, the Central Government has notified the
‘broadcasting services and cable services’ to be Telecommunication
Systems under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
Act, 1997. The functions of the Authority are laid down in the
said Act. In addition, TRAI has been assigned additional functions,
through a separate notification. The T.R.A.I. began the examination
of all the issues/constraints during the introduction of CAS in the
four metros. Meanwhile, the TRAI has, through its order issued
on 15th January 2004, fixed the ceiling on charges payable by
cable subscribers to the cable operators; by cable operators to
MSOs/Broadcasters and by MSOs to Broadcasters (including their
authorised distribution agencies) to be those prevalent as on 26th
December 2003 for both FTA and pay channels (for CAS and non-
CAS areas) until final determination by it on the various issues
concerning these charges.
On TRAI’s interim recommendation, the implementation of CAS
has been suspended in all the four metros w.e.f. 27th February,
2004 through the issue of a notification, which has been challenged
by some MSOs in various law courts. The Chennai High Court
has, however, granted stay on the operation of a aforesaid
notification.
TRAI is in the process of examination of these issues, through a
consultative process with all the stake holders. A detailed
Consultation Paper has also been circulated by TRAI. Its final
recommendations are awaited”.

12
(b) From Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
25. The TRAI in its note dated 22 June, 2004 submitted the
following status of the CAS:
“The Government of India issued a Notification No. 39 dated 9th
January, 2004 under the proviso to clause (k) of sub-section (1) of
Section 2 of the TRAI Act, 1997 as amended, whereby the scope
of the expression ‘Telecommunication Services’ under the TRAI
Act was expanded to include the broadcasting Services within the
purview of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. Through
an order on the same day, the Government of India, in exercise of
the powers under clause (d) of the sub-section (1) of the Section
11, added the following to TRAI’s functions:
(1) make recommendations regarding:
• the terms and conditions on which the “addressable
systems” shall be provided to customers
• the parameters for regulating maximum time for
advertisements in pay channels and other channels
(2) Specify standard norms for and periodicity of revision of rates of
pay channels, including interim measures.
TRAI issued a consultation note dated 15th January, 2004 on various
issues concerning the Cable TV Industry. After analyzing the
various issues raised in the consultation note and based on the
study of various inputs and comments received in response to the
consultation note, the TRAI forwarded interim recommendations
on 23.02.2004 that the CAS should be kept in abeyance for at least
three months. The Government of India, accepted the
recommendation and vide Notification No. S.O. 271(E) dated 27th
February, 2004 suspended the mandatory operation of CAS until
such date as may be notified by the Government.
The GOI notification dated 27.02.2004 was challenged in the Madras
High Court and an interim stay on the operation of this notification
was granted by Madras High Court on 04.03.2004. The Madras
stay order has delivered the final judgement and the interim stay
is made absolute. The position now on CAS is that it is operational
only in Chennai.
To take final view on CAS, TRAI based on the responses received
on the consultation note dated 15th January, 2004 and discussions

13
held with various stakeholders, issued a detailed Consultation Paper
on “The issues relating to Broadcasting and Distribution of TV
Channels” on 20 April, 2004. TRAI also held detailed discussion
with stakeholders in Chennai, Delhi and Mumbai. A detailed
workshop to educate consumers on CAS is being held in Mumbai
on 19.06.2004. TRAI has also constituted a committee with
representatives of the State of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, West Bengal
and NCT of Delhi to assist TRAI in finalizing the recommendation.
The TRAI is now in the process of finalisation of its
recommendations/regulations on Conditional Access System and
related issues and it is expected that these will be finalized in
July, 2004. Since TRAI has not finalized its views on CAS, it may
not be in position to provide any suggestions at this stage”.
(c) Dated 29.03.2005 from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
26. In their note dated 29.03.2005 the Ministry has further stated
as under:
“The implementation of CAS was to be undertaken in Delhi,
Mumbai and Kolkata (Zone-wise) and Chennai w.e.f. 1.9.2003. The
Government subsequently de-notified the implementation of CAS
in Delhi through a notification dated 29.08.2003, which was later
quashed by the Delhi High Court on 4.12.2003, in a case filed by
M/s Jay Polychem & Ors. CAS was not implemented in Mumbai
and Kolkata. The Government of Maharashtra requested for
postponement of the implementation of CAS in Mumbai, citing a
number of issues, including additional burden on the common
man in terms of purchase of STBs. The West Bengal Government
also highlighted a number of issues impinging on the consumers’
interest.
The Multi-system Operators (MSOs)/Cable Operators in Chennai
city went ahead with its implementation w.e.f. 1.9.2003. The Chief
Minister of Tamil Nadu, through her DO letter dated 6.1.2004,
requested for withdrawal of CAS and suggested introduction of
such system in future after consultation with the concerned State
Government and keeping in mind the interest of the consumers. It
was also suggested that a regulatory mechanism might be put in
place to keep a check on the Broadcasters and Multi Service
Operators with adequate powers given to the State Government.
The MSOs in Delhi decided to implement CAS in the notified
areas of Delhi w.e.f. 15th December, 2003, pursuant to Delhi High

14
Court Order dated 4.12.2003. The implementation of CAS in Delhi
witnessed partial implementation of CAS in many parts of the
notified area, apart from certain difficulties faced by the consumers
at large. In the initial stage, a petition was filed by Consumer
Coordination Council and Consumer Online Foundation before
Delhi High Court, seeking various reliefs, including the prayer for
withdrawal of implementation of CAS on account of consumers’
concerns like pricing of channels/STBs, monopoly of cable
operators, prescription of service quality parameters, etc. The Delhi
High Court, in its interim order dated 26.12.2003, declined to
restrain the Government from implementing CAS in Delhi and
decided also to review the situation after three months. The
aforesaid interim order also directed as under:
“….. we desire that in this period of three months all the loopholes,
difficulties faced by the consumers, effect of the implementation
and problems, if any, arising out of the implementation can be
assessed and remedial measures be taken in that regard.
There has to be some regulatory body in terms of the synopsis of
comments, which have been filed by the respondent to see the
implementation. We would like the respondent to enlighten this
Court of the steps taken in this direction before the next date of
hearing…..”
Meanwhile, the Chief Minister of Delhi, through series of
correspondence, highlighted various issues arising from the
implementation, which are summarized below:
— Linkages between the broadcasters, MSOs, Cable Operators
and the consumers must be strengthened to focus on the
issues viz., product pricing, quality, availability and pricing
of pay channels etc. To sort out various distortions and to
remove mistrust among the various stakeholders, a manual
spelling out the details of the broadcasters and MSOs must
be indicated.
— Absence of regulatory body for dealing with the broadcasters
and MSOs.
— Lack of awareness among the consumers regarding the
benefits of CAS and the feeling among the consumers that
CAS is being imposed on them. The consumers perceive
that the additional financial burden of having to buy a set
top box and get limited pay channels is not of any

15
advantage in the present system of pricing of the channels
and the arrangements for purchase/sent [Sic. ‘Rent’] of STBs
is also unsatisfactory. The consumers are being made to
pay for seeing less.
— Need for re-consideration of the system of CAS from the
point of view of inadequacy of competition in local area
leading to virtual monopoly by the Cable Operators, which
is not only leading to current distortions but also likely to
aggravate as the backward linkages with the broadcasters
and MSOs do not seem to have been adequately worked
out in terms of pricing, availability of channels, etc.
Following the order of the High Court dated 26.12.2003 as
mentioned in para 3 above, the Government brought “Broadcasting
and Cable Services” within the ambit of TRAI Act on 9.1.2004. Pursuant
to Government’s notification dated 9.1.2004, TRAI became the Regulator
for broadcasting and cable services. Through another notification dated
9.1.2004. TRAI was also assigned additional functions under Section 11
(1) (d) of the said Act, which mandated TRAI to make
recommendations regarding terms and conditions on which the
“Addressable Systems ” shall be provided to customers and the
parameters for regulating maximum time for advertisements in pay
channels as well as other channels. These additional functions were
assigned keeping in view the difficulties faced during the course of
implementation of CAS in four metro cities.
TRAI began the consultation process by issuing the consultation
note on 15th January, 2004. Based on the inputs received from the
stakeholders, TRAI made interim recommendation to the Government
on 23.2.2004 to suspend CAS for at least 3 months, in order to look
into various issues arising from the implementation of CAS.
Government suspended CAS till further orders on 27th February, 2004,
citing the grounds leading to such an action. The Madras High Court
however granted stay on the operation of the aforesaid notification
and CAS is currently under implementation in Chennai. The issue of
implementation of CAS in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata is subjudice.
TRAI carried the consultation process forward, with the issue of a
more detailed consultation paper titled “ Issues relating to Broadcasting
and Distribution of TV Channels ” on 20.4.2004. TRAI has now
furnished its final recommendations on 1st October, 2004. These
recommendations, inter alia , cover the following aspects:

16
— Direction of Regulatory Intervention.
— Consumer Choice.
— Pricing.
— Interconnection Agreement and Revenue Share.
—P romotion of Competition in the distribution of TV
Channels.
— Rationalisation of Licence Fee and Taxation.
— Advertisement.
— Regulatory Enforcement.
— Quality of Service.
Keeping in view the specific recommendation of TRAI on the issue
of the options for introducing addressability, the Ministry has sought
the views of all the State Governments on 12th October, 2004 followed
by reminders in the months of January and February, 2005. Some State
Governments like MP , Bihar, HP and Nagaland have furnished their
views. This issue was also slated for discussion by SIMCON (State
Information Minister’s Conference) on 18-19th February, 2005, which
has now been rescheduled on 15-16th April, 2005. Simultaneously, the
matter is being pursued with the remaining State Governments. It
needs to be pointed out that earlier when CAS was sought to be
implemented, the State Governments had also opposed its
implementation as a number of problems were encountered impinging
on the consumers’ interest. Therefore, the issues connected with the
implementation of CAS needs to be addressed in consultation with
the State Governments.
Thus, the Ministry is currently in the process of examination of
TRAI’s recommendations referred above. The Ministry proposes to have
consultation with all the stakeholders.
27. The Committee’s anxiety was to have the Conditional Access
System implemented in such a manner that it becomes consumer
friendly. By handing over the issue to the TRAI as an interim
regulator, the Government has made an effort to find a favourable
lasting solution acceptable to all the parties involved viz., the
Government, the Multi System Operators, the Cable Operators and
most importantly, the Consumers. Now, the Committee have been
informed that TRAI has made its final recommendations on
implementation of CAS, which are currently being examined by the

17
Ministry. In this regard, the Committee would like to impress upon
the Ministry to take an early decision on the issue by addressing
the genuine concerns of all parties, while protecting the interests of
consumers. The Committee may be kept informed of the initiatives
taken by the Ministry in this regard.

18
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Amended Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 2002, apart
from mandating viewing of pay channels through an addressable
system i.e. Conditional Access System, seeks to ensure that every
subscriber pays only for those pay channels they wish to watch and
receive a minimum number of free-to-air channels at a reasonable price.
The Committee notes that under this system of conditional access, for
viewing of pay channels subscribers would be required to install a Set
Top Box (STB).
Action Taken by Government
“The Ministry in their reply has agreed to the recommendation”.
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee is deeply concerned to note that even though the
CAS is to be rolled out within the next few days, yet many of the
important issues agitating the public and having financial implications
have not been resolved. Availability of Set Top Boxes at affordable
prices to the subscribers and its distribution are not clearly defined.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry in their reply has stated that:
“The implementation of CAS is being closely monitored by the
Implementation Committee, comprising representatives of Multi-
System Operators (MSOs), Broadcasters, Cable Operators etc. They
will also interact with the representatives of consumer protection
groups and take steps to address their concerns. The STBs will be
made available by the MSOs and broadcasters at reasonable and
affordable prices. The cost of STB ranges between Rs. 2500/- and
Rs. 3000/-. As per data furnished by the Customs and Central
Excise Authorities, 1,59,580/-STBs had been imported by MSOs/
Cable Operators as on 16.08.2003. The MSOs and the Cable
Operators have come out with different attractive schemes for

19
making the STBs available to the subscribers, i.e. through
installment/hire-purchase/outright purchase, loan schemes etc. or
on a refundable deposit plus nominal daily rental charges. The
cost to the subscribers would be affordable. Incable Net has, for
example announced an introductory offer of making available
Digital STBs to the customers at a rate of Re. 999/-+ nominal
daily rent of Rs. 1/-. Siti Cable and Hathway too will make
available STBs on similar lines at a refundable deposit and payment
of a nominal daily rental charges. The Cable Television Networks
(Amendment) Rules, 1994 have been amended by the Government
through issue of Notification of 6th June, 2003 which requires that
the cable operator shall make provisions for rent and security
deposits or refund thereof as well as warranty, repair and
maintenance in the manner notified by the Government. The
Government has also notified on 8th September, 2003 the manner
of making provision for rent, security deposit etc. in STBs. As per
the amended Rules, the cable operator will intimate to each cable
subscriber in writing and at least fifteen days before the
introduction of CAS, the various details of the STBs like payment
schemes, maximum time for refund of security deposit, maintenance
facility, maximum time for repair/replacement of the STB, period
of warranty etc. The cable operators have also been required to
furnish this information to the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting duly authenticated by the authorized signatory (copies
of these Notifications are available in Ministry’s website
www.mib.nic.in)”.
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
Further, in addition to anticipated high cost of the STB, its
inapplicability in case a subscriber shifts residence and switch over to
another MSO have not been resolved. The Ministry is now persuading
the MSOs to provide the STBs on returnable basis and fix rentals for
the same, even though there is no such provision in the Act. The
Committee also notes that though the MSOs/cable operators under
the Act can not force the consumer to procure any particular type of
STB, yet it is clear from the submission of the Ministry that the MSOs
would opt for costlier Digital STBs as they are more suitable to them.
It is also a matter of concern to the Committee the Ministry has not
been able to address the issue of installing multiple STBs for subscribers
homes having more then one TV set. It is also a matter of concern
that the Act or the notifications of the Ministry have not provided for
a complaint redressal mechanism to deal with consumers’ complaints
against cable operators/MSOs/Broadcasters. The Committee urges the

20
Ministry to look into all these aspects and resolve them in a given
time frame and ensure that interest of the TV viewers are well protected
otherwise the very objective of introduction of CAS to ensure quality
entertainment at affordable rates will be substantially frustrated creating
great confusion and inconvenience.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry in their reply has stated that:
“The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has already published
standards both for Analogue and Digital STBs and each and every
STB must conform to these prescribed standards. The technical
parameters of the STBs which will conform to the Indian standards,
as prescribed by the BIS will take into account the internationally
accepted standards. The Cable Television (Amendment) Rules, 2003
notified on 06.06.2003, inter-alia, provide that cable operator shall
make provisions for rent and security deposit or refund thereof as
well as warranty repair and maintenance in the manner notified
by the Government. Through issue of Notification dated
8th September, 2003, the Government has notified the manner of
making provision for rent, security deposit etc. in STBs. As per
the amended Rules, the cable operator will intimate to each cable
subscriber in writing and at least fifteen days before the
introduction of CAS, the various details of the STBs like payment
schemes, maximum time for refund of security deposit, maintenance
facility, maximum time for repair/replacement of the STB, period
of warranty etc. The cable operators have also been required to
furnish this information to the Ministry of I&B duly authenticated
by its authorized signatory (copy of Notification available in
Ministry’s website www.mib.nic.in). The Ministry has also through
advertisement in the leading dailies indicated the helpline numbers
of the MSOs as well as of the Ministry for complaint redressal
mechanism. Any violation of the provisions of Section 4A shall be
treated as a cognizable offence. Besides, in case of violation of the
provisions of the Cable Act/Rules, they are also at liberty to
approach the notified authorized officers as well as the Chairman
of the Inter Media Publicity Coordination Committee who have
been authorized to receive the complaints and interact with the
nodal officers concerned. During the course of discussion with the
MSOs, they had informed that they would prefer to go in for
digital STB since these are less susceptible to hacking and also
ensure better quality signals”.

21
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
The Committee feels that the Ministry should ensure that the MSOs
being the sole suppliers of the STBs, do not exploit the subscribers
with regard to availability, affordability and choice of the STBs. The
Ministry should ensure strict enforcement of the provisions of the Act
in this regard and that the STBs conform strictly to the standards
formulated by BIS and choice of STBs remain with the consumer.
The Ministry in their reply has stated that:
“As already pointed out, the STBs will be made available to the
subscribers by the cable operators only. An Implementation
Committee has been constituted consisting of the officers of the
Ministry of I&B for visiting the metros to have an on-the-spot
assessment of the demand of STBs, preparedness of the MSOs and
cable operators in the smooth roll-out of the CAS and also to
ensure that the quality of STBs is as per the standards prescribed
by the BIS. The Ministry has also amended the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Rules, 1994 through issue of Notification
dated 8th September, 2003 requiring the cable operator to intimate
to each cable subscriber in writing and at least fifteen days before
the introduction of CAS, the various details of the STBs like
payment schemes, maximum time for refund of security deposit,
maintenance facility, maximum time for repair/replacement of the
STB, period of warranty etc. The cable operators have also been
required to furnish this information to the Ministry of I&B duly
authenticated by its authorized signatory (copy of Notification
available in Ministry’s website www.mib.nic.in)”.
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
As regards pay channels the Committee desires that the Ministry
to ensure that the rates of pay channels are transparent, so as to avoid
bundling of channels by pay channels broadcasters and such rates be
notified to pubic as early as possible so that they can exercise their
choice whether or not to opt for STBs.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry in their reply has stated that:
“The Government has notified through issue of Notification dated
6th June, 2003 every cable operator to publicise the rate of
subscription for each individual pay channel provided by the cable

22
operator and discounts, if any offered on suscribing to a minimum
number of channels or more. It has further been provided that the
discounts so offered for subscribing to the minimum number of
channels or more shall not be such as to dilute/nullify the choice
of subscribing to individual channels. Besides, it has been stipulated
that the subscriber shall not be forced to buy more than the
channel(s) of his choice through the mechanism of discounted
pricing and by grouping of channels in such a way as to render
the choice of individual pay channels offered, an illusory one.
The Ministry has also amended the Cable Television Networks
(Regulation) Rules, 1994 through issue of Notification dated
8th September, 2003 requiring the cable operator to intimate to
each cable subscriber in writing and at least fifteen days before
the introduction of CAS, the various details of the STBs like
payment schemes, maximum time for refund of security deposit,
maintenance facility, maximum time for repair/replacement of the
STB, period of warranty etc. The cable operators have also been
required to furnish this information to the Ministry of I&B duly
authenticated by its authorized signatory (copies of these
Notifications available in the Ministry’s website www.mib.nic.in)”.

23
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Availability of Set Top Boxes
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40 & 42)
The Committee had noted that according to the Ministry’s estimates
only one-third of the Cable TV Subscribers would opt for CAS/Set
Top Boxes (STB), as the rest would be satisfied with the Free to Air
channels available within the basic tier. Therefore, the initial requirement
of STBs as estimated would only be 20 lakhs against the total
viewership of 56 lakhs in 4 metros. The Multi-System Operators (MSOs)
had assured the Ministry of having placed orders for import of 27
lakh STBs. The Committee noted that the contention was based upon
the guess work of the MSOs who had vested interests in the issue
and had not been independently verified by the Ministry through any
survey of its own. On the other hand, IBF had estimated that the
availability of STBs would only be to the tune of four to five percent
of the requirement and according to them, it would lead to a black
out of pay channels in the four metros. The Committee further noted
that there appeared to be no credible data available with the Ministry
as regards the arrival of STBs into the country, and it was after sensing
the serious concern of the Committee that the Ministry had assured to
monitor weekly arrival of STBs.
In view of the aforementioned, the Committee failed to share the
optimism of the Ministry that a smooth roll out of CAS would be
possible. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the Ministry
of I&B meticulously monitor the availability of STBs so as to avoid
any black out of pay channels and also make all out efforts to ensure
expeditious indigenous manufacture of STBs.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry, in its reply, has stated as follows:
“The Ministry has been constantly in touch with the Multi-System
Operators (MSOs) and the Ministry of Finance (Central Board of

25
Excise and Customs) to monitor the arrival of imported Set Top
Boxes (STB). As per the information furnished by the Central Board
of Excise and Customs (CBEC), as on 16th August, 2003, 159, 580
STBs had been imported. Experience has now shown that the
requirement of STBs will pick up only at a later stage. The initial
demand for STBs may not be as anticipated due to multifarious
factors (for e.g., in Chennai, with the implementation of the CAS
w.e.f 1.9.2003, the consumers appear to the satisfied with the free-
to-air channels being presently received for which no STB is
required and more so, some of the popular pay channels have
also switched over to free-to-air category) which has had the slow
of take of STBs. Therefore, the initial demand may be relatively at
a slow pace. Besides, in Mumbai and Kolkata, due to the ensuing
festival season on account of which the law enforcing officers are
being over stretched, the State Government has been apprehending
law and order problems if the CAS is implemented immediately .
However, as stated above, the effective implementation of the roll
out in the metros will depend on the co-operation that will be
extended by the State nodal authorities concerned, who are notified
as authorized officers under section 2 (a) of the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. This Ministry had, in fact,
convened a meeting of the State authorities of the four metros on
15th September to chalk out the further course of action on the
roll out of the addressability. During the course of deliberations, it
was suggested that State level Committees be set up by the State
Governments comprising representatives of the various
stakeholders/consumer groups besides the representatives of the
State and of this Ministry in order to facilitate smooth roll out of
the CAS. It was agreed, in principle, in the said meeting that the
recommendations of the Committee so set up after consideration
of the State Government, would be forwarded to this Ministry for
notifying the areas and dates for the roll out of the CAS in different
parts of the State.
Consequent to the above decision, the State Governments of the
four metros have recently been requested by this Ministry to set
up the Committee and to convene its meeting at the earliest”.
The Ministry, in their reply, have further stated:
“An Implementation Committee, comprising various stakeholders
has been set up for effective coordination and monitoring of
preparedness to implement Conditional Access System in the metro

26
cities w.e.f. 1.9.2003. In order to ensure the smooth roll-out of CAS
in the metros, the Government, in consultation with the MSOs has
staggered the implementation of the CAS in a phased zone wise
manner in the metros of Kolkata and Mumbai w.e.f. 1 September,
2003 instead of 15th July, 2003. As per the information furnished
by the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), as on 16th
August, 2003, 1,59,580 STBs had been imported. Moreover, orders
have also been placed by the MSOs for import of adequate quantity
of the same. Experience has now shown that the requirement of
STBs will pick up only at a later stage. The initial demand for
STBs may not be as anticipated due to multifarious factors (for
e.g., in Chennai, with the implementation of the CAS w.e.f. 1.9.2003,
the consumers appear to be satisfied with the Free-to-Air channels
being presently received for which no STB is required and more
so, some of the popular pay channels have also switched over to
free-to-air category) which has subscribed to the slow of take of
STBs. Therefore, the initial demand may be relatively at a slow
pace. Besides, in Mumbai and Kolkata, due to the ensuring festival
season on account of which the law enforcing officers are being
over stretched, the State Government has been apprehending law
and order problems if the CAS is implemented immediately.
In the meeting taken by the Secretary of this Ministry on
15th September, 2003 with the representatives of the four State
Governments, it was decided to set up State level Committees
consisting of representatives of Ministry and based on the
recommendations of the said Committee, after consideration with
the State Governments, the same would be forwarded to this
Ministry for notifying the fresh areas and date for the roll out of
the CAS in different parts of the State. Accordingly, the State
Governments of the four metros have been requested recently by
this Ministry to initiate appropriate further action in this regard”.
The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu in her letter dated
06.01.2004 addressed to the Union Minister of Information and
Broadcasting had mentioned, inter alia , as follows:
“With regard to Chennai, I would like to mention that though
CAS is under implementation since the 1st of September, 2003, it
has not proved to be popular. ……The common public are deprived
of the opportunity of viewing popular programmes on pay channels
due to the advent of set top boxes. However, in the absence of
any regulatory mechanism, the monthly rates fixed by broadcasters
are too high for the consumers to bear after investing in set top

27
boxes. The set top boxes are also highly priced and made available
on very rigid terms by Multi Service Operators. Thus the
introduction of set top boxes is not at all consumer friendly and
there seems to be no reason why the TV viewers of Chennai alone
should suffer consequences of CAS experiment in the whole of
India.
I therefore request you to withdraw CAS with immediate effect”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph Nos. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, & 14 of Chapter—I)
Indigenous manufacture of STBs
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The Committee were seriously concerned to find that the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting arbitrarily decided the cut off date
for introduction of Conditional Access System without making any
indepth study about the availability and price of Set Top Boxes. No
efforts were made to explore the possibilities of its indigenous
production even though the CAS is a simple device and many of the
public sector institutions could and were willing to manufacture them.
The import of Set Top Boxes in such a large number would result in
avoidable drain on the foreign exchange reserves of the country. Even
the modest estimates put the figure of 20 lakh Set Top Boxes which
would amount to outgo of Rs. 600 crores. Prudence required that after
assessing the genuine demand Government should explore possibilities
of indigenous manufacture in a given time frame.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary had assured the
Committee that the Ministry would get in touch with C-DAC, which
has the technology and capacity to manufacture STBs.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Notes, has stated as follows:
The observation made to the effect that, no efforts were made to
explore the possibilities of its indigenous production even though
the CAS is a simple device is denied. The Ministry has left no
stones unturned in its endeavour of exploring the possibilities of
indigenous manufacture. A series of meetings were held for the
purpose with the indigenous manufactures. It was, inter alia ,

28
indicated by the Consumer Electronic and T.V . Manufacturers’
Association (CETMA) that the indigenous industry would be able
to make the STBs available, in about sixty days from the date
CAS is implemented. Thus, the indigenous industry was, in fact,
not prepared fully to gear up to the situation.
It was decided to implement the CAS in a phased zone-wise
manner in the metros of Mumbai and Kolkata and at one go in
Chennal w.e.f. 1.9.2003, with the intention of using intervening
period to step up the preparedness on CAS, to educate the
consumers and to closely monitor the procurement and availability
of STBs. Officers of the Ministry of I&B have visited the metro
cities to assess the preparedness for CAS and have inter alia ,
observed that the demand of Set Top Boxes at the first stage would
be met by imports and through the procurement of STBs by MSOs/
cable operators is in progress. The representative of Consumer
Electronics and Television Manufactures’ Association (CETMA), who
represented the indigenous industry, were consulted at different
times. CETMA and some other manufacturers had made an appeal
for reduction of custom duty on the import of components, required
for manufacturers of Set Top Boxes (STBs). The Central Excise
duty of 16% on crucial components required in the manufacture
of Set Top Boxes indigenously has been dispensed with by the
Ministry of Finance so as to give a boost to the indigenous industry.
The reduction of customs duty on import of Set Top Boxes
from 50.8% to 5% is a temporary measure till such time the
indigenous industry is geared up fully to meet the demands of
the consumers”.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter—I)
Enhancing Minimum Number of Free-to-Air Channels
Recommendation (Para Nos. 46 & 47)
The Committee had noted that the task force had worked out
subscription rate of Rs. 72 for 60 channels on the basis of cost plus
reasonable profits of the cable operators and only marginal cost was
required if the channels were increased upto 80 or 90 channels. The
Committee failed to understand when the Free to Air broadcasters
were ready to provide upto 60 channels, and in the aftermath of
introduction of CAS, a large number of subscribers would opt for the
basic bouquet, then why the basic tier had been kept at 30 channels.

29
The Committee was also concerned that the consumer would have no
choice with regard to channels to be provided in the basic tier.
The Committee also urged the Ministry to reconsider the issue of
basic tier with a view to enhancing the number of the channels to be
made available. The Committee further urged the Ministry to ensure
that the subscriber was able to exercise choice in matters of channels
to be available within the basic tier and make suitable amendments in
the law, if required.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have submitted the
reply as follows:
“Pursuant to the recommendations of the Task Force, the
Government has, through issue of a Notification on 7th May 2003,
specified the minimum number of free-to-air channels to the
included in the package of channels forming the basic System tier,
as thirty, in the four metros. As per the study conducted by the
Cost Accounts Branch of the Ministry of Finance, it has been
worked out that the cost of the cable operator to show free-to-air
channels would be Rs. 71.33 for 60 channels and a very nominal
increase in cost is required, if the number of channels is increased
upto 80 or 90 channels. Though the number of free-to-air channels
may be 70 to 80 on an average in each metro, yet only 35 such
channels on an average were being shown. If a minimum number
was not prescribed, then the cable operators would not be bound
by any such requirement. In fact, free-to-air channels over and
above this number, provided by the cable operators will also be at
no extra cost. Some of the MSO, e.g. Incable have indicated that
they would be in a position to show nearly 70 free-to-air channels
while Siti Cable has indicated that they would be able to carry
60 free-to-air channels. Thus, the consumer would be benefited as
he would get a large number of free-to-air channels at a cost of
Rs. 72/- only (exclusive of local taxes). The package of channels
forming the basic System tier includes the compulsory transmission
of three Doordarshan channels notified under Section 8 of the Cable
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, the genres of
entertainment, news, sports, children’s programmes and music and
must be in English, Hindi and regional languages depending on
the availability of such channels in the metros”.

30
The Ministry in their reply have also stated that:
“The package of channels forming the basic System tier include
the compulsory transmission of three Doordarshan Channel notified
under section 8 of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act,
1995, the genres of entertainment, news, sports, children’s
programmes and music and must be in English, Hindi or regional
languages depending on the availability of such channels in the
Metros. Transmission of various channels in certain area through
cable networks depends on the popularity and demand of majority
of people, residing in such area. In fact, some of the MSO, e.g.
Incable have indicated that they would be in a position to show
nearly 70 free-to-air channels while Siticable have indicated that
they would be able to carry 6o free-to-air channels. Thus, the
consumer would be benefited as he would get a large number of
free-to-air channels at a cost of Rs. 72/- only (exclusive of local
taxes). Subscribers will thus have control over the content that the
being viewed in their homes”.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter-I)

31
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES ARE INTERIM IN NATURE
Implementation of Conditional Access System
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
Summing up their Original Report, the Committee had expressed
their considered view that Conditional Access System should be
implemented systematically in a given time frame by deferring the
date fixed, if necessary keeping in view the interests of the people
without disrupting telecast of quality programmes and dissemination
of information in any manner. In any case, cable subscribers should
not be put into worse position after introduction of CAS.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have responded as
follows:
“The Government has noted the concern expressed by the
Committee and therefore, after consultations with the MSOs decided
to implement the zone wise phased roll-out w.e.f. 1.9.2003 in the
metros of Kolkata and Mumbai and at one go at Chennai. In
Delhi the same will be implemented immediately after the ensuring
Assembly elections”.
Status notes from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
(a) Dated 15.06.2004 from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
The Ministry in their note dated 15 June, 2004 on Conditional
Access System have stated as follows:
“The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment, Act 2002
was passed by the Lok Sabha on 15.05.2002 and by the Rajya
Sabha on 10.12.2002.The Bill received the assent of the President
on 31.12.2002. The said amendment introduced a concept of
‘Addressability’ (CAS) in the Cable Television Network, which
could be mandated in specific area and from a specific date, to be

32
notified by the Government. Initially, it was introduced in the four
metros w.e.f.  15th July, 2003. Later, CAS was notified for
implementation w.e.f. 1st September, 2003 in the three metros in a
phased zone-wise manner and at one go in Chennai. Through a
notification issued on 29th August, 2003, the implementation of
CAS was, however, withdrawn in the NCT of Delhi. This was
challenged before the Delhi High Court, which quashed the said
notification by its order dated 04.12.03.
In a batch of writ petitions filed, through its order dated 26.12.2003,
the Delhi High Court had, inter alia , observed that” there has to
be some regulatory body in terms of the synopsis of the comments
which have been filed by Respondents to see the implementation”.
The High Court, therefore, directed that it be enlightened of the
steps taken in this direction before 05.04.2004.
On 9th January, 2004, the Central Government has notified the
‘broadcasting services and cable services’ to be Telecommunication
Systems under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
Act, 1997. The functions of the Authority are laid down in the
said Act. In addition, TRAI has been assigned additional functions,
through a separate notification. The T.R.A.I. began the examination
of all of the issues/constraint during the introduction of CAS in
the four metros. Meanwhile, the TRAI has, through its order issued
on 15th Jan. 2004, fixed the ceiling on charges payable by cable
subscribers to the cable operators; by cable operators to MSOs/
Broadcasters and by MSOs to Broadcasters (including their
authorised distribution agencies) to be those prevalent as on 26th
Dec. 2003 for both FTA and pay channels (for CAS and non-CAS
areas) until final determination by it on the various issues
concerning these charges.
On TRAI’s interim recommendation, the implementation of CAS
has been suspended in all the four metros w.e.f. 27th February,
2004 through the issue of a notification, which has been challenged
by some MSOs in various law Courts. The Chennai High Court
has, however, granted stay on the operation of a aforesaid
notification.
TRAI is in the process of examination of these issues, through a
consultative process with all the stake holders. A detailed
Consultation Paper has also been circulated by TRAI. Its final
recommendations are awaited”.

33
(b) From Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
The TRAI in its note dated 22 June, 2004 submitted the following
status of the CAS:
“The Government of India issued a Notification No. 39 dated 9th
January, 2004 under the proviso to clause (k) of sub-section (1) of
Section 2 of the TRAI Act, 1997 as amended, whereby the scope
of the expression ‘Telecommunication Services’ under the TRAI
Act was expanded to include the Broadcasting Services within the
purview of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. Through
an order on the same day, the Government of India, in exercise of
the powers under clause (d) of the sub-section (1) of the Section
11, added the following to TRAI’s functions:
(1) make recommendations regarding:
• the terms and conditions on which the “addressable
systems” shall be provided to customers
• the parameters for regulating maximum time for
advertisements in pay channels and other channels
(2) Specify standard norms for and periodicity of revision of rates
of pay channels, including interim measures.
TRAI issued a consultation note dated 15th January, 2004 on various
issues concerning the Cable TV Industry. After analyzing the
various issues raised in the consultation note and based on the
study of various inputs and comments received in response to the
consultation note, the TRAI forwarded interim recommendations
on 23.02.2004 that the CAS should be kept in abeyance for at least
three months. The Government of India, accepted the
recommendation and vide Notification No. S.O. 271(E) dated 27th
February, 2004 suspended the mandatory operation of CAS until
such date as may be notified by the Government.
The GOI notification dated 27.02.2004 was challenged in the Madras
High Court and an interim stay on the operation of this notification
was granted by Madras High Court on 04.03.2004. The Madras
stay order has delivered the final judgement and the interim stay
is made absolute. The position now on CAS is that it is operational
only in Chennai.
To take final view on CAS, TRAI based on the responses received
on the consultation note dated 15th January, 2004 and discussions

34
held with various stakeholders, issued a detailed Consultation Paper
on “The issues relating to Broadcasting and Distribution of TV
Channels” on 20 April, 2004. TRAI also held detailed discussion
with stakeholders in Chennai, Delhi and Mumbai. A detailed
workshop to educate consumers on CAS is being held in Mumbai
on 19.06.2004. TRAI has also constituted a Committee with
representatives of the State of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, West
Bengal and NCT of Delhi to assist TRAI in finalizing the
recommendation.
The TRAI is now in the process of finalisation of its
recommendations/regulations on Conditional Access System and
related issues and it is expected that these will be finalized in
July, 2004. Since TRAI has not finalized its views on CAS, it may
not be in position to provide any suggestions at this stage”.
(c) Dated 29.03.2005 from the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
In their note dated 29.03.2005 the Ministry has further stated as
under:
“The implementation of CAS was to be undertaken in Delhi,
Mumbai and Kolkata (Zone-wise) and Chennai w.e.f. 1.9.2003. The
Government subsequently de-notified the implementation of CAS
in Delhi through a notification dated 29.08.2003, which was later
quashed by the Delhi High Court on 4.12.2003, in a case filed by
M/s Jay Polychem & ors.
CAS was not implemented in Mumbai and Kolkata. The
Government of Maharashtra requested for postponement of the
implementation of CAS in Mumbai, citing a number of issues,
including additional burden on the common man in terms of
purchase of STBs. The West Bengal Government also highlighted
a number of issues impinging on the consumers’ interest.
The Multi-system Operators (MSOs)/Cable Operators in
Chennai city went ahead with its implementation w.e.f. 1.9.2003.
The Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, through her DO letter dated
6.1.2004, requested for withdrawal of CAS and suggested
introduction of such system in future after consultation with the
concerned State Government and keeping in mind the interest of
the consumers. It was also suggested that a regulatory mechanism
might be put in place to keep a check on the Broadcasters and
Multi Service Operators with adequate powers given to the State
Government.
The MSOs in Delhi decided to implement CAS in the notified
areas of Delhi w.e.f. 15th December, 2003, pursuant to Delhi High

35
Court Order dated 4.12.2003. The implementation of CAS in Delhi
witnessed partial implementation of CAS in many parts of the
notified area, apart from certain difficulties faced by the consumers
at large. In the initial stage, a petition was filed by Consumer
Coordination Council and Consumer Online Foundation before
Delhi High Court, seeking various reliefs, including the prayer for
withdrawal of implementation of CAS on account of consumers’
concerns like pricing of channels/STBs, monopoly of cable
operators, prescription of service quality parameters, etc. The Delhi
High Court, in its interim order dated 26.12.2003, declined to
restrain the Government from implementing CAS in Delhi and
decided also to review the situation after three months. The
aforesaid interim order also directed as under:
‘….. we desire that in this period of three months all the
loopholes, difficulties faced by the consumers, effect of the
implementation and problems, if any, arising out of the
implementation can be assessed and remedial measures be taken
in that regard.
There has to be some regulatory body in terms of the synopsis
of comments, which have been filed by the respondent see the
implementation. We would like the respondent to enlighten this
Court of the steps taken in this direction before the next date of
hearing…..”
Meanwhile, the Chief Minister of Delhi, through series of
correspondence, highlighted various issues arising from the
implementation, which are summarized below:
- Linkages between the broadcasters, MSOs, Cable Operators
and the consumers must be strengthened to focus on the
issues viz., product pricing, quality, availability and pricing
of pay channels etc. To sort out various distortions and to
remove mistrust among the various stakeholders, a manual
spelling out the details of the broadcasters and MSOs must
be indicated.
- Absence of regulatory body for dealing with the broadcasters
and MSOs.
- Lack of awareness among the consumers regarding the
benefits of CAS and the feeling among the consumers that
CAS is being imposed on them. The consumers perceive
that the additional financial burden of having to buy a set

36
top box and get limited pay channels is not of any
advantage in the present system of pricing of the channels
and the arrangements for purchase/sent [Sic. ‘Rent’] of STBs
is also unsatisfactory. The consumers are being made to
pay for seeing less.
- Need for re-consideration of the system of CAS from the
point of view of inadequacy of competition in local area
leading to virtual monopoly by the Cable Operators, which
is not only leading to current distortions but also likely to
aggravate as the backward linkages with the broadcasters
and MSOs do not seem to have been adequately worked
out in terms of pricing, availability of channels, etc.
Following the order of the High Court dated 26.12.2003 as
mentioned in para 3 above, the Government brought “Broadcasting
and Cable Services” within the ambit of TRAI Act on 9.1.2004. Pursuant
to Government’s notification dated 9.1.2004, TRAI became the Regulator
for broadcasting and cable services. Through another notification
dated 9.1.2004. TRAI was also assigned additional functions under
Section 11 (1) (d) of the said Act, which mandated TRAI to make
recommendations regarding terms and conditions on which the
“Addressable Systems” shall be provided to customers and the
parameters for regulating maximum time for advertisements in pay
channels as well as other channels. These additional functions were
assigned keeping in view the difficulties faced during the course of
implementation of CAS in four metro cities.
TRAI began the consultation process by issuing the consultation
note on 15th January, 2004. Based on the inputs received from the
stakeholders, TRAI made interim recommendation to the Government
on 23.2.2004 to suspend CAS for at least 3 months, in order to look
into various issues arising from the implementation of CAS.
Government suspended CAS till further orders on 27th February, 2004,
citing the grounds leading to such an action. The Madras High Court
however granted stay on the operation of the aforesaid notification
and CAS is currently under implementation in Chennai. The issue of
implementation of CAS in Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata is subjudice.
TRAI carried the consultation process forward, with the issue of a
more detailed consultation paper titled “Issues relating to Broadcasting
and Distribution of TV Channels” on 20.4.2004. TRAI has now furnished
its final recommendations on 1st October, 2004. These recommendations,
inter alia , cover the following aspects:
— Direction of Regulatory Intervention.

37
— Consumer Choice.
— Pricing.
— Interconnection Agreement and Revenue Share.
—P romotion of Competition in the distribution of TV
Channels.
— Rationalisation of Licence Fee and Taxation.
— Advertisement.
— Regulatory Enforcement.
— Quality of Service.
Keeping in view the specific recommendation of TRAI on the issue
of the options for introducing addressability, the Ministry has sought
the views of all the State Governments on 12th October, 2004 followed
by reminders in the months of January and February, 2005. Some State
Governments like MP , Bihar, HP and Nagaland have furnished their
views. This issue was also slated for discussion by SIMCON (State
Information Minister’s Conference) on 18-19th February, 2005, which
has now been rescheduled on 15-16th April, 2005. Simultaneously, the
matter is being pursued with the remaining State Governments. It
needs to be pointed out that earlier when CAS was sought to be
implemented, the State Governments had also opposed its
implementation as a number of problems were encountered impinging
on the consumers’ interest. Therefore, the issues connected with the
implementation of CAS needs to be addressed in consultation with
the State Governments.
Thus, the Ministry is currently in the process of examination of
TRAI’s recommendations referred above, The Ministry proposes to have
consultation with all the stakeholders.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see paragraph No. 27 of Chapter-I)
   N
EW D ELHI; M.M. PALLAM RAJU,
27 September, 2005 Chairman,
5 Asvina, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

38
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2005-2006)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6th September, 2005 in
Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri M.M. Pallam Raju— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Chaudhary
3. Shri Mani Cherenamei
4. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Vishnu Sai
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
Rajya Sabha
Nil
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri K.L. Arora — Under Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Tewari — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then, considered the Draft
Action Taken Report on “Conditional Access System (CAS)” and after
some deliberations the Draft Report was adopted.

39
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the
Draft Report and present the same to the House at a date and time
convenient to him.
4. The Committee then discussed the on-the-spot study visit
programme and finalized to visit Udaipur, Mumbai, Pune and Goa in
the first week of October, 2005 to discuss Rural Telephony, Universal
Service Obligation, Functioning of Doordarshan etc.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

40
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRD REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 39, 43, 44, 45, 48
Total: 5
Percentage: 45.45%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: 22.72%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.: 40, 41, 42, 46 & 47
Total: 5
Percentage: 45.45%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies are of interim nature:
Paragraph No.: 49
Total: 1
Percentage: 9.10%