REPORT
Introductory
The Information Technology Act was enacted in the year 2000 and
implemented w.e.f 17th October, 2000 to give a fillip to the growth
and usage of computers, internet and software in the country as well
as to provide a legal framework for the promotion of e-commerce and
e-transactions in the country. The Information Technology Act, 2000
which consist of 94 Sections in 13 Chapters and with Four Schedules
provides for a legal framework for evidentiary value of electronic record
and computer crimes which are of technological nature.
2. The salient features of the Information Technology Act, 2000 are
as follows:—
(i) Extends to the whole of India (Section 1)
(ii) Authentication of electronic records (Section 3)
(iii) Legal Framework for affixing Digital signature by use of
asymmetric crypto system and hash function (Section 3)
(iv) Legal recognition of electronic records (Section 4)
(v) Legal recognition of digital signatures (Section 5)
(vi) Retention of electronic record (Section 7)
(vii) Publication of Official Gazette in electronic form (Section 8)
(viii) Security procedure for electronic records and digital
signature (Section 14, 15, 16)
(ix) Licensing and Regulation of Certifying authorities for issuing
digital signature certificates (Section 17-42)
(x) Functions of Controller (Section 18)
(xi) Appointment of Certifying Authorities and Controller of
Certifying Authorities, including recognition of foreign
Certifying Authorities (Section 19)
(xii) Controller to act as repository of all digital signature
certificates (Section 20)
(xiii) Data Protection (Section 43 & 66)
(xiv) Various types of computer crimes defined and stringent
penalties provided under the Act (Section 43 and Section
66, 67, 72)

2
(xv) Appointment of Adjudicating officer for holding inquiries
under the Act (Section 46 & 47)
(xvi) Establishment of Cyber Appellate Tribunal under the Act
(Section 48-56)
(xvii) Appeal from order of Adjudicating Officer to Cyber
Appellate Tribunal and not to any Civil Court (Section 57)
(xviii) Appeal from order of Cyber Appellate Tribunal to High
Court (Section 62)
(xix) Interception of information from computer to computer
(Section 69)
(xx) Protection System (Section 70)
(xxi) Act to apply for offences or contraventions committed
outside India (Section 75)
(xxii) Network service providers not to be liable in certain cases
(Section 79)
(xxiii) Power of police officers and other officers to enter into any
public place and search and arrest without warrant
(Section 80)
(xxiv) Offences by the Companies (Section 85)
(xxv) Constitution of Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee who
will advice the Central Government and Controller
(Section 88)
3. The computer crimes in the Act are classified into two categories
i.e. civil penalties and criminal offences, the details of which are as
follows:—
Civil-Penalties Section
12
• Unauthorised access 43(a)
• Unauthorised copying, downloading and
extraction of files 43(b)
• Introduction of virus 43(c)
• Damage to Computer System and computer
Network 43(d)
• Disruption of computer, computer network 43(e)

3
12
• Denying authorised person access to computer 43(f)
• Providing assistance to any person to facilitate
unauthorized access to a computer 43(g)
• Charging the service availed by a person to
an account of another person by tampering
and manipulation of other computer 43(h)
• Failure to furnish information, return, etc. to
the Controller or Certifying Authority 44
Criminal offences Section
• Tampering with computer source documents
(i.e. listing of programmes) 65
• Hacking computer system 66(1)
• Electronic forgery i.e. affixing of false digital
signature, making false electronic record 74
• Electronic forgery for the purpose of cheating 74
• Electronic forgery for the purpose of harming
reputation 74
• Using as genuine a forged electronic record
• Publication for fraudulent purpose
• Offences and contravention by companies 85
• Unauthorised access to protected system 70
• Confiscation of computer, network, etc. 76
• Publication of information which is obscene in
electronic form 67
• Misrepresentation or suppressing of material
fact while obtaining any licence or digital
signature 71
• Breach of confidentiality and Privacy 72
• Publishing fake Digital Signature Certificate 73

4
4. The following are excluded from the purview of the Information
Technology Act, 2000:—
(i) Power of Attorney
(ii) Trust
(iii) Will, and
(iv) Any contract for the sale or the conveyance of immovable
property or any interest in such property.
5. Through the Information Technology Act, amendments have been
made in the following other Acts:—
(i) Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(Sections 3, 17, 22, 34, 35, 39, 47, 59, 65, 67, 73, 81, 85, 88,
90 & 131)
(ii) Indian Penal Code, 1860
(Sections 29, 167, 172, 173, 175, 192, 204, 463, 464, 466, 468,
469, 470, 471, 474, 476, & 477)
(iii) Bankers Book Evidence Act, 1891
(Section 2)
(iv) Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
[Section 58 (Sub-Section (2) Clause (P)]
6. The Information Technology Act, 2000 was enacted keeping in
view technology directions and scenario as it existed at that point of
time. As the technology has a habit of reinventing itself into cheaper
and more cost effective options, it becomes imperative to give a fresh
look to any technology driven law from time to time. Moreover, due
to overall increase in e-commerce, growth in outsourcing business,
new forms of transactions, new means of identification, consumers
concern, promotion of e-governance and other information technology
applications, technology neutrality from its present ‘technology specific’
form in consonance with development all over the world, security
practices and procedures for protection of Critical Information
infrastructure, emergence of new forms of computer misuse like child
pornography, video voyeurism, identity theft and e-commerce frauds
like phishing and online theft, rationalization of punishment in respect
of offences with reference to the Indian Penal code, a need was felt to
review the Indian Information Technology Act, 2000.
7. In that direction, an Expert Committee was set up in January,
2005 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of

5
Information Technology. The Expert Committee comprised various
representatives of the Government, legal experts in the areas of Cyber
Laws, Service Providers, representatives of IT Industry and apex
industry Associations, National Association for Software Companies
(NASSCOM) and Manufacturers Association of Information Technology
(MAIT). The mandate of the Expert Committee was to review the
provisions of the IT Act, 2000, to consider the feasibility of making the
Act technology neutral and recommend necessary amendments to that
effect, and to recommend suitable legislation for Data Protection under
the Act. In August, 2005, the Expert Committee submitted its report
which was based upon the interactive sessions with various interest
groups, deliberations of the Inter-Ministerial Group comprising
representatives of Ministries/Departments concerned with the subject
matter, presentation made by NASSCOM and feedback on the
publication of the report on the DIT website.
8. Now, the Government was left with two approaches i.e. either
to enact new and exclusive legislations or to amend the existing
legislations to encompass the new crimes and to enact specific
legislations to address the issues if amendments to the existent laws
do not suffice. As the second approach required minimum effort, the
Government preferred it by creating a few more provisions in the
Information Technology Act, 2000 and some supplementary provisions
by making amendments in other Acts such as the Indian Penal Code
and the Code of Criminal Procedures, 1973.
9. Thus, the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006
(Annexure I) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2006
and referred to this Committee for detailed examination and report. In
the process, the Committee received several write ups from and heard
the views/suggestions of numerous individuals, experts, associations,
industry representatives, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Ministry
of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) and the Department of
Information Technology. After considering and paying due attention to
such views/suggestions and clarifications, the Committee have
attempted in this Report to suggest and recommend certain measures
to be taken by the Government for making the law more effective and
comprehensive.
I. Self-Enabling and People Friendly Laws
10. Upon receipt of several suggestions from various quarters that
the Information Technology Act should be self-enabling instead of
leaving several provisions to be taken care of by the Indian Penal
Code (IPC), Criminal Penal Code (Cr. P .C.) etc. as computers did not

6
exist when these laws were formulated, the Committee desired to hear
the views of the Department of Information Technology. In reply, it
was stated that at the time of the drafting of the principal Act in 1998,
the experts were of the opinion that Acts like IPC, Cr. PC, were primary
and basic Acts which were very appropriately worded and had passed
the test of time. It was further stated that several other legislations
framed over the last fifty years used to refer to these basic Acts.
Moreover, the law enforcement agencies and the courts very well
understood these Acts and the issues involved therein.
11. The Committee, during the evidence, asked whether it would
not be very cumbersome to refer to a number of provisions contained
in other Acts when a cyber crime was committed. In response, the
Secretary, DIT stated:—
“In terms of definition, they are too closely linked. Say, if you talk
of impersonation, in our Act, we have to follow a similar set of
provisions, a similar set of definitions which are used in IPC.”
12. The Committee, then queried about the provisions contained
in the Bill to make the law people friendly in view of the major trend
the world over to have such comprehensive laws which would easily
be understood by the common man and having least dependence on
other laws. In reply, it was stated that the necessity of the people
friendly law was the main guiding principle before the Department in
suggesting appropriate provisions in the Information Technology
(Amendment) Bill, 2006.
13. It was further stated that in order to make the law more people
friendly, the punishments had been rationalized in some of the offences.
Such rationalization would help in the growth of the IT Industry and
check undue harassment of the ignorant citizens, not aware of the
nuances of cyber laws.
14. On the issue of bringing a self-enabling and people friendly
law instead of referring to the provisions contained in the other laws,
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) were of the
opinion that the legislative practice to criminalise certain acts or
omissions as an offence under the Indian Penal Code and in the
Information Technology Act, 2000 seemed to be working well and the
same should continue.
II. Cyber Crime and Cyber Terrorism
15. During the course of the examination of the Bill the Committee
were informed by some legal experts/industry representatives that the

7
proposed amendments did not put much focus on cyber crimes
including cyber terrorism and their coverage was not at all
commensurate with the requirement. Citing some example they stated
that although morphing was taking place across the country, yet there
was not a single direct provision under the proposed amendments to
make morphing a penal offence punishable with imprisonment and
fine. Similarly, there was no specific provision to make cyber terrorism
a punishable crime.
16. In the above context, the Committee desired to know from the
Department that whether it was not necessary for India, as a sovereign
nation, to enact a specific law making morphing, cyber terrorism and
other similar cyber crime penal offences punishable with the highest
fine and imprisonment. In reply, the Department stated that a provision
to make cyber terrorism a punishable crime with highest fine and
imprisonment similar to the lines of Section 121 and Section 120 B of
IPC might be considered, as the punishment with imprisonment of
either description for a term which might extend to 10 years is the
highest imprisonment terms given for any offence under the IT Act. It
was also stated that morphing would get covered in sub-clause (1) of
Sections 43 and 66.
17. In evidence the Committee asked whether ‘cyber terrorism’
has been defined anywhere in the IT Act, 2000 or in the proposed
amendments. The representative of the Department replied in the
negative.
III. Jurisdiction of the Law
18. In the context of the reported cyber offences committed outside
the country, the Committee attempted to look into the jurisdiction and
applicability of the IT Act, 2000. Section 1(2) of the Information
Technology Act says “It shall extend to the whole of India and save
as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to any offence or
contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person”.
Similarly, Section 75 provides as under:—
Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India-
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of this
Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention committed outside
India by any person irrespective of his nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), this Act shall apply to an
offence or contravention committed outside India by any person if the
act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a
computer, computer system or computer network located in India.

8
19. In the above context, while taking evidence of a legal expert
in cyber crimes, the Committee desired to know the effectiveness of
enforcing the above provision to the cyber crimes perpetrated abroad.
In reply the expert stated:—
“…….Section 75 brings some sanity to that approach by saying it
will only apply so long as it impacts a computer, a computer
system or a computer network that is physically located in India.
So, as a sovereign nation, there is nothing stopping India to enact
a law making the cyber terrorism as a specific offence punishable
with the highest imprisonment.”
20. Asked to state specifically how could the Indian State enforce
its will within the domain of another sovereign nation, the witness
replied that it was a practical problem. The Committee, then, asked
whether there was any practicable way out to deal with this tricky
situation. In reply, the witness stated that the USA was effectively
assuming jurisdiction over computers located outside its domain on
the ground that the activity of those computers impacted the computers
physically located in the USA. The witness further stated that another
option could be that India should join some of the global treaties like
Convention on Cyber Crime or Group 7. He added:—
“In the internet space there is one specific agency which is known
as International Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.
In short, it is known as ICANN. It is a global body that manages
internet. However, it has steered clear of any controversy of even
contributing towards cyber crime regulation. It does have a
Committee known as the Government Advisory Committee of
which India is already a Member.”
21. He summed up by stating that as ICANN/Government
Advisory Committee was dealing only with the policy issues concerning
internet and had not gone to the direction of regulating cyber crime
per se , the practical problem of ensuring the physical presence of the
alleged perpetrators of cyber crime from abroad still persisted.
22. In the above context, a representative of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) while deposing before the Committee stated that
apart from specific provisions in the Information Technology Act, there
was a basic law and Sections 3 and 4 of the Indian Penal Code could
take care of this eventuality.
23. Asked to state categorically the means by which the jurisdiction
of Indian laws could extend beyond its boundaries, the witness stated:—
“………jurisdiction is not an issue because even without specific
provisions in this statute, Sections 3 and 4 (of IPC), if interpreted

9
properly, have enough scope and cover wide area………….Now
the question is that if a New Zealander sitting in New Zealand
commits an offence under this law which impacts India, perhaps
on this point, I would say it is a bit tricky and we will have to
understand frankly.”
24. The Committee desired to know whether it would be
appropriate for India to have an extradition treaty especially in respect
of cyber crime or should there be a special International Convention
on cyber crime to make it obligatory on the part of the signatories to
extend mutual cooperation. In response, another representative of CBI
submitted that it was high time that India considered becoming
signatory to such an International Treaty/Convention, otherwise, it
would be extremely difficult to book the perpetrator of cyber crime
sitting abroad.
25. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) on
the issue of dealing with the cyber crimes perpetrated abroad but
impacting India, stated that Sub-Clause (a) of Clause 49 of the
Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 sought to insert sub-
section (3) in Section 4 of the Indian Penal Code so as to extend the
jurisdiction of the IPC to any person in any place without and beyond
India committing offence by targeting a computer resource located in
India. Further, the main thrust of Section 75 of the Information
Technology Act and the proposed sub-section (3) of Section 4 of IPC
was to criminalize those acts of persons which might have an impact
on any person and property situated in India.
26. Not convinced, the Committee asked whether the physical
presence of the alleged accused in a criminal prosecution was not
necessary. In reply the Legislative Department submitted that in a
criminal prosecution, the physical presence of the alleged accused was
necessary and the same might be ensured through international
cooperation and bilateral extradition treaties.
27. The Committee, then, decided to hear the views of the
Department of Information Technology on this perplexing issue. The
Department, in reply, stated that all the countries world over had
expanded the jurisdiction of their cyber laws to offences or
contraventions committed on their systems in the country from outside
the country. Following such a practice, India had also provided Section
75 in the Information Technology Act for offences or contraventions
committed on systems in India from outside the country. It was also
stated that the Governments all over the world had also taken recourse

10
to enter into treaties to bring to book the cyber criminal outside the
territorial jurisdiction of their country. India, on its part, had also made
efforts to enter bilateral agreements with foreign countries to deal with
the cyber crimes committed on Indian systems from foreign lands.
Cyber crime treaties were stated to be covered under the Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaties (MLATs). India is also a member of Cyber Crime
Technology Information Network System (CTINS) a Japanese
Government initiative for mutual exchange of information regarding
cyber crimes among the member countries which is, of course, advisory
in nature.
28. Asked to specify whether it would be prudent for India to
become a signatory to any unilateral International Treaty or Convention
on Cyber Crime to effectively implement the law, it was replied that
international cooperation in the form of mutual legal assistance would
require an international agreement or other similar arrangements such
as reciprocal legislation. It was further stated that such provisions,
whether multilateral or bilateral, would oblige authorities of the
contracting party to respond to the request for mutual legal assistance
in the agreed case. It would, therefore, be necessary for India also to
become a signatory to any international treaty or an international
convention on Cyber Crime on the mutually acceptable terms.
29. In response to a specific query with regard to the number of
countries with whom India had already entered into Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaties (MLATs), it was replied that with seventeen
countries India had already entered into such treaties, with five
countries treaties had already been signed but the same had yet to
come into force and with four countries treaties had already been
finalised/initiated but the same were awaiting signature.
30. The Committee asked how action could be taken against the
alleged perpetrator of cyber crime taking shelter in those countries
with which India did not have any extradition treaty. In reply, the
Secretary, DIT during evidence submitted:—
“There are provisions in the general laws. I assume we cannot go
beyond those general laws…………….whatever is to be done in
the light of cyber crime, it must be done within the framework of
what is being done for a general law and outside law.”
IV . Substitution of ‘digital signature’ by ‘electronic signature’ (Clause 2)
31. Clause 2 of the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006
says “In the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter in this Part

11
referred to as the principal Act), for the words “digital signature”
occurring in the Chapter, section, subsection and Clause referred to in
the Table below, the words “electronic signature” shall be substituted.
TABLE
S.No.     Chapter/section/sub-section/Clause
 1. Clause ( d), ( g), ( h) and ( zg) of section 2;
 2. Section 5 and its marginal heading;
 3. Marginal heading of section 6;
 4. Clauses ( a), ( b), ( c) and ( e) of section 10 and its marginal
heading;
 5. Heading of Chapter V;
 6. Clauses ( f) and ( g) of section 18;
 7. Sub-section ( 2) of section 19;
 8. Sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 21 and its marginal
heading;
 9. Sub-section ( 3) of section 25;
10. Clause ( c) of section 30;
11. Clauses ( a) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1) and sub-section( 2) of
section 34;
12. Heading of Chapter VII;
13. Section 35 and its marginal heading;
14. Section 64;
15. Section 71;
16. Sub-section ( 1) of section 73 and its marginal heading;
17. Section 74; and
18. Clauses ( d), (n) and ( o) of sub-section ( 2) of Section 87.
32. In the above context, the Committee received views from some
experts/associations that while the law talked about ‘electronic
signature’ in a couple of sections, in reality it was still continuing on
‘digital signature’. They opined that mere replacement of the term
‘digital signature’ by the words ‘electronic signature’, as proposed in
the Bill would not be enough and it had to be followed in spirit also.

12
33. One of the experts while tendering evidence before the
Committee submitted:—
“………… while the law has made it technologically very sound
by providing for electronic signatures, there is a slight
disconnect…….. what I am trying to say is that while we are
talking of big generic electronic signature which includes digital
signature and lot of other things, the law effectively continues to
be law of digital signatures.. Either we can use a language or we
can suggest to the Government for illustration, the digital signature
regime is detailed.”
34. Asked to state categorically how electronic signature could be
followed in letter and spirit, the witness replied that biometrics needed
to be an integral part of it.
35. On the issue of ‘electronic signature’ the Ministry of Law and
Justice (Legislative Department) have stated that Information Technology
Act, 2000 defines ‘electronic signatures’ to mean authentication of any
electronic record by a subscriber by means of the electronic technique
specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature. The
Information Technology Act, 2000 confers power on the Controller to
supervise the activities of the certifying authorities. Statutory provision
obliging certifying officers to follow certain procedure has also been
made in section 30 of the Act. The Information Technology Act, 2000
and the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 put emphasis
on reliable electronic signatures and enable the Central Government to
take necessary steps keeping in view the needs of emerging
technologies.
36. Taking cognizance of such views/suggestions the Committee
desired to be apprised of the views of the Department of Information
Technology for enforcing ‘electronic signature’ in letter and spirit. In
reply, it was stated that the United Nations had passed a resolution in
the year 2001 recommending that all States should give favourable
consideration to the Model Law on ‘Electronic Signatures’ when
enacting or revising there laws in view of the need for uniformity of
the law applicable to alternatives to paper based methods of
communication and storage of information.
37. The Department further stated that ‘digital signature’, as a
matter of fact, has been one of the types of ‘electronic signature’ and
based on the technologies available, ‘digital signature’ has been found
to be one of the most reliable methods for security, integrity and
authentication of electronic records. However, since the technology is

13
an ever-evolving process, there could be such technologies which could
be used as a reliable method for the electronic records. Moreover, as
it is difficult to amend the Act very frequently, and hence for future
technologies, a provision has been made for incorporating those
technologies for ‘electronic signatures’ under the proposed Second
Schedule of the Bill.
38. The Committee asked about the mechanism put in place to
guard against forgery of digital signatures. The representative of the
Department of Information Technology submitted in evidence:—
“……..there are two parts as far as the digital signature is concerned
……. One is the user experience and the other is, what is actually
happening at the back. These are two different parts, both of which
have been touched upon……… In Karnataka for example, the entire
land records have been digitalized. They are now securely stored;
there is no difficulty in verifying whether a particular record has
been signed by that particular Revenue Official. They have the
tracking, they use biometric………..they are well protected by all
these methodologies and there is no difficulty…… But when we
talk about translating that into a piece of paper and getting a
printout and then try to adopt the same value to the printed paper,
then there are issues.”
39. Asked to specify the mechanism developed to check tampering
or fraud of digital signature the representative of DIT replied:—
“Sir, in the digital records, which are stored, there is a mechanism
to audit it, which shows every change that has been made; who
has changed it; on what date it has been changed.”
V . Auditing of Electronic Records
40. Some of the industry representatives suggested to the
Committee that there should be an auditing of all the electronic records
in order to have legal sanctity as well as to check frauds that are
constantly occurring in corporate India. The representatives further
stated that it would also help in bringing far more clarity to the entire
regime of proof of electronic records.
41. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the
views of the Department of Information Technology, it was replied
that the suggestions made by the industry representatives seemed to
be appropriate. It was further stated that the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India had already started conducting Information Systems

14
Audit of Government Organisations, Departments, PSUs, Autonomous
Bodies and Authorities for evaluation of acquisition and installation of
the computer and computer systems, systems effectiveness, security,
economy, efficiency and data integrity and compliance of system related
activities with applicable laws, regulations and guidelines.
42. Asked to indicate the global practice relating to the auditing
of the electronic records, the Department replied that it would have
been better if the concerned industry representatives provided more
details regarding the global practices and standards in this regard as
there would be a need to setup process, practice and standards in line
with those prevailing in international arena for undertaking such audits.
43.  One of the representatives of the industry while tendering
evidence before the Committee stated in this regard that globally
auditing of electronics records was being done. He also stated that
there were two independent streams of auditing, one relating to the
information systems and the other to information security.
VI. Definition and Role of Intermediary & Liability of Network
Service Providers (Clauses 4 & 38)
44. Section 2 (w) of the principal Act defines “intermediary”, with
respect to any particular message as any person who on behalf of
another person receives, stores or transmits that message or provide
any service with respect to that message.
45. Clause 4. sub-Clause (F) of the Bill proposes to amend the
above definition of ‘intermediary’ as follows:—
“(w) “intermediary”, with respect to any particular electronic
records, means any person who on behalf of another person
receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service
with respect to that record and includes telecom service providers,
network service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting
service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-
auction sites, online-market places and cyber cafes, but does not
include body corporate referred to in section 43-A.
46. Further, Clause 38 of the Bill intends to substitute chapter XII
of the principal Act whereby the intermediaries will not be made liable
in certain cases. The said Clause reads as follows:—
“For Chapter XII of the principal Act, the following Chapters shall
be substituted, namely:—

15
CHAPTER XII
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2)
and (3), an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party
information, data, or communication link made available by him.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if—
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing
access to a communication system over which information
made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily
stored; or
(b) the intermediary does not—
(i) initiate the transaction,
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the
transmission.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if—
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted in the commission
of the unlawful act;
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by
the appropriate Government or its agency that any
information, data or communication link residing in or
connected to a computer resource controlled by the
intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the
intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable access
to that material on that resource without vitiating the
evidence in any manner.
(4) Intermediary shall observe such other guidelines as the Central
Government may prescribe in this behalf.
Explanation.—For this purpose of this section, the expression “third
party information” means any information dealt with by an
intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.”
***** ***** ***** *****
***** ***** ***** *****
***** ***** ***** *****

16
47. In the above contexts, some of the experts/industry
representatives were of the view that the definition of ‘intermediary’
was not clear which was bound to create a problem of interpretation
as to who would be an intermediary. So much so that under the
existing definition, even an employer would become an intermediary.
48. One of the experts/industry representatives who tendered
evidence before the Committee stated:—
“Currently the network service providers are made liable for all
third party content or data. In the proposed one, they are not
being made liable at all except when it is proved that they
conspired or abetted. How does the Government expect a normal
citizen to prove conspiracy or abetment by network service
provider?”
49. The Committee desired to hear the comments of the
Department of Information Technology on the above issue of properly
defining the terms ‘intermediary’ and its role. In reply, it was stated
that Section 79 of the principal Act had been revised in line with
those provided for similar provisions in the European Act. Sub-
section 4 of Section 79 of the Act has empowered the Central
Government to provide guidelines which may be observed by the
intermediary. These guidelines would vary from time to time keeping
in view the new services, technologies and circumstances. Accordingly,
guidelines were stated to be proposed for prescription through the
rule making powers.
50. Not convinced, the Committee asked during evidence what
actually constituted the ‘intermediary’. In reply, a representative of the
Department of IT stated that any service provider was an intermediary.
In that case, the Committee asked the rationale for intermediaries/
service, providers being not made liable in certain cases. In reply, the
representative of DIT stated:—
“………any of the service provider may not be knowing exactly
what their subscribers are doing. For what they are not knowing,
they should not be penalised. This is the provision being followed
worldwide.”
51. Asked to elaborate, the witness stated that the intermediaries
or service providers did not have anything to do with what was
passing or returned through their network. But if they selected or
changed or modified any content, then they would not be covered
under the instant Clause.

17
52. The Committee then desired to know the mechanism evolved
to establish conspiracy or abetment on the part of the intermediaries/
service providers. In reply, it was stated that the proposed Section 79
did not absolve the network service providers from civil liabilities. It
was also stated that the exemption of intermediaries from liability had
been clearly defined in the proposed sub-sections 2&3 of Section 79.
Further, sub-section 4 empowered the Government to prescribe
guidelines which were to be observed by the intermediaries.
53. The Committee asked whether the possibility of suing or
getting information from the service provider would cease to exist in
the eventuality of proposed Section 79 being put in place. In reply, it
was stated that any consumer could sue the network service providers
for civil liabilities.
54. During evidence, the Committee asked whether it would not
be extremely difficult to establish conspiracy or abetment in order to
sue the intermediaries/service providers. In reply, the representative
stated:—
“It becomes very difficult. Sir, you are right.”
55. The Committee then queried whether it would not be prudent
to cast some minimum obligation/responsibility upon the
intermediaries/service providers when their platform was being abused
for transmission of obscene and objectionable contents. In reply, a
representative of, DIT stated:—
“Unfortunately, at the discussion that we were having on the IT
Act, the general consensus was that the intermediary should not
be put under such an obligation. That is why, we have incorporated
it. Now that we have your views, I think we will really look at
it.”
56. When the Committee desired to have the views of the
Legislative Department as to whether they were satisfied with the
term ‘intermediary’ and its role as defined in the Bill, they just defined
the term as spelt out in the Bill and stated that there were many
aspects of intermediaries which would result in criminal liability and
Civil liability and the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006
provided for adequate safeguards in this regard.
57. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on the above issue
stated that the Bill sought to remove the ‘due diligence’ Clause for
claiming immunity by the intermediaries. Elaborating the ramifications,

18
they stated that in the real world some liabilities existed on the owner
of a premise for prevention of certain types of criminal offences
including sale of contraband goods. Absence of any such obligation
would, therefore, place the intermediaries such as online auction sites/
market places in a privileged position and disturb the equilibrium
with their counter part real life entities. Also, quite often the damages
caused to the victims through reckless activities in the cyber world
used to be immense and irreparable. The CBI, therefore, suggested
that the intermediaries should be divided into two classes i.e. online
Market Places/Auction sites, and the rest. Entities in the former class
of intermediaries should not be given immunity unless they proved
due diligence which might be exercised by them through technical
scrutiny of traffic data through filters for removing hate content,
obscene material, sale of contraband goods, etc.
58. Asked to comment on the rationale behind removing the words
‘due diligence’ and the above views/suggestions of the CBI, the
Department of Information Technology stated that the words ‘due
diligence’ were provided in section 79 of the IT Act as it was felt that
it had been adequately and properly defined by the Supreme Court of
India. However, while suggesting amendments to the IT Act, it was
felt that the provisions under Section 79 pertaining to exemption from
liability of network service provider should be explicitly defined.
Further, the sub-section 4 of Section 79 has empowered the Central
Government to provide certain guidelines which would be observed
by the network service providers. The words ‘due diligence’ could be
covered under those guidelines.
Obligations on body corporates
59. As regards casting obligation of paying damages through
compensation only on ‘body corporates’, it was clarified by the
Department that this issue was extensively debated by the Expert
Committee according to whom it was a well thought idea to restrict
the Section to the body corporates alone. The Department further stated
that once the system was put in place, it might be considered to
extend the Section to the individuals and persons.
60. A representative of the Department of Information Technology
supplemented in evidence:—
“…..But basically we are really to satisfy the customers who are
doing outsourcing or asking call centres to be operated and they
should be given protection. This would help business in general.
Most of such businesses or almost all the business is done only by
body corporate. To that extent, provision which is being made will
be adequate.”

19
61. Asked to state, whether the industry representatives were
consulted while fixing obligations on the body corporate, a
representative of the Department stated in evidence that NASSCOM
and other industry people were consulted on the issue.
VII. Contraventions of serious nature
(Clause 19)
62. Section 43 of the IT Act, 2000 reads as under:—
“Penalty for damage to computer, computer system, etc.—if any
person without permission of the owner or any other person who
is incharge of a computer, computer system or computer network—
(a) Accesses or secures access to such computer, computer
system or computer network;
(b) Downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base
or information from such computer, computer system or
computer network including information or data held or
stored in any removable storage medium;
(c) Introduces or causes to be introduced any computer
contaminant or computer virus into any computer, computer
system or computer network;
(d) Damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer
system or computer network, data, computer data base or
any other programmes residing in such computer, computer
system or computer network;
(e) Disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer
system or computer network;
(f) Denies or causes the denial of access to any person
authorized to access any computer, computer system or
computer network by any means;
(g) Provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to
a computer, computer system or computer network in
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or
regulations made thereunder;
(h) Charges the services availed of by a person to the account
of another person by tampering with or manipulating any
computer, computer system, or computer network,
he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation not
exceeding one crore rupees to the person so affected.”

20
63. Clause 19 of the IT (Amendment) Bill, 2006 proposes to amend
section 43 of the principal Act. The Clause reads as follows:—
“In section 43 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalty”, the word
“Compensation” shall be substituted;
(b) after Clause (h), the following Clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a
computer resource or diminishes its value or utility or affects
it injuriously by any means,”.
64. In the above context, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
opined that contraventions enumerated in Clauses (c) to (i) have been
serious in nature. They, therefore, suggested that while contraventions
enumerated in Clauses (a) & (b) of Section 43 might remain as
proposed, the contraventions enumerated in Clauses (c) to (i) may be
made punishable with imprisonment for 3 years and fine.
65. The Committee sought the views of the Department of
Information Technology in this regard. In reply, it was stated that the
contraventions listed in (c) of Section 43 were of civil nature where
damages were payable by way of compensation to a maximum extent
of rupees one crore. The contraventions have also been made criminal
offences in Section 66 of the Bill with imprisonment and fine.
VIII. Compensation for failure to protect data
(Clause 20)
66. Clause 20 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Section 43 A
regarding compensation for failure to protect data. The Clause reads:—
“After Section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘43A. Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling
any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource
which it owns, controls or operates, is negligent in implementing
and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such
body corporate shall be liable to pay damages by way of
compensation, not exceeding five crore rupees, to the person so
affected.

21
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “body corporate” means any company and includes a firm,
sole proprietorship or other association of individuals
engaged in commercial or professional activities;
(ii) “r easonable security practices and procedures” means
security practices and procedures designed to protect such
information from unauthorized access, damage, use,
modification, disclosure or impairment, as may be specified
in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified
in any law for the time being in force and in the absence
of such agreement or any law, such reasonable security
practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultations with such professional
bodies or associations as it may deem fit;
(iii) “sensitive personal data or information” means such personal
information as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with such professional bodies
or associations as it may deem fit.”
67. In the above context, the Committee received a number of
suggestions from individuals experts/industry representatives. The main
suggestions were as follows:—
(i) It should be clarified what would constitute ‘wrongful loss’
or ‘wrongful gain’ in all instances;
(ii) It should be extended to any situation when the body
corporate fails to maintain the reasonable security practices
and procedure;
(iii) The obligation to pay damages by way of compensation
should also extend to any person operating the information
alongwith the body corporate owning or controlling personal
information;
(iv) Some mechanism should be put in place by the means of
which the affected individual is informed about the breach
and other details;
(v) An empowering provision should be made in this Section
to authorize appropriate Self Regulatory Organisations
(SROs) to evolve proper approaches in order to foster a
healthy information security culture through education
backed by demonstrative enforcement.

22
(i) Wrongful loss or wrongful gain
68. In response to the above, the Department of Information
Technology stated that the words ‘wrongful loss’ or ‘wrongful gain’
have been provided in tune with the Indian Penal Code (IPC). These
terms have been well defined under Section 23 of the Indian Penal
Code. The Department also stated that Section ‘2’ of the principal Act
had provided for definition of ‘information’, ‘data’ and ‘computer’
which would be valid both for online and offline activities.
(ii) Quantum of damage through compensation
69. Taking cognizance of the amount of fine not exceeding
Rs. 5 crore, as prescribed in the proposed Section 43A, on body
corporates being negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable
security practices and procedures, the Committee desired to be apprised
of the rationale for fixing the damages by way of compensation at Rs.
5 crore. In reply, a representative of the Department submitted in
evidence:—
“………..a person who has committed a contravention, is liable to
pay compensation to a victim to the maximum of Rs. one crore in
the existing Section 43 of the Act. Now through Section 43A, it is
proposed to make the body corporate who acquires the data or
possess the data or process the data also liable, in case there is
any data theft. He needs to implement the best security practices
to protect the data from leakage. In case of any contravention, the
body corporate will have to pay rupees five crore.”
70. Appreciating the enhancement of damages from the originally
prescribed rupees one crore, the Committee specifically desired to know
how the figure of rupees five crore was arrived at especially in view
of, say, at least a thousand crore rupees flourishing IT industry. The
representative replied:—
“Sir, in fact, the figure of about Rs. 25 crore was suggested initially.
Then, I think, the industry said ‘now we should keep it low’.
Then Rs. 5 crore was kept there. This is the factual position.”
71. Expressing their concern, the Committee asked whether there
could be a concept of ‘cap’ on damages prescribed under the law. The
representative of the Department replied that no capping on damages
was intended. Rather a provision was being made that over and above
the amount of Rs. 5 crore, the Court could grant additional
compensation to the victim.

23
72. Asked to indicate the mechanism evolved for imposition of
the damage of rupees five crore, the representative of the Department
replied that first the victim would go to the Adjudicator, then to the
Cyber Tribunal and if still dissatisfied he could go to the High Court
and Supreme Court.
73. The Committee asked whether the entire process was not very
cumbersome. A representative of, DIT replied:—
“Sir, about implications under the Act, the Tribunal and the
Adjudicator can award at best Rs. 5 crore.”
74. He further submitted:—
“We shall immediately look into the views of the Members on the
enhancement and we will get back after consulting the industry.”
75. In this context, the Committee desired to have the views of
the industry about the basis in which they recommended to reduce
the fine to Rs. 5 crore from the original proposal of Rs. 25 crore. In
reply, one of the industry representatives submitted in evidence:—
“…………In not a single case in the last several years even one
rupee damage by way of compensation has been awarded in India.
That really erodes the confidence of the community and corporate
India on this so-called effective remedy of providing damages by
way of compensation.”
76. In a subsequent evidence, another industry representatives
supplemented:—
“……….the best deterrent is certainty of punishment and not
necessarily the extent which may be somewhat open
ended………with the little experience that we have seen if you
have very severe punishment, then in cases where the evidence is
not completely full proof, where it is somewhat circumstantial, the
court takes a view, quite rightly, of giving the benefit of doubt to
the defendant.”
77. They summed up by stating that Rs. 5 crore as prescribed
under the law seemed to be a sufficient deterrence.
78. Asked to indicate similar penalty provision that were being
followed in advanced countries, one of the industry representatives
submitted:—
“Sir, we have not greatly studied this point, but the contracts that
are entered into impose high penalty for any breach. They are all

24
subject to the jurisdiction of the Courts in other countries. So,
other countries have a history of awarding damages which our
Courts do not do. Considering that, it is a reasonable amount. But
we are not really experts in it.”
(iii)  Stolen Data—prosecution of recipient
79. A number of suggestions were received from various quarters
that a suitable provision should be incorporated in the Act to prosecute
the recipient of stolen data.
80. In the above context, when the Committee desired to have the
views of the Department of Information Technology, it was replied
that an appropriate provision in this regard might be considered for
incorporation in the Act.
81. The Legislative Department, when asked to furnish their
comments, stated that the provision for this purpose could be
considered favourably as there was no specific provision in the IT Act
which prescribed prosecution of persons receiving the stolen data.
(iv) Data Protection and Retention
82. Several suggestions were received from various industry
representatives that the proposed amendments have completely been
silent on data protection. The industry’s contention was that as there
was no adequate provision of data protection in India as compared to
the level of such protection available in Europe, the law here was
turning out to be a stronger anti-outsourcing legislation.
83. The representatives further submitted in evidence that the
enabling data protection provision should include ‘sensitive personal
data’ as defined by the European Union. Asked to distinguish between
‘personal data’ and ‘sensitive personal data’, an industry representative
stated that essentially it was derived from the European Union Data
protection directive which distinguished between ‘personal data’ and
‘sensitive personal data’. While ‘personal data’ has been defined in a
much more generic manner, ‘sensitive personal data’ has been
exhaustively defined as ‘personal data consisting of information as to
the racial or ethnic origin of the data subject, his political opinions,
his religious beliefs or other beliefs of a similar nature, whether he is
a member of the trade union, his physical or mental health or condition,
his sexual life, the commission or alleged commission by him or any
offence and proceeding for any offence committed or alleged to have
been committed by him, the disposal of such proceedings for the
sentence of any court in such proceedings.’

25
84. The industry representative summed up:—
“So, the point we are trying to make here is essentially that when
we are talking about sensitive personal data here and in the future
should we come up with the data protection legislation, then there
would be no inconsistency between what is brought about there
and what is brought about here.”
85. Some other experts/associations who deposed before the
Committee were of the opinion that ‘privacy’ as a concept, had not
been defined under the explanation or the definitional Clause or under
the proposed Section 72 in the manner expected. Asked to elaborate,
one such representative submitted during evidence that ‘privacy’ in
today’s context needed to be classified into two kinds i.e. ‘personal
privacy’ and ‘data privacy’.
86. On the issue of data protection, when the Committee desired
to have the views of the Legislative Department, they stated that in
the context of the protection of intellectual property rights, there is no
provision in the present Bill to protect the data. Copyrights and Patents
traditionally conferred property rights in “expression” and “invention”
respectively. Ideas and facts remained in public domain for all to draw
on and to innovate a new one. Data protection legislation confer
database rights over facts, business method and software patents. The
competing challenges are the property protection on data exclusivity
and demand for more areas in public domain so that creativity may
grow. These are hard policy options and legislative Department leaves
it to the administrative Ministry to take decision in the matter.
87. As regards data retention, the Legislative Department stated
that data retention was as important as data protection. Therefore, it
was highly desirable that the protected data should be retained for a
specified period. The retention of accurately recorded and retrievable
research data was of utmost importance for the progress of scientific
integrity. The investigator must have clearly defined responsibility for
recording, retaining, and storing research data. The data retention was
essential for following reasons:—
(a) In the interests of national security;
(b) For the purpose of preventing or detecting crime or of
preventing disorder;
(c) In the interests of the economic well-being of India;
(d) In the interests of public safety;

26
(e) For the purpose of protecting pubic health;
(f) For the purpose of assessing or collecting any tax, duty,
levy or other imposition, contribution or charge payable to
a Government department;
(g) For the purpose, in an emergency, of preventing death or
injury or any damage to a person’s physical or mental
health, or of mitigating any injury or damage to a person’s
physical or mental health.
88. The Legislative Department further stated that the Information
Technology Act, 2000 has only one section relating to retention of
electronic records  i.e.  Section 7 which provides that where any law
provides that document, record or information shall be retained for
any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have
been satisfied if such documents, records or information is retained in
the electronic form. the term ‘information’ is defined in the Act to
include data, text, images, sound, voice, codes, computer programme,
software and data bases or micro film or computer generated micro
fiche.
89. The Legislative Department concluded by stating that thus this
Section did not specify the period for which the data was to be retained
but provided that if any other Act provided for data retention for a
specific period then if the data was retained in electronic form that
requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied.
90. The Department of Information Technology agreed that it would
be appropriate to provide for an enabling data protection and retention
legislation. They also agreed to the proposal that ‘personal privacy’ or
‘individual identity privacy’ should find a place alongwith ‘data
privacy’.
IX. Amendment of Section 61 (Powers to Civil Courts)
(Clause 29)
91. Section 61 of the principal Act says “No Court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter
which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal constituted under this Act is empowered by or
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken
in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.”
92. Clause 29 of the Bill proposes to amend the above Section by
saying “Provided that the Court may exercise jurisdiction in any cases

27
where the claim for injury or damage suffered by any person exceeds
the maximum amount which can be awarded under this Chapter.”
93. In the above context, the industry representatives submitted to
the Committee that the circumstances under which the Civil Court’s
role would come into play should be clarified. They further suggested
that it should also be clarified whether the Civil court could restrict
the jurisdiction of the tribunal in the present case.
94. Asked to comment upon the above suggestions of the industry
representatives, the Department of Information Technology submitted
that it would be appropriate to suggest that the Adjudicating Officer
would transfer the cases, where the damages claimed have been more
than Rs. 5 crore, to an appropriate Court.
X. Quantum of Punishment
[(Clauses 31, 36, 37, 49 (e), 49 (h) and 51 (a)]
95. Clause 31 of the Bill proposes to amend sections 66, 67 &
67 A whereby the quantum of punishment for cyber crimes would be
reduced to two years and thereby be made non-cognisable.
96. Similarly, Clause 36 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Section
72A where offences would be made non-cognisable. Clause 37 intends
to substitute Section 77 & 78 of the principal Act by new Sections 77,
77(A), 77(B) and 78. As per the proposed Section 77(A), offences created
under Sections 66, 66A, 72 and 72 A would be made complaint offences.
97. Vide Clause 49 (e) of the Bill, Section 417A is proposed to be
incorporated in the IPC to criminalize cheating by using the electronic
signatures and password etc. However, this offence has been made
non-cognisable.
98. Likewise, vide Clause 49 (h) of the Bill, Section 502A of the
principal Act is proposed to be incorporated in the IPC to criminalize
invasion of privacy by imaging and transmission of private parts of
someone. This offence has also been made non-cognisable.
99. Moreover, Clause 51 (a) of the Bill proposes to add a new
Section 98D in Cr.P .C. vide which no court shall take cognizance of an
offence punishable under Sections 417A, 419A and 502 of IPC except
on complaint of the aggrieved. However, offences under 417A and 502
are proposed to be made non-cognisable.

28
100. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) while commenting
upon the aforesaid provisions suggested that offences under all the
above Sections should be made cognizable. Some industry
representatives were also of the same view.
101. T aking into consideration the above suggestions, the
Committee desired to know from the Department of Information
Technology the rationale for reducing the quantum of punishment
under various Sections, as enumerated above. In reply, it was stated
that to provide clarity in interpretation of the offences and damages,
the provisions of Section 66 have been expanded keeping the existing
provision pertaining to hacking. The contraventions in Section 43 have
been mapped as offences in Section 66. Attempts have been made to
rationalize the punishments in line with the Penal Code.
102. It was further stated that the growth and progress of the IT
industry has been because the Government has played only a
supportive role, and has consciously kept out of regulating the industry.
Similarly, the growth of the Internet and its utility has been because
it has been a completely uncontrolled medium. Moreover, the
Government is trying to enhance usage of PCs and the Internet, is
launching a massive e-Governance programme, and is working towards
bridging the digital divide. Except a handful of users, the majority
may be abysmally ignorant of the nuances of cyber laws. While penal
provisions are necessary to prevent flagrant abuse of the system, care
has to be taken that such provisions do not give occasion for
harassment of legitimate users and the common man. Such an approach
would only scare users, thereby defeating the efforts of the Government
to proliferate e-Governance and increase use of Information Technology
for better productivity. The Government might well lose the tremendous
advantage that they now enjoy in this field. Punishments have been
rationlised keeping these factors and the established norms of Indian
legal system in mind. It was felt that there should be a need to create
a balance between the Indian Penal code and IT Act, 2000.
103. The Department summed up by stating that attempts have
been made to rationalize the punishment of offences. The punishment
of three years in general as provided in the IT Act was made cognisable
and bailable. The whole idea of rationalizing the punishment was that
the person should be able to get a bail.
104. In evidence, raising the same issue the Committee asked about
the immediate provocation on the part of the Government to reconsider
its own earlier proposal of keeping the term of imprisonment at three
years. A representative of the Department submitted that the issue
was that people were not getting bails in the court of law.

29
105. Expressing their surprise the Committee asked whether the
Department was trying to be criminal friendly and desired to know
whether a provision could be incorporated whereby imprisonment of
three years could be made bailable in case of first offence and non-
bailable in subsequent offences. The representative of DIT replied:—
“We tried the Law Ministry. In the Circular, Schedule II of the Cr.
PC, they say it is not amendable. That is why the whole issue
came up there”.
106. When the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department)
were asked to give their opinion on the above issue, it was stated that
the penalty provisions as proposed under various Clauses seemed to
be adequate.
(i) Definition of terms ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’
   (Clause 31)
107. Clause 31 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 66 of the
principal Act by saying “If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently,
does any act referred to in Section 43, he shall be punishable…………”
The said Clause explains that the words ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’
shall have the meaning assigned to them in Sections 24 and 25
respectively of the Indian Penal Code.
108. In the above context, the Committee received suggestions to
the effect that merely going by the definition of the terms ‘dishonestly’
and ‘fraudulently’ as in the IPC might not be an appropriate way to
deal in the new law.
109. Asked to comment, the Department of Information Technology
stated that both the terms ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’ were being
used in reference of the crime. The existing definitions for these two
terms in IPC have been proposed to be used in the Information
Technology Act. Law Ministry has suggested that the definition for
terms like ‘fraudulently’ ‘dishonesty’ as appear in IPC should be
incorporated in the Information Technology Act so that any confusion,
as well different interpretation of these two terms  w.r.t. crime at any
point of time could be avoided by different courts in the country.
110. The Department further stated:—
“We would like to retain the definition of terms like ‘fraudulently’
and ‘dishonesty’ in line with IPC as the courts very well understand
interpretation of these definitions in reference of crimes and
offences”

30
111.  In evidence, the Committee asked whether some terms like
‘dishonestly’, fraudulently’, ‘impersonation’, while dealing in the cyber
process were not different from what was ordinarily understood in
the general penal law of the land. The Committee further desired to
know whether it would not be appropriate to define the above terms
in the IT Act itself. The Secretary, DIT replied:—
“Then the pronouncement of the courts would have to apply
slightly differently to the IT Act and slightly differently to the
IPC.”
(ii) Omission of the word ‘hacking’
112. Clause 31, while intending to amend Section 66 has proposed
to delete the word ‘hacking’. In this regard, the Committee received a
number of representations that there has been no rationale in deleting
the offence of hacking under Section 66 of the existing law as the
current provisions of that Section of the principal Act have been very
wide to fight newly emerging kinds of cyber crimes.
113. A representative of the industry while deposing before the
Committee stated in evidence:—
“………….If it is deleted or made extremely narrow by the
proposed Section 66(1) which is talking about dishonestly or
fraudulently doing the act, then the interest of corporate India
may not be appropriately met……………”
114. A retired Secretary, R&AW was also of the same view and
stated in evidence that the proposed amendment to delete ‘hacking’
would seriously affect the capability of the law enforcing agencies/
officers to bring to book the offenders violating the IT Act. He was,
therefore, of the view that ‘hacking’ should remain in its present form.
115. The Committee desired to hear the comments of the
Department of Information Technology on the above suggestions. In
reply, it was stated that the word ‘hacking’ was more a colloquial
word and would change over a period of time. It was further stated
that all features of ‘hacking’ have been adequately covered in Clauses
19 (Section 43) and 31 (Section 66).
116. In evidence, a representative of the Department of Information
Technology stated that all the features of hacking were there and only
the word ‘hacking’ was removed.

31
117. The Committee asked the need for removing the word
‘hacking’ which was already there in the Act. The representative of
the Department replied:—
“Sir, the reason is this. Earlier, the word ‘hacking’ appeared in
Section 66 as a criminal offence. Hacking is normally taken to be
a criminal offence. Now, since Section 43 A is more a civil kind of
thing there, we are mapping one-to-one Sections 43 and 66 together
and so we removed the word ‘hacking’ so that there is no seamless
mapping in both the Sections. Otherwise there is no reason.”
(iii)  Child Pornography
118. Clause 31 proposes to insert Section 67 A whereby punishment
has been provided for publishing or transmitting of material containing
sexually explicit act in electronic form.
119. In the above context, a non-official witness as well as the CBI
have been of the view that the proposed Section should be recast to
include ‘child pornography’ also and specific provisions should be
incorporated in this Section to criminalize child pornography in tune
with the laws prevailing in advanced democracies of the world as
well as Article 9 of the Council of Europe Convention on Cyber Crimes
which states as under:—
“Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as
may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its
domestic law, when committed intentionally and without right,
the following conduct:
(a) producing child pornography for the purpose of its
distribution through a computer system;
(b) offering or making available child pornography through a
computer system;
(c) distributing or transmitting child pornography through a
computer system;
(d) procuring child pornography through a computer system
for oneself or for another person;
(e) possessing child pornography in a computer system or on
a computer-data storage medium.
2. For the purpose of paragraph 1 above, the term “child
pornography” shall include pornographic material that visually
depicts:

32
(a) a minor engaged in sexually explicit conduct;
(b) a person appearing to be a minor engaged in sexually
explicit conduct;
(c) realistic images representing a minor engaged in sexually
explicit conduct.
3. For the purpose of paragraph 2 above, the term “minor” shall
include all persons under 18 years of age. A Party may, however,
require a lower age-limit, which shall be not less than 16 years.
4. Each Party may reserve the right not to apply, in whole or in
part, paragraphs 1, sub-paragraphs d. and e, and 2, sub-paragraphs
b. and c.
120. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Department of Information Technology in incorporating an express
provision on defining child pornography as suggested by the Expert
Committee, it was replied that a new Section 67A related to punishment
for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit
acts has been proposed as per which stringent provision has been
made relating to pornography in general and would also automatically
cover child pornography.
121. On the issue of criminalising child pornography and making
penal provision towards that, the Department stated that, the advice/
assistance in the Commission of Crime (Pornography) through offering
advice on information regarding the websites for facilitating any
possession or downloading illegal content might be considered an
offence.
122. The Department of Information Technology also agreed to a
suggestion that the pre-offence grooming i.e. the initial actions taken
by the offender to prepare the child for sexual relationships through
online enticement and distributing or showing pornography to a child
should also be made a criminal offence.
XI.  Powers of Interception
 (Clause 33)
123. Clause 33 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 69 of the
principal Act which deals with the power to issue directions for
interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through
any computer resource. Such powers of interception are proposed to
be vested with the Central Government and not with the State
Governments.

33
124. In the above context, CBI and some other non-official
witnesses were of the view that given the fact that ‘Public Order’ and
‘Police’ are State subjects as per Schedule VII of the Constitution and
in view of the proliferation of cyber crimes, it would be expedient to
confer powers of interception on the State Governments also in tune
with the provisions of the Indian Telegraphic Act, 1885.
125. They also suggested that interception should be allowed for
prevention of any cognisable offence in addition to the prescribed
grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India; security of State and
defence of India; friendly relations with foreign States and public order.
It has further been suggested that an emergency provision of
interception, as provided in Section 5(2) of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885,
should also be made in the IT Act, 2000.
126. T aking such views/suggestions into consideration, the
Committee desired to be apprised of the comments of the Department
of Information Technology. In reply it was stated that in case of
computer to computer/internet communication the information can be
accessed simultaneously from different points all over the country/
world. In such a scenario, interception of information at one point will
not prevent the access of such information from other points. For
example, if a State Government takes a decision to block a site/
information, it may be possible to do the same in a particular State
whereas the information can be accessed from other States or other
parts of the country. In such circumstances the very purpose of vesting
power of interception in State Government will be defeated. The power
of interception accordingly has been proposed to be vested with Central
Government.
127. The Committee pointed out in evidence that the investigating
agencies have invariably been working in the States as well. In such
a scenario, the Committee desired to know, how would the State
Governments be able to intercept e-mails without the powers to do
so. Responding to the query of the Committee, a representative of the
DIT stated that there were two issues involved  i.e.  one was blocking
which had to be done at the national level at gateways and the other
was interception which was done at the local level.
128. When it was made clear by the Committee that they were
not interested in the first issue and categorically desired to know if an
E-mail was to be intercepted in any State whether the concerned State
Government was empowered to do so. In reply, another representative
of DIT stated that there were five agencies which were authorised to

34
do so. He further stated that such interception was being done at the
‘gateway’ level and there was nothing called ‘Central’ level.
129. Asked to indicate the reasons for reluctance in incorporating
provisions similar to Section 5 (2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 in
order to empower the State Governments to intercept E-mails, the
representative of DIT submitted:-
“For E-mails, today it is being done.”
XII. Traffic Data
(Clause 36)
130. Clause 36 of the Bill intends to add a new Section 72-A
which would make service providers and intermediaries liable for
imprisonment upto two years and fine upto Rs. 5 lakh for disclosing
personal information of their subscribers without the subscribers consent
and with intent to cause injury or wrongful loss to the subscriber.
131. In this regard, the CBI while in general agreement with the
provisions of this Section, suggested that specific provision should be
made empowering the law enforcement agencies to call for information
(subscriber and log data) from the service providers and others in the
discharge of their official duties. They also suggested that the term
‘traffic data’ may be defined to include subscriber and log data on the
lines of Article 1 (d) of Council of Europe Convention on Cyber Crimes.
132. In the above context, the Committee desired to have the
response of the Department of Information Technology. In reply it was
stated that the word ‘traffic data’ has been used in “Convention of
Cyber Crime” brought out by European Commission. The ‘traffic data’
is defined as “any computer data relating to a communication by
means of a computer system, generated by a computer system that
formed a part in the chain of communication, indicating the
communication’s origin, destination, route, time, date, size, duration,
or type of underlying service”. The term ‘traffic data’ requires careful
examination. The online collection of data under the existing
technological protocols IPv4 used for internet connectivity do not
provide for such fields as defined in the definition of ‘traffic data’
directly. Any service provider needs to capture data online and process
it further for arriving at ‘traffic data’ indicating the communication’s
origin, destination, route, time, date, size, duration, or type of
underlying service. It is an involving and requires a backend processing.
Therefore, ‘traffic data’ cannot be stored online in real mode. It is,
therefore, not recommended that word ‘traffic data’ is used in the Act.

35
XIII. Compounding Offences
(Clause 37)
133. Clause 37 proposes to amend Section 77 and 78 of the
principal Act by virtue of which the proposed Section 77 A will render
offences under Sections 66, 66 A, 72 and 72 A compoundable.
134. The CBI suggested that offences under the above Sections
should not be made compoundable as cyber crimes under the said
Sections have been affecting the individuals besides causing irreparable
damages to the security and economy of the country.
135. Asked to comment upon the above suggestion, the
Department of Information Technology stated that compounding of
offences under Section 66, 72, 72 A has been in line with the concept
of “Plea-Bargaining” introduced recently by the Government. The
compounding of contraventions has been proposed in order to facilitate
litigants to settle disputes among themselves. This will lessen the
burden on the courts and help in speedy settlement of disputes.
136. The Committee asked whether a concerted attempt was not
being made to make offences less grave vis-a-vis the existing law, albeit
with the purported intention of promoting the IT industry. In reply, it
was stated that the provision of compounding offences would not
apply where the accused, by reason of his previous conviction, was
liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of different
kind for such offence.
XIV . Powers to investigate and omission of Section 80
(Clauses 37 & 39)
137. Clause 37 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 78. As per
this amendment, the power of investigation for a cognisable offence
would rest with an officer of the rank of a DSP and above. However,
for investigations of a non-cognisable offence, a police officer of any
rank can investigate but cannot arrest.
138. In the above context, the CBI submitted before the Committee
that as there was a scarcity of DSP level officers in the field who were
otherwise busy with law and order work, restricting the power of
investigation of cognisable offences to DSP level officers would cause
serious impediment in combating cyber crimes.
139. Echoing the same opinion, a retired Secretary (R&AW) while
tendering evidence before the Committee stated:—
“......we feel that this provision which says that only DSP can
investigate these cases goes against the spirit of treating all offences

36
on the same footing. The Criminal Procedure Code has laid down
a procedure for investigating cases. Even the murder case or a
rape case is investigated by a Station House Officer. So, why IT
cases cannot be investigated by him? We have a shortage of DSPs
in the Police Force. I am told that the CBI’s Cyber Wing has got
only two DSPs and the Delhi Police has only one. The number of
cases is going to be very large with the extension of IT culture.
So, is there a need to confine the investigation of cognisable offences
to the level of DSP?”
140. Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to omit Section 80 of the principal
Act. Under the existing provisions of the said Section, an officer not
below the rank of DSP is empowered to enter and search any public
place and arrest without warrant any person found therein who is
reasonably suspected of having committed or committing or about to
commit any offence under the Act.
141. In this regard, the CBI and some non-official witnesses
suggested that the existing Section 80 of the Act should be retained as
there was a lot of preventive utility of the said Section, especially for
search of cyber cafes widely used for communication by anti-national
elements. One of the industry representatives was also of the view
that it would make no sense to completely delete Section 80 of the
Act.
142. The Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
when asked whether it was desirable to empower officers of the rank
of DSP and above to investigate cognisable offences, stated that such
a provision was desirable since investigation of most of the computer
related offence needed a certain level of technological knowledge that
might not be available with all ranks of Police Officers.
143. The Committee then desired to know from the Department
of Information Technology the rationale for empowering police officers
of the rank of DSP and above to investigate cognisable offences under
Section 78 as well as the logic for deletion of Section 80 of the principal
Act. In reply, it was stated that the present Sections 78 and 80 were
being proposed to be merged in order to classify offences rationally as
cognisable and non-cognisable depending upon their severity and in
line with the IPC. It was further stated that it was felt desirable to
empower DSP level officers and above to investigate cognisable offences
since investigation of such offences needed a certain level of
technological knowledge that might not be available with all ranks
which would likely result in unnecessary harassment of legitimate users.
144. Replying to a query of the Committee in this regard a
representative of the DIT submitted during evidence that it was

37
considered to be a little more matured approach to empower DSP
level officers to investigate cognisable offences. The Committee asked
whether it would be desirable to entrust the DSPs, who were mostly
direct recruitees, with investigation of such complicated cases
overlooking the vastly experienced Inspectors. In reply, the Secretary,
DIT submitted:—
“One is general knowledge about Information Technology. But in
these cases, there has to be specialised knowledge, for instance,
knowledge of cyber law.”
145. The Secretary, DIT further stated that the Department believed
that higher officers in the police hierarchy would better understand
the nuances of cyber laws and in that context it was proposed that
the DSP level officers be given the power to investigate cognisable
offences.
146. Drawing the attention of the Department to a system evolved
in Tamil Nadu since last three years whereby all the engineering
colleges were to provide basic training courses in IT to all the lower
level officers including the policemen, the Committee asked whether a
similar system could be emulated nationwide in order to enable the
officers of Inspector level to handle IT related cases efficiently. The
Secretary, DIT replied:—
“We are thinking of doing training courses, as you said, as
in-service training courses.”
147. Referring to a note received from the Legislative Department
wherein it was mentioned that the IT related registered cases
nationwide rose from 68 in 2004 to 179 in 2005, the Committee pointed
out that the enhanced penetration of internet and proliferation of IT
into all sections of society and economy would invariably result in
increased number of cyber offences. In this regard, the Committee
asked whether it would not be prudent to impart training courses to
lower level police officers for aptly handling the growing number of
cyber crimes. In response, the representatives of the Department replied
in the affirmative.
XV . Miscellaneous
(a) Definition of computer network
148. Section 2(1) (j) of the IT Act, 2000 pertaining to the definition
of ‘computer network’ reads as follows:
“(j) “computer network” means the interconnection of one or more
computers through—
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line or other
communication media; and

38
(ii) terminals or a complex con sisting of two or more
interconnected computers whether or not the interconnection
is continuously maintained;”
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to substitute the existing clause (j) as
follows :—
“(j) “computer network” means the inter-connection of one or more
computers or computer systems through—
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, 1 wireless or
other communication media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more inter-
connected computers whether or not the inter-connection is
continuously maintained;”.
(b) Status of Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT – In)
149. The Department propose to add a new Section viz. Section
70A after Section 70 of the principal Act. The new Section reads as
follows:—
“70A. (I). The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-
In) shall serve as the national nodal agency in respect of Critical
Information Infrastructure for co-ordinating all actions relating to
information security practices, procedures, guidelines, incident
prevention, response and report.
(2). For the purposes of sub-section ( I), the Director of the Indian
Computer Emergency Response Team may call for information
pertaining to cyber security from the service providers,
intermediaries or any other person.
(3). Any person who fails to supply the information called for
under sub-section (2), shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
(4). The Director of the Indian Computer Emergency Response
Team may, by order, delegate his powers under this section to his
one or more subordinate officers not below the rank of Deputy
Secretary to the Government of India.”
(c) Adjudication Process
150. Section 43 provides for civil remedy under which damages
by way of compensation upto rupees one crore can be sought. But

39
such compensation claims can be filed not before a court of law but
before a statutory officer known as Adjudicating Officer.
151. In this context, the Committee were informed by some non-
official witnesses that by an executive order in 2003, the Government
have appointed the IT Secretaries in each State as Adjudicating Officers
and in the opinion of such witnesses the IT Secretaries have neither
the time nor the inclination/professional ability to deal with such
matters.
152. When the Committee desired to know the views of the
Department of Information Technology on the above observations, it
was replied that the executive order was issued by the Government
for appointing Secretaries dealing with Information Technology in
different States as Adjudicating Officers. This was done as Secretaries
dealing with Information Technology in their respective States have
knowledge of Information Technology and also have the necessary
knowledge of the court processes as they have acted as Sub-Divisional
Magistrates and District Magistrates. They have knowledge of Civil
procedures, Code of Criminal Procedures and are in a position to
provide a better citizen interface. The Adjudicating Officer in all the
States were stated to be in place and no complaint of any nature in
this regard was received in the Department.
153. During the course of the oral evidence a representative of
the Department further clarified:-
“Since Secretaries (IT) in different States are appointed as
Adjudicating Officers, they are largely having engineering
background. So, by an Executive Order Secretaries (IT) were
appointed as Adjudicating Officers and they were given powers of
Civil courts”.
154. When asked to clarify as to whether the present arrangement
of Secretary (IT) functioning as ex-officio Adjudicating Officer who
has judicial/quasi-judicial powers was legally correct, the witnesses
added:-
“.......the Ministry of Law was consulted. Now the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal is also in place. Justice R.C. Jain is functioning there. I
had a discussion with him a couple of months ago. We requested
him to study that and suggest if there are any changes to be
made. Your suggestion is well taken and we will talk to him once
again.”

40
(d) Setting up of Special Courts
155. During the course of the examination of the Bill, the
Committee were informed by some non-official witnesses that one of
the main reasons for the IT Act remaining ineffective in its present
form was the absence of Special Courts which could properly study
and hear cases pertaining to the complicated cyber issues.
156. Commenting upon the above observation, the Department of
Information Technology stated that the Adjudicating Officers with their
day-to-day experience with matters pertaining to Information
Technology were Special Courts in all practical purposes. It was further
stated that all proceedings before the Adjudicating Officer were deemed
to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of Section 193 and 228
of the Indian Penal code. The Adjudicating Officers have the powers
of the civil courts and the proceedings would deem to be a civil court
for the purposes of Section 345 and 346 of the Cr. P .C.
157. In the context of setting up of special courts to try cyber
crime cases, the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
stated that generally special courts were set up to relieve the burden
of ordinary courts, provide for speedy trial and punishment for
offences, deal with large number of cases of the similar nature or of
peculiar nature and facilitate expeditious investigation of such nature
of cases. They further stated that the number of cases registered under
the IT Act, 2000 was very limited i.e. 60 cases in 2003, 68 cases in
2004 and 179 cases in 2005 as per the statistics available with the
National Crime Records Bureau (Ministry of Home Affairs). The
Legislative Department were, therefore, of the opinion that in view of
the registration of limited number of cases under the IT Act, 2000, it
would be appropriate if the cases continued to be tried by the ordinary
courts.
(e) Spam
158. While examining the Information Technology (Amendment)
Bill, 2006, the Committee were apprised by the industry
representatives/legal experts that ‘spam’ or the issue of receiving
unwanted and unwarranted e-mails have not been addressed under
the proposed amendments.
159. In the above context, the Committee asked whether it would
not be prudent to incorporate specific provisions in the proposed law
to protect the e-mail account holders from unwarranted mails. In reply,
the Department of Information Technology stated that Sub-Section (b)

41
of Section 66 A and Clause (i) of Section 43 of the IT Act addressed
the issues pertaining to spam.
160. As a close scrutiny of the above said two Sections revealed
that the issue of spam had not been adequately covered, the Committee
in evidence desired to know how could the menace of spam be
appropriately tackled with. In response, the Secretary, DIT replied that
unwarranted e-mails could be generated from anywhere in the world.
(f) Powers of Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)
161. During the course of the examination of the Bill, suggestions
were received from various quarters that instead of vesting the powers
of ‘Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)’ vaguely in the Central
Government which has been otherwise so hard pressed, some concrete
safeguards should be found out.
162. Asked to comment on the above suggestion, the Department
of Information Technology stated that Controller of Certifying
Authorities had been assigned specific responsibility of licensing
certifying authorities for issue of digital signatures and regulate the
functioning of certifying authorities. Prescribing the best security
practices and procedures was not part of his responsibilities in the
principal Act. Central Government has been empowered to prescribe
such security practices in the principal Act. A provision has been co-
opted in Clause 20 and Central Government has been empowered
accordingly. The Department further stated that the Clause 33 provided
for substitution of new Section for Section 69 of the principal Act. The
power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption
of any information through computer resources were being proposed
to be provided to the Central Government. The provisions have been
in line with the guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
for interception of communication. The Department further stated that
the subject of encryption, interception and decryption required input
and coordination among different Ministries and Departments and it
was, thus, felt that the Central Government would be in a better
position to coordinate that rather than the Controller of Certifying
Authorities.
163. When the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department) were asked to give their comments on the issue, they
stated that there was no need to vest the powers of the Controller of
Certifying Authorities (CCA) in the Central Government.
164. The Committee then asked the Department of Information
Technology to respond to the above observation of the Legislative

42
Department. In reply, it was stated that the powers of the CCA were
limited to license the Certifying Authorities and supervise their
operation. Accordingly, Clause 12 has been proposed in the IT Bill to
amend Section 29 of the IT Act where the powers of the Controller
have been limited to the particular chapter only. The Department
further stated that as the power of interception was a larger issue, the
Central Government has been empowered to order for interception.
However, to avoid single point choking the Central Government may
provide the power to other agencies to deal with the cases in
emergency situations.
165. In evidence, the Committee desired to know what constituted
‘other agencies’. In reply, a representative of the Department stated
that it was difficult to visualise which agencies would come into picture
at what time due to technological requirements. The Secretary, DIT,
supplementing his colleague stated:—
“The present position is that it is being referred to the Department
of Telecommunications. But tomorrow we may have a system where
we have to require not only interception but also decryption. At
the moment, the present position is regarding the blocking.”
166. When the Committee desired to know the views of the
Controller of Certifying Authorities on the above issue, he submitted
in evidence:—
“As per the present Act, any request for blocking comes to the
Controller of Certifying Authority, and he examines it with the
advice of the agencies concerned as to whether a particular site is
to be blocked or not, or to be intercepted. Based on the inputs of
the advice that is given, an order is passed. It is given to the
Department of Telecommunications because they are the licensing
agencies for all ISPs to take necessary action. That is the procedure
which has been put and that procedure is being followed currently.”
(g) Electronic Fund Transfer
167. The Committee, during the course of the examination of the
IT (Amendment) Bill, 2006 received some suggestions from the industry
representatives that there was a need for specific provisions in the law
to legalise and enable electronic fund transfer. Similarly, the concept of
electronic payments, digital cash, electronic cash, electronic money or
other existing systems of electronic payments needed to be
appropriately recognised.

43
168. In this regard, the Legislative Department also expressed the
view that although electronic payment of money has been recognised
by IT Act, 2000, there was still a need for a separate Act for Electronic
Fund Transfer since certain transactional issues could not be covered
in the IT Act.
169. Asked to comment on the above suggestions, the Department
of Information Technology stated that a separate Act for Electronic
Fund Transfer needed to be drafted. Such an Act would address liability
issues between sender, receiver of the funds and the service provider
transmitting the funds. These are specialised issues and were not being
covered in the IT Act and, therefore, a separate Act called “EFT Act”
might be necessary. This approach was stated to have been adopted
world wide. It was also stated that the Reserve Bank of India had
been considering the formulation and legislation of such Electronic
Fund Act.
170. The Committee, during the oral evidence, desired to be
apprised of the latest position in this regard. In response, a
representative of the Department stated:—
“........we checked it up with the RBI with respect to the latest
details of Electronic Transfer Act. What they have said in writing
is that the Payment and Settlement System Bill is coming up for
approval in the next Parliament Session. Standing Committee have
already given its recommendations on this Bill. This Bill is
comprehensive. As such, no other separate Act will be necessary
for payment system. What it primarily means is the Payment and
Settlement Bill takes care of this element.”

44
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Introductory
1. The Committee note that the Information Technology Act
was enacted in the year 2000 and implemented with effect from
17 October, 2000. The Act which consists of 94 Sections and
4 Schedules was meant to provide a legal framework for promotion
of e-commerce and e-transactions and also give a fillip to growth
and usage of computers, software, internet, etc. The Act was also
enacted with a view to legalising evidentiary value of electronic
record and computer/cyber crimes which are of technical nature.
However, like any other technology driven law, the Act acquired
obsolescence and therefore a need was felt to amend it within six
years of its enactment primarily due to proliferation of IT into various
walks of life, phenomenal growth in outsourcing business, new
means of transactions and identifications, emergence of newer forms
of misuse of computers etc. Therefore, an Expert Committee headed
by the Secretary, Department of Information Technology, Government
of India was set up in January, 2005 in order to make the Act
technology neutral, to co-opt various provisions for data protection
and to update the Act as per changing scenario. The Expert
Committee submitted their Report in August, 2005. Based on the
recommendations of the Expert Committee, the Government have
sought to make changes in the IT Act through amendments to the
existing legislation. Thus, the Information Technology (Amendment)
Bill, 2006 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15.12.2006 and referred to
this Committee for detailed examination and report.
Self enabling and people friendly laws
2. The IT Act, 2000 draws sustenance in respect of several
provisions from various sources like the Indian Penal Code (IPC),
1860, the Criminal Penal Code (Cr. P .C.), the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, the Bankers Book Evidence Act, 1891, Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 etc. Today, information technology has reduced the world
to a global village. The law pertaining to IT should, therefore, be
self containing and easily comprehensible to the global village
community. The Committee, however, regret to note that the
Government have not acknowledged this underlying principle despite
the experience gained in about seven years in the administration of
the IT Law and no effort has been made to bring a new and exclusive

45
legislation. What has been attempted is to go for a ‘short cut route’
by making certain changes in the existing legislation and the other
relied upon Acts. Justifying this, the representatives of DIT have
maintained that the experts who were engaged while drafting the
Bill have been of the opinion that IPC and Cr. P .C. from which the
principal Act of 2000 draws sustenance in respect of several
provisions, have stood the test of time. The Committee feel that to
the extent of their local applicability these are very appropriately
worded in the primary and basic Acts. However, when laws
pertaining to information technology are taken into consideration,
then the connotations change drastically. The Committee are of the
view that the IT laws for their universal application, should be self-
enabling and comprehensive so that a mere reading of the relevant
clause is sufficient for any agency/individual concerned sitting
anywhere in the world to comprehend the import and culpability.
The Committee consider it unfortunate that the Government did not
choose to bring a new and exclusive Bill in order to make the IT
Law very comprehensive, self enabling and people friendly which
undoubtedly would have been more effective in enforcement.
Cyber Crime and Cyber Terrorism
3. During the course of the examination of the IT (Amendment)
Bill, 2006, the Committee’s attention was drawn towards inadequate
focus on and coverage of cyber crime including cyber terrorism in
the proposed law. The Committee are really surprised to observe
that the term ‘cyber terrorism’ has not been defined anywhere in
the IT Act, 2000 or in the proposed amendments. The Department’s
statement that it may be considered to incorporate provisions to
make cyber terrorism a punishable crime with highest fine and
imprisonment in line with Sections 120 B and 121 of IPC does not
impress the Committee as the centuries old Indian Penal Code may
not be all encompassing to include different types of emerging cyber
crimes including cyber terrorism. Moreover, in view of the fact that
cyber crimes intend to create havoc and destablise the society and
cyber terrorism is equivalent to waging war against the nation, the
Committee strongly recommend that adequate, stringent, specific and
self enabling provisions should be incorporated in the IT Act itself
to deal with such offences.
Jurisdiction of Law
4. Another disquieting aspect that has come to the notice of the
Committee relate to the jurisdiction and applicability of the Act for

46
dealing with cyber offences committed outside India. This aspect is
presently included in Section 1(2) and Section 75 of the IT Act,
2000. The Committee’s examination revealed that the provisions
contained in these two Sections in their present form seem to be
inadequate for the country to enforce its will in cases where cyber
crimes are committed against India from outside the geographical
boundaries of the country. During examination this disturbing
inadequacy was candidly admitted by various stakeholders including
legal experts, industry representatives, Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI), Legislative Department and the Department of Information
Technology (DIT). However, the Committee have been informed by
the official witnesses during evidence that Sections 3 and 4 of the
Indian Penal Code (IPC), if interpreted properly, have enough scope
and can cover wider areas. It has also been informed that the
Government have signed Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs)
with 17 countries till date which will cover cyber crimes. Further,
similar Treaties with nine other countries have been stated to be
under process. The Committee cannot remain contented with this.
After examining the issue in its wider implications, the Committee
are of the view that the relevant general laws in the IPC are time
consuming procedures and hence not sufficient to deal with situations
of cyber crimes committed against the country from foreign locations.
The cyber crimes committed in virtual space have no boundaries
and therefore, the legal framework to tackle such confine less
incidents ought to be so suitably modified that the impediments of
regions/geographical boundaries are not taken advantage of to delay
or deny justice. Moreover, the cyber crimes including cyber terrorism
are wanton acts committed in split second from remote places and
hence they require to be tackled with the same speed and a justice
delivery system that is as quick. Therefore, instead of taking recourse
to piecemeal solution of entering into MLATs with one country at a
time, the Committee would prefer that India should be a signatory
to an omnibus International Convention on the issue so that cyber
crimes committed against any country from anywhere are tackled
with utmost promptitude and without the technicalities of citizenship,
etc. coming into play. The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that
India as one of the world leaders in information technology, ought
to take initiative in materialising such an International Convention
against cyber crimes/cyber terrorism under the auspices of United
Nations. Accordingly, they desire that the Department should
immediately prepare a roadmap in consultation/coordination with
the Ministries of External Affairs, Law and Justice and Home Affairs
for a suitable International Convention. The Government may, in
the meantime, utilize their diplomatic channels for creating a

47
movement in favour of the Convention in the comity of nations.
The Committee are hopeful that such an initiative by the Government
of India under the auspices of United Nations will tackle the twin
scourge of cyber crimes and cyber terrorism to a substantial extent
universally and spare the Government from taking recourse to adhoc
approaches/arrangements to counter a perennial problem. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this
matter.
Substitution of ‘digital signature’ by ‘electronic signature’
(Clause 2)
5. The Committee note that pursuant to a resolution passed by
the United Nations in the year 2001 recommending that all the States
should give favourable consideration to the Model Law on ‘Electronic
Signatures’ when enacting or revising their laws, the Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 vide Clause 2 proposes to
substitute the words ‘digital signature’, wherever occurring in the
principal Act, by the words ‘electronic signature’. The Committee
also find that ‘ digital signature’, in fact, is one of the types of
‘electronic signature’ and is considered to be one of the most reliable
methods for security, integrity and authentication of electronic records.
However, in view of the difficulty to amend the Act very frequently
and keeping in mind the ever-evolving technological developments,
a need has been felt to substitute ‘digital signature’ by the all
encompassing term ‘electronic signature’. The Committee feel that it
is a step in right direction to put emphasis on reliable electronic
signature as it would enable the Central Government to take steps
commensurate with the needs of emerging technologies. Although
some mechanism has been stated to be put in place to guard against
forgery of digital signature, yet the Committee desire that in view
of the immense importance of digital signature being a better
alternative to paper based methods of communication and storage of
information, awareness programmes should be resorted to, in
association with the industry, to educate the citizens on the possible
misuse/abuse of digital signature.
6. The Committee also desire that in order to facilitate
implementation of the ambitious National e-Governance Plan (NEGP)
with active public participation, the Department should make earnest
endeavors to make digital records available to the general public in
people friendly and easily accessible formats. In view of the extant
socio-economic milieu, the Committee desire that the affordability
factor should be taken into consideration while making digital
records available to the common man.

48
Auditing of Electronic Records
7. The Committee note that according to the representatives of
the industry auditing of electronic records is desirable as per the
global practice to provide some legal sanctity to these records and
check frauds that are constantly occurring in corporate India. The
DIT, while concurring with the appropriateness of the suggestion,
have regrettably passed on the onus to the industry to find out
more details regarding the global practices and standards in this
regard. The Committee disapprove such an attitude of the nodal
Department as they themselves should have done all the spade work
in this regard. However, after interaction with the industry
representatives, the Committee feel that auditing of electronic records
is a pressing need in the present scenario when more and more data
and records are not only being generated digitally but even the
existing ones are being digitalised for excellent retention value and
easy storage and retrieval. During the course of the examination, the
Committee could comprehend that even DIT are not fully clear about
the status of digitally generated records, albeit they being official
government documents. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
suitable clause be inserted in the Bill to make auditing of electronic
records mandatory so that electronic records both in terms of
information system and information security are accorded clarity,
authenticity and legal sanctity.
Definition and role of Intermediary and liability of network service
providers
(Clause 4 and Clause 38)
8. Section 2 (w) of the IT Act defines ‘intermediary’ with respect
to any particular message as any person who on behalf of any other
person receives, stores or transmits that message or provide any
service with respect to that message. The Committee note that
Clause 4 sub-clause (F) of the Bill now seeks to define the term
‘intermediary’ as any person who on behalf of another person
receives, stores or transmits electronic records or provides any service
with respect to that record and includes telecom service providers,
network service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting
service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online auction
sites, online market places and cyber cafes. It also seeks to explicitly
exclude ‘body corporate’ as referred to in Section 43(A) of the
principal Act as an intermediary. The Committee also find that Clause
38 of the Bill proposes to substitute the entire Chapter XII of the
principal Act whereby the intermediaries are absolved of liability in

49
certain cases. In some other situations, the culpability of the
intermediaries has been fixed. To exercise further control over the
intermediaries, Clause 38 also stipulates that they shall observe such
other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in the
matter under sub-section 4 of Section 79. After carefully going
through the various proposals, the Committee are constrained to point
out that the definition and role of intermediaries sought to be made
through the amendments are not very clear, particularly with regard
to the exclusion of body corporate referred to in Section 43 (A) of
the Bill. They, therefore, desire that the Department should reexamine
Clause 4 (F) of the Bill so that there is no scope for ambiguity
while interpreting the definition and role of the intermediaries.
9. The Committee observe that under the existing provision of
the IT Act, 2000 the network service providers are made liable for
all third party content or data. But under the proposed amendments,
the intermediaries/service providers shall not be liable for any third
party information data, or communication link made available by
them, except when it is proved that they have conspired or abetted
in the commission of the unlawful act. The Department’s reasoning
for not making the intermediaries/service providers liable in certain
cases is that a general consensus was arrived at, while discussions
were going on the amendments to the IT Act, to the effect that the
intermediaries/service providers may not be knowing what their
subscribers are doing and hence they should not be penalised. The
Committee do not agree with this. What is relevant here is that
when their platform is abused for transmission of allegedly obscene
and objectionable contents, the intermediaries/service providers
should not be absolved of responsibility. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a definite obligation should be cast upon the
intermediaries/service providers in view of the immense and
irreparable damages caused to the victims through reckless activities
that are undertaken in the cyber space by using the service providers’
platform. Casting such an obligation seems imperative, more so when
it is very difficult to establish conspiracy or abetment on the part of
the intermediaries/service providers, as also conceded by the
Department.
10. What has caused further concern to the Committee, in the
above context, is that the Bill proposes to delete the words ‘due
diligence’ as has been existing in Section 79 of the principal Act.
The Department’s logic for the proposed removal of the words ‘due
diligence’ is the intention to explicitly define the provisions under
Section 79 pertaining to exemption from liability of network service

50
providers. The Department have further contended that the words
‘due diligence’ would be covered under the guidelines which the
Central Government can issue under sub-section 4 of Section 79 of
the principal Act. The Committee do not accept the reasoning of the
Department as they feel that removing an enabling provision which
already exists in the principal Act and leaving it to be taken care of
by the possible guidelines makes no sense. They are in agreement
with the opinion of some of the investigating agencies that absence
of any obligation to exercise ‘due diligence’ would place some of
the intermediaries like online auction sites/market places in an
uncalled for privileged position thereby disturbing the equilibrium
with similar entities that exist in the offline world. The Committee
also feel that if the intermediaries can block / eliminate the alleged
objectionable and obscene contents with the help of technical
mechanisms like filters and inbuilt storage intelligence, then they
should invariably do it. The Committee are of the firm opinion that
if explicit provisions about blocking of objectionable material/
information through various means are not codified, expecting self-
regulation from the intermediaries, who basically work for
commercial gains, will just remain a pipedream. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the words ‘due diligence’ should be
reinstated and made a pre-requisite for giving immunity to
intermediaries like online market places and online auction sites.
Contraventions of serious nature
(Clause 19)
11. Section 43 of the IT Act, 2000 provides for payment of
compensation not exceeding rupees one crore as penalty for damages
to computer, computer system, etc. It enlists eight situations under
Clauses (a) to (h) where the damages are liable to be paid. The
Committee note that the amending Bill proposes that the marginal
heading of Section 43 be changed from ‘Penalty’ to ‘Compensation’.
An additional Clause [(i)] relating to destruction/alteration, etc. of
information in a computer resource has also been added. While
agreeing with the additional Clause, the Committee tend to share
the apprehensions of some of the investigating agencies regarding
gravity of contraventions enumerated in Clauses (c) to (i). These
contraventions are of serious nature and may have calamitous
consequences in many cases, more so where Intellectual Property
Right (IPR) or related aspects and security matters are involved. They,
therefore, feel that merely a compensation not exceeding one crore
rupees may not suffice. The Committee, therefore, desire that Clauses
(c) to (i) of Section 43 be made cognizable offences punishable with

51
three years imprisonment and fine. Furthermore, the contraventions
under Clauses (c) to (i) ought to invite a fine substantially greater
than one crore rupees as a detriment. In any case, the quantum of
fine is qualified by the word ‘not exceeding’. As regards
contraventions under Clauses (a) and (b) the extant compensation
may be retained. The side heading of amended Clause 43 may,
therefore, be retained as in the principal Act.
Compensation for failure to protect data
(Clause – 20)
12. The Committee note that under the proposed new Section 43A,
obligation is cast upon ‘body corporate’ for paying damages through
compensation. The industry representatives are of the view that the
obligation to pay damages by way of compensation should also
extend to any person operating the information alongwith the body
corporate owning or controlling personal information. According to
the Department, the issue was extensively debated by the Expert
Committee in consultation with industry representatives like
NASSCOM and then it was decided to restrict the Section to body
corporates alone. The Committee appreciating the position
recommend that the obligation of paying damage through
compensation for the time being be restricted to body corporate only.
Extension of the Section to individuals may be considered once the
system is put in place and experience gained.
13. The Committee observe that Clause 20 of the Bill proposes
to insert a new Section 43 A which provides to impose a fine not
exceeding Rs. 5 crore upon body corporates in case of being negligent
in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and
procedures. The Committee also note that initially an amount of
Rs. 25 crore was suggested as fine, but upon the insistence of the
industry it was decreased to Rs. 5 crore. According to the industry,
Rs. 5 crore as prescribed under the law, is a sufficient deterrent
because certainty of punishment and not necessarily the extent is
what matters. The industry have further submitted that the Courts
of Law generally give the benefit of doubt to the defendant in severe
punishment cases where evidence is not completely fool proof. The
Committee are in absolute disagreement with the views expressed
by the industry in suggesting the fine at Rs. 5 crore. They feel that
on the plea of certainty of punishment, the extent of fine should
not be on such a lower side. Moreover, the Court judgements are
perceivably based on fool proof evidences, irrespective of the severity
of cases. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to

52
restore at least the originally suggested amount of Rs. 25 crore as
damages by way of compensation to be imposed upon the body
corporates for negligence in implementing and maintaining
reasonable security practices and procedures. The Committee are
hopeful that such an increase commensurate with the magnitude of
the IT industry, will send a right message to the stakeholders across
the globe.
14. The Committee also find that as per the existing mechanism
for imposition of the damage of rupees five crore, the victim has to
go to the Adjudicator, then to the Cyber Tribunal and as a last
resort to the High Court and the Supreme Court. The Committee
feel that it is too cumbersome a procedure which has been
corroborated by the industry when they have stated that in not a
single case in the last several years even one rupee damage by way
of compensation has been awarded in India. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department should initiate action in
consultation with other appropriate agencies to simplify the
complicated adjudication process so that the remedy of providing
damages by way of compensation is effectively implemented.
15. The Committee observe that as of now there is no specific
provision in the Bill for protection and retention of data as agreed
to by the industry, investigating agencies, legal experts and the
Legislative Department, albeit the principal Act draws sustenance in
this regard from other enabling laws. In the opinion of the
Committee, it is but essential that there should be clear-cut and
specific provisions for data protection and retention in the amended
Act as the retention of accurately recorded, protected and retrievable
research data is of utmost importance for facilitating scientific
integrity and investigations.
16. The Committee also feel that specific provisions prescribing
suitable punitive measures for the recipient of stolen data need to
be incorporated in this Section. This is one field where the intentions
of the recipient are not above board in most of the cases and hence
the culpability aspect cannot be overlooked or ignored.
17. As regards the issue of personal privacy, the Committee are
not convinced by the logic extended by DIT about non-inclusion of
specific provisions in this regard in the Bill as the issue requires a
wider debate. Ideally, the Committee would have preferred the
inclusion of this important aspect in the draft Bill itself, however,
this was not done. Now that the Department have veered towards

53
the view taken by the Committee, they would like the Department
to add suitable provisions to define and protect personal privacy.
18. The Committee further note that, according to the explanation
of the Department, the terms wrongful loss and wrongful gain are
being co-opted in the Bill in tune with the IPC where these words
are well defined. At the cost of appearing repetitive, the Committee
would like to impress upon the Department that in order to make
the new law a more comprehensive and user friendly one, these
terms ought to be defined unambiguously and definitely in the
context of information technology/cyber related matters/
contraventions.
Powers to Civil Courts
(Clause 29)
19. The Committee note that according to Section 61 of the
principal Act, ‘no Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an Adjudicating Officer
appointed under this Act or the Cyber Appellate Tribunal constituted
under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and
no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act.’ However, Clause 29 of the
Bill proposes to amend the above Section by saying ‘Provided that
the Court may exercise jurisdiction in any cases where the claim for
injury or damage suffered by any person exceeds the maximum
amount which can be awarded under this Chapter.’ In the above
context, the industry representatives have opined that the
circumstances under which the Civil Court’s role will come into play
should be clarified. They have further suggested that it should also
be clarified whether the Civil Court could restrict the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal in the present case. The Department’s response that it
will be appropriate for the Adjudicating Officer to transfer the cases,
where the damages claimed exceed the maximum prescribed amount,
to an appropriate Court does not seem to appropriately address the
concerns of the industry. The Committee find sufficient justifications
in the points raised by the industry representatives and desire that
the circumstances under which the Civil Courts role will come into
play should be spelt out clearly and it should also be clarified
whether the Civil Court can restrict the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
in the instant case. Utmost care should, however, be exercised while
clarifying/modifying the existing Section lest the alleged offenders
misuse such an enabling Clause to circumvent the jurisdiction and
authority of the Adjudicating Officer in these matters.

54
Quantum of Punishment
[(Clauses 31, 36, 37, 49(e), 49(h) and 51(a)]
20. The Committee observe that Clause 31 of the Bill proposes
to amend sections 66, 67 & 67A whereby the quantum of punishment
for cyber crimes will be reduced to two years and thereby making
such offences non-cognisable. Similarly, Clause 36 of the Bill proposes
to insert a new Section 72A where again, offences will be made
non-cognisable. The Committee further note that Clause 37 intends
to substitute Section 77 & 78 of the principal Act by new Sections
77, 77 (A), 77 (B) and 78. As per the proposed Section 77(A), offences
committed under Sections 66, 66A, 72 and 72A will be made
complaint offences. Vide Clause 49 (e) of the Bill, Section 417A is
proposed to be incorporated in the IPC to criminalise cheating by
use of the electronic signatures and password, etc. Here also, this
offence is proposed to be made non-cognisable. Likewise, vide Clause
49 (h) of the Bill, a new Section viz. Section 502 A of the principal
Act is proposed to be incorporated in the IPC to criminalise invasion
of privacy by imaging and transmission of private parts of someone.
This offence is proposed to be made non-cognisable. Moreover,
Clause 51 (a) of the Bill proposes to add a new Section 98 D in
Cr.P .C. vide which no court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under Sections 417 A, 419 A and 502 of IPC except on
complaint of the aggrieved. However, offences under Section 419A
only are proposed to be made cognisable. Thus, the various
amendment proposals seek to tone down the quantum of punishment
for various types of cyber crimes. Expressing their serious reservations
on this, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and some industry
representatives have maintained that in view of their gravity, offences
under all the above cited Sections should be made cognisable. On
the other hand, the Department of Information Technology have
stated that these punishments are proposed to be rationalised because
while penal provisions are necessary to prevent flagrant abuse of
the system, care has to be taken that such provisions do not give
occasion for harassment of legitimate users and the common man
ignorant of the nuances of information technology. In a nutshell, the
Department’s contention is that since people are not getting bails
easily, they propose to keep offences under the above Sections non-
cognisable. The Committee are astonished by such a reasoning. They
are of the opinion that facilitation of bail to the alleged offenders
of cyber crimes cannot and should not be construed a valid reason
for reducing the quantum of punishment and thereby making it
non-cognisable. Similarly, it is hard to believe that the alleged
offenders are not aware of the nuances of information technology

55
and in any case ignorance can not be an excuse for perpetrating
crimes. As cyber crimes are a global phenomenon taking place with
lightning speed, unmindful of the adverse ramifications upon all
sections of the society, the Committee urge upon the Department to
initiate immediate measures to make cyber offences under all the
above said Sections cognisable.
21. The Committee are surprised to note the statement of the
Department of Information Technology that according to the Law
Ministry, Schedule II of the Cr.P .C. is not amendable to incorporate
a provision for making imprisonment of three years bailable. The
Committee desire that the Department of Information Technology
and the Ministry of Law and Justice should work out modalities to
examine whether making imprisonment of three years bailable will
be in the best interest of the nation and help the Government to
encourage enhanced usage of computer/internet and proliferation of
e-Governance and information technology for better productivity.
Definition of the terms ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’
(Clause 31)
22. The Committee observe that Clause 31 of the Bill explains
that the words ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’ shall have the same
meaning as assigned in Sections 24 and 25 respectively of the Indian
Penal Code. According to the Department of Information Technology,
the existing definitions of these two terms in IPC are proposed to
be used in the IT Act as both the terms are being used in reference
to the crime and the Courts very well understand interpretations of
these definitions. According to the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Legislative Department), the two terms as appearing in the IPC
should be incorporated in the IT Act in order to avoid any confusion
as well as different interpretations by different Courts in the country.
The Committee feel that the said terms may be different while
dealing with cyber offences from what is ordinarily understood in
the general penal law of the country. Going by the statement of the
Department of Information Technology and Legislative Department
that the Courts very well understand the definitions of the two terms
as defined in the IPC, the Committee are inclined to believe that
the Courts will equally understand the two terms if defined
separately in the IT Act with reference to the cyber crimes committed.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should examine
the matter in all its implications for formulating appropriate
definitions of the expressions ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’ in the
IT Act. The Committee may be apprised of the decision arrived at
in this regard expeditiously.

56
Omission of the word ‘hacking’
23. The Committee note that Clause 31, while intending to amend
Section 66 proposes to delete the word ‘hacking’. In this regard, a
number of views have been received pointing out absence of logical
rationale in deleting the offence of hacking under Section 66 of the
existing law as the current provisions of that Section of the principal
Act are very wide to fight newly emerging kinds of cyber crimes.
According to the Department, hacking is more a colloquial word
and will change over a period of time and although the word
‘hacking’ is proposed to be removed, yet all the features of hacking
have been adequately covered in Clause 19 of Section 43 and Clause
31 of Section 66. The Department have further submitted that Section
43A is more of a civil kind whereas hacking as appeared in Section
66 is a criminal offence and in their effort to avoid seamless mapping
in both the Sections the word ‘hacking’ is proposed to be removed.
The Committee find no justification in such arguments in deleting
the word ‘hacking’ as it existed in the principal Act. The Committee
feel that hacking under Section 66 of the IT Act is one provision
that is applicable to and is available with the law enforcement
agencies across the country for booking all kinds of new cyber
crimes. Therefore, as the proposed deletion of hacking will adversely
affect the capability of the law enforcing agencies/officers to bring
to book the cyber offenders, the Committee are of the strong opinion
that ‘hacking’ should be retained in its original form. The Committee
are confident that retaining the existing language of Section 66 of
the IT Act and making hacking an offence under the Indian Cyber
Law will send a right message to the stakeholders globally.
Child Pornography
24. The Committee note that Clause 31 of the Bill intends to
insert a new Section 67A which provides for stringent punishment
for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit
acts in electronic form. But the Committee are concerned to find
that the term ‘child pornography’ has nowhere been mentioned in
the proposed Section. The Department’s argument that the Section
while covering ‘pornography’ will automatically cover child
pornography does not convince the Committee as there should be
no scope for assumption or presumption when fresh amendments
are being proposed. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the
Department to include the term ‘child pornography’ in the proposed
Section 67A in view of its growing menace. They also desire that
specific provisions should be incorporated in this Section to

57
criminalise child pornography in tune with the laws prevailing in
the advanced Countries and Article 9 of the Council of Europe
Convention on Cyber Crimes. In view of the several manifestations
of sexual abuse of the children and its loathsome ramifications, the
Committee desire that the act of grooming the child for sexual
relationship through online enticement or distributing/showing
pornography or through any other online means should also be made
a criminal offence and a suitable provision be made in this regard
in the proposed Section 67A.
Powers of interception
(Clause 33)
25. The Committee observe that Clause 33 of the Bill proposes
to amend Section 69 of the principal Act which deals with the power
to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of
any information through any computer resource. The Committee also
note that such powers of interception are proposed to be vested
with the Central Government and not with the State Governments.
The rationale for not conferring powers of interception on the State
Governments, according to the Department, is that if a State
Government takes a decision to block a particular site/information,
it may be possible to do so in that State, but such information can
be accessed from other States or other parts of the country, thereby
defeating the very purpose of vesting powers of interception in the
State Governments. The Committee are not satisfied with the
reasoning, because blocking and interception are two very different
things. They understand blocking of information at one point will
not prevent the access of such information from other points, as
cyber information passes through national and regional gateways.
The Department’s statement that at present interception is being done
at the ‘gateway’ level and there is nothing called ‘Central’ level does
not impress the Committee. Taking all the above factors into account
and in view of the fact that ‘Public Order’ and ‘Police’ are State
subjects as per Schedule VII of the Constitution, the Committee feel
that it would be appropriate and expedient to confer powers of
interception on the State Governments in tune with the provisions
of Section 5 (2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. The Committee
also desire that an emergency provision of interception, as provided
in the said Section of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 should be
incorporated in the IT Act to combat proliferation of cyber crimes.
In view of the emerging kind of cyber offences, the Committee
further recommend that interception should be allowed for prevention
of any cognisable offence in addition to the already prescribed

58
grounds of sovereignty and integrity of India; security of State and
defence of India; friendly relations with foreign States and public
order.
Traffic Data
(Clause 36)
26. The Committee note that Clause 36 of the Bill proposes to
add a new Section 72A which will make service providers and
intermediaries liable for imprisonment upto two years and fine upto
Rs. 5 lakh for disclosing personal information of their subscribers
without the subscriber’s consent and with the intent to cause injury
or wrongful loss to the subscriber. Commenting on this proposal,
the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) have stated before the
Committee that specific provisions should be made empowering the
law enforcement agencies to call for information (subscriber and log
data) from the service providers and others in discharge of their
official functions. They are also of the opinion that the term ‘traffic
data’ should be defined to include subscriber and log data in tune
with the Article 1(d) of Council of Europe Convention on Cyber
Crimes. However, the Department of Information Technology are not
in favour of incorporating and using the term ‘traffic data’ in the
Act on the ground that it is an involving task and requires a careful
examination as a service provider needs to capture data online and
process it further for arriving at ‘traffic data’ indicating the
communication’s origin, destination, route, time, date, size, duration,
or type of underlying service. The Committee are surprised to observe
the logic of the Department for not including the term ‘traffic data’
in the Act. They feel that with the resources and expertise that are
at the disposal of the Department, they should involve themselves
and carefully examine the feasibility of incorporating and using the
term ‘traffic data’ in the Act and also defining it appropriately to
include subscriber and log data for facilitation of investigations by
the law enforcement agencies. In the opinion of the Committee, the
law ought to be crystal clear to the maximum extent so that the
enforcement agencies are clear in their mind about how to proceed
against offenders and the legal proceedings in cyber crimes do not
get mired into unnecessary controversies, thereby delaying justice.
Compounding Offences
(Clause 37)
27. The Committee observe that Clause 37 of the IT (Amendment)
Bill, 2006 proposes to amend Sections 77 and 78 of the principal Act

59
as a result of which the proposed Section 77 A will render offences
under Sections 66, 66 A, 72 and 72 A compoundable. According to
the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), offences under the above
Sections should not be made compoundable as cyber crimes under
the said Sections are affecting the individuals beside causing
irreparable damages to the security and the economy of the country.
According to the Department of Information Technology, the
compounding of contraventions are proposed in order to facilitate
litigants to settle disputes among themselves and speedy settlement
of disputes. The Department have, however, further submitted that
the provision of compounding offences will not apply where the
accused, by reason of his previous conviction, is liable to either
enhanced punishment or to a punishment of different kind for such
offence. Thus their contention seems to be that serious offences
cannot be compounded. However, keeping in view the concerns
expressed by the premier investigating agency, the Committee desire
that the situations where compounding of offences will not be
applicable should be unambiguously spelt out in the Bill to put to
rest any apprehensions in this regard.
Powers to investigate and omission of Section 80
(Clauses 37 & 39)
28. The Committee note that Clause 37 of the Bill proposes to
amend Section 78 of the principal Act by virtue of which the power
of investigation for a cognisable offence will rest with an officer of
and above the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP),
though the responsibility for investigation of a non-cognisable offence
is vested with a police officer of any rank without the power to
arrest. According to the Department of Information Technology and
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), such a
provision of empowering atleast a DSP rank officer to investigate
cognisable offences has been made on the ground that investigation
of offences like cyber crimes need a certain level of technological
knowledge that may not be available with all ranks of police officers.
Moreover, the Government consider it a matured approach to
empower DSP level officers to investigate cognisable offences. The
Committee are unable to accept such reasoning as they are of the
view that when Station House Officers can investigate much sensitive
cases like murder and rape, there is no point in confining
investigation of IT related cases to DSP and above rank officers,
especially in view of their scarcity and other pressing assignments.
Moreover, the general perception that only DSP and above rank
police officers can better understand the nuances of information

60
technology does not impress the Committee in view of the fact that
now-a-days given the current educational system and avenues
available all around, every graduate/post graduate has a passion to
acquaint herself /himself with information technology. In view of
the above and taking into consideration the fact that the penetration
of internet and proliferation of IT into all sections of society and
economy has resulted in increased number of cyber offences, as has
been corroborated from the figures furnished by the Ministry of
Law and Justice (Legislative Department), the Committee recommend
that investigation of cognisable cyber offences should be entrusted
with the officers of Inspector level and above.
29. The Committee are also given to understand that some State
Governments like Tamil Nadu have asked all the Engineering
Colleges in the State to provide basic training course in IT to all
personnel in their police forces. This step would certainly help these
trained officers to efficiently deal with IT related cases. The
Committee desire that the Department of Information Technology in
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs should take
immediate initiatives to convince other States to emulate the practice
resorted to by the Tamil Nadu Government in imparting basic
training courses to police personnel and others so that the Inspector
level officers are adequately trained to handle cyber crime cases.
30. The Committee observe that Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to
omit Section 80 of the principal Act under the provisions of which
an officer not below the rank of DSP is empowered to enter and
search any public place and arrest without warrant any person found
therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or
committing or about to commit any offence under the Act. According
to the CBI and the industry, the existing Section 80 of the Act should
not be deleted altogether as there is lot of preventive utility of the
said Section, especially for search of cyber cafes widely used for
communication by anti-national elements. The Department’s
contention in proposing to delete the said Section is to merge
Sections 78 and 80 in order to classify offences rationally as
cognisable and non-cognisable depending upon their severity and in
line with the Indian Penal Code. The Committee are not inclined to
accept the views expressed by the Department for proposing to delete
Section 80 as such an act will prove detrimental to the society and
national interest for it will seriously impair the power of searching
and raiding cyber cafes widely perceived as being misused as havens
for anti-social and anti-national elements. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Section 80 of the principal Act should be retained

61
with some modifications commensurate with the suggestions of the
Committee for Section 78.
Miscellaneous
(a) Definition of computer network
31. The Committee note that Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to
amend section 2 (1) (j) of the principal Act by adding the word
‘wireless’ in order to amplify the definition of ‘computer network’.
The Committee while appreciating the move, desire that the word
‘wired’ may also be included between the words ‘terrestrial line’
and ‘wireless’ to give more clarity to the Clause.
(b) Status of the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-
In)
32. The Committee note that the Department have proposed a
new Section viz. 70A to notify the Indian Computer Emergency
Response Team (CERT-In) as the national nodal agency. However,
the status of CERT-In has not been defined in the proposed Section.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the words ‘a Government body’
may be inserted in the new section in sub-section 70(1) immediately
after the words ‘The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
(CERT-In)’, to clarify the status of the body beyond any doubt. In
the view of the Committee, this would not only make the definition
of CERT-In more clear but also, as the Department have time and
again emphasised, will instill confidence in the foreign investors
regarding existence of a bonafide legal frame work in the Country.
(c) Adjudication Process
33. The Committee note that Section 43 provides for civil remedy
under which damages by way of compensation upto rupees one
crore can be sought. But such compensation claims can be filed not
before a court of law but before a statutory officer known as
Adjudicating Officer. The Committee find that by an executive order
in 2003, the Government have appointed the IT Secretaries in each
State as Adjudicating Officer. In this context, some non-official
witnesses, who deposed before the Committee, are of the opinion
that IT Secretaries have neither the time nor the inclination and
professional ability to deal with such matters. But according to the
Department, the IT Secretaries have adequate knowledge of civil
and criminal procedures and matters relating to information
technology and thus they are in a position to provide a better citizen
interface. The Department have further submitted that such an
arrangement is made on the pattern of the SEBI Act and no complaint
of any nature has been received in this regard. Even then, taking

62
into consideration the concerns expressed in this regard, the
Department have requested the Ministry of Law and Justice and the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal to study and suggest whether any change
is required in the process of appointment of Adjudicating Officers.
Appreciating the step taken by the Department to address the above
mentioned concern, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
opinion of the Ministry of Law and Justice as soon as the review on
the matter is complete.
(d) Setting up of Special Courts
34. In the process of the examination of the Bill, the Committee
have been given to understand by some industry representatives
that one of the main reasons for the IT Act remaining ineffective in
its present form is the absence of Special Courts which can properly
study and hear cases pertaining to the complicated cyber issues. But
the Department are of the view that the Adjudicating Officers with
their day-to-day experience and efficient dealing with matters
pertaining to information technology are Special Courts for all
practical purposes and hence there is no need to set up Special
Courts to try cases relating to cyber crimes. The Committee agree
with the views of the Department and feel that the Magistrates/
Judges trying cyber cases need not be experts in that area as the
basic exercise and technical intricacies of such cases are dealt with
by the investigating officers and lawyers. However, they are of the
opinion that the Department, in tandem with the industry, should
take measures to initiate some basic training programmes for all
those associated and dealing with cyber cases in order to enable
them to understand and effectively handle the complexities of such
cases.
(e) Spam
35. One of the important issues that has been brought to the
notice of the Committee during the course of the examination of the
Bill is that ‘spam’ or receiving unwanted and unwarranted e-mails
has not been appropriately addressed in the proposed amendments.
The Department’s reply that sub-Section (b) of Section 66 A and
Clause (i) of Section 43 of the Act appropriately address the issue
pertaining to spam does not convince the Committee as a close
scrutiny of the above said two Sections reveals that the issue of
spam has not been adequately dealt with. The Committee appreciate
to note the Secretary, DIT’s statement that it is very difficult to deal
with spam as it can be generated from anywhere in the world. But
in view of the irritation and agony that the recipients of unwarranted
e-mails have to go through, the Committee are of the considered

63
view that specific legislations should be incorporated in the proposed
amendments to effectively deal with such mails. So far as generation
of spam beyond the geographical boundary of India is concerned,
the Committee feel that once the issue of jurisdiction of law, as has
been broached upon elsewhere, is settled, that will automatically
take care of this problem.
(f) Powers of Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA)
36. While examining the Bill, the Committee received suggestions
from some quarters that instead of vesting the powers of ‘Controller
of Certifying Authorities (CCA)’ vaguely in the Central Government
which has been otherwise so hard pressed, some concrete safeguards
should be found out. The Committee also note that according to the
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), there is no
need to vest the powers of the Controller of Certifying Authority in
the Central Government. However, according to the Department of
Information Technology, specific responsibility of licensing the
Certifying Authorities for issue of digital signatures and regulating
their functions has been assigned to the Controller of Certifying
Authorities whereas the power to issue directions for interception or
monitoring or decryption of any information through computer
resources are being proposed to be provided to the Central
Government, interception being a larger issue. However, to avoid
single point choking, the Central Government may provide the power
to other agencies to deal with the cases in emergency situations.
The Committee find that at present, the Department of
Telecommunications, being the licensing authority for Internet Service
Providers (ISPs), have been assigned with such powers of
interception, monitoring, etc. The Committee are in agreement with
the views of the Department that as the issues of monitoring,
interception, encryption and decryption require input and
coordination among different Ministries and Departments, the Central
Government would be in a better position to coordinate that than
the Controller of Certifying Authorities. However, the Committee
feel that instead of using the words ‘other agencies’, it would be
appropriate to identify three/four agencies alongwith the Department
of Telecommunications, anticipating the technological evolutions and
commensurate requirements so that there is no ambiguity in
interpreting the law in this regard.
(g) Electronic Fund Transfer
37. During the course of the examination of the IT (Amendment)
Bill, 2006, some industry representatives suggested to the Committee
that there is a need for specific provisions in the law to legalise and

64
enable electronic fund transfer and recognition of the concept of
electronic payments, digital cash, electronic cash, electronic money
or other existing systems of electronic payments. The Legislative
Department are also of the view that there is a need for a separate
Act for Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) since certain transactional
issues cannot be covered under the IT Act. The Department of
Information Technology concur with the views of the Legislative
Department and are of the opinion that a separate Act for EFT needs
to be drafted. In this context, the Committee are given to understand
that the Payment and Settlement System Bill which will take care of
the electronic fund transfer issues is going to be introduced in the
Monsoon Session, 2007 of the Parliament for approval. The
Committee hope that the proposed Payment and Settlement System
Bill will adequately deal with the issues of electronic payments,
digital cash, electronic money, and all other existing systems of
electronic payments in order to address the concerns expressed by
the industry. The Committee would like to be periodically apprised
of the developments made in this regard.
38. To sum up, the foregoing paragraphs have identified several
areas relating to the cyber law in general and the Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 in particular, which require
necessary attention. These inter alia  include, the need for a
comprehensive, self enabling and people friendly IT law; urgent
initiatives in materialising an International Convention against cyber
crimes/cyber terrorism under the auspices of the United Nations;
auditing of electronic records; data protection and retention; casting
a definite obligation upon the intermediaries/ service providers;
simplification of the Adjudication Process; making cyber offences
cognisable under various Sections; retention of hacking in its original
form; inclusion of ‘child pornography’ in the law and deterrent
provisions against child abuse; and conferring powers of interception
on the State Governments in tune with the provisions of Section 5
(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885; etc. The Committee trust that
their observations/recommendations will be examined in depth and
necessary legislative proposals will be brought forth at the earliest
with a view to ensuring an appropriate legal framework to address
the cyber space.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
31 August, 2007 Chairman,
09 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

65
ANNEXURE I
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 96 of 2006
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
PART I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the
Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2006.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
PART II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY
ACT, 2000
2. In the Information Technology Act, 2000
(hereinafter in this Part referred to as the
principal Act), for the words “digital signature”
occurring in the Chapter, section, sub-section
and clause referred to in the Table below, the
words “electronic signature” shall be
substituted:
Substitution
of words
“digital
signature”
by words
“electronic
signature”.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
21 of 2000

66
TABLE
Sl.No. Chapter/section/
sub-section/clause
(1) clauses (d), (g), (h) and (zg) of section 2;
(2) section 5 and its marginal heading;
(3) marginal heading of section 6;
(4) clauses (a), (b), (c) and (e) of section 10
and its marginal heading;
(5) heading of Chapter V;
(6) clauses (f) and (g) of section 18;
(7) sub-section (2) of section 19;
(8) sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 21 and
its marginal heading;
(9) sub-section (3) of section 25;
(10) clause (c) of section 30;
(11) clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (1) and
sub-section (2) of section 34;
(12) heading of Chapter VII;
(13) section 35 and its marginal heading;
(14) section 64;
(15) section 71;
(16) sub-section (1) of section 73 and its
marginal heading;
(17) section 74; and
(18) clauses (d), (n) and (o) of sub-section (2)
of section 87.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, for sub-
section (4), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to
documents or transactions specified in the
First Schedule:—
Provided that the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
amend the First Schedule by way of
addition or deletion of entries thereto.
Amendment
of section 1.

67
(5) Every notification issued under sub-
section (4) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.”
4. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(A) for clause (j), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(j) “computer network” means the
inter-connection of one or more computers
or computer systems through—
(i) the use of satellite, microwave,
terrestrial line, wireless or other
communication media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting
of two or more interconnected computers
whether or not the inter-connection is
continuously maintained;’;
(B) in clause (n), the word
“Regulations” shall be omitted;
(C) after clause (n), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(na) “cyber cafe” means any facility
from where access to the internet is offered
by any person in the ordinary course of
business to the members of the public;’;
(D) after clause (f), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ta) “electronic signature” means
authentication of any electronic record by
a subscriber by means of the electronic
technique specified in the Second Schedule
and includes digital signature;
(tb) “Electronic Signature Certificate”
means an Electronic Signature Certificate
issued under section 35 and includes Digital
Signature Certificate;’;
(E) in clause (v), for the words “data,
text”, the words “data, message, text” shall
be substituted;
Amendment
of section 2.

68
(F) for clause (w), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(w) “intermediary”, with respect to any
particular electronic records, means any
person who on behalf of another person
receives, stores or transmits that record or
provides any service with respect to that
record and includes telecom service
providers, network service providers,
internet service providers, web-hosting
service providers, search engines, online
payment sites, online-auction sites, online-
market places and cyber cafes, but does not
include body corporate referred to in
section 43A;’.
5. In Chapter II of the principal Act, for
the heading, the heading “Digital Signature and
Electronic Signature” shall be substituted.
6. After section 3 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3A. (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 3, but subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber
may authenticate any electronic record by
such electronic signature or electronic
authentication technique which—
(a) is considered reliable; and
(b) may be specified in the Second
Schedule.
(2) For the purpose of this section any
electronic signature or electronic
authentication technique shall be considered
reliable if—
(a) the signature creation data or
the authentication data are, within the
context in which they are used, linked
to the signatory or, as the case may be,
the authenticator and to no other
person;
Amendment
of heading
of
Chapter II.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
Electronic
signature.

69
(b) the signature creation data or
the authentication data were, at the
time of signing, under the control of
the signatory or, as the case may be,
the authenticator and of no other
person;
(c) any alteration to the electronic
signature made after affixing such
signature is detectable;
(d) any alteration to the information
made after its authentication by
electronics signature is detectable; and
(e) it fulfils such other conditions
which may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may
prescribe the procedure for the purpose of
ascertaining whether electronic signature is
that of the person by whom it is purported
to have been affixed or authenticated.
(4) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, add to
or omit any electronic signature or
electronic authentication technique and the
procedure  for affixing such signature from
the Second Schedule:
Provided that no electronic signature or
authentication technique shall be specified
in the Second Schedule unless such
signature or technique is reliable.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-
section (4) shall be laid before each House
of Parliament”.
7. After section 6 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
6A. (1) The appropriate Government
may, for the purpose of this Chapter and
for efficient delivery of services to the
public through electronic means authorise,
Insertion of
new section
6A.
Delivery of
services by
service
provider.

70
by order, any service provider to set up,
maintain and upgrade the computerised
facilities and perform such other services
as it may specify, by notification in the
Official Gazette.
Explanation—For the purposes of this
section, service provider so authorised
includes any individual, private agency,
private company, partnership firm, sole
proprietor firm or any such other body or
agency which has been granted permission
by the appropriate Government to offer
services through electronic means in
accordance with the policy governing such
service sector.
(2) The appropriate Government may
also authorise any service provider
authorised under sub-section (1) to collect,
retain and appropriate such service charges,
as may be prescribed by the appropriate
Government for the purpose of providing
such services, from the person availing such
service.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), the appropriate Government
may authorise the service providers to
collect, retain and appropriate service
charges under this section notwithstanding
the fact that there is no express provision
under the Act, rule, regulation or
notification under which the service is
provided to collect, retain and appropriate
e-service charges by the service providers.
(4) The appropriate Government shall,
by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify the scale of service charges which
may be charged and collected by the service
providers under this section:
Provided that the appropriate
Government may specify different scale of
service charges for different types of
service.’.

71
8. After section 10 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“10A. Where in a contract formation,
the communication of proposals, the
acceptance of proposals, the revocation of
proposals and acceptances, as the case may
be, are expressed in electronic form or by
means of an electronic record, such contract
shall not be deemed to be unenforceable
solely on the ground that such electronic
form or means was used for that purpose.”.
9. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), for the words “agreed with the
addressee, the word “stipulated” shall be
substituted.
10. For sections 15 and 16 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘15. An electronic signature shall be
deemed to be a secure electronic signature
if—
(i) the signature creation data, at the
time of affixing signature, was under the
exclusive control of signatory and no other
person; and
(ii) the signature creation data was
stored and affixed in such exclusive manner
as may be prescribed.
Explanation—In case of digital signature,
the “signature creation data” means the
private key of the subscriber.
16. The Central Government may, for the
purposes of sections 14 and 15, prescribe the
security procedures and practices:
Provided that in prescribing such security
procedures and practices, the Central
Government shall have regard to the
commercial circumstances, nature of transactions
and such other related factors as it may
consider appropriate.’.
Insertion of
new section
10A.
Validity of
contracts
formed
through
electronic
means.
Amendment
of section
12.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 15
and 16.
Secure
electronic
signature.
Security
procedures
and
practices.

72
11. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
12. In section 29 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words “any
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules
or regulations made thereunder”, the words
“any contravention of the provisions of this
Chapter” shall be substituted.
13. In section 30 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause (c), after the word
“assured”, the word “and” shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) be the repository of all Electronic
Signature Certificates issued under this Act;
(cb) publish information regarding its
practices, Electronic Signature Certificates
and current status of such-certificates; and”.
14. In section 34 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), in clause (a), the words “which
contains the public key corresponding to the
private key used by that Certifying Authority
to digitally sign another Digital Signature
Certificate” shall be omitted.
15. In section 35 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (4),—
(a) the first proviso shall be omitted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words
“Provided further”, the word “Provided”
shall be substituted.
16. In section 36 of the principal Act, after
clause (c), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the subscriber holds a private key
which is capable of creating a digital
signature;
Omission of
section 20.
Amendment
of section
29.
Amendment
of section
30.
Amendment
of section
34.
Amendment
of section
35.
Amendment
of section
36.

73
(cb) the public key to be listed in the
certificate can be used to verify a digital
signature affixed by the private key held
by the subscriber;”.
17. After section 40 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“40A. In respect of Electronic Signature
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such
duties as may be prescribed.”.
18. In Chapter IX of the principal Act, in
the heading, for the words “PENALTIES AND
ADJUDICATION”, the words “PENALTIES,
COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION”
shall be substituted.
19. In section 43 of the principal Act,—
(a) in the marginal heading, for the
word “Penalty”, the word “Compensation”
shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (h), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(i) destroys, deletes or alters any
information residing in a computer resource
or diminishes its value or utility or affects
it injuriously by any means,”.
20. After section 43 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘43A. Where a body corporate,
possessing, dealing or handling any
sensitive personal data or information in a
computer resource which it owns, controls
or operates, is negligent in implementing
and maintaining reasonable security
practices and procedures and thereby causes
wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any
person, such body corporate shall be liable
to pay damages by way of compensation,
Insertion of
new section
40A.
Amendment
of heading
of Chapter
IX.
Amendment
of section
43.
Insertion of
new section
43A.
Compensation
for failure
to protect
data.
Duties of
subscriber
of
Electronic
Signature
Certificate.

74
not exceeding five crore rupees, to the
person so affected.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section,—
(i) “body corporate” means any
company and includes a firm, sole
proprietorship or other association of
individuals engaged in commercial or
professional activities.
(ii) “reasonable security practices and
procedures” means security practices and
procedures designed to protect such
information from unauthorised access,
damage, use, modification, disclosure or
impairment, as may be specified in an
agreement between the parties or as may
be specified in any law for the time being
in force and in the absence of such
agreement or any law, such reasonable
security practices and procedures, as may
be prescribed by the Central Government
in consultation with such professional
bodies or associations as it may deem fit;
(iii) “sensitive personal data or
information” means such personal
information as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with
such professional bodies or associations as
it may deem fit.’.
21. In section 46 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), for the words “direction or
order made thereunder”, the words “direction
or order made thereunder which renders him
liable to pay penalty or compensation,” shall
be substituted.
22. In Chapter X of the principal Act, in
the heading, the word “REGULATIONS” shall
be omitted.
23. In section 48 of the principal act, in
sub-section (1), the word “Regulations” shall
be omitted.
Amendment
of section
46.
Amendment
of heading
of Chapter
X.
Amendment
of section
48.

75
24. For sections 49 to 52 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“49. (1) The Cyber Appellate Tribunal
shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of other Members, as the Central
Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
(2) The selection of Chairperson and
Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
shall be made by the Central Government
in consultation with the Chief Justice of
India.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this
Act—
(a) the jurisdiction, powers and
authority of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may be exercised by the Benches thereof;
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal with one or two Members of such
Tribunal as the Chairperson may deem fit:
Provided that every Bench shall be
presided over by the Chairperson or the
Judicial Member appointed under sub-
section (3) of section 50;
(c) the Benches of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal shall sit at New Delhi and at such
other places as the Central Government
may, in consultation with the Chairperson
of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify;
(d) the Central Government shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the areas in relation to which each Bench
of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal may
exercise its jurisdiction.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (3), the Chairperson of the
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 49
to 52.
Composition
of Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.

76
Cyber Appellate Tribunal may transfer a
Member of such Tribunal from one Bench
to another Bench.
(5) If at any stage of the hearing of
any case or matter it appears to the
Chairperson or a Member of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal that the case or matter
is of such a nature that it ought to be heard
by a Bench consisting of more Members,
the case or matter may be transferred by
the Chairperson to such Bench as the
Chairperson may deem fit.
50. (1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Chairperson of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal unless he is, or has been,
or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court.
(2) The Members of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, except the Judicial Member to be
appointed under sub-section (3), shall be
appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons, having special knowledge of,
and professional experience in, information
technology, telecommunication, industry,
management or consumer affairs:
Provided that a person shall not be
appointed as a Member, unless he is, or has
been, in the service of the Central Government
or a State Government, and has held the post
of Additional Secretary to the Government of
India or any equivalent post in the Central
Government or State Government for a period
of not less than two years of Joint Secretary to
the Government of India or any equivalent post
in the Central Government or State Government
for a period of not less than seven years.
(3) The Judicial Members of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst persons who
is or has been a member of the Indian Legal
Service and has held the post of Additional
Secretary for a period of not less than one year
Qualifications
for
appointment
as
Chairperson
and
Members of
Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.

77
or Grade I post of that Service for a period of
not less than five years.
51. (1) The Chairperson or Member of the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for
a term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office or until he attains the
age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
(2) Before appointing any person as the
Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, the Central Government shall satisfy
itself that the person does not have any such
financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson
or Member.
(3) An officer of the Central Government
or State Government on his selection as the
Chairperson or Member of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have to retire
from service before joining as such Chairperson
or Member.
52. The salary and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service
including pension, gratuity and other retirement
benefits of, the Chairperson or a Member of
the Cyber Appellate  Tribunal shall be such as
may be prescribed.
52A. The Chairperson of the Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall have powers of general
superintendence and directions in the conduct
of the affairs of that Tribunal and he shall, in
addition to presiding over the meetings of the
Tribunal, exercise and discharge such powers
and functions of the Tribunal as may be
prescribed.
52B. Where Benches are constituted, the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may, by order, distribute the business of that
Tribunal amongst the Benches and also the
matters to be dealt with by each Bench.
Term of
office,
conditions
of service,
etc., of
Chairperson
and
Members.
Salary,
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions
of service
of
Chairperson
and
Members.
Powers of
super-
intendence,
direction,
etc.
Distribution
of business
among
Benches.

78
52C. On the application of any of the
parties and after notice to the parties, and after
hearing such of them as he may deem proper
to be heard, or suo motu  without such notice,
the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
may transfer any case pending before one
bench, for disposal to any other Bench.
52D. If the Members of a Bench consisting
of two Members differ in opinion on any point,
they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and make a reference to the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
who shall hear the point or points himself and
such point or points shall be decided according
to the opinion of the majority of the Members
who have heard the case, including those who
first heard it.”.
25. In section 53 of the principal Act, for
the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson or Member, as the case may be,”
shall be substituted.
26. In section 54 of the principal Act, for
the words “Presiding Officer” wherever they
occur, the words “Chairperson or the Member”
shall be substituted.
27. In section 55 of the principal Act, for
the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson or the Member” shall be
substituted.
28. In section 56 of the principal Act, for
the words “Presiding Officer”, the word
“Chairperson” shall be substituted.
29. In section 61 of the principal Act, the
following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that the court may exercise
jurisdiction in cases where the claim for
injury or damage suffered by any person
exceeds the maximum amount which can
be awarded under this Chapter.”.
Power of
Chairperson
to transfer
cases.
Decision by
majority.
Amendment
of section
53.
Amendment
of section
54.
Amendment
of section
55.
Amendment
of section
56.
Amendment
of section
61.

79
30. In section 64 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “penalty imposed”, the
words “penalty imposed or compensation
awarded” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the marginal heading, for the
word “penalty”, the words “penalty or
compensation” shall be substituted.
31. For sections 66 and 67 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘66. If any person, dishonestly or
fraudulently, does any act referred to in
section 43, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years or with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees or with both.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) the word “dishonestly” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of
the Indian Penal Code;
(b) the word “fraudulently” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of
the Indian Penal Code.
66A. Any person who sends, by means
of a computer resource or a communication
device,—
(a) any content that is grossly offensive
or has menacing character; or
(b) any content which he knows to be
false, but for the purpose of causing
annoyance, inconvenience, danger,
obstruction, insult, injury, criminal
intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will,
persistently makes use of such computer
resource or a communication device,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years and with
fine.
Amendment
of section
64.
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 66
and 67.
Computer
related
offences.
Punishment
for sending
offensive
messages
through
communi-
cation
service, etc.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860.

80
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, the term “communication device”
means cell phones, Personal Digital
Assistance (PDA) or combination of both
or any other device used to communicate,
send or transmit any text, video, audio or
image.
67. Whoever publishes or transmits or
causes to be published or transmitted in the
electronic form, any material which is lascivious
or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect
is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt
persons who are likely, having regard to all
relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the
matter contained or embodied in it, shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years and also with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
67A. Whoever publishes or transmits or
causes to be published or transmitted in the
electronic form any material which contains
sexually explicit act or conduct shall be
punished on first conviction with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may
extend to five years and with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years and also with
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Exception.—This section and section 67 does
not extend to any book, pamphlet, paper,
writing, drawing, painting, representation or
figure in electronic form—
‘(i) the publication of which is proved
to be justified as being for the public good
on the ground that such book, pamphlet,
Punishment
for
publishing
or
transmitting
obscene
material in
electronic
form.
Punishment
for
publishing
or
transmitting
of material
containing
sexually
explicit act,
etc., in
electronic
form.

81
paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure is in the interest of
science, literature, art or learning or other
objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide  for
religious purposes.’.
32. In section 68 of the principal Act, for
sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Any person who intentionally or
knowingly fails to comply with any order
under sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an
offence and shall be liable on conviction to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years or a fine not exceeding one lakh
rupees or both.”.
33. For section 69 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“69. (1) Where the Central Government
is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
so to do in the interest of the sovereignty
or integrity of India, defence of India,
security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States or public order or for
preventing incitement to the commission of
any cognizable offence relating to above or
for investigation of any offence, it may
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
for reasons to be recorded in writing, by
order, direct any agency of the Government
to intercept or monitor or decrypt or cause
to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted
any information transmitted through any
computer resource.
(2) The Central Government shall
prescribe safeguards subject to which such
interception or monitoring or decryption
may be made or done, as the case may be.
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or
any person incharge of the computer
Amendment
of section
68.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 69.
Power to
issue
directions
for
interception
or
monitoring
or
decryption
of any
information
through any
computer
resource.

82
resource shall, when called upon by any
agency which has been directed under sub-
section (1), extend all facilities and technical
assistance to—
(a) provide access to the computer
resource containing such information;
(b) intercept or monitor or decrypt the
information;
(c) provide information contained in
computer resource.
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or
any person who fails to assist the agency
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be
punished with an imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years.”.
34. In section 70 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(1) The appropriate Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette,
declare any computer resource which
directly or indirectly affects the facility of
Critical Information Infrastructure, to be a
protected system.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, “Critical Information Infrastructure”
means the computer resource, the
incapacitation or destruction of which, shall
have debilitating impact on national
security, economy, public health or safety.’;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) the Central Government shall
prescribe the information security practices
and procedures for such protected system.”.
Amendment
of section
70.

83
35. After section 70 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“70A. (1) The Indian Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) shall
serve as the national nodal agency in
respect of Critical Information Infrastructure
for co-ordinating all actions relating to
information security practices, procedures,
guidelines, incident prevention, response
and report.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),
the Director of the Indian Computer
Emergency Response Team may call for
information pertaining to cyber security
from the service providers, intermediaries
or any other person.
(3) Any person who fails to supply the
information called for under sub-section (2),
shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year or
with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.
(4) The Director of the Indian Computer
Emergency Response Team may, by order,
delegate his powers under this section to
his one or more subordinate officers not
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the
Government of India.”.
36. After section 72 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“72A. Save as otherwise provided in
this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, any person including an
intermediary who, while providing services
under the terms of lawful contract, has
secured access to any material containing
personal information about another person,
with the intent to cause or knowing that
Insertion of
new section
70A.
Indian
Computer
Emergency
Response
Team to
serve as
national
nodal
agency.
Insertion of
new section
72A.
Punishment
for
disclosure
of
information
in breach of
lawful
contract.

84
he is likely to cause wrongful loss or
wrongful gain discloses, without the
consent of the person concerned, or in
breach of a lawful contract, such material
to any other person, shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.”.
37. For sections 77 and 78 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“77. No compensation awarded, penalty
imposed or confiscation made under this
Act shall prevent the award of
compensation or imposition of any other
penalty or punishment under any other law
for the time being in force.
77A. Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, offences under sections 66,
66A, 72 and 72A may be compounded by
the aggrieved person:
Provided that the provisions of this
section does not apply where the accused
is, by reason of his previous conviction,
liable to either enhanced punishment or to
a punishment of a different kind for such
offence.
77B. No court shall take cognizance of
an offence punishable under sections 66,
66A, 72 and 72A, except upon a complaint
made by the person aggrieved by the
offence.
78. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no
police officer below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police shall investigate any
cognizable offence under this Act.
(2) When information is given to an officer
in charge of a police station of the commission
Substitution
of new
sections for
sections 77
and 78.
Compen-
sation,
penalties or
confiscation
not to
interfere
with other
punishment.
Offences
under
sections 66,
66A, 72 and
72A to be
compoundable.
Cognizance
of offences
under
sections 66,
66A, 72 and
72A.
Power to
investigate
offences.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

85
within the limits of such station of a non-
cognizable offence under this Act, he shall cause
to be entered the substance of the information
in a  book to be kept by such officer in such
form as the State Government may prescribe
in this behalf.
(3) any police officer receiving such
information may exercise the same powers in
respect of investigation (except the power to
arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge
of the police station may exercise in a
cognizable case under section 156 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”
38. For Chapter XII of the principal Act,
the following Chapters shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘CHAPTER XII
I
NTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE
IN CERTAIN CASES
79. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in any other law for the time being in force
but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2)
and (3), an intermediary shall not be liable for
any third party information, data, or
communication link made available by him.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall
apply if—
(a) the function of the intermediary is
limited to providing access to a
communication system over which
information made available by third parties
is transmitted or temporarily stored; or
(b) the intermediary does not—
(i) initiate the transmission,
(ii) select the receiver of the
transmission, and
(iii) select or modify the information
contained in the transmission.
Substitution
of new
Chapters
for Chapter
XII.
Exemption
from
liability of
intermediary
in certain
cases.

86
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall
not apply if—
(a) the intermediary has conspired or
abetted in the commission of the unlawful
act;
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or
on being notified by the appropriate
Government or its agency that any
information, data or communication link
residing in or connected to a computer
resource controlled by the intermediary is
being used to commit the unlawful act, the
intermediary fails to expeditiously remove
or disable access to that material on that
resource without vitiating the evidence in
any manner.
(4) Intermediary shall observe such other
guidelines as the Central Government may
prescribe in this behalf.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
section, the expression “third party information”
means any information dealt with by an
intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.
CHAPTER XIIA
E
XAMINER OF E LECTRONIC E VIDENCE
79A. The Central Government may, for the
purposes of providing expert opinion on
electronic from evidence before any court or
other authority specify, by notification in the
Official Gazette, any Department, body or
agency of the Central Government or a State
Government as an Examiner of Electronic
evidence.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, “electronic form evidence” means any
information of probative value that is either
stored or transmitted in electronic form and
includes computer evidence, digital audio,
digital video, cell phones, digital fax machines.’.
Central
Government
to notify
Examiner of
Electronic
Evidence.

87
39. Section 80 of the principal Act shall be
omitted.
40. In section 81 of the principal Act, the
following proviso shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in
this Act shall restrict any person from
exercising any right conferred under the
Copyright Act, 1957 or the patents Act,
1970.
41. In section 82 of the principal Act,—
(a) for the marginal heading, the
following marginal heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Chairperson, Members, officers and
employees to be public servants.”;
(b) for the words “Presiding Officer”,
the words “Chairperson, Members” shall be
substituted.
42. In section 84 of the principal Act, for
the words “Presiding Officer”, the words
“Chairperson, Members” shall be substitute.
43. After section 84 of the principal Act,
the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“84A. The Central Government may, for
secure use of the electronic medium and
for promotion of e-governance and
e-commerce, prescribe the modes or
methods for encryption.
84B. Whoever abets any offence shall,
if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of the abetment, and no
express provision is made by this Act for
the punishment of such abetment, be
punished with the punishment provided for
the offence under this Act.
Omission of
section 80.
Amendment
of section
81.
Amendment
of section
82.
Amendment
of section
84.
Insertion of
new
sections
84A, 84B
and 84C.
Modes of
methods for
encryption.
Punishment
for
abetment of
offences.
14 of 1957.
39 of 1970.

88
Explanation.—An act or offence is said
to be committed in consequence of
abetment, when it is committed in
consequence of the instigation, or in
pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the
aid which constitutes the abetment.
84C. Whoever attempts to commit an
offence punishable by this Act or causes
such an offence to be committed, and in
such an attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence, shall, where no
express provision is made for the
punishment of such attempt, be punished
with imprisonment of any description
provided for the  offence, for a term which
may extend to one-half of the longest term
of imprisonment provided for that offence,
or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both.”
44. In section 87 of the principal Act,—
(A) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(a) the conditions for considering
reliability of electronic signature or
electronic authentication technique under
sub-section (2) of section 3A;
(aa) the procedure for ascertaining
electronic signature or authentication under
sub-section (3) of section 3A;
(ab) the manner in which any
information or matter may be authenticated
by means of electronic signature under
section 5;”;
(ii) after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the manner in which the
authorised service provider may collect,
Punishment
for attempt
to commit
offences.
Amendment
of section
87.

89
retain and appropriate service charges
under sub-section (2) of section 6A;”;
(iii) for clause (e), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(e) the manner of storing and affixing
electronic signature creation data under
section 15;
(ea) the security procedures and
practices under section 16;”;
(iv) clause (g) shall be omitted;
(v) after clause (m), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ma) the form of application and fee
for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate
under section 35;
(vi) after clause (o), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(oa) the duties of subscribers under
section 40A;
(ob) the reasonable security practices
and procedures and sensitive personal data
or information under section 43a;”;
(vii) in clause (r), for the words
“Presiding Officer”, the words “Chairperson
and Members” shall be substituted;
(viii) in clause (s), for the words
“Presiding Officer”, the words “Chairperson
and Members” shall be substituted;
(ix) for clause (w), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(w) the powers and functions of the
Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal under section 52A;
(x) the safeguards for interception or
monitoring or decryption under sub-section
(2) of section 69;

90
(y) the information security practices
and procedures for protected system under
section 70;
(z) the guidelines to be observed by the
intermediaries under sub-section (4) of
section 79;
(za) the modes or methods for
encryption under section 84A,”;
(B) in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the words, brackets, letter and
figures “Every notification made by the
Central Government under clause (f) of sub-
section (4) of section 1 and every rule made
by it”, the words “Every rule made by the
Central Government” shall be substituted;
(ii) the words “the notification or”
wherever they occur, shall be omitted.
45. In section 90 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), for clause (c), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(c) the form of information book under
sub-section (2) of section 78.”.
46. Sections 91, 92, 93 and 94 of the
principal Act shall be omitted.
47. For the First Schedule and the Second
Schedule to the principal Act, the following
Schedules shall be substituted, namely:—
“FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (4) of section 1]
D
OCUMENTS OR T RANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE A CT
SHALL NOT APPLY
Sl.No. Description of documents
or transactions
12
1. A negotiable instrument (other than a
cheque) as defined in section 13 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
Amendment
of section 90.
Omision of
sections 91,
92, 93 and
94.
Substitution
of new
Schedules for
First
Schedule and
Second
Schedule.
26 of 1881

91
2. A power-of-attorney as defined in
section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney
Act, 1882
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
4. A will as defined in clause (h) of section
2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925,
including any other testamentary
disposition by whatever name called.
5. Any contract for the sale or conveyance
of immovable property or any interests
in such property.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sub-section (1) of section 3A]
E
LECTRONIC S IGNATURE OR E LECTRONIC
AUTHENTICATION T ECHNIQUE AND P ROCEDURE
Sl.No. Description Procedure
(1) (2) (3)
48. The Third Schedule and the Fourth
Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.
PART III
AMENDMENT OF THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
49. In the Indian Penal Code—
(a) in section 4,—
(i) after clause (2), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) any person in any place
without and beyond Indian committing
offence targeting a computer resource
located in India.”;
12
7 of 1882
2 of 1882
39 of 1925
Omission of
Third
Schedule
and Fourth
Schedule.
Amendment
of Indian
Penal Code.
Amendment
of section 4.
45 of 1860.
.”.

92
(ii) for the Explanation, the following
Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘Explanation.—In this section—
(a) the word “offence” includes
every act committed outside India
which, if committed in India, would be
punishable under this Code;
(b) the expression “computer
resource” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause (k) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000.’;
(b) in section 40, in clause (2), after the
figure “117”, the figures “118, 119 and 120”
shall be inserted;
(c) in section 118, for the words
“voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design”, the
words “voluntarily conceals by any act or
omission or by the use of encryption or
any other information hiding tool, the
existence of a design” shall be substituted;
(d) in section 119, for the words
“voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design”, the
words “voluntarily conceals by any act or
omission or by the use of encryption or
any other information hiding tool, the
existence of a design” shall be substituted;
(e) after section 417, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“417A. Whoever, cheats by using
the electronic signature, password or
any other unique identification feature
of any other persons, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description
Amendment
of section
40.
Amendment
of section
118.
Amendment
of section
119.
Insertion of
new section
417A.
Punishment
for identity
theft.
21 of 2000.

93
for a term which may extend to two
years and shall also be liable to fine.”;
(f) after section 419, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“419A. Whoever, by means of any
communication device or computer
resource cheats by personation, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may
extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine.
Explanation.— The expression
“computer resource” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of
sub-section (l) of section 2 of the
Information Technology act, 2000.”;
(g) in section 464, for the words
“digital signature” wherever they occur,
the words “electronic signature” shall
be substituted;
(h) after Chapter XXI, the following
Chapter shall be inserted, namely;—
“CHAPTER XXIA
O
F P RIVACY
502A. Whoever, intentionally or knowingly
captures, publishes or transmits the image of a
private area of any person without his or her
consent, under circumstances violating the
privacy of that person, shall be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years or with fine not exceeding
two lakh rupees, or with both.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this
section—
(a) “transmit” means to send
electronically a visual image with the intent
that it be viewed by a person or persons;
(b) “capture”, with respect to an image,
means to videotape, photograph, film or
record by any means;
Insertion of
new section
419A.
Punishment
for cheating
by
personation
using
computer
resource.
Amendment
of section
464.
Insertion of
new
Chapter
XXIA.
Punishment
for violation
of privacy.
21 of 2000.

94
(c) “Private area” means the naked or
undergarment clad genitals, public area,
buttocks or female breast;
(d) “publishers” means reproduction in
the printed or electronic form and making
it available for public;
(e) “under circumstances violating
privacy” means circumstances in which a
person can have a reasonable expectation
that—
(i) he or she could disrobe in
privacy, without being concerned that
an image of his private area is being
captured; or
(ii) any part of his or her private
area would not be visible to the public,
regardless of whether that person is in
a public or private place.”
PART IV
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN EVIDENCE
ACT, 1872
50. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,—
(a) in section 3 relating to interpretation
clause, in the paragraph appearing at the
end, for the words “digital signature” and
“Digital Signature Certificate”, the words
“electronic signature” and “Electronic
Signature Certificate” shall respectively be
substituted;
(b) after section 45, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“45A. When in a proceeding, the court
has to form an opinion on any matter
relating to any information transmitted or
stored in any computer resource or any
other electronic or digital form, the opinion
of the examiner of Electronic Evidence
referred to in section 79A of the Information
Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant fact.
Amendment
of Indian
Evidence
Act.
Amendment
of section 3.
Insertion of
new section
45A.
Opinion of
Examiner of
Electronic
Evidence.
1 of 1872.
21 of 2000.

95
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence
shall be an expert.”;
(c) in section 47A,—
(i) for the words “digital signature”, the
words “electronic signature” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words “Digital Signature
Certificate”, the words “Electronic Signature
Certificate” shall be substituted;
(d) in section 67A, for the words
“digital signature” wherever they occur, the
words “electronic signature” shall be
substituted;
(e) in section 85A, for the words
“digital signature” at both the places where
they occur, the words “electronic signature”
shall be substituted;
(f)  in section 85B, for the words “ digital
signature” wherever they occur, the words
“electronic signature” shall be substituted;
(g) in section 85C, for the words
“Digital Signature Certificate”, the words
“Electronic Signature Certificate” shall be
substituted;
(h) in section 90A, for the words
“digital signature” at both the places where
they occur, the words “electronic signature”
shall be substituted;
PART V
A
MENDMENT OF THE C ODE OF C RIMINAL
PROCEDURE, 1973
51. In the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973,—
(a) after section 198A, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“198B. No court shall take cognizance
of an offence punishable under sections 417A,
Amendment
of section
47A.
Amendment
of section
67A.
Amendment
of section
85A.
Amendment
of section
85B.
Amendment
of section
85C.
Amendment
of section
90A.
Amendment
of Code of
Criminal
Procedure.
Insertion of
new section
198B.
Prosecution
of offences
under
2 of 1974.

96
419A and 502a of the Indian Penal Code,
except upon a complaint made by the
person aggrieved by the offence.”;
(b) in section 320,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in the Table, after the
entries relating to—
(A) sections 352, 355 and 358, the following
entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3
“Identity theft  417A The person against
whom the offence
was committed.”;
(B) section 502, the following entries shall
be inserted, namely:—
12 3
“Violation of 502A The person against
privacy whom the offence
was committed.”;
(ii) in sub-section (2), in the Table, after
the entries relating to section 419, the following
entries shall be inserted, namely:—
12 3
“Cheating by 419A The person against
personation by whom the offence
using computer was committed.”;
resource
(iii) in the First Schedule, under the heading
“I. Offences under the Indian Penal Code”,—
(A) After the entries relating to section 417,
the following entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
123456
“417A Identity Imprisonment Non- Bailable Any
theft for 2 years cognizable magistrate.”;
and fine.
sections 417A,
419A and
502A of Indian
Penal Code.
Amendment
of section
320.
45 of 1860.

97
(B) after the entries relating to section 419,
the following entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
123456
“419A Cheating Imprison- Cogniza- Bailable Any
by ment ble magistrate.”;
personation for 5 years
by using and fine.
computer
resource
(c) after the entries relating to section 502,
the following entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
123456
“502A Violation Imprisonment Non- Bailable Any
of for 2 years cognizable magistrate.”.
privacy or fine
or both.

98
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Information Technology Act was enacted in the year 2000
with a view to give a fillip to the growth of electronic based
transactions, to provide legal recognition for e-commerce and
e-transactions, to facilitate e-governance, to prevent computer based
crimes and ensure security practices and procedures in the context of
widest possible use of information technology worldwide.
2. With proliferation of information technology enabled services
such as e-governance, e-commerce and e-transactions, protection of
personal data and information and implementation of security practices
and procedures relating to these applications of electronic
communications have assumed greater importance and they require
harmonisation with the provisions of the Information Technology Act.
Further, protection of Critical Information Infrastructure is pivotal to
national security, economy, public health and safety, so it has become
necessary to declare such infrastructure as a protected system as to
restrict its access.
3. A rapid increase in the use of   computer and internet has
given rise to new forms of crimes like publishing sexually explicit
materials in electronic form, video voyeurism and breach of
confidentiality and leakage of data by intermediary, e-commerce frauds
like personation commonly known as Phishing, identity theft and
offensive messages through communication services. So, penal
provisions are required to be included in the Information Technology
Act, the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act and the Code of
Criminal Procedure to prevent such crimes.
4. The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL) in the year 2001 adopted the Model Law on Electronic
Signatures. The General Assembly of the United Nations by its
resolution No. 56/80, dated 12th December, 2001, recommended that
all States accord favourable consideration to the said Model Law on
Electronic Signatures. Since the digital signatures are linked to a specific
technology under the existing provisions of the Information Technology
Act, it has become necessary to provide for alternate technology of
electronic signatures for bringing harmonisation with the said Model
Law.

99
5. The service providers may be authorised by the Central
Government or the State Government to set up, maintain and upgrade
the computerised facilities and also collect, retain and appropriate
service charges for providing such services at such scale as may be
specified by the Central Government or the State Government.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; DAYANIDHI MARAN.
The 6th December , 2006.

100
Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to substitute the words “digital
signatures” by the words “electronic signatures” as provided in the
Table thereunder so as to make it technology neutral.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend   sub-section (4) of
section 1 so as to exclude Negotiable Instruments, power of attorney,
trust, will and contract from the application of the Act and to empower
the Central Government to amend the entries in the First Schedule.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 and to define
certain new expressions.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to substitute heading of Chapter II
with new heading “DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC
SIGNATURE’ so as to make the Act technology neutral.
Clause 6.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 3A which
provides for authentication of electronic record by electronic signature
or electronic authentication technique. It also empowers the Central
Government to insert in the Second Schedule any electronic signature
or electronic authentication technique and prescribe the procedure for
the purpose of ascertaining the authenticity of electronic signature.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 6A which
empowers the Central Government as well as the State Government
to authorise the service providers for providing efficient services
through electronic means to the public against appropriate service
charges. Further the said section empowers the Central Government
as well as the State Government to specify the scale of service charges.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 10A to provide
for contracts formed through electronic means.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to make amendment in sub-section (1)
of section 12 which is of a consequential nature.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 15 and 16 so as
to remove certain inconsistencies in the procedures relating to secure
electronic signatures and to provide for security procedures and
practices.

101
Clause 11.—This clause provides for omission of section 20 with a
view to empower the Certifying Authority under section 30 to act as
repository of electronic signatures.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to make amendment in
sub-section (1) of section 29 with a view to limit the powers of the
Controller in respect of access to any computer system only with
reference to the provisions of Chapter VI and not with reference to
the provisions of entire Act. The powers with respect to access to any
computer system under other provisions of the Act are proposed to be
entrusted to the Central Government under section 69.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 30 with a view to
empower the Certifying Authority to be the repository of all Electronic
Signature Certificates issued under the Act.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 34 with a view to
make the provisions of that section technology neutral.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 with a view to
omit the first proviso to sub-section 94 so as to make the provisions
of that section technology neutral.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 36 so as to add
two more representations for issuance of digital signature.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 40A which
provides for duties of the subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to make an amendment in the Chapter
heading of Chapter IX with a view to provide for making compensation
for damages in respect of various contraventions.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to amend section 43 so as to add
certain more contraventions for damaging computer or computer
system.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 43A so as to
empower the Central Government to provide for reasonable security
practices and procedures and the sensitive personal data or information
and also to provide for compensation for failure to protect sensitive
personal data or information stored in a computer resource.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to make amendment in section 46
with a view to make consequential changes.

102
Clause 22 and 23.—These clauses seek to make amendments in the
heading of Chapter X and section 48 with a view to suitably modify
the same with the title of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal as mentioned
in clause ( n) of sub-section (1) of section 2.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 49 to 52 and
insert new sections 52A to 52D. Section 49 provides for the
establishment of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal. Sections 50, 51 and 52
provide for qualifications, term of office, conditions of service and
salary and allowances of the Chairperson and Members of the said
Tribunal. Sections 52A to 52D provide for powers of the Chairperson
and distribution of business among the Benches.
Clause 25 to 28.—These clauses seek to make amendments in
sections 53 to 56 with a view to make the Cyber Appellate Tribunal
a multi-member body.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to insert a proviso in section 61 so
as to provide jurisdiction to courts in certain cases.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 64 so as to recover
the compensation also as the arrears of land revenue.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 66 and 67 and
insert new sections 66A and 67A with a view to make certain more
computer related wrong actions punishable and enhance the penalty.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 68 so as to reduce
the quantum of punishment and fine.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to substitute section 69 so as to
empower the Central Government to issue directions to an agency for
interception or monitoring or decryption of any information transmitted
through any computer resource. It also provides for punishment for
rendering assistance to such agency.
Clause 34.—This clause seeks to amend section 70 so as to enable
the Central Government as well as the State Government to declare
any computer resource as protected system. It also provides for
information security practices and procedures for such protected system.
Clause 35.— This clause seeks to insert a new section 70A for
empowering Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as
a national nodal agency in respect of Critical Information Infrastructure.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 72A which
makes the disclosure of information in breach of a lawful contract
punishable.

103
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 77 and 78 and
to insert new sections 77A and 77B. Section 77 provides that
compensation, penalties or confiscation under the Act shall not interfere
with the award of compensation or imposition of any other penalty or
punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
Section 77 provides for certain offences relating to computer resource
as compoundable offences. Section 77B provides that Court shall take
cognizance only on a complaint and not otherwise. Section 78 provides
for power to investigate offences.
Clause 38.—This clause seeks to substitute Chapter XII and to insert
a new Chapter XIIA which provides for exemption of intermediaries
from liability in certain circumstances and also empowers the Central
Government to prescribe guidelines to be observed by intermediaries
for providing services. It also empower the Central Government to
specify the Examiner of Electronic Evidence.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to omit section 80 of the Act with a
view to entrust the powers of search and seizure, etc., to a Police
Officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police and for
that purpose necessary provisions have been included in section 78 by
substituting the same vide clause 37.
Clause 40.—This clause proposes to insert a proviso to section 81
so that the rights conferred under this sections hall be supplementary
to and not in derogation of the provisions of the Copyright Act or the
Patents Act.
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to make amendment in section 82
with a view to declare the Chairperson, Members, officers and
employees as public servants.
Clause 42.—This clause seeks to amend section 84 with a view to
make consequential changes.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to insert three new sections 84A, 84B
and 84C with a view to empower the Central Government to prescribe
the modes and methods of encryption for secure use of electronic
media and for promotion of e-governance and e-commerce applications.
Further it provides that abetment of and attempt to commit any offence
shall also be punishable.
Clauses 44 and 45.—These clauses seek to make amendments in
sections 87 and 90 respectively, which are of consequential nature.
Clause 46.—This clause seeks to omit sections 91 to 94 for the
reason that these provisions have become redundant as necessary

104
modifications have already been carried out in the Indian Penal Code
and other related enactments.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to substitute new Schedules for the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule so as to provide for documents
or transactions to which the provisions of the Act shall not apply. It
also enables the list of electronic signature or electronic authentication
technique and procedure for affixing such signature to be specified in
the Second Schedule.
Clause 48.—This clause seeks to omit the Third Schedule and Fourth
Schedule as consequential to the omission of provisions of sections 93
and 94.
Clause 49.—This clause provides for certain amendments in the
Indian Penal Code so as to specify certain offences relating to the
computer resources.
Clause 50.—This clause provides for certain consequential
amendments in the Indian Evidence Act pursuant to the changes
proposed in the Act.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for amendments in the Code of
Criminal Procedure by inserting new section 198B and amending
section 320 so as to make certain consequential amendments pursuant
to the changes proposed in the Act.

105
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide for multi-member composition
of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal but the number of Members may be
determined by the Central Government in the times to come. The
salary, allowances and retirement benefits payable to the Chairperson
and other Members of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal as and when
appointed shall be met out of the annual Budget estimates of the
Ministry. For the present, the Bill does not involve any additional
recurring or non-recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund
of India.

106
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 1
which empowers the Central Government to amend the First Schedule
by adding or deleting entries relating to documents or transactions to
which the provisions of the Act shall not apply.
2. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 3A vide which
the Central Government is being empowered to—
(a) prescribe the conditions to be fulfilled for considering any
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique
as reliable;
(b) prescribe the procedure for affixing and authentication of
electronic signature; and
(c) insert in the Second Schedule any electronic signature or
electronic authentication technique and the procedure for
affixing such signatures.
3. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 6A which
empowers the Central Government as well as the State Government
to authorise the service provider to collect, retain and appropriate
service charges. Further the said section empowers the Central
Government and the State Government to specify, by notification, the
scale of service charges.
4. Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend section 15 which empowers
the Central Government to prescribe the manner of storing and affixing
the signature creation data for a secure electronic signature. The said
clause also seeks to amend section 16 which empowers the Central
Government to prescribe the security procedures and practices for a
secure electronic record and a secure electronic signature.
5. Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 40A which
empowers the Central Government to prescribe the duties to be
performed by the subscriber of the Electronic Signature Certificate.
6. Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 43A which
empowers the Central Government to prescribe, in consultation with
professional bodies or associations, the reasonable security practices
and procedures and the sensitive personal data or information.

107
7. Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 49 which
empowers the Central Government to specify by notification the places
for sitting of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal and the areas of their
jurisdiction. Further, the said clause seeks to insert a new section 52A
which empowers the Central Government to prescribe powers and
functions of the Chairperson of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal.
8. Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to amend section 69 which empowers
the Central Government to prescribe the safeguards for interception or
monitoring or decryption.
9. Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of
section 70 which empowers the Central Government as well as the
State Government to declare by notification any computer resource
which affects the facility of Critical Information Infrastructure to be a
protected system. Further, the said clause seeks to insert a new
sub-section (4) to section 70 which empowers the Central Government
to prescribe the information security practices and procedures for the
protected system.
10. Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 78 which
empowers the State Government to prescribe the form of information
book.
11. Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 79, sub-
section (4) of the said section empowers the Central Government to
prescribe the guidelines to be observed by intermediary. Further, the
said clause seeks to insert another new section 79A which empowers
the Central Government to specify by notification the Examiner of
Electronic Evidence for providing expert opinion on electronic form
evidence.
12. Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 84A which
empowers the Central Government to prescribe the modes and methods
for encryption.
13. The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made
or notification issued are matters of procedure and administrative detail,
and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed
Bill itself.
14. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

108
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
(45 OF 1860)
******
4. The provisions of this Code apply also
to any offence committed by—
******
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft
registered in India wherever it may be.
Explanation.— In this section the word
“offence” includes every act committed outside
India which, if committed in India, would be
punishable under this Code.
Illustration
A, who is a citizen of India, commits a
murder in Uganda. He can be tried and
convicted of murder in any place in India in
which he may be found.
******
40. Except in the Chapters and sections
mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section
the word “offence” denotes a thing made
punishable by this Code.
In Chapter IV , Chapter VA and in the
following sections, namely sections 64, 65, 66,
67, 71, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117, 187,
194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 224,
225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389
and 445, the word “offence” denotes a thing
punishable under this Code, or under any
special or local law as hereinafter defined.
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212,
216 and 441, the word “offence” has the same
meaning when the thing punishable under the
Extension of
Code to
extraterritorial
offences.
“Offence”.

109
special or local law is punishable under such
law with imprisonment for a term of six
months or upwards, whether with or without
fine.
******
118. Whoever intending to facilitate or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
facilitate the commission of an offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design to commit
such offence or makes any representation which
he knows to be false respecting such design,
shall, if that offence be committed, be
punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or, if the offence be not committed,
with imprisonment of either description, for a
term which may extend to three years; and in
either case shall also be liable to fine.
Illustration
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be
committed at B, falsely informs the Magistrate
that a dacoity is about to be committed at C,
a place in an opposite direction, and thereby
misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate
the commission of the offence. The dacoity is
committed at B in pursuance of the design. A
is punishable under this section.
119. Whoever, being a public servant
intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby facilitate the commission
of an offence which it is his duty as such public
servant to prevent.
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal
omission, the existence of a design to commit
such offence, or makes any representation
which he knows to be false respecting such
design,
Concealing
design to
commit
offence
punishable
with death
or
imprisonment
for life—if
offence be
committed;
if offence
be not
committed.
Public
servant
concealing
design to
commit
offence
which it is
his duty to
prevent—

110
shall, if the offence be committed be
punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may
extend to one-half of the longest term of such
imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided
for that offence, or with both;
or, if the offence be punishable with death
or imprisonment for life, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend
to ten years;
or, if the offence be not committed, shall
be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence for a term
which may extend to one-fourth part of the
longest term of such imprisonment or with such
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.
Illustration
A, an officer of police, being legally bound
to give information of all designs to commit
robbery which may come to his knowledge,
and knowing that B designs to commit robbery,
omits to give such information, with intent to
facilitate the commission of that offence. Here
A has by an illegal omission concealed the
existence of B’s design and is liable to
punishment according to the provision of this
section.
******
464. A person is said to make a false
document or false electronic record—
First.—Who dishonestly or fradulently—
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a
document or part of a document;
(b) makes or transmits any electronic
record or part of any electronic record;
(c) affixes any digital signature on any
electronic record;
(d) makes any mark denoting the
execution of a document or the authenticity
of the digital signature,
Making a
false
document.
if offence
be
committed.
if offence
be
punishable
with death,
etc.;
if offence
be not
committed,

111
with the intention of causing it to be believe
that such document or part of document,
electronic record or digital signature was made,
signed, sealed, executed, transmitted or affixed
by or by the authority of a person by whom
or by whose authority he knows that it was
not made, signed, sealed, executed or affixed;
or
Secondly.—Who, without lawful authority,
dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or
otherwise, alters a document or an electronic
record in any material part thereof, after it has
been made, executed or affixed with digital
signature either by himself or by any other
person, whether such person be living or dead
at the time of such alteration; or
Thirdly.—Who dishonestly or fraudulently
causes any person to sign, seal, execute or alter
a document or an electronic record or to affix
his digital signature on any electronic record
knowing that such person by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot,
or that by reason of deception practised upon
him, he does not know the contents of the
document or electronic record or the nature of
the alteration.
Illustrations
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for
rupees 10,000, written by Z. A., in order to
defraud B, adds a cipher to the 10,000, and
makes the sum 1,00,000 intending that it may
be believed by B that Z so wrote the letter. A
has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z’s authority, affixes Z’s seal
to a document purporting to be a conveyance
of an estate from Z to A, with the intention of
selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining
from B the purchase money. A has committed
forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed
by B, payable to bearer, but without any sum
having been inserted in the cheque.

112
A fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting
the sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits
forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on
a banker, signed by A, without inserting the
sum payable and authorizes B to fill up the
cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten
thousand rupees for the purpose of making
certain payments. B fradulently fills up the
cheque by inserting the sum of twenty
thousand rupees. B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself
in the name of B without B’s authority,
intending to discount it as a genuine bill with
a banker and intending to take up the bill on
its maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with
intent to deceive the banker by leading him to
suppose that he had the security of B, and
thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of
forgery.
(f) Z’s will contains these words—“I direct
that all my remaining property be equally
divided between A, B and C.” A dishonestly
scratches out B’s name, intending that it may
be believed that the whole was let to himself
and C. A has committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory
note and makes it payable to Z or his order
by writing on the bill the words “Pay to Z or
his order” and signing the endorsement. B
dishonestly erases the words “Pay to Z or his
order”, and thereby converts the special
endorsement into a blank endorsement. B
commits forgery.
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A
afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate,
executes a conveyance of the same estate to B,
dated six months earlier than the date of the
conveyance to Z, intending it to be believe that
he had conveyed the estate to B before he
conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.

113
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally
writes down a different legatee named by Z,
and by representing to Z that he has prepared
the will according to his instructions, induces
Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B’s
name without B’s authority, certifying that A is
a man of good character and in distressed
circumstances from unforeseen misfortune,
intending by means of such letter to obtain
alms from Z and other persons. Here, as A
made a false document in order to induce Z to
part with property, A has committed forgery.
(k) A without B’s authority writes a letter
and signs it in B’s name certifying to A’s
character, intending thereby to obtain
employment under Z. A has committed forgery
inasmuch as he intended to deceive Z by the
forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to
enter into an express or implied contract for
service.
Explanation 1.— A man’s signature of his
own name may amount to forgery.
Illustrations
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of
exchange, intending that it may be believed that
the bill was drawn by another person of the
same name. A has committed forgery.
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece
of paper and signs it with Z’s name, in order
that B may afterwards write on the paper a
bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and
negotiate the bills as though it had been
accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B,
knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper
pursuant to A’s intention, B is also guilty of
forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable
to the order of a different person of the same
name. A endorses the bill in his own name,
intending to cause it to be believed that it was
endorsed by the person to whose order it was
payable: here A has committed forgery.

114
(d) A purchases an estate sold under
execution of a decree against B.B., after the
seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z,
executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal
rent and for a long period and dates the lease
six months prior to the seizure, with intent to
defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that
the lease was granted before the seizure. B,
though he executes the lease in his own name,
commits forgery by antedating it.
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency,
lodges effects with B for A’s benefit, and with
intent to defraud his creditors; and in order to
give a colour to the transaction, writes a
promissory note binding himself to pay to B
a sum for value received, and antedates the
note, intending that it may be believed to have
been made before A was on the point of
insolvency. A has committed forgery under the
first head of the definition.
Explanation 2.— The making of a false
document in the name of a fictious person,
intending it to be believed that the document
was made by real person, or in the name of a
decreased person, intending it to be believed
that the document was made by the person in
his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
Explanation 3.— For the purposes of this
section, the expression “affixing digital
signature” shall have the meaning assigned to
it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Illustration
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictious
person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the
name of such fictitious person with intent to
negotiate it. A commits forgery.
******
—————
21 of 2000.

115
EXTRACTS FROM THE I NDIAN E VIDENCE A CT, 1872
(1 OF 1872)
******
3. In this Act the following words and
expressions are used in the following senses,
unless a contrary intention appears from the
context:—
“Court” includes all Judges and
Magistrates, and all persons, except arbitrators,
legally authorised to take evidence.
“Fact” means and includes—
(1) anything, state of thing, or relation
of things, capable of being perceived by the
senses;
(2) any mental condition of which any
person is conscious.
Illustrations
(a) That there are certain objects
arranged in a certain order in a certain
place, is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw
something, is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words, is a
fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion,
has a certain intention, acts in good faith
or fradulently, or uses a particular word in
a particular sense, or is or was at a
specified time conscious of a particular
sensation, is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation,
is a fact.
One fact is said to be relevant to another
when the one is connected with the other in
any of the ways referred to in the provisions
of this Act relating to the relevancy of facts.
Interpretation
clause.
“Relevant”.
“Fact”.

116
The expression “facts in issue” means and
includes—
any fact from which, either by itself or in
connection with other facts, the existence, non-
existence, nature or extent of any right, liability,
or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or
proceeding, necessarily follows.
Explanation.— Whenever, under the
provisions of the law for the time being in force
to Civil Procedure, any Court records an issue
of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in the
answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations
A is accused of the murder of B.
At his trial the following facts may be in
issue:—
that A caused B’s death;
that A intended to cause B’s death;
that A had received grave and sudden
provocation from B;
that A, at the time of doing the act which
caused B’s death, was, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its
nature.
“Document” means any matter expressed
or described upon any substance by means of
letters, figures or marks, or by more than one
of those means, intended to be used, or which
may be used, for the purpose of recording that
matter.
Illustrations
A writing is a document:
words printed lithograhed or photographed
are documents:
A map or plan is a document:
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is
a document:
“Facts in
issue”.
“Document”.

117
A caricature is a document.
“Evidence” means and includes—
(1) all statements which the Court permits
or requires to be made before it by witnesses,
in relation to matters of fact under inquiry;
such statements are called oral evidence;
(2) all documents including electronic
records produced for the inspection of the
Court;
such documents are called documentary
evidence.
A fact is said to be proved when, after
considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes it to exist, or considers its
existence so probable that a prudent man ought,
under the circumstances of the particular case,
to act upon the supposition that it exists.
A fact is said to be disproved when, after
considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes that it does not exist, or
considers its non-existence so probable that a
prudent man ought, under the circumstances
of the particular case, to, act upon the
supposition that it does not exist.
A fact is said not to be proved when it is
neither proved nor disproved.
“India” means the territory of India
excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
the expressions “Certifying Authority”, “digital
signature”, “Digital Signature Certificate”,
“electronic form”, “electronic records”,
“information”, “secure electronic record”,
“secure digital signature” and “subscriber” shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in the Information Technology Act, 2000.
******
“Evidence”.
“Proved”.
“Disproved”.
“Not
proved”.
“India”.
20 of 2000.

118
47A. When the Court has to form an
opinion as to the digital signature of any
person, the opinion of the Certifying
Authority which has issued the Digital
Signature Certificate is a relevant fact.
******
67A. Except in the case of a secure
digital signature, if the digital signature of
any subscriber is alleged to have been
affixed to an electronic record the fact that
such digital signature is the digital
signature of the subscriber must be proved.
******
85A. The Court shall presume that
every electronic record purporting to be an
agreement containing the digital signatures
of the parties was so concluded by affixing
the digital signature of the parties.
85B. (1) In any proceedings involving a
secure electronic record, the Court shall
presume unless contrary is proved, that the
secure electronic record has not been altered
since the specific point of time to which
the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure
digital signature, the Court shall presume
unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure digital signature is
affixed by subscriber with the intention
of signing or approving the electronic
record;
(b) except in the case of a secure
electronic record or a secure digital
signature, nothing in this section shall
create any presumption relating to
authenticity and integrity of the
electronic record or any digital
signature.
Opinion as
to digital
signature
when
relevant.
Proof as to
digital
signature.
Presumption
as to
electronic
agreements.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records and
digital
signatures.

119
85C. The Court shall presume, unless
contrary is proved, that the information
listed in a Digital Signature Certificate is
correct, except for information specified as
subscriber information which has not been
verified, if the certificate was accepted by
the subscriber.
******
90A. Where any electronic record,
purporting or proved to be five years old,
is produced from any custody which the
Court in the particular case considers
proper, the Court may presume that the
digital signature which purports to be the
digital signature of any particular person
was so affixed by him or any person
authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation.—Electronic records are said
to be in proper custody if they are in the
place in which, and under the care of the
person with whom, they naturally be; but
no custody is improper if it is proved to
have had a legitimate origin, or the
circumstances of the particular case are such
as to render such an origin probable.
This Explanation applies also to section
81a.
******
———————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE INFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY
ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
******
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1 .  ( 1 ) ******
(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to,—
(a) a negotiable instrument (other than
a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881;
Presumption
as to
Digital
Signature
Certificates.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records five
years old.
Short title,
extent,
commence-
ment and
application.
26 of 1881.

120
(b) a power-of-attorney as defined in
section 1A of the Powers-of-Attorney Act,
1882;
(c) a trust as defined in section 3 of
the Indian trusts Act, 1882;
(d) a will as defined in clause (h) of
section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925
including any other testamentary
disposition by whatever name called;
(e) any contract for the sale or
conveyance of immovable property or any
interest in such property;
(f) any such class of documents or
transactions as may be notified by the
Central Government in the Official Gazettee.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
******
(d) “affixing digital signature” with its
grammatical variations and cognate
expressions means adoption of any
methodology or procedure by a person for
the purpose of authenticating an electronic
record by means of digital signature;
******
(g) “Certifying Authority” means a
person who has been granted a licence to
issue a Digital Signature Certificate under
section 24;
(h) “certification practice statement”
means a statement issued by a Certifying
Authority to specify the practices that the
Certifying Authority employs in issuing
digital Signature Certificates;
******
(j) “computer network” means the
interconnection of one or more computers
through—
7 of 1882.
2 of 1882.
39 of 1925.
Definitions.

121
(i) the use of satellite, microwave,
terrestrial line or other communication
media; and
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting
of two or more interconnected computers
whether or not the interconnection is
continuously maintained;
******
(n) “Cyber-Appellate Tribunal” means
the Cyber Regulations Appellate Tribunal
established under sub-section (1) of
section 48;
******
(v) “information” includes data, text,
images, sound, voice, codes, computer
programmes, software and data bases or
micro film or computer generated micro
fiche;
(w) “intermediary” with respect to any
particular electronic message means any
person who on behalf of another person
receives, stores or transmits that message
or provides any service with respect to that
message;
******
(zg) “subscriber” means a person in
whose name the Digital Signature
Certificate is issued;
******
CHAPTER II
D
IGITAL S IGNATURE
******
5. Where any law provides that information
or any other matter shall be authenticated by
affixing the signature or any document shall
be signed or bear the signature of any person
then, notwithstanding anything contained in
Legal
recognition
of digital
signatures.

122
such law, such requirement shall be deemed to
have been satisfied, if such information or
matter is authenticated by means of digital
signature affixed in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, “signed”, with its grammatical
variations and cognate expressions, shall, with
reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand
written signature or any mark on any document
and the expression “signature” shall be
construed accordingly.
6. (1) Where any aw provides for—
(a) the filing of any form, application
or any other document with any office,
authority, body or agency owned or
controlled by the appropriate Government
in a particular manner;
(b) the issue or grant of any licence,
permit, sanction or approval by whatever
name called in a particular manner;
(c) the receipt or payment of money in
a particular manner,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, such
requirement shall be deemed to have been
satisfied if such filling, issue, grant, receipt or
payment, as the case may be, is effected by
means of such electronic form as may be
prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may, for
the purpose of sub-section (1), by rules,
prescribe—
(a) the manner and format in which
such electronic records shall be filed, crated
or issued;
(b) the manner or method of payment
of any fee or charges for filing, creation or
issue any electronic record under clause (a).
******
Use of
electronic
records and
digital
signatures
in
Government
and its
agencies.

123
10. The Central government may, for the
purposes of this Act, by rules, prescribe—
(a) the type of digital signature;
(b) the manner and format in which
the digital signature shall be affixed;
(c) the manner or procedure which
facilitates identification of the person
affixing the digital signature;
(d) control processes and procedures to
ensure adequate integrity, security and
confidentiality of electronic records or
payments; and
(e) any other matter which is necessary
to give legal effect to digital signatures.
******
12. (1) Where the originator has not agreed
with the addressee that the acknowledgement
of receipt of electronic record be given in a
particular form or by a particular method, an
acknowledgement may be given by—
(a) any communication by the
addressee, automated or otherwise; or
(b) any conduct of the addressee,
sufficient to indicate to the originator that
the electronic record has been received.
******
CHAPTER V
S
ECURE E LECTRONIC R ECORDS AND S ECURE D IGITAL
SIGNATURES
******
15. If, by application of a security procedure
agreed to by the parties concerned, it can be
verified that a digital signature, at the time it
was affixed, was—
(a) unique to the subscriber affixing it;
Power to
make rules
by Central
Government
in respect
of digital
signature.
Acknowled-
gement of
receipt.
Secure
digital
signature.

124
(b) capable of identifying such
subscriber;
(c) created in a manner or using a
means under the exclusive control of the
subscriber and is linked to the electronic
record to which it relates in such a manner
that if the electronic record was altered the
digital signature would be invalidated,
then such digital signature shall be deemed to
be a secure digital signature.
16. The Central Government shall for the
purposes of this Act prescribe the security
procedure having regard to commercial
circumstances prevailing at the time when the
procedure was used, including—
(a) the nature of the transaction;
(b) the level of sophistication of the
parties with reference to their technological
capacity;
(c) the volume of similar transactions
engaged in by other parties;
(d) the availability of alternatives
offered to but rejected by any party;
(e) the cost of alternative procedures;
and
(f) the procedures in general use for
similar types of transactions or
communications.
******
18. The Controller may perform all or any
of the following functions, namely:—
******
(f) specifying the contents of written,
printed or visual materials and
advertisements that may be distributed or
used in respect of a Digital Signature
Certificate and the public key;
Security
procedure.
Functions of
Controller.

125
(g) specifying the form and content of
a Digital Signature Certificate and the key;
******
19. (1) ******
(2) Where any Certifying Authority is
recognised under sub-section (1), the Digital
Signature Certificate issued by such Certifying
Authority shall be valid for the purposes of
this Act.
******
20. (1) The Controller shall be the repository
of all Digital Signature Certificates issued under
this Act.
(2) The Controller shall —
(a) make use of hardware, software and
procedures that are secure from intrusion
and misuse;
(b) observe such other standards as
may be prescribed by the Central
Government,
to ensure that the secrecy and security of the
digital signatures are assumed.
(3) The Controller shall maintain a
computerised data base of all public keys in
such a manner that such data base and the
public keys are available to any member of the
public.
21. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), any person may make an
application, to the Controller, for a licence to
issue Digital Signature Certificates.
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub-
section (1), unless the applicant fulfils such
requirements with respect to qualification,
expertise, manpower, financial resources and
other infrastructure facilities, which are
necessary to issue Digital signature Certificates
Recognition
of foreign
Certifying
Authorities.
Licence to
issue Digital
Signature
Certificates.
Controller
to act as
repository.

126
as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
******
23. (1) ******
(3) No Certifying Authority whose licence
has been suspended shall issue any Digital
Signature Certificate during such suspension.
******
29. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions
of sub-section (1) of section 69, the Controller
or any person authorised by him shall, if he
has reasonable cause to suspect that any
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules
or regulations made thereunder has been
committed, have access to any computer
system, any apparatus, data or any other
material connected with such system, for the
purpose of searching or causing a search to be
made for obtaining any information or data
contained in or available to such computer
system.
******
30. Every Certifying Authority shall, —
******
(c) adhere to security procedures to
ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the
digital signatures are assured; and
******
34. (1) Every Certifying Authority shall
disclose in the manner specified by regulations—
(a) its Digital Signature Certificate
which contains the public key
corresponding to the private key used by
that Certifying authority to digitally sign
another Digital Signature Certificate;
******
Suspension
of licence.
Access to
computers
and data.
Certifying
Authority
to follow
certain
procedures.
Disclosure.

127
(d) any other fact that materially and
adversely affects either the reliability of a
digital Signature Certificate, which that
authority has issued, or the Authority’s
ability to perform its services.
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying
Authority any event has occurred or any
situation has arisen which may materially and
adversely affect the integrity of its computer
system or the conditions subject to which a
Digital Signature Certificate was granted, then,
the Certifying Authority shall —
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any
person who is likely to be affected by that
occurrence; or
(b) act in accordance with the procedure
specified in its certification practice
statement to deal with such event or
situation.
CHAPTER VII
D
IGITAL S IGNATURE C ERTIFICATES
35. (1) ******
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-
section (1), the Certifying Authority may, after
consideration of the certification practice
statement or the other statement under sub-
section (3) and after making such enquiries as
it may deem fit, grant the Digital Signature
Certificate or for reasons to be recorded in
writing, reject the application:
Provided that no Digital Signature
Certificate shall be granted unless the Certifying
Authority is satisfied that —
(a) the applicant holds the private key
corresponding to the public key to be listed
in the Digital Signature Certificate;
Certifying
Authority
to issue
Digital
Signature
Certificate.

128
(b) the applicant holds a private key,
which is capable of creating a digital
signature;
(c) the public key to be listed in the
certificate can be used to verify a digital
signature affixed by the private key held
by the applicant:
Provided further that no application shall
be rejected unless the applicant has been given
a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed rejection.
******
CHAPTER IX
P
ENALTIES AND A DJUDICATION
43. If any person without permission of the
owner or any other person who is incharge of
a computer, computer system or computer
network,—
(a) accesses or secures access to such
computer, computer system or computer
network;
******
46. (1) For the purpose of adjudging
under this Chapter whether any person has
committed a contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of any rule,
regulation, direction or order made
thereunder the Central Government shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3),
appoint any officer not below the rank of
a Director to the Government of India or
an equivalent officer of a State Government
to be an adjudicating officer for holding an
inquiry in the manner prescribed by the
Central Government.
******
Penalty for
damage to
computer,
computer
system, etc.
Power to
adjudicate.

129
CHAPTER X
THE C YBER R EGULATIONS A PPELLATE T RIBUNAL
48. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish one or more appellate
tribunals to be known as the Cyber Regulations
Appellate Tribunal.
******
49. A Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall consist
of one person only (hereinafter referred to as
the Presiding Officer of the Cyber Appellate
Tribunal) to be appointed, by notification, by
the Central Government.
50. A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as the Presiding Officer of a Cyber
Appellate Tribunal unless he —
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to
be, a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) is or has been a member of the
Indian Legal Service and is holding or has
held a post in Grade I of that Service for
at least three years.
51. The Presiding Officer of a Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for a term
of five years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or until he attains the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.
52. The salary and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service
including pension, gratuity and other retirement
benefits, of, the Presiding Officer or a Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be
prescribed:
Provided that neither the salary and
allowances nor the other terms and conditions
of service of the Presiding Officer shall be
varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
Establishment
of Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.
Composition
of Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.
Qualifications
for
appointment
as Presiding
Officer of
the Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.
Term of
office.
Salary,
allowances
and other
terms and
conditions
of service
of Presiding
Officer.

130
53. If, for reason other than temporary
absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of
the Presiding Officer of a Cyber Appellate
Tribunal, then the Central Government shall
appoint another person in accordance with the
provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and
the proceedings may be continued before the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal from the stage at
which the vacancy is filled.
54. (1) The Presiding Officer of a Cyber
appellate Tribunal may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central
Government, resign his office:
Provided that the said Presiding Officer
shall, unless he is permitted by the Central
Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three
months from the date of receipt of such notice
or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the
expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
(2) The Presiding Officer of a Cyber
Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from
his office except by an order by the Central
Government on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry
made by a Judge of the supreme Court in
which the presiding Officer concerned has been
informed of the charges against him and given
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of these charges.
(3) The Central Government may, by rules,
regulate the procedure for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid
Presiding Officer.
55. No order of the Central Government
appointing any person as the Presiding Officer
of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be called
in question in any manner and no act or
proceeding before a Cyber Appellate Tribunal
Filling up
of
vacancies.
Resignation
and
removal.
Orders
constituting
Appellate
Tribunal to be
final and not
to invalidate
its
proceedings.

131
shall be called in question in any manner on
the ground merely of any defect in the
constitution of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal.
56. (1) The Central Government shall
provide the Cyber Appellate Tribunal with such
officers and employees as that Government may
think fit.
(2) The officers and employees of the Cyber
appellate Tribunal shall discharge their
functions under general superintendence of the
Presiding Officer.
(3) The salaries, allowances and other
conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Cyber appellate Tribunal shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
******
64. A penalty imposed under this Act, if it
is not paid, shall be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue and the licence or the Digital
Signature Certificate, as the case may be, shall
be suspended till the penalty is paid.
******
66. (1) Whoever with the intent to cause of
knowing that he is likely to cause wrongful
loss or damage to the public or any person
destroys or deletes or alters any information
residing in a computer resource or diminishes
is value or utility or affects it injuriously by
any means, commits hacking.
(2) Whoever commits hacking shall be
punished with imprisonment up to three years,
or with fine which may extended up to two
lakh rupees, or with both.
67. Whoever publishes or transmits or
causes to be published in the electronic form,
any material which is lascivious or appeals to
the prurient interest or if its effect is such as
to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who
Staff of the
Cyber
Appellate
Tribunal.
Recovery of
penalty.
Hacking
with
computer
system.
Publishing
of
information
which is
obscene in
electronic
form.

132
are likely, having regard to all relevant
circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished
on first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to
five years and with fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees and in the event of a second
or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend
to ten years and also with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees.
68. (1) ******
(2) Any person who fails to comply with
any order under sub-section (1) shall be guilty
of an offence and shall be liable on conviction
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years or to a fine not exceeding two lakh
rupees or to both.
69. (1) If the Controller is satisfied that it
is necessary or expedient so to do in the interest
of the sovereignty or integrity of India, the
security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States or public order or for preventing
incitement to the commission of any cognizable
offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
by order, direct any agency of the Government
to intercept any information transmitted
through any computer resource.
(2) The subscriber or any person incharge
of the computer resource shall, when called
upon by any agency which has been directed
under sub-section (1), extend all facilities and
technical assistance to decrypt the information.
(3) The subscriber or any person who fails
to assist the agency referred to in sub-section (2)
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years.
70. (1) The appropriate Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
that any computer, computer system or
computer network to be a protected system.
******
Power of
Controller
to give
directions.
Directions
of Controler
to a
subscriber
to extend
facilities to
decrypt
information.
Protected
system.

133
71. Whoever makes any misrepresentation
to, or suppress any material fact from, the
Controller or the Certifying Authority for
obtaining any licence or Digital Signature
Certificate, as the case may be, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
******
73. (1) No person shall publish a Digital
Signature Certificate or otherwise make it
available to any other person with the
knowledge that —
******
74. Whoever knowingly creates, publishes
or otherwise makes available a Digital Signature
Certificate for any fradulent or unlawful
purpose shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees,
or with both.
******
77. No penalty imposed or confiscation
made under this Act shall prevent the
imposition of any other punishment to which
the person affected thereby is liable under any
other law for the time being in force.
78. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a police
officer not below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police shall investigate any
offence under this Act.
CHAPTER XII
N
ETWORK SERVICE PROVIDERS NOT TO BE LIABLE IN
CERTAIN CASES
79. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that no person providing any service
as a network service provider shall be liable
under this Act, rules or regulations made
thereunder for any third party information or
Penalty for
misre-
presentation.
Penalty for
publishing
Digital
Signature
Certificate
false in
certain
particulars.
Publication
for
fraudulent
purpose.
Penalties or
confiscation
not to
interfere
with other
punishments.
Power to
investigate
offences.
Network
service
provdiers
not to be
liable in
certain
cases.
2 of 1974.

134
data made available by him if he proves that
the offence or contravention was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence or contravention.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “Network service provider” means
an intermediary;
(b) “third party information” means any
information dealt with by a network service
provider in his capacity as an intermediary.
CHAPTER XIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
80. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any
police officer, not below the rank of a Deputy
Superintendent of Police, or any other officer
of the Central Government or a State
Government authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf may enter any public
place and search and arrest without warrant
any person found therein who is reasonably
suspected or having committed or of
committing or of being about to commit any
offence under this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the expression “public place” includes
any public conveyance, any hotel, any shop or
any other place intended for use by, or
accessible to the public.
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub-
section (1) by an officer other than a police
officer, such officer shall, without unnecessary
delay, take or send the person arrested before
a magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or
before the officer-in charge of a police station.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall, subject to the provisions
Power of
police
officer and
other
officers to
enter,
search, etc.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

135
of this section, apply, so far as may be, in
relation to any entry, search or arrest, made
under this section.
******
82. The Presiding Officer and other officers
and employees of a Cyber Appellate Tribunal,
the Controller, the Deputy Controller and the
Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be
public servants within the meaning of section
21 of the Indian Penal Code.
******
87. (1) ******
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely;—
(a) the manner in which any
information or matter may be authenticated
by means of digital signature under section
5;
(b) the electronic form in which filing,
issue, grant or payment shall be effected
under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(c) the manner and format in which
electronic records shall be filed, or issued
and the method of payment under sub-
section (2) of section 6;
(d) the matters relating to the type of
digital signature, manner and format in
which it may be affixed under section 10;
******
(n) the form in which application for
issue of a Digital Signature Certificate may
be made under sub-section (1) of section
35;
(o) the fee to be paid to the Certifying
authority for issue of a Digital Signature
Controller,
Deputy
Collector
and
Assistant
Controllers
to be public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
45 of 1860.

136
Certificate under sub-section (2) of
section 35;
******
(3) Every notification made by the Central
Government under clause (f) of sub-section (4)
of section 1 and every rule made by it shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the notification or the rule or both Houses agree
that the notification or the rule should not be
made, the notification or the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that
notification or rule.
******
90. (1) ******
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely;—
******
(c) any other matter which is required
to be provided by rules by the State
Government.
******
91. The Indian Penal Code shall be
amended in the manner specified in the First
Schedule to this Act.
Power of
State
Government
to make
rules.
Amendment
of Act 45
of 1860.

137
92. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall be
amended in the manner specified in the Second
Schedule to this Act.
93. The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891
shall be amended in the manner specified in
the Third Schedule to this Act.
94. The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
shall be amended in the manner specified in
the Fourth Schedule to this Act.
——————
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 91)
A
MENDMENTS TO THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
(45 OF 1860)
1. After section 29, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“29A. The words “electronic record”
shall have the meaning assigned to them
in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 2
of the information Technology Act, 2000.”.
2. In section 167, for the words “such public
servant, charged with the preparation or
translation of any document, frames or translate
that document”, the words “such public
servant, charged with the preparation or
translation of any document or electronic
record, frames, prepares or translates that
document or electronic record” shall be
substituted.
3. In section 172, for the words “produce a
document in a Court of Justice”, the words
“produce a document or an electronic record
in a Court of Justice” shall be substituted.
4. In section 173, for the words “to produce
a document in a court of Justice”, the words
“to produce a document or electronic record in
a Court of Justice” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of Act 1 of
1872.
Amendment
of Act 18
of 1891.
Amendment
of Act 2 of
1934.
Electronic
record.
21 of 2000.

138
5. In section 175, for the word “document”
at both the places where it occurs, the words
“document or electronic record” shall be
substituted.
6. In section 192, for the words “makes any
false entry in any book or record, or makes
any document containing a false statement”, the
words “makes any false entry in any book or
record, or electronic record or makes any
document or electronic record containing a false
statement” shall be substituted.
7. In section 204, for the word “document”
at both the places where it occurs, the words
“document or electronic record” shall be
substituted.
8. in section 463, for the words “Whoever
makes any false documents or part of a
document with intent to cause damage or
injury”, the words “Whoever makes any false
documents or false electronic record or part of
a document or electronic record, with intent to
cause damage or injury” shall be substituted.
9. In section 464,—
(a) for the portion beginning with the
words “A person is said to make a false
document” and ending with the words “by
reason of deception practised upon him, he
does not know the contents of the
document or the nature of the alteration”,
the following shall be substituted,
namely:—
“A person is said to make a false
document or false electronic record—
First —Who dishonestly or fraudu-
lently—
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a
document or part of a document;
(b) makes or transmits any electronic
record or part of any electronic record;

139
(c) affixes any digital signature on any
electronic record;
(d) makes any mark denoting the
execution of a document or the authenticity
of the digital signature,
with the intention of causing it to be
believed that such document or part of
document, electronic record or digital signature
was made, signed, sealed, executed, transmitted
or affixed by or by the authority of a person
by whom or by whose authority he knows that
it was not made, signed, sealed, executed or
affixed; or
Secondly—Who, without lawful authority,
dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or
otherwise, alters a document or an electronic
record in any material part thereof, after it has
been made, executed or affixed with digital
signature either by himself or by any other
person, whether such person be living or death
at the time of such alteration; or
Thirdly—Who dishonestly or fraudulently
causes any person to sign, seal, execute or alter
a document or an electronic record or to affix
his digital signature on any electronic record
knowing that such person by reason of
unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot,
or that by reason of deception practised upon
him, he does not know the contents of the
document or electronic record or the nature of
the alteration.”;
(b) after Explanation 2, the following
Explanation  shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
‘Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this
section, the expression “affixing digital
signature” shall have the meaning assigned to
it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section (2)
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.’.
21 of 2000.

140
10. In section 466,—
(a) for the words “Whoever forges a
document”, the words “Whoever forges a
document or an electronic record” shall be
substituted;
(b) the following Explanation shall be
inserted at the end, namely:—
‘Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section, “register” includes any list, data or
record of any entries maintained in the
electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000’.
11. In section 468, for the words “document
forged”, the words “document or electronic
record forged” shall be substituted.
12. In section 469, for the words “intending
that the document forged”, the words
“intending that the document or electronic
record forged” shall be substituted.
13. In section 470, for the words
“document”, in both the places where it occurs,
the words “document or electronic record” shall
be substituted.
14. In section 471, for the word
“document”, wherever it occurs, the words
“document or electronic record” shall be
substituted.
15. In section 474, for the portion beginning
with the words “Whoever has in his possession
any document” and ending with the words “if
the document is one of the description
mentioned in section 466 of this Code”, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“Whoever has in his possession any
document or electronic record, knowing the
same to be forged and intending that the
same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be
21 of 2000.

141
used as a genuine, shall, if the document
or electronic record is one of the description
mentioned in section 466 of this Code.”
16. In section 476, for the words “any
document”, the words “any document or
electronic record” shall be substituted.
17. In section 477A, for the words “book,
paper, writing” at both the places where they
occur, the words “book, electronic record, paper,
writing” shall be substituted.
———————
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 92)
AMENDMENTS TO THE I NDIAN E VIDENCE A CT, 1872
(1 OF 1872)
1. In section 3,—
(a) in the definition of “Evidence”, for
the words “all documents produced for the
inspection of the Court”, the words “all
documents including electronic records
produced for the inspection of the Court”
shall be substituted;
(b) after the definition of “India”, the
following shall be inserted, namely;—
‘the expressions “Certifying Authority”
“digital signature”, “digital signature
certificate”, “electronic form”, “electronic
records”, “information”, “secure electronic
record”, “secure digital signature” and
“subscriber” shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in the Information
Technology Act, 2000.’.
2. In section 17, for the words “oral or
documentary”, the words “oral or documentary
or contained in electronic form” shall be
substituted.
21 of 2000.

142
3. After section 22, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“22A. Oral admissions as to the
contents of electronic records are not
relevant, unless the genuineness of the
electronic record produced is in question.”.
4. In section 34, for the words “Entries in
the books of account”, the words “Entries in
the books of account, including those
maintained in an electronic form” shall be
substituted.
5. In section 35, for the word “record”, in
both the places where it occurs, the words
“record or an electronic record” shall be
substituted.
6. For section 39, the following section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“39. When any statement of which
evidence is given forms part of a longer
statement, or of a conversation or part of
an isolated document, or is contained in a
document which forms part of a book, or
is contained in part of electronic record or
of a connected series of letters or papers,
evidence shall be given of so much and no
more of the statement, conversation,
document, electronic record, book or series
of letters or papers as the Court considers
necessary in that particular case to the full
understanding of the nature and effect of
the statement, and of the circumstances
under which it was made.”.
7. After section 47, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“47A. When the Court has to form an
opinion as to the digital signature of any
person, the opinion of the Certifying
authority which has issued the Digital
Signature Certificate is a relevant fact.”.
When oral
admission
as to
contents of
electronic
records are
relevant.
What
evidence to
be given
when
statement
forms part
of a
conversation,
document,
electronic
record,
book or
series of
letters or
papers.
Opinion as
to digital
signature
when
relevant.

143
8. In section 59, for the words “contents of
documents”, the words “contents of documents
or electronic records” shall be substituted.
9. After section 65, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely;—
‘65A. The contents of electronic records
may be proved in accordance with the
provisions of section 65B.
65B. (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, any information
contained in an electronic record which is
printed on a paper, stored, recorded or
copied in optical or magnetic media
produced by a computer (hereinafter
referred to as the computer output) shall
be deemed to be also a document, if the
conditions mentioned in this section are
satisfied in relation to the information and
computer in question and shall be
admissible in any proceedings, without
further proof or production of the original,
as evidence of any contents of the original
or of any fact stated therein of which direct
evidence would be admissible.
(2) the conditions referred to in sub-
section (1) in respect of a computer output
shall be the following, namely;—
(a) the computer output containing the
information was produced by the computer
during the period over which the computer
was used regularly to store or process
information for the purposes of any
activities regularly carried on over that
period by the person having lawful control
over the use of the computer;
(b) during the said period, information
of the kind contained in the electronic
record or of the kind form which the
information so contained is derived was
regularly fed into the computer in the
ordinary course of the said activities.
Special
provision as
to evidence
relating to
electronic
record.
Admissibility
of electronic
records.

144
(c) throughout the material part of the
said period, the computer was operating
properly or, if not, then in respect of any
period in which it was not operating
properly or was out of operation during
that part of the period, was not such as to
affect the electronic record or the accuracy
of its contents; and
(d) the information contained in the
electronic record reproduces or is derived
form such information fed into the
computer in the ordinary course of the said
activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of
storing or processing information for the
purposes of any activities regularly carried on
over that period as mentioned in clause (a) of
sub-section (2) was regularly performed by
computers, whether—
(a) by a combination of computers
operating over that period; or
(b) by different computers operating in
succession over that period; or
(c) by different combinations of
computers operating in succession over that
period; or
(d) in any other manner involving the
successive operation over that period, in
whatever order, of one or more computers
and one or more combinations of
computers,
all the computers used for that purpose during
that period shall be treated for the purposes of
this section as constituting a single computer;
and references in this section to a computer
shall be construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired
to give a statement in evidence by virtue of
this section, a certificate doing any of the
following things, that is to say,—

145
(a) identifying the electronic record
containing the statement and describing the
manners in which it was produced.
(b) giving such particulars of any
device involved in the production of that
electronic record as may be appropriate for
the purpose of showing that the electronic
record was produced by a computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to
which the conditions mentioned in sub-
section (2) relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person
occupying a responsible official position in
relation to the operation of the relevant device
or the management of the relevant activities
(whichever is appropriate) shall be evidence of
any matter stated in the certificate; and for the
purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient
for a matter to be stated to the best of the
knowledge and belief of the person stating it.
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) information shall taken to be
supplied to a computer if it is supplied
thereto in any appropriate form and
whether it is so supplied directly or (with
or without human intervention) by means
of any appropriate equipment;
(b) whether in the course of activities
carried on by any official, information is
supplied with a view to its being stored or
processed for the purposes of those
activities, by a computer operated otherwise
than in the course of those that information,
of duly supplied to that computer, shall be
taken to be supplied to it in the course of
those activities;
(c) a computer output shall be taken to
have been produced by a computer
whether it was produced by it directly or
(with or without human intervention) by
means of any appropriate equipment.

146
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section any reference to information being
derived from other information shall be a
reference to its being derived therefrom by
calculation, comparison or any other process.’.
10. After section 67, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“67A. Except in the case of a secure
digital signature, if the digital signature of
any subscriber is alleged to have been
affixed to an electronic record the fact that
such digital signature is the digital
signature of the subscriber must be
proved.”
11. After section 73, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘73A. In order to ascertain whether a
digital signature is that of the person by
whom it purports to have been affixed, the
Court may direct—
(a) that person or the Controller or the
Certifying Authority to produce the Digital
Signature Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public
key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate
and verify the digital signature purported
to have been affixed by that person.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, “Controller” means the Controller
appointed under sub-section (1) of section
17 of the Information Technology Act,
2000.’.
12. After section  81, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“81A. The Court shall presume the
genuineness of every electronic record
purporting to be the Official Gazette, or
purporting to be electronic record directed
by any law to be kept by any person, if
Proof as to
digital
signature.
Proof as to
verification
of digital
signature.
Presumption
as to
Gazettes in
electronic
forms.
21 of 2000.

147
such electronic record is kept substantially
in the form required by law and is
produced from proper custody.”.
13. After section 85, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“85A. The Court shall presume that
every electronic record purporting to be an
agreement containing the digital signatures
of the parties was so concluded by affixing
the digital signature of the parties.
85B. (1) In any proceedings involving a
secure electronic record, the Court shall
presume unless contrary is proved, that the
secure electronic record has not been altered
since the specific point of time to which
the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure
digital signature, the Court shall presume
unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure digital signature is affixed
by subscriber with the intention of signing
or approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure
electronic record or a secure digital
signature, nothing in this section shall create
any presumption relating to authenticity
and integrity of the electronic record or any
digital signature.
85C. The Court shall presume, unless
contrary is proved, that the information
listed in a Digital Signature Certificate is
correct, except for information specified as
subscriber information which has not been
verified, if the certificate was accepted by
the subscriber.”.
14. After section 88, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘88A. The Court may presume that an
electronic message forwarded by the
Presumption
as to
electronic
agreements.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records and
digital
signatures.
Presumption
as to
Digital
Signature
Certificates.
Presumption
as to
electronic
messages.

148
originator through an electronic mail server
to the addressee to whom the message
purports to be addressed corresponds with
the message as fed into his computer for
transmission; but the Court shall not make
any presumption as to the person by whom
such message was sent.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, the expression “addressee” and
“originator” shall have the same meanings
respectively assigned to them in clauses (b)
and (za) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of
the Information Technology Act, 2000.’.
15. After section 90, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“90A. Where any electronic record,
purporting or proved to be five years old,
is produced from any custody which the
court in the particular case considers
proper, the Court may presume that the
digital signature which purports to be the
digital signature of any particular person
was so affixed by him or any person
authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation.—Electronic records are said
to be in proper custody if they are in the
place in which, and under the care of the
person with whom, they naturally be; but
no custody is improper if it is proved to
have had a legitimate origin, or the
circumstances of the particular case are such
as to render such an origin probable.
This Explanation applies also to section
81A.”.
16. For section 131, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“131. No one shall be compelled to
produce documents in his possession or
electronic records under his control, which
any other person would be entitled to
Presumption
as to
electronic
records five
years old.
Production
of
documents
or electronic
records
which
21 of 2000.

149
refuse to produce if they were in his
possession or control, unless such last-
mentioned person consents to their
production.”.
——————
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 93)
A
MENDMENTS TO THE B ANKERS’ B OOKS E VIDENCE
ACT, 1891
(18 OF 1891)
1. In section 2—
(a) for clause (3), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(3) “bankers’ books” include ledgers,
day-books, cash-books, account-books and
all other books used in the ordinary
business of a bank whether kept in the
written form or as printouts of data stored
in a floppy, disc, tape or any other form of
electro-magnetic data storage device;
(b) for clause (8), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(8) “certified copy” means when the
books of bank,—
(a) are maintained in written form, a
copy of any entry in such books together
with a certificate written at the foot of such
copy that it is a true copy of such entry,
that such entry is contained in one of the
ordinary books of the bank and was made
in the usual and ordinary course of
business and that such book is still in the
custody of the bank, and where the copy
was obtained by a mechanical or other
process which in itself ensured the accuracy
of the copy, a further certificate to that
effect, but where the book from which such
copy was prepared has been destroyed in
another
person,
having
possession,
could refuse
to produce.

150
the usual course of the bank’s business after
the date on which the copy had been so
prepared, a further certificate to that effect,
each such certificate being dated and
subscribed by the principal accountant or
manager of the bank with his name and
official title; and
(b) consist of printouts of data stored
in a floppy, disc, tape or any other electro-
magnetic data storage device, a printout of
such entry or a copy of such printout
together with such statements certified in
accordance with the provisions of section
2A.’.
2. After section 2, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“2A. A printout of entry or a copy of
printout referred to in sub-section (8) of
section 2 shall be accompanied by the
following, namely:—
(a) a certificate to the effect that it is a
printout of such entry or a copy of such
printout by the principal accountant or
branch manager; and
(b) a certificate by a person in-charge
of computer system containing a brief
description of the computer system and the
particulars of—
(A) the safeguards adopted by the
system to ensure that data is entered or
any other operation performed only by
authorised persons;
(B) the safeguards adopted to prevent
and detect unauthorised change of data;
(C) the safeguards available to retrieve
data that is lost due to systemic failure or
any other reasons;
(D) the manner in which data is
transferred from the system to removable
Conditions
in the
printout.

151
media like floppies, discs, tapes or other
electro-magnetic data storage devices;
(E) the mode of verification in order to
ensure that data has been accurately
transferred to such removable media;
(F) the mode of identification of such
data storage devices;
(G) the arrangements for the storage
and custody of such storage devices;
(H) the safeguards to prevent and
detect any tampering with the system; and
(I) any other factor which will vouch
for the integrity and accuracy of the system.
(c) a further certificate from the person
in-charge of the computer system to the
effect that to the best of his knowledge and
belief, such computer system operated
properly at the material time, he was
provided with all the relevant data and the
printout in question represents correctly, or
is appropriately derived from, the relevant
data.”.
———————
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 94)
A
MENDMENTS TO THE R ESERVE B ANK OF I NDIA
ACT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
In the  Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in
section 58, in sub-section (2), after clause (p),
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(pp) the regulation of fund transfer
through electronic means between the banks
or between the banks and other financial
institutions referred to in clause (c) of
section 45-I, including the laying down of
the conditions subject to which banks and
2 of 1934.

152
other financial institutions shall participate
in such fund transfers, the manner of such
fund transfers and the rights and
obligations of the participants in such fund
transfers;”.
******

153
Lok Sabha
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000.
——————
(SHRI D AYANIDHI M ARAN, Minister of Communications
and Information Technology)

154
ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th January, 2007 from 1100
hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Sohan Potai
4. Shri Tufani Saroj
5. Shri P .C. Thomas
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Department of Information Technology
1. Shri Jainder Singh — Secretary
2. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar — Addl. Secy.
3. Shri C. Balakrishnan — Addl. Secy. & Financial
Advisor

155
4. Shri R. Chanrasekhar — Addl. Secy.
5. Shri Pankaj Agrawala — Jt. Secy.
6. Dr. A.K. Chakravorti — Advisor
7. Dr. U.P . Phadke — Advisor
8. Dr. B.K. Gairola — Director General (NIC)
9. Dr. S.L. Sarnot — DG, STQC
10. Dr. Gulshan Rai — Sr. Director and ED-ERNET
11. Debjani Nag — Deputy Controller of
Certifying authority
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Information
Technology to the sitting of the Committee. He, then, requested the
representatives of the Department to give a brief presentation on ‘the
Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
3. Accordingly, the representatives of the Department gave a power
point presentation on the various aspects of the Bill and attended to
the queries of the Members.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing valuable information on the Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

156
ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 22nd  February, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Narahari Mahato
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
7. Shri Motur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
9. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Information Technology
1. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R. Chandrasekhar — Additional Secretary
3. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan — Joint Secretary & Financial
Advisor

157
4. Shri Pankaj Agrawala — Joint Secretary
5. Dr. U.P . Phadke — Advisor
6. Dr. S.L. Sarnot — Director General, STQC
7. Dr. Gulshan Rai — Senior Director and ED-
ERNET
8. Shri B.K. Gairola — Director General, NIC
9. Dr. N. Vijyaditya — Controller of Certifying
Authority
10. Shri S. Basu — Senior Director
11. Shri V .B. Tenaja — Senior Director
12. Shri R. Rastogi — Senior Director
13. Mrs. Devjani Nag — Deputy Controller of
Certifying Authority
14. Dr. B. Vasanta — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Information
Technology to the sitting of the Committee. He, then, requested the
representatives of the Department to further brief the Committee on
‘the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
3. Accordingly, the representatives of the Department briefed the
Committee on various aspects of the Bill and responded to further
queries of the Members.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable information
on the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

158
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on the 20th April, 2007 (Friday) from
1500 hours to 1800 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3.  Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri P .C. Thomas
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
10. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
11. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of NASSCOM
1. Shri Kiran Karnik — President
2. Shri Shyamal Ghosh — Adviser, Cyber Security
3. Shri Nandkumar Sarvade — Director, Cyber Security &
Compliance

159
4. Shri Ameet Nivsarkar — Vice President
5. Shri Rajdeep Sahrawat — Vice President
Representative of Tulir-Centre for Prevention &
Healing of Child Sexual Abuse
Ms. Vidya Reddy — Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of NASSCOM to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of
NASSCOM to give their views/suggestions on various aspects of the
Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
3. The representatives of NASSCOM accordingly gave their views/
suggestions on various Sections/Clauses of the Bill through a power-
point presentation. They also attended to the queries of the Members
on the Bill.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of NASSCOM for
appearing before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable
information on the Bill.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned for tea.
5. The Committee reassembled after tea-break and the Chairman,
then, welcomed the representative of Tulir-Centre for Prevention &
Healing of Child Sexual Abuse to the sitting of the Committee. The
representative then gave a brief power-point presentation on ‘Child
Abuse’ and attended to the queries of the Members.
6. The Chairman, then, thanked the representative of Tulir for
appearing before the Committee and for furnishing valuable information
on Child Abuse.
The witness, then, withdrew.
7. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports
for consideration and adopted the same:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***

160
8. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above Draft Reports in light of the factual verifications made by the
concerned Ministry/Departments and present the same to the House
on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

161
ANNEXURE V
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th May, 2007 from 1500 hours
to 1730 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
6. Shri Narahari Mahato
7. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
9. Shri Motiur Rahman
10. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
Non-Official Witness
Shri Pavan Duggal — Advocate, Supreme Court
of India
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the non-official witness to the sitting of the Committee.
He, then, requested the witness to present his views/suggestions on
‘the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.

162
3. Accordingly, the witness presented his views on various aspects
of the Bill with particular reference to cyber crime and responded to
the queries of the Members.
4. The Chairman then thanked the non-official witness for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing valuable information on the
‘Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
The witness, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
5. Thereafter, the Committee decided to seek further extension of
time upto the end of the Monsoon Session in 2007 to finalise and
present the Report on the Bill to the House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

163
ANNEXURE VI
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 14th May, 2007 from 1500
hours to 1540 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
3. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
4. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
6. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
7. Shri Motiur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri K.N. Chaturvedi — Secretary
2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta — Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Reeta Vashistha — Deputy Legislative Counsel

164
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Law
& Justice (Legislative Department) to the sitting of the Committee. He,
then, requested the representatives of the Department to respond to
the queries of the Members on various legal aspects of the ‘Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
3. During the course of the deliberations, the Committee expressed
their displeasure over the unpreparedness of the representatives of the
Legislative Department in appropriately responding to the queries of
the Members.
4. The Committee directed the Secretariat that a List of Points on
the Bill may be handed over to the Legislative Department for obtaining
written replies. Accordingly, the List of Points was provided to the
Secretary, Legislative Department.
5. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

165
ANNEXURE VII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21st May, 2007 from 1500 hrs.
to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri G. Nizamuddin
5. Shri Lalmani Prasad
6. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
7. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI)
Representatives of the FICCI
1. Shri Vivek Bharati — Advisor-National Policy,
Programme & Projects,
FICCI

166
2. Dr. K.K. Bajaj — Global Head, Information
Risk Management and
Managed Security Services
Tata Consultancy Services
3. Shri Pavan Duggal — Advocate, Supreme Court
of India
4. Shri Hari S. Bhardwaj — Legal Counsel, Infosys
Technologies Limited
5. Shri Deepak Bhardwaj — Director-Technology Policy
& Standards, Intel
Technology India Pvt. Ltd.
6. Shri Vivek Agarwal — Company Secretary &
Head-legal, CMC Limited
7. Shri Deepak Jacob — Head-Legal & Compliance,
India Pvt. Limited
8. Shri Tabrez Ahmad — Industry Affairs, Microsoft
Corporation (I) Pvt. Ltd.
9. Ms. Priya Bhattacharjee — Assistant Director, FICCI
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Federation of Indian Chamber
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) to the sitting of the Committee.
He then, requested the representatives of the FICCI to give a brief
presentation highlighting their views/suggestions on the proposed
amendments in the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
3. Accordingly, the representatives of FICCI gave a power point
presentation covering various aspects of the bill. They also replied to
the queries of the Members.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives for appearing before
the Committee and for furnishing valuable information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
5. *** *** ***
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

167
ANNEXURE VIII
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 22nd May, 2007 from 1500 hrs.
to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri G. Nizamuddin
5. Shri Sohan Potai
6. Shri Lalmani Prasad
7. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
9. Shri Narahari Mahato
10. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
12. Shri Dara Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Shri P .K.H. Tharakan — Secretary (R) (Retd.)
Representatives of Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (ASSOCHAM)
1. Shri Pavan Duggal — Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court of India

168
2. Shri Ramji Srinivasan — Advocate
3. Shri Deepak Gupta — American Express
4. Shri D.P . Vadya — Hughes Communications
5. Shri Amit Verma — Acme Telepower
6. Shri Jagdish Agarwal — Acme Telepower
7. Shri T.R. Dua — COAI
8. Shri S.V . Ramana — Genpact
9. Maj. Gen. Sharma — Satyam
10. Shri Amitabh Singhal — ISPAI
11. Shri Amit Dev — Time Broadband
12. Shri R.K. Singh — MCorp Global
13. Shri Ajay Sharma — ASSOCHAM
14. Shri Varun Aggarwal — ASSOCHAM
2. *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** ***
4. The Chairman then welcomed Shri P .K.H. Tharakan, Secretary
(R) (Rtd.) to the sitting of the Committee. He requested the non-official
witness to give his views/suggestions on various aspects of the Bill
and respond to the queries of the Members.
5. Accordingly, the non-official witness presented his views/
suggestions on the proposed amendments in the Bill and responded
to the queries of the Members.
6. The Chairman thanked the witness for appearing before the
Committee and for furnishing valuable information on the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
7. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
ASSOCHAM to the sitting of the Committee. He, then, requested the
representatives to give a brief presentation on various aspects of the
Bill highlighting ASSOCHAM’s views/suggestions.
8. Accordingly, the representatives of ASSOCHAM gave a power
point presentation and responded to the queries of the Members on
several aspects of the Bill.

169
9. The Chairman thanked the representatives of ASSOCHAM for
appearing before the Committee and for furnishing valuable information
that the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the
Bill.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

170
ANNEXURE IX
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th June, 2007 from
1430 hours to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri Sohan Potai
6. Shri Tufani Saroj
7. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
8. Shri Narahari Mahato
9. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Motiur Rahman
11. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Cyril John — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary

171
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
1. Shri M.L. Sharma — Special Director
2. Shri Navneet Ranjan Wasan — Joint Director
3. Shri Rajni Kant Mishra — Joint Director
4. Shri P .V . Ramasastry — Dy. Inspector General of
Police
The Ministry of Law & Justice
(Legislative Department)
1. Shri K.N. Chaturvedi — Secretary
2. Shri S.R. Dhaleta — Joint Secretary
3. Ms. Reeta Vashistha — Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Special Director and
other officers of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to the sitting
of the Committee. He, then, requested the representatives of the CBI
to present their views/suggestions on ‘Information Technology
(Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
3. Accordingly, the witnesses presented their views/suggestions on
various aspects of the Bill and also responded to queries of the
Members.
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing valuable information on the ‘Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. The Committee, then, took the evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department). To begin
with, the Chairman asked the Secretary of the Department to make an
oral presentation on various legal aspects of the ‘Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’. Clarifications were, thereafter,
sought by the Committee on information submitted previously by the
Department and queries were also raised by the Members on several
new aspects and issues. The evidence was, however, inconclusive.
The witness, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

172
ANNEXURE X
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th July, 2007 from 1500 hrs.
to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Sohan Potai
7. Shri Lalmani Prasad
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
9. Shri P .C. Thomas
10. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
11. Shri Ramesh Dube
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
13. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
14. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
15. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary

173
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Information Technology
1. Shri Jainder Singh — Secretary
2. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan — Joint Secretary & Financial
Advisor
3. Shri Pankaj Agrawala — Joint Secretary
4. Shri N. Ravi Shankar — Joint Secretary
5. Dr. U.P . Phadke — Advisor
6. Shri A.K. Chakravorti — Advisor
7. Dr. Gulshan Rai — ED-ERNET
8. Dr. N. Vijyaditya — Controller of Certifying
Authority
9. Shri B.K. Gairola — Director General, NIC
10. Shri S. Basu — Senior Director
11. Dr. B. Vasanta — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Information
Technology to the sitting of the Committee. He, then, requested the
representatives of the Department to attend to further queries of the
Members on ‘the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’.
3. Accordingly, the representatives of the Department attended to
the further queries of the Members on various aspects of the Bill.
4. As some more points still remained to be clarified, the Committee
decided to hold another meeting on the Bill on a later date.
5. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable information
on the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

174
ANNEXURE XI
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd July, 2007 from 1100 hrs.
to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Shri G. Nizamuddin
6. Shri Lalmani Prasad
7. Shri Tufani Saroj
8. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
9. Shri Narahari Mahato
10. Shri Ramesh Dube
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Motiur Rahman
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Department of Information Technology
1. Shri Jainder Singh — Secretary
2. Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar — Additional Secretary

175
3. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan — Joint Secretary & Financial
Advisor
4. Shri A.K. Chakravorti — Advisor
5. Dr. U.P . Phadke — Advisor
6. Dr. Gulshan Rai — ED-ERNET
7. Shri B.K. Gairola — Director General, NIC
8. Dr. N. Vijyaditya — Controller of Certifying
Authority
9. Dr. B. Vasanta — Director
10. Mrs. Harsh Prabha — Additional Director
11. Shri B.N. Sathpathy — Economic Advisor
12. Shri S. Abasi — Director
13. Mrs. Devjani Nag — Dy. CCA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Department of Information
Technology to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee
took up the remaining points on Information Technology (Amendment)
Bill, 2006 for discussion with the Department.
3. The representatives of the Department attended to the further
queries of the Members on various aspects of the Bill.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing valuable information
on the Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

176
ANNEXURE XII
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th August, 2007 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri K.V . Thangka Balu — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Dube
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Narahari Mahato
5. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
7. Shri Motiur Rahman
8. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
9. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
10. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
2. As the Chairman was not present, the Committee, under rule
258 (3) of the rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha, chose Shri K.V . Thangka Balu to preside over the meeting.

177
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Report on ‘Information
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006’ for consideration and adopted
the same. During the course of adoption, Shri A. Vijayaraghavan, M.P .
and a Member of the Committee gave a note containing his suggestions
on the Amending Bill.
5. After deliberating on the suggestions of Shri A. Vijayaraghavan,
the Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Draft Report,
after giving appropriate consideration to the suggestions of Hon’ble
Member and in the light of the factual verifications made by the
Department of Information Technology and present the same to the
House.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

178
APPENDIX
LIST OF THE MEMBERS OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
16. Shri P .C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda*
19. Shri Narahari Mahato**
20. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
##
21. Shri Ramesh Dube @

179
Rajya Sabha
#22. Vacant
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
* Nominated w.e.f. 25th September, 2006 in place of Shri Rajnarayna Budholiya, MP
(L.S.)
** Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006.
# Vacated dated 15th December, 2006.
## Nominated w.e.f. 23rd February, 2007.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 21st June, 2007.

FIFTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.9.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.9.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)


C.I.T. No. 172
Price : Rs. 188.00
© 2007 B Y LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
Introductory ................................................................................... 1
I. Self enabling and people friendly laws ................................ 5
II. Cyber crime and cyber terrorism............................................ 6
III. Jurisdiction of law ....................................................................... 7
IV. Substitution of ‘digital signature’ by ‘electronic signature’ ....... 10
V . Auditing of electronic records ................................................. 13
VI. Definition and role of intermediary & liability of network
service providers .......................................................................... 14
Obligation on body corporate .................................................. 18
VII. Contraventions of serious nature ............................................ 19
VIII. Compensation for failure to protect data ............................. 20
(i) Wrongful loss or wrongful gain .................................... 22
(ii) Quantum of damage through compensation ............. 22
(iii) Stolen Data-prosecution of recipient ............................. 24
(iv) Data protection and retention ........................................ 24
IX. Powers to Civil Courts .............................................................. 26
X. Quantum of Punishment ........................................................... 27
(i) Definitions of term ‘dishonestly’ and ‘fraudulently’ ... 29
(ii) Omission of the word ‘hacking’ .................................... 30
(iii) Child pornography ............................................................ 31
XI. Powers of interception ............................................................... 32
XII. Traffic Data .................................................................................... 34
XIII. Compounding Offences .............................................................. 35
XIV . Powers to investigate and omission of Section 80 ............ 35
XV . Miscellaneous
(a) Definition of computer network....................................... 37
(b) Status of Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
(CERT–In) ............................................................................... 38

PAGE
(ii)
(c) Adjudication Process............................................................ 38
(d) Setting up of Special Courts ............................................. 40
(e) Spam ........................................................................................ 40
(f) Powers of Controller of Certifying Authorities
(CCA)....................................................................................... 41
(g) Electronic Fund Transfer .................................................... 42
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS .............................. 44
A
NNEXURES
I. The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 as
introduced in Lok Sabha ........................................................... 65
II. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee (2006-2007)
held on 29th January, 2007 ....................................................... 154
III. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Committee (2006-2007)
held on 22nd February 2007 .................................................... 156
IV . Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 20th April, 2007 ..................................... 158
V . Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 08th May, 2007 ....................................... 161
VI. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 14th May, 2007 ....................................... 163
VII. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 21st May, 2007 ....................................... 165
VIII. Minutes of the Twenty-First sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 22nd May, 2007 ..................................... 167
IX. Minutes of the Twenty–Second sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 11th June, 2007 ...................................... 170
X. Minutes of the Twenty-Fifth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 16th July, 2007........................................ 172
XI. Minutes of the Twenty-Eighth sitting of the Committee
(2006-2007) held on 23rd April, 2007 ..................................... 174
XII. Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee (2007-2008)
held on 29th August, 2007 ....................................................... 176
APPENDIX .................................................................................................. 178

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
   Shri Nikhil Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Ramesh Dube
4. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
5. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
6. Smt. Jayaprada
7. Shri Narahari Mahato
8. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
9. Shri Harish Nagpal
10. Shri G. Nizamuddin
11. Shri Sohan Potai
12. Shri Lalmani Prasad
13. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
14. Shri Badiga Ramakrishna
15. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
16. Shri Tufani Saroj
17. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
18. Smt. Rubab Sayeda
19. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
20. Shri P .C. Thomas
21. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Dara Singh
25. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
26. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
27. Shri Motiur Rehman
28. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
29. Shri Shyam Benegal
30. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
31. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi*
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P . Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri P .C. Koul — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
*Nominated with effect from 24th August, 2007.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2007-08) present this Fiftieth Report on ‘Information Technology
(Amendment) Bill, 2006’ relating to the Ministry of Communications
and Information Technology (Department of Information Technology).
2. The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was
introduced in Parliament on 15th December, 2006 and referred to this
Committee on 19th December, 2006 for examination and report within
three months. However, due to other pressing assignments and the
wide range of consultations/interactions required for and in connection
with the examination of this vital piece of legislation, the Committee
sought extension of time to finalise their Report. Speaker, Lok Sabha
was pleased to accord extension of time upto the end of the Monsoon
Session to present the Report to the House.
3. In the process of the examination of the Bill, the Committee
received extensive inputs in the form of several write-ups/suggestions
from the stakeholders/industry/legal luminaries/NGOs/general public
and heard their views at the sittings of the Committee held on
20th April, 2007, 8th May, 2007, 21st May, 2007 and 22nd May, 2007.
The Committee received inputs also from the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) and the Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative
Department). The representatives of the Legislative Department
tendered evidence before the Committee on 14th May, 2007 and
11th June, 2007 and those of CBI on 11th June, 2007. Besides furnishing
background material, written replies and several clarifications, the
representatives of the Department of Information Technology deposed
before the Committee on 29th January, 2007, 22nd February, 2007,
16th July, 2007 and 23rd July, 2007.
4. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 29th August, 2007.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to Shri Pavan
Duggal, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court, Shri P .K.H. Tharakan,
Secretary (Retd.), R&AW, Smt. Vidya Reddy as well as the
representatives of National Association of Software & Service
Companies (NASSCOM), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
& Industry (FICCI) and Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (ASSOCHAM) for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing written inputs/suggestions on the amending Bill.

6. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Legislative
Department and the Department of Information Technology for
tendering evidence before the Committee and providing valuable
information/clarifications that the Committee desired in connection with
examination of the Bill.
7. Last but not the least, the Committee would like to place on
record their deep appreciation of the huge amount of spadework done
by their predecessor Committee (2006-07) Appendix for and in
connection with the examination of the Amending Bill. The Committee
benefited substantially from the untiring efforts and the hard work
done by their predecessor Committee.
8. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations
and recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; NIKHIL KUMAR,
31 August, 2007 Chairman,
09 Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Information Technology.
(vi)

50
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY)
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2006
FIFTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Bhadrapada, 1929 (Saka)
