LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928  (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty-First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Demands for Grants (2006-07)' ]
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
39


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928  (Saka)
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-First Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2006-07)']
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2006

C. I. T.  No. 161
Price  : Rs. 56.00
© 2006 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by S. Narayan & Sons,
New Delhi-20.

CONTENTS
PAGE  NO.
COMPOSITION  OF  THE   COMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER  I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER  II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 8
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies of the Government ............................................. 37
CHAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ........ 39
CHAPTER  V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies are interim in nature ............................... 45
ANNEXURES
I Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Information Technology (2006-07)
held on 13.12.2006 ........................................................... 47
II Analysis of Action taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Thirty-First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee ............................................................. 49

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-07)
Shri Nikhil Kumar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Abdullakutty
3. Shri Nikhil Kumar Chaudhary
4. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
5. Smt. Jayaprada
6. Shri Bhubaneshwar Prasad Mehta
7. Shri Harish Nagpal
8. Shri G. Nizamuddin
9. Shri Sohan Potai
10. Shri Lalmani Prasad
11. Kunwar Jitin Prasad
12. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
13. Shri Tufani Saroj
14. Shri Tathagat a Satpathy
15. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
16. Shri P.C. Thomas
17. Shri Kinjarapu Yerrannaidu
18. Smt. Rubab Saheda
19. Shri Narahari Mahato
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Vijay J. Darda
23. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
25. Shri Dara Singh
26. Shri A. Vijayaraghavan
27. Shri N.R. Govindrajar
28. Shri Motiur Rahman
29. Shri Eknath K. Thakur
30. Shri Shyam Benegal
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P. Sreedharan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman Standing Committee on Information Technology
(2006-07) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Thirty-Ninth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Thirty-First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for
Grants (2006-07)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology (Department of Posts).
2. The Thirty-First Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 2 August,
2006 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Department
furnished Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Report on 22 November, 2006.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 13 December, 2006.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body
of the Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-First Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II .
NEW DELHI;
13 December, 2006
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
NIKHIL KUMAR,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on
Information Technology

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report on the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee contained in their Thirty First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2006-07) pertaining to the Department of Posts (DoP).
2. The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 02 August,
2006 and was also laid on the Table on Rajya Sabha on 02 August, 2006. It
contained 35 recommendations/observations.
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the recommendations/observations
contained in the Report have been received and categorised as under:–
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:–
Para Nos. 1, 3, 6 to 8, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23 to 35.
(Total : 26, Chapter - II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:–
Para Nos. 4 and 13.
(Total : 2, Chapter - III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:–
Para Nos. 2, 5, 9, 12 and 22.
(Total : 5, Chapter - IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of
interim nature:-
Para Nos. 15 and 18.
(Total : 2, Chapter - V)

2
4. The Committee trusts that utmost importance would be given to the
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The
Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished to
them at an early date.
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on
some of the recommendations.
A. UTILISATION OF MANPOWER
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. In their Thirty-First Report, observing that technological growth and
computerisation of various activities initiated by the Department of Posts would
not only bring down the operational cost but also generate additional resources
in the coming years, the Committee had recommended that the existing manpower
in Department of Posts should be rationally and optimally utilised by their
suitable redeployment.
7. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated that the
rationalisation of manpower deployment and utilisation is a continuous and
ongoing process and in accordance with the policy of the Government of
India. The Department of Posts has been implementing a 2% cut annually on
direct recruitment, as also following the instructions regarding not filling up
posts vacant for the prescribed duration.
8. The Committee are aware that rationalisation of manpower deployment
and utilisation is a continuous process. Yet, they are of the view that such
ongoing exercise should reflect a comparatively improved performance over
the years on the part of the Postal Department. The Committee are constrained
to observe that the Department, in their submissions, have nowhere indicated
the concrete results achieved so far in their endeavour of manpower
deployment and utilisation. The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that
instead of viewing the issue as a mere continuous process, the Department of
Posts should ensure that such rationalisation of manpower deployment and
utilisation effectively culminates in to an efficient delivery of the postal
services everywhere. In this context, the Committee would like to have a
comparative analysis for the last five years as well as the roadmap for the
future.

3
B. RECOVERY OF ARREARS
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
9. In their earlier Report the Committee had expressed their concern over
the huge outstandings against agency charges pending recovery from the
Ministries/Departments and other organisations respectively amounting to
Rs. 12.32 crore on account of EPF, Rs. 8.28 crore on account of CMPF,
Rs. 100 crore from DoT/BSNL (on account of telegram charges). Drawing the
attention of the Department to the Committee’s Twenty-Sixth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) wherein they had emphasised expeditious recovery of agency
charges etc. The Committee had once again recommended that the Department
of Posts should devise some innovative mechanism to make an early recovery
of dues.
10. The Department in their Action Taken Notes, have stated that recovery
on account of payment of EPF & CMPF is a continuous process and such
balances in these heads cannot be wiped out fully. The Department have further
stated that in case of EPF as per agreement only 75% advance is received
against the payment made and in case of CMPF there was no provision for
advance payment. Therefore, there are always outstanding amounts. However,
Postal Circles are continuously taking action for liquidation of outstanding
amounts. Regarding arrears of telegraph and rental charges, the Department
have informed that liaison with BSNL/DoT is being maintained to enable early
settlement of arrears.
11. The Committee recognise that recovery on account of payment of
EPF and CMPF is a continuous process and such balances in these heads
cannot be wiped out fully. However, they are of the opinion that such balances
should not be allowed to keep mounting. The Postal Circles, therefore, need
to intensify their efforts for recovery of the outstanding amounts. In the opinion
of the Committee, urgent measures are warranted to recover Rs. 100 crore
from BSNL towards arrears of telegraph and rental charges as the Department
can ill-afford to forego or even prolong the recovery of such a sizeable amount.
C. TREATMENT OF PENSION LIABILITIES
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
12. Pointing out that a step motherly treatment was being meted out to
the Department of Posts in terms of charging payments to the pensioners
towards operational working expense of the Department, the Committee had in

4
their earlier Report desired the Department to take up the matter vigorously
with the M/o Finance and the Planning Commission to treat the pension
payments as a separate common head, as was being done by the other
Ministries.
13. The Department in their action taken reply have stated as under:–
“As advised by the Standing Committee, the Department of Posts has
taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to charge Pension and
Pensionary benefits to the common head of accounts i.e. 2071-Pension
and other pensionary benefits, at par with other Ministries/Departments.”
14. The Committee note with deep concern that despite their repeated
emphasis to put the pension payments of the Department of Posts under a
separate common head, in line with other Ministries, such payments continue
to be kept under the operational working expenses of the Department. The
Committee are unable to understand the reluctance on the part of the Ministry
of Finance in putting the pension payments of the Department of Posts under
a separate common head, more so when such a provision has already been
prescribed for other Ministries/Departments. The Committee expect the
Department of Posts to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Finance and would like to be apprised of the progress made in the matter.
D. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH-EAST
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
15. In their earlier report, the Committee had observed that funds to the
tune of Rs. 15.00 crore, Rs. 8.98 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore, Rs. 15.23 crore and
Rs. 22.70 crore were allocated to N.E. Region in the years 2002-03, 2003-04,
2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively, whereas the expenditure was only
to the tune of Rs. 2.53 crore Rs. 3.91 crore and Rs. 4.24 crore in the years
2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. Commenting that the under utilisation of funds
showed lack of proper planning and foresight on the part of the Department,
the Committee had desired to be apprised of the reasons for under utilisation
of funds over the years in the North-Eastern region and emphasised that the
funds allocated for the NE region should be fully and effectively utilized during
the year 2006-2007.
16. In their Action Taken notes, the Department have stated as under:–
“Funds to the tune of Rs. 15.00 crore, Rs. 8.98 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore,
Rs. 15.23 crore and Rs. 22.70 crore were allocated to the NE Region in the

5
year 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively under
the mandatory clause of earmarking 10% of the total outlay under each
existing plan scheme. The Department finds it very difficult to invest in a
manner that can lead to full utilisation of the allocated funds for
North-East Region under the constraints of certain defined parameters
adopted for the whole country that did not match with the specific needs
of the Region and, therefore, provide lesser manuverability for the
execution.”
In all these Plan projects, the major component of the total outlay was on
computerisation of post offices. However, under the scope of this Plan,
computerisation is to be undertaken up to the level of triple handed post
offices. This criterion of undertaking the computerisation only up to triple
handed post offices was relaxed to double-handed level for North-East.
Computers have been provided to all the double-handed post offices
during the Plan year 2005-06 and there is no further scope for fund
utilisation under these projects in the NE Region. Thus, although
utilisation of fund is not up to the allocation, in terms of physical outlays,
the achievement is optimal.
Similarly, implementation of the Plan schemes of ‘Expansion of Postal
Network’, ‘Mechanisation and Modernisation of the Mail Movement’,
‘Modernisation/Upgradation and Promotion of Philately’, ‘Training’,
‘Construction of Buildings’ in the NE Region has been effective, despite
the constraints such as execution of the schemes under certain defined
parameters adopted for the whole country which may not be fully
applicable in the NE Region. The ban on the purchase of vehicles by the
Finance Ministry also put restrictions on the ‘Mechanisation of Mail
Movement’. Further, there are certain restrictions on the use of funds in
areas like developing the Department’s own infrastructure in terms of
buildings for operative offices, as Planning Commission gives low priority
to construction work.
Despite the constraints mentioned above, Department of Posts has been
able to utilize the funds to the benefit of the North-Eastern region to a
large extent. The utilisation of funds allocated for the North-East for Plan
activities is being monitored regularly.
Keeping in view the various constraints as discussed above,
Department is going to make a separate Sub-Plan on the North-East
in the forthcoming 11th Five year plan that will ensure full utilisation
of the earmarked fund for the North-East Region for schemes specific
to the region.”

6
17. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department
that although utilisation of funds is not upto the allocation in terms of physical
outlays the achievement is optimal in the North-East Region. The Committee
feel that merely by providing computers to all the double handed post offices
in the region during the plan year 2005-2006, the Department cannot claim
to have optimally achieved the physical outlays as provision of computers is
one of the many physical parameters that has been set for the North-Eastern
Region. Needless to say, in other schemes like ‘Expansion of Postal Network’,
‘Mechanisation and Modernisation of the Mail Movement’, ‘Training’ there
have been shortfalls in utilisation of funds and the Department ought to look
into it, the constraints. The Committee feels that the Department’s effort in
creating a separate sub-plan for the North-East in the forthcoming Eleventh
Five year Plan will help in full utilization of funds. The Committee hope that
such an effort will enable effective implementation of specific schemes
earmarked for the development of the North-East Region.
E. BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
18. The Committee in their earlier report had noted that in terms of revenue
generation Business Post had 29% growth from the year 2003-04, whereas the
Speed Post had a growth rate of only 18%. The Committee, further, observed
that the share of the total volume of the Speed Post services handled by the
Department of Posts was around 11% as per a projection made by Kurt Salamon
& Associates (KSA) Report on “Market Survey”. However, market share of
India Post was 50% in the mail delivery market if all mail products were put
together. The Committee were constrained to note that inspite of the huge
infrastructure and widespread delivery system, the Department was having
only 11% of the market share in the express market. The Committee had
recommended that the Department should focus on the core business and
evolve comprehensive strategies to promote growth in the Speed post business
by creating more value additions for the benefit of customer.
19. The Department in their Action Taken Notes, have stated that for
promotion of growth in Speed Post business, the following services/facilities
had been introduced:–
“1. Pick up by Postmen– The facility of picking up of ordinary mail and
Speed Post articles and sale of postal stamps and stationery by postmen
has been launched from 18.7.05.

7
2. Speed Post Gold– This is essentially a Speed Post service between
Central Business Districts of major metros and is time sensitive with
Electronic IOD facility. Dedicated arrangements for collection,
transmission and delivery are there. The cost is speed post charges +
premium charges. In case of delay, automatic refund of premium charges
would be there. The service has been introduced between Delhi and
Mumbai to start with.
3. One India One Rate– Since 2006 is the 20th anniversary of Speed Post,
it has been decided that a flat rate of Rs. 25 would be charged for all
articles weighing upto 50 gms for anywhere in India other than ‘local’.
These charges are effective from 21st August 2006.
4. Local Rates for NCR– It has been decided that Speed Post and Express
Parcel Post articles booked in and destined for Delhi/New Delhi, Ghaziabad,
Gurgaon, Noida and Faridabad would be treated as local for the purpose
of determining of tariff.
20. The Committee are highly perturbed to note that despite the huge
infrastructure and widespread delivery system of the Department of Posts,
their market share in Speed Post services remains around 11 percent only
and in terms of revenue generation by such services, the growth rate is
18 percent only. The Committee also note that pursuant to their
recommendations, the Department have initiated certain measures like pick
up by postmen, Speed Post Gold, One India One Rate and local rates for NCR,
for promtion of Speed Post business. The Committee hope that the Department
will persist with the above said measures, besides innovating other prudent
measures, so that the huge potential of the speed post business is effectively
tapped for substantial revenue generation.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE  GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—GROSS EXPENDITURE
Recommendation (Para No.1)
The Committee note that the gross expenditure of the Department of
Posts has shown a rising trend over the years i.e. Rs. 5476.15 crore in 2002-03,
Rs. 5736.06 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 5964.54 in 2004-05 and to Rs 6326.06 (RE) in
2005-06. The anticipated gross expenditure for the year 2006-07 is put at
Rs. 6528.18 crore. The Department of Posts have stated that the rise in
expenditure is mainly due to the expenditure incurred on mandatory items such
as salaries, pensionary charges and increase in D.A. and merger of 50% D.A.
with basic pay. The Committee have further been informed that the Department
of Posts are making concerted efforts to control expenditure by not only
reducing staff strength but also observing economy measures strictly on the
basis of guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time. The
Committee are of the view that the Department of Posts should identify specific
steps which can be taken like venturing into new business areas, improving
services, increasing productivity in order to maximize revenues to supplement
the growing expenditure in the long run. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department of Posts is focusing on venturing into new business
areas, improving services and increasing productivity in order to maximize
revenues to supplement the growing expenditure in the long run. The action
taken in this regard so far is detailed below:
(1) The Department realizes that the vast network of post offices can
be utilized further for venturing into new business areas and retailing
more services, in addition to the existing mail, money transfer, Post Office
Savings Bank and Postal Life Insurance services. Some specific steps
taken so far are:
(i) A Business Development Directorate was set up in 1996 to design,
monitor, develop and market value added premium products of the
Department. Due to the initiatives of this Directorate, the

9
Department has ventured into new business areas like Business
Post, Direct Mail and Logistic Post and has also added on new
features to the premium product schemes, such as volume
discounts based on business offered, Book Now Pay later scheme,
monthly billing and customized operations. The facility of picking
up of ordinary mail and Speed Post articles and sale of postal
stamps and stationery by postmen was launched in 2005. The
Business Directorate has also rationalized the rate structure for
Speed Post in 2006 and introduced the One India One Rate Scheme
under which a flat rate is being charged for all articles in a specified
weight slab, with a view to attracting more customers and increasing
revenue generation.
(ii) A new thrust to Parcel Service has been given by establishing a
separate Parcel Division in the Business Development Directorate,
whose objective is to arrest the declining traffic in this segment,
build up the necessary infrastructure to handle and transport
parcels and facilitate the creation of parcel as a competitive brand.
(iii) A Retail Post Service was introduced by the Department in 1996,
under which the post office acts as a single window facilitator for
various services that are provided on a commission basis through
tie-ups with other organizations. To further take care of the local
variations in the country, powers were delegated to the Heads of
Circles to create and operate customized business packages. Some
of the new retail services provided are:
(a) Verification of Data
The Department has undertaken verification of subscriber address data
by postmen for several Telecom/Mobile companies. Electoral rolls were
displayed in Post Offices across the country and the task of receipt of forms
for registration of voters and verification of their addresses was carried out by
the Department for the Election Commission of India. Verification of data for
other organizations has also been carried out, e.g. data relating to widows
living in villages in the State of Gujarat, prior to disbursal of Widows’ pensions
through Savings Bank Accounts.
(b) Collection of Data through Customised Surveys
The Department has been collecting data for other organizations such as
data on property holders for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and an
infrastructure survey of nearly 20,000 villages for the Registrar General of
India.

10
(c) Acceptance Of Income Tax Returns
About 2000 post offices are collecting income tax returns since July,
2006.
(d) Miscellaneous Retail Services
The core competence of the post offices in offering counter services and
delivery of articles is utilized in this scheme. Organizations like the UPSC,
different Universities, cellular operators, etc. are using the facilities for
remittance, payment and other retail services offered by the Post Offices for
sale of application forms for examinations, collection of subscriptions, sale of
cash cards and recharge coupons etc. At present 1093 Post Offices are making
Passport Application forms available all over India. Service tax registration
forms and returns are also being accepted in the post offices in Delhi.
(e) e-Payment Options
Post Office counters are the ideal place for accepting money, for placing
orders and also having the orders delivered. The e-Payment facility developed
by the Department of Posts enables acceptance of payments in ‘many-to-one’
mode and their web based electronic consolidation. Thus, post offices could
collect payments of bills of any utility all over India, consolidate the payments
electronically, and make the payment to the utility from one place in one cheque,
practically the next day. The Post Office is a trusted environment where
individuals will feel more secure with remote transactions. Therefore, use of
the retail post office network as a front end for e-commerce is being planned, in
consultation with the CII.
(f) Access for seeking information and generating awareness
The Customer Care Centres (CCCs) of the Department of Posts located at
various District Headquarters are being utilized as collection points for
applications under Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005, to various Central
Government public authorities (95 at present). The citizen is provided an
acknowledgment by the CCC and the application is forwarded to the concerned
Central Government public authority
In addition, the post offices are utilized for dissemination of information
relating to various schemes/programmes and for creating awareness regarding
rights and duties of citizens with regard to issues handled by several
Departments/Ministries such as Consumer Affairs, Child Welfare and Labour,
Agriculture, Company Affairs etc.

11
(g) Post Offices As Common Service Centres
The effort here is to provide a whole range of services in not only cities
and towns, but also in rural areas. A framework has been developed to position
post offices even in villages to become e-enabled ‘Common Service Centres’
to provide e-access to services and facilities. These post offices could also
become focal points for e-Governance initiatives of Union and State
Governments. The Department now has Kisan Soochna Kendras in Dehradun
and Jaipur, to provide relevant information to farmers, through a tie-up with a
Non-Governmental Organization, Jai Kisan.
(h) Financial Services
In addition to the traditional financial services, such as PLI and POSB (an
agency service for the Finance Ministry), provided through the postal network,
the Department has taken several new initiatives through tie-ups with
organizations to provide a wide range of financial services through its retail
network. To establish India Post as a friendly neighbourhood one-stop financial
service provider, a scheme for remodelling selected post offices as Finance
Marts for providing POSB (Post Office Savings Bank) services and new financial
services in the banking and insurance sector, has been launched in the Tenth
Plan and will be extended to more locations in the Eleventh Plan.
Among the new initiatives for retailing financial services is a facility for
customers for receiving quarterly interest under the Senior Citizen Savings
Scheme at their doorstep through the Money Order service of the Department
after paying’ money order commission. In the case of the Monthly Income
Scheme/Senior Citizen Savings Scheme, interest can now also be received
through post-dated cheques on the instructions of the account holder.
The Department has also offered the facilities under Post Office Savings
Bank to Ministry of Rural Development to disburse payment to the beneficiaries
of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.
(i) Money Transfer
In addition to the ordinary money order service, an on-line domestic
money transmission service was launched in January, 2006 and is presently
being offered through more than 50 selected post offices. This service gives
easy access to a different customer segment and provides assured time
sensitive money delivery.
The International Money Transfer Service, which is operated in
association with a multi national company, Western Union Financial Services
International, provides customers the facility of receiving instantaneous
remittances from more than 196 countries on real time basis.

12
(j) Retailing Mutual Funds
Since February 2001, a growing network of nearly 220 post offices is
distributing select Mutual Funds and Bonds (Principal/Prudential -ICICI/SBI/
ICICI Capital/IDBI/RBI Bonds/UTI AMC Ltd). The service, while extending
the reach of the capital market of the country also provides the common man
easy access to market based investment options.
(k) Retailing Non-Life Insurance Products
The Department of Posts is providing the facility for sale of various Non-
Life Insurance products through its post offices, in a tie-up with Oriental
Insurance Company Limited (OIC), thereby supplementing its portfolio of Postal
Life Insurance products. An innovative scheme to provide Oriental Accidental
Death Insurance for POSB accountholders on request basis was also launched
in 2006.
(2) In order to improve services, regular contact with customers is
maintained through customer meets and interaction with trade and commerce
associations and action is taken based on their feedback. The on-going
modernization and computerization of operative offices, with particular
emphasis on customer requirements, is also enabling visible improvement in
services.
(3) The new services/products being offered are being promoted through
sustained marketing and publicity efforts in order to maximise revenue
generation. The new initiatives are being supported by suitable technology
induction and upgradation, which also has an impact on productivity.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—RECOVERIES
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts are paid agency charges
for the services rendered by them to the Ministries/Departments and other
organizations of Government. The Department of Posts received agency
charges to the tune of Rs. 102.10 crores in 2002-03, Rs. 103.91 crore in 2003-04,
Rs. 150.85 crore in 2004-05 and Rs. 133.60 crore (RE) 2005-06. A sum of
Rs. 155.75 crore is expected to be received on this account during the year
2006-07. The Committee find that the recoveries on account of PLI/RPLI forms
approximately more than 65% of the total recoveries of the Department of
Posts and for generating additional resources for PLI/RPLI Children Policy has
been introduced w.e.f. 20.2.2006 and proposal for Accident Policy is under
examination. A roadmap for PLI/RPLI has been chalked out for increasing

13
revenue in PLI and RPLI by 23.5% and 50% every year respectively. The
Committee are satisfied to note that although new avenues are being explored
by the Department of Posts to generate additional revenues but they are of the
view that it is just a beginning and there are ample opportunities for the
Department of Posts which can be explored and executed. The Committee note
that with a huge infrastructure and penetration in the rural as well as urban
areas of the country the Department of Posts have an added advantage which
can be utilized by introducing and implementing new schemes. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that apart from PLI/RPLI, new proposals and schemes
should be introduced at the earliest so that the recoveries are increased in line
with the rate of receipts.
Action Taken by the Government
As per a recent clarification in this regard, since all types of accident
policies are covered under General Insurance, the proposed Accident Policy
cannot be introduced under Postal Life Insurance (PLI). New proposals and
schemes can be introduced by the PLI Directorate once PLI is brought under
the IRDA umbrella.
Apart from PLI/RPLI, the Department is venturing into new business
areas and retailing more services, in addition to the existing mail, money transfer,
Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) and Postal Life Insurance services. Some of
the new services offered are as below:–
1. Premium services– Business Post, Direct Mail and Logistic Post.
2. Financial services– Distribution of select mutual funds and bonds,
sale of various Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OIC) Non-Life
Insurance products, disbursal of payments to the beneficiaries of
the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme through Post
Office Savings Bank.
An innovative scheme to provide Oriental Accidental Death
Insurance at a premium of Rs. 15 per annum for POSB accountholders
on request basis was also launched in 2006.
3. Money transfer services- International Money Transfer Service,
iMO on-line domestic money transmission.
4. Retail services– Collection and verification of data, acceptance of
income tax returns, sale of passport application forms and application
forms for examinations, sale of cash cards, recharge coupons etc.,
utility bill payment (including e-payment), collection of

14
subscriptions, acceptance of service tax registration forms and
returns, collection and forwarding of applications under the Right
to Information (RTI) Act, 2005, on behalf of various Central
Government public authorities (95 at present), dissemination of
information relating to various issues and Government schemes/
programmes and setting up Common Service Centres to provide e-
access to various services and facilities and become focal points
for e-Governance initiatives of Union and State Governments.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE RECEIPTS
Recommendation (Para No.6)
The Committee note that the revenue receipts of the Department are mainly
derived from the earnings of sale of stamps, postage realized in cash, commission
on MOs/IPOs and remuneration for small savings works. The Committee also
note that the Revenue Receipts of the Department of Posts were Rs. 4009.65
crore in 2002-03, Rs. 4256.93 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 4431.85 crore in 2004-05,
Rs. 5046.70 crore (RE) and Rs. 2179.38 crore (actual up to Jan ’06) in 2005-06.
The anticipated revenue receipts during the year 2006-2007 are Rs. 4998.71
crore. The Committee feel that there is no significant improvement in revenue
receipts of the Department over the years. They are highly perturbed with the
reply of Department of Posts that the slow revenue receipts is due to competition
with private agencies/couriers in the market and introduction of Hotmail/e-mail
through internet facility. The Committee, however, feel, that the scope of revenue
generation is increasing with the technological changes, as more and more
new areas are opening up. They, therefore, recommend that the Department of
Posts should be more receptive in accepting technological changes and also
explore new avenues to maximize their revenue receipts. They also desire that
Department of Posts could be well managed with high level of efficiency and
productivity with prudent financial management.
Action Taken by the Government
The Department realizes the need to harness new technology to support
all its operations and improve management so as to fully exploit the new business
areas that are opening up. Accordingly, in the 10th Five Year Plan, nearly
80% of the plan funds were allocated for technology upgradation and
modernization. The areas of activity include computerization and networking
of all areas of operation and administrative offices and introduction of e-enabled
services. In the financial services sector, a consultancy is already going on to

15
develop a project for providing online connectivity and introduction of ATMs,
Debit Cards etc. can be introduced for the Post Office Savings Bank (POSB)
customers who would be provided services at par with other nationalized banks.
In the 11th Five Year Plan, there would be increasing focus on using technology
to support operations and management decisions and garner more revenue.
The Department has expanded its range of services to maximize revenue
receipts. Some of the new services offered are as below:–
1. Premium services– Business Post, Direct Mail and Logistic Post.
2. Financial services– Distribution of select mutual funds and bonds,
sale of various Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OIC) Non-Life
Insurance products, disbursal of payments to the beneficiaries of
the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme through Post
Office Savings Bank.
3. Money transfer services– International Money Transfer Service,
iMO on-line domestic money transmission.
4. Retail services– Collection and verification of data, acceptance of
income tax returns, sale of passport application forms and application
forms for examinations, sale of cash cards, recharge coupons etc.,
utility bill payment (including e-payment), collection of
subscriptions, acceptance of service tax registration forms and
returns, collection and forwarding of applications under the Right
to Information (RTI) Act, 2005, on behalf of various Central
Government public authorities (95 at present), dissemination of
information relating to various issues and Government schemes/
programmes and setting up Common Service Centres to provide
e-access to various services and facilities and become focal points
for e-Governance initiatives of Union and State Governments.
In order to improve the efficiency of the postal system in line with
the customer expectation, the Department is developing an assessment
framework called ‘Sevottam’ in collaboration with the Department of
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances and the Tata Consultancy
Services Ltd.. This framework will enable the Department to ascertain
how well public service delivery is functioning, through assessment of
Citizens’ Charter implementation, public grievance redress and excellence
in service delivery and service delivery capability, while taking into
account customer expectations, employees requirements and
infrastructure availability to meet the desired quality standards. The
assessment framework will enable basic compliance to the desired
standards, and ensures quality of processes and measurement of quality

16
of service as per a corresponding standard developed by
BIS -IS 15700:2005.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE DEFICIT
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee observe that the revenue deficit of the Department of
Posts during the X Five Year Plan period was Rs 1364.40 crore in 2002-03,
Rs. 1375.22 crore in 2003-04, Rs. 1381.84 crore in 2004-05, and Rs. 989.72 crore
in 2005-06. However, a revenue deficit of Rs. 1373.72 crores (excluding provision
of Rs. 5.51 crore for NE Region) is anticipated during the year 2006-07. The
growing trend of revenue deficit from the year 2002- 2003 onwards is stated to
be on account of increase in working expenses year after year. The Committee
are informed that the Department are making all out efforts to reduce the revenue
deficit through increasing revenues/recoveries from agency functions like
PLI/RPLI and remuneration for SB/SC work. Although the Committee appreciate
the sincere efforts made by the Department of Posts to reduce the revenue
deficit below Rs. 1000 crore in the year 2005-06 but they are constrained to
note that an amount of Rs. 1393.72 crore as revenue deficit has been anticipated
by the Department of Posts during the year 2006-07. The Committee are of the
view that there is an urgent need to curtail  expenditure by reducing costs,
technology induction and promoting premium products by better pricing and
marketing. They also desire that the Department of Posts should explore the
possibility of utilizing the spare land available with them for earning a fair
chunk of revenue to reduce the deficit of the Department.
Action taken by the Government
Revenue Deficit of Rs. 989 for the year 2005-06 conveyed to Standing
Committee on Information and Technology was provisional. However, the final
revenue deficit for the said year is Rs. 1210.60 crore, as the Ministry of Finance
will not be giving the entire remuneration for the POSB agency services provided
by the Department and is adhering to amount of Rs. 2318.12 crore projected by
the Ministry of Finance for RE 2005-06.
Efforts to bring down the deficit are continuing through focus on potential
areas for revenue generation such as premium products and financial services
and through the induction of technology, while also taking appropriate economy
measures.

17
With regard to utilization of spare land available with the Department,
various steps have already been taken. The Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) has directed the Department of Posts to work out a plan for
commercial exploitation of vacant plots of the Department in consultation with
Ministry of Finance & Department of Urban Development. Accordingly a note
on setting up of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) called the Postal Land
Development Authority (PLDA) for development and commercial exploitation
of Postal Estates has been approved by the Postal Services Board. The proposal
was sent to Planning Commission for in-principle, approval. As per the advice
of Planning Commission, the Department has engaged a consultant to undertake
a market survey on commercial development of land in 4 plots in July, 2006.
Further action will depend upon results of the survey.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE DEFICIT
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the revision of postal rates have not been
keeping pace with the steadily rising cost of operation. Section 7 of the Indian
Post Office Act 1898, states that the rates for classes of postal articles and
services mentioned in the 1st Schedule can be revised by amendment to the
schedule by introduction of a Bill in Parliament to amend the Indian Post Office
Act. Although, the Committee support the Department’s concern on the rising
cost of operations but they are of the view that the revision of postal rates
should be made keeping in view the Universal Service Obligation of providing
postal services at reasonable cost.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE DEFICIT
Recommendation (Para No.10)
During evidence, the representatives of the Department of Posts
contended before the Committee that in addition to the pension burden, certain
other factors also contributed to the burgeoning revenue deficit. The
Department identified these causative factors as, the imposition of Service Tax
on department of Posts, imposition of Banking Cash Transactions Tax and the

18
Ministry of Finance’s not honouring the recommendation of the Committee
constituted by them for an annual hike of 10% in the remuneration for the
agency services provided to them by Department of Posts. Since the Department
of Posts run a number of Services under social obligation below the cost
margin and also are rendering several agency functions of the Ministry of
Finance, the Committee are of the view that the points raised by Department of
Posts require a deeper consideration. They trust that the Ministry of Finance
will favourably look into the matter with a view to helping the premier public
postal network of the country.
Action taken by the Government
Regarding imposition of Banking Cash Transactions Tax (BCTT), the
matter has been taken up with Ministry of Finance at the level of Minister of
Communications & IT in August, 2006 with the recommendation that Department
of Posts should be exempted from the BCTT.
Regarding imposition of Service Tax on services provided by Department
of Posts, as a result of the efforts of the Department, in July, 2006, the Ministry
of Finance has exempted money orders, operation of savings accounts and
issue of postal orders from service tax. The Department is pursuing the matter
with Ministry of Finance for exemption of other services like Speed Post further
from the ambit of Service Tax.
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE DEFICIT
Recommendation (Para No.11)
The Committee have been informed that the Department of Posts render
a number of other services on behalf of other Departments and the rates for
such services are generally determined in mutual consultation and also by
costing experts group. These agency services are provided by the Department
without any profit margin. In this connection, the Committee desire that the
Department of Posts should be more flexible in negotiating prices for agency
services in order to have adequate profit margin for the services provided by
them to other Ministries/Departments and other Organisations so that it would
help in bringing down the deficit to a certain extent.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted for future consultations
with costing expert groups.

19
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EAST.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee are happy to note that in order to improve transportation
of mails, steps like computerization of Mail Offices/Registration Centres and
the possibility of leasing aircraft are being examined especially to tackle the
problem related to conveyance of mail in the North Eastern States. The
Committee, therefore, desire that these steps should be expedited and the
outcome thereof reported to the Committee at the earliest.
Action taken by the Government
A proposal for leasing of an aircraft for carriage of mail for the North East
sectors i.e. the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram, Tripura,
Manipur and Meghalaya is under consideration. In this regard several options
have been examined. An Expression of Interest was called for from airlines and
transport agencies in April 2006, but could not be finalized due to financial
viability. As the problem mainly relates to North East, the issue has been taken
up with Secretary, NE Council and Department of NE Region.
EXPANSION OF POSTAL NETWORK
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that Postal Circles have been empowered to identify
such locations/post offices where existing post offices are not justified as per
the norms of the Department and also to cater to the postal requirements by
relocation/merger of post offices, without affecting the access to postal facilities
in any area. In this context, the Committee will like to put in a word of caution
to the Department of Posts to carefully assess the relocation or merger of post
offices so that ordinary customers do not have to walk long distances for the
basic postal services in the country.
Action taken by the Government
The Department of Posts will keep the convenience of the ordinary
customers in view while taking decisions on relocation/merger of post offices.

20
EXPANSION OF POSTAL NETWORK
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee find that number of demands pending for opening of
Extra Departmental Branch Offices (EDBO) and Departmental Sub Office (DSO)
in various circles in all the States/Union Territories are 311 as on February,
2006. In this connection, they are constrained to note that the proposal for
opening up of new post offices during the XIth Plan has not yet been finalized.
They wonder as to how the Department would be able to meet the demand of
opening up of 311 new post offices. Although the Committee appreciate the
approach of the Department to increase access to postal facilities mainly by
rationalizing the network and provision of low cost option but are anxious as
to how the problem of opening of new post offices will be solved by the
Department of Posts. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Postal
department should rightly address the needs of postal facilities in the faster
growing parts of the country and take decisions accordingly to cater to the
postal needs of these areas. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
detailed action taken in this regard at the earliest.
Action taken by the Government
The Department of Posts has prepared a proposal for opening franchised
outlets in identified areas with a view to providing alternative means of access
to the postal network. This will supplement the efforts being made for providing
post offices where justified by relocation of existing post offices from areas
where these are no longer justified.
MECHANIZATION /MODERNIZATION OF MAIL MOVEMENT.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that for the Mechanization /Modernization of Mail
Movement Scheme the financial outlay for the Xth Plan period was Rs. 21.00
crore. An amount of Rs. 0.30 crore, Rs. 12.76 crore, Rs. 0.05 crore and Rs. 1.86
crore was kept in the RE for the years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06
respectively, whereas the actual expenditure nil in 2002-03, Rs. 12.59 crore in
2003-05, Rs. 0.04 crore in 2004-05 and Rs. 0.09 crore upto 31.1.2006. Only four
mail motor vehicles were purchased in 2003-04 and 26 mail vehicles and 18 two
wheelers and 36 three wheelers in 2005-06. According to the Department, the

21
reason for less actual expenditure over the years is due to ban imposed by the
Ministry of Finance on procurement of vehicles. The Committee note that the
total fleet strength of Mail vehicles with the Department of Posts are 1175
vehicles, 37 three wheelers and 165 two wheelers which according to them is
not sufficient. The Committee are happy to note that the matter of purchasing
new vehicles was pursued by the Department of Posts with the Ministry of
Finance for relaxation of ban and the same has been obtained for procurement
of 26 MMS vehicles, 26 mopeds and 36 three wheelers. The Committee trust
that the process of mechanization/modernization of mail movement will be
vigorously pursued with a view to improving the quality of postal service in
the country.
Action taken by the Government
The Department is vigorously pursuing the process of mechanization/
modernization of mail movement with a view to improving the quality of postal
service in the country.
In 2006-07, a proposal for procurement of additional 28 vehicles, 32 two-
wheelers and 40 three-wheelers is in process, subject to the approval of the
Ministry of Finance for relaxation of the ban on purchase of vehicles.
DECLINE IN MAIL VOLUME
Recommendation (Para No. 20 & 21)
The Committee note that there is a decline of mail traffic from
8635.23 Million in 2003-04 to 7360.36 Million in 2004-05. The decline in mail
traffic over the years has been attributed to advancement of alternative
communication media like E-mail, telephone, mobile and internet services and
the services provided by private couriers to the public. To meet customer
expectations and to exploit the full potential a comprehensive plan for improving
quality of service in mail, parcel and Speed Post operations having latest
technology is stated to be under formulation by the Department of Posts. The
Committee observe the fact that more and more customers are turning to
electronic form of communication and letter carriers are bringing lesser and
lesser revenue. However, it is also a fact that express market is growing at a
larger pace, wherein speed post has only 10% of the total share. This shows
that the private sector has shown willingness and ability to provide delivery
and communication services more efficiently than the Department of Posts.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should rightly

22
address the issue of efficiency lost in mail in the comprehensive plan and with
the latest technology under formulation it will concentrate on processing and
delivery of mails to improve quality and contain cost alongwith fulfilling the
Universal Services Obligation. The Committee also desire that the
comprehensive plan of the Department of Posts should be finalized
expeditiously in order to become competitive with the private couriers.
And
The Committee also note that one of the challenges faced by the
Department of Posts in the recent years is the demand of new post offices,
while their budget and staff remains the same, which may hit the efficiency and
delivery of mails in time. The Committee desire that these issues should rightly
be addressed to and rectified in the comprehensive plan in order to get back
the traditional mail and the prestige of the postal services.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted.
As far as improving efficiency in mail services is concerned, postmen are
now collecting mail from doorsteps of customers and also selling postage
stamps & stationery on their delivery beat. Improvement in processing and
delivery is a continuous feature and various steps have been taken to achieve
the same, for instance, wherever there is delivery advantage transmission is
shifted from rail to road transport, unnecessary handling is reduced in transit.
Monitoring has also been stepped up.
SPEED POST AND RETAILING ACTIVITY
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that courier industry is unregulated in India and
operations of couriers are not open to public scrutiny. The established couriers
are able to offer highly discounted rates to large corporate customers and a
number of small couriers operate intercity services at very low rates. The courier
services also have flexibility in pricing as per the requirement and opportunity
to garner business whereas on the other hand, Speed Post does not have much
flexibility being a Government organization. These factors have affected the
market share of Speed Post in certain segments. The Committee whereas

23
observed that in the areas where the postal services competes with the courier
services in delivering packages and express letters it has been soundly beaten
despite its Government subsidies by better management and efficient services.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department to try and re-build its
services as it has the core competence, reliability and the reach through which
it can get back the mail volume lost in the express market. The Committee also
learn that the Department is going to bring a Draft Indian Post Office
(Amendment) Bill, 2006 to overhaul the Indian Postal Act of 1898, wherein
private courier services are being put under the purview of a regulator and the
Department’s exclusive domain over letters weighing below 500 grams. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter.
Action taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted.
For promotion of growth in Speed Post business, the following services/
facilities have been introduced:
1. Pick up by Postmen- The facility of picking up of ordinary mail and
Speed Post articles and sale of postal stamps and stationery by postmen
has been launched from 18.7.05.
2. Speed Post Gold- This is essentially a Speed Post service between
Central Business Districts of major metros and is Time sensitive with
Electronic IOD facility. Dedicated arrangements for collection,
transmission and delivery are there. The cost is speed post charges +
premium charges. In case of delay, automatic refund of premium charges
would be there. The service has been introduced between Delhi and
Mumbai to start with.
3. One India One Rate- Since 2006 is the 20th anniversary of Speed
Post, it has been decided that a flat rate of Rs. 25 would be charged for all
articles weighing upto 50 gms for anywhere in India other than “local’.
These charges are effective from 21
st August 2006.
4. Local Rates for NCR- It has been decided that Speed Post and
Express Parcel Post articles booked in and destined for Delhi/New Delhi,
Ghaziabad, Gurgoan, Noida and Faridabad would be treated as local for
the purpose of determining of tariff.
There is progress with regard to the Draft Bill. The Draft Amendment
Bill-2006 was placed on public domain “http//:indiapost.gov.in” from
19.04.2006 to 10.05.2006, to call for the views and comments of individuals

24
and groups. The views and comments received in response thereto have
been examined and the Draft Amendment Bill-2006 has been forwarded to
the Committee of Secretaries for examination and is likely to be submitted
to the Parliament in the Budget Session, 2007.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee further note that customer meets are carried out by all the
circles to get feedback from the customers on various new products launched
by the Department. Interactions are also held with the Chambers of Commerce
to find out the requirements for business and also apprise them about the new
products of the Department. Market surveys are also carried out for the same.
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department in this regard
and believe that these discussions will also be continued on in the future. In
the opinion of the Committee these discussions will help in rebuilding the
Postal Department in times to come.
Action taken  by the Government
The Department is committed to continually interacting with customers
and various Chambers of Commerce, to inform them regarding the new
initiatives/products of the Department and also take action on their feedback.
Recommendation  (Para No. 25)
The Committee appreciate the fact that the Department of Posts have
started retailing activity on a large scale which includes money transfers, mutual
funds, retailing activity of Government Securities, data verification for Election
Commission of India and Registrar General of India, receiving of applications
under the Right to Information Act, etc. The initiatives taken by Department in
inviting suggestions from the Chief Secretaries of the States to utilize the
strength of Postal Network for retailing activities is also a laudable move. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Department to carry on these initiatives to
their logical conclusion. They would like to be informed of the further
developments in the area.
Action taken by the Government
The Department is continuously liaising with various State
Governments and organizations to utilize the strength of the Postal Network

25
for retailing activities. The further developments in the area are indicated
below:–
(i) The IMO (Instant Money Order) Service, which was launched from
24 post offices from 10 cities in 9 circles during January 2006 on a pilot
basis, has since been extended to 17 more post offices and is presently
available at 41 post offices in 24 cities. The service will be extended to
another 21 post offices covering all remaining State capitals/UTs by the
middle of October 2006.
(ii) On 2nd February 2006, Government of India introduces National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme to provide wage employment to
skilled/semi skilled/unskilled labourers across the country. The
Government has identified 200 most backward districts in 27 States for
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) implementation. The
Department of Posts has taken initiative to implement National Rural
Employment Guarantee of Government of India under which wages will
be disbursed to skilled/semi skilled/unskilled labourers across the country
through Post Office Savings Bank. Under it, the SB accounts of the wage
earners are being opened in Branch offices on the basis of list provided
by Village/Gram Panchayat.
(iii) The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) announced by
Finance Minister in the union Budget will be implemented through the
post offices. Under it, disbursement of pension shall be made to the old
age pensioners through POSB accounts standing at Branch office/Sub
office. Initiative has been taken to open dialogue with the State
Governments to implement the above two schemes through post offices
in the State and details are being worked out.
(iv) The Department is now providing the front end for accepting
applications at Post Offices under the Right to Information Act, 2005, on
behalf of 95 Government Departments/Ministries.
(v) A framework has been developed to position post offices even in
villages to become e- enabled ‘Common Service Centres’ to provide
e-access to services and facilities. These post offices could also become
focal points for e-Governance initiatives of Union and State Governments.
The Department now has Kisan Soochna Kendras in Dehradun and Jaipur,
to provide relevant information to farmers, through a tie-up with a Non-
Governmental Organization Jai Kisan.

26
AUTOMATIC MAIL PROCESSING CENTRES (AMPCS)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 26 & 27)
The Committee observe that an outlay of Rs. 71.05 crore was approved
for the Xth Plan for setting up of 2 AMPCs at Kolkata and Delhi. Out of which
Rs. 11.15 crore has been spent in 2002-2003 solely for spillover expenditure
from the Ninth Plan. A sum of Rs. 0.60 crore in 2003-04 was spent as committed
expenditure on modifying the buildings to house AMPCs and Rs. 0.15 crore
was spent in 2004-05. In 2006-07 a fund of Rs. 59.00 crore has been earmarked
for the two centers. The Committee in their previous reports have reportedly
expressed their concern over the delay in opening of AMPCs. They are,
therefore, of the view that Department of Posts should implement this scheme
at least now at the earliest and the Committee be intimated about the action
taken without any further delay.
And
The Committee further note that global tender for the opening of AMPCs
are to be floated shortly and major building works have been completed and
after the finalisation of tender residual finishing will be taken up in consultation
with the approved vendor. Both the projects are expected to be completed by
March 2007. The Committee are of the view that there has been a substantial
delay in the project as it was started in the IXth Five Year Plan and further
delay in the opening up of AMPC will hamper the services being provided to
the customers by the Department of Posts. The Committee recognize the urgent
need for a more effective delivery channel and that AMPC will add value to the
mail through technology with sufficient revenue generation. In the opinion of
the Committee, these improvements will also help in supporting Universal
Service Obligation of the Department of Posts for providing postal services to
every nook and corner of the country. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the project should be completed within the stipulated time, i.e., by the March
2007.
Action taken by the Government
The Memorandum for consideration of the Expenditure Finance
Committee was circulated on 19.1.05. The EFC in its meeting held on 19.5.05
recommended installation of both the projects during the 10th Plan with an

27
outlay of Rs. 71.05 crore. Recommendations of EFC were accepted by the
Chairman i.e. Secretary (Posts) on 27.6.05 and approved by the Finance Minister
on 2.9.05.
The Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd. have been engaged as
project consultants and an agreement to this effect was signed on 24.2.06. A
Committee was constituted on 17.11.05 to finalise the technical specifications
for the machines to be procured for this project. The Technical Specification
Committee finalized its recommendations on 9.3.06 which were made part of the
tender document. Since the machines to be procured for this project are not
manufactured in India, a Global Tender has been floated in this case on 17.8.06.
The last date of submission of bid document was specified as 26.9.06, with the
Bids received to be opened on the same day i.e. 26.9.06. The Department expects
to issue the Purchase Order for the machines during the current financial year
and to utilize the funds allocated for this project for the year 2006-07.
NATIONAL DATA CENTRE
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 5 crore was allocated to
Department of Posts for National Data Centre against the proposal of Rs. 10
crore for the year 2002-03 which was reduced to Rs. 0.20 crore at the RE stage.
A sum of Rs. 0.50 crore was earmarked for 2003-04 and Rs 4 crore for the year
2005-06. However, there was no expenditure during all these years as the scheme
has not been approved by the competent authority. The Committee have further
observed that the reasons for the delay in opening up of National Data Centre
was due to the delay in implementation of an important project for
Computerization of Post Offices which was approved in January 2004 and has
now been more or less been achieved. The Standing Finance Committee for
setting up of the National Data Centre has also got the approval and it is
proposed to be set up in National Informatics Centre (NIC), New Delhi with
Rs. 4 crore in 2005-06 as an initial payment. The project is likely to be completed
by March, 2007. The Committee in their previous report had expressed their
concern over the delay in opening of National Data Centre. They are of the
view that in the computerization of different operations in the postal system,
the National Data Centre holds the key by creating centralized database which
would be accessible to all postal units and will facilitate effective access and
data management. They further believe that establishment of National Data
Centre would lead to a complete makeover to automation and efficiency, as it
will provide inter-operability connectivity and single point data entry which
will facilitate the customer needs. The Committee also felt that with the setting

28
up of National Data Centre (NDC), the existing postal services will be upgraded
and the Department will get a techno savvy status. The Committee, therefore,
desired that the project shall be completed within the stipulated time by March
2007. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The Department has entrusted the task of establishing the National Data
Centre and networking of post offices to the National Informatics Centre (NIC)
on a turnkey basis. The Department has made an advance payment of Rs 3.00
crore for the initiation of National Data Centre project on 4.7.06. The project is
expected to be completed by March 2007.
ONLINE POSTAL SERVICE
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts have introduced the
official website viz. www.indiapost.gov.in. The Committee appreciate the
Department’s move in introducing the website, however, they are of the view
that the Department should take necessary steps to ensure that the website is
timely updated and accessible to everyone to get the proper feed back from the
public in redressing their grievances. The Committee would also like to have
details of the popularity of the website of India Post.
Action taken by the Government
A new version of software on the web based complaint handling system
has been introduced w.e.f. 26/1/2006 for speedy redress of the complaints
registered on the website as well as smooth functioning of the Computerised
Customer Care Centres. In case of any difficulty experienced by the CCCCs in
functioning of web site, the faults are immediately rectified by the Postal Training
Centre, Mysore, which is monitoring the working of web system. Details of the
inward and outward complaints handled on web site during the period from
1/1/06 - 23/10/06 are enclosed for information of the Committee. (Annex-1)

29
ANNEXURE I
OUITWARD COMPLAINTS PENDENCY REPORT UNDER PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES DURING 1.1.2006 AND 23.10/2006
DIRECTORATE PUBLIC GRIEVNACES
           Details (Days)
Office Name Ob Rcd. During Closed During Total <15 15-30 31-60 61-90 >90
CHHATTISGRAH 42 2355 2074 323 214 55 45 6 3
APS DIRECTORATE 7 3093 2594 506 141 99 165 46 55
JAMMU & KASHMIR 293 252 29 516 15 5 15 26 455
HIMANCHAL PRADESH 33 1805 1313 525 140 95 151 56 83
NORATH EASTERN 206 1464 1080 590 98 61 114 52 265
UTTARANCHAL 20 2148 1500 668 225 174 192 64 13
ASSAM 405 3072 2374 1103 255 132 219 104 393
JHARKHAND 631 1188 708 1111 50 41 121 122 777
ORISSA 424 3656 2702 1378 282 117 278 134 567
RAJASTHAN 58 7086 5351 1793 508 301 483 217 284
HARYANA 454 5140 3773 1821 302 207 428 226 658
KERALA 255 7281 5531 2005 557 279 355 230 584
MADHYA PRADESH 432 8449 6551 2330 718 300 483 182 647
ANDHRA PRADESH 96 13041 10634 2503 1244 353 529 191 186
GUJARAT 568 16101 13463 3206 1121 623 673 307 482
TAMILNADU 544 16178 13329 3393 1107 441 606 284 955
BIHAR 1939 3191 1586 3544 214 174 451 263 2442
KARNATAKA 501 13718 10062 4157 1001 431 1009 344 1372
PUNJAB 689 11911 8390 4210 879 707 1088 336 1200
DELHI 1231 14752 9952 6031 1262 806 1497 676 1790
UTTAR PRADESH 3315 13670 9391 7594 1269 984 1347 467 3527
WEST BENGAL 4835 12433 7926 9342 778 328 967 679 6590
MAHARASHTRA 6438 45734 32233 19939 3994 2116 3311 1871 8647
TOTAL 23416 207718 152546 78588 16374 8829 14527 6883 31975

30
INWARD COMPLAINTS PENDENCY REPORT UNDER PUBLIC GRIEV ANCE DURING 01.10.2006 AND 23.10.2006
DIRECTORATE PUBLIC GRIEV ANCES
     Pending Details (Days)
Office Name Ob Rcd. During Closed During Total <15 15-30 31-60 61-90 >90
APS DIRECTORATE 154 147 86 215 84 67 43 13 8
HIMACHAL PRADESH 237 173 105 305 111 62 70 23 39
CHHATTISGRAH 390 328 304 414 205 77 90 27 15
UTTARANCHAL 419 493 282 630 324 131 146 19 10
GUJARAT 859 1131 1051 939 447 155 175 47 115
JAMMU & KASHMIR 1002 102 97 1007 68 58 131 95 665
NORTH EASTERN 1024 225 129 1120 141 95 165 104 615
PUNJAB 1195 550 435 1310 325 202 376 123 284
RAJASTHAN 1241 669 579 1331 344 262 393 112 220
ANDHRA PRADESH 1274 1327 1213 1388 585 221 255 102 225
ASSAM 1360 377 318 1419 267 121 227 138 666
HARYANA 1420 482 436 1466 318 203 275 138 532
ORISSA 1684 720 654 1750 447 178 293 181 651
KERALA 1864 900 968 1796 465 223 325 189 594
MADHYA PRADESH 1862 977 803 2036 620 297 478 142 499
KARNATAKA 2437 1394 1203 2628 662 322 572 194 878
TAMILNADU 2629 2068 1787 2910 1003 332 411 190 974
JHARKHAND 3133 603 445 3291 423 284 523 288 1773
DELHI 3668 1620 1314 3974 931 472 662 329 1580
WEST BENGAL 7530 1515 1470 7575 952 483 914 562 4664
MAHARASHTRA 11478 3274 3238 11514 1985 1136 1858 1137 5398
UTTAR PRADESH 12626 4440 4123 12943 2857 1631 2694 1147 4614
BIHAR 16053 3962 3405 16610 2814 1808 3445 1580 6963
TOTAL 75539 27477 24445 78571 16378 8820 14521 6880 31972

31
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee further note that on-line postal services like e-post,
e-Bill Post, Customer Care Centre, Track and Trace System and i-Money order
transmission, are being run by the Department. The Committee would, therefore,
like the various other services of the Department to be brought under on-line
in the coming years. The Committee further believe that the on-line services
will increase transparency, accountability and improve postal services and
efficiency of the Department.
Action taken by the Government
In addition to the online services referred to by the Committee, other
services where online facilities have been introduced by the Department are:
1. Speed Post Gold- This is essentially a Speed Post service between
Central Business Districts of major metros and is time-sensitive with
Electronic IOD facility. Dedicated arrangements for collection,
transmission and delivery are there. The cost is speed post charges +
premium charges. In case of delay, automatic refund of premium charges
would be there. The service has been introduced between Delhi and
Mumbai to start with.
2. e-Payment Software- A new payment software has been prepared
which offers the facility of receiving payments for the bills at the Post
Office counters. The service is web based and facilitates collection and
consolidation of electricity bills, telephone bills and other utility bills.
The statistics of Bill collection is available to the Service Provider online.
Further, the Department has entrusted the task of establishing the National
Data Centre and networking of post offices to the National Informatics
Centre (NIC) on a turn-key basis. The Department has made an advance
payment of Rs 3.00 crore for the initiation of National Data Centre project
on 4.7.06. The project is expected to be completed by March 2007.
SUBLETTING SPACE FOR ATM
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee note that the Department of Posts are examining various
possibilities like sub-letting space for ATMs of different Banks, possible use
of such ATMs for its own Saving Bank ATM cards that can be introduced,

32
however, no final decision have yet been taken in this regard. The Committee
believe that it is a welcome step and hope that more possibilities will be explored
as the Post Offices have the advantage of its reach and the visibility of its
locations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
take final decision in this regard as early as possible. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the final action in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
In respect of providing space in the Post Offices for installation of
ATMs of various Banks, the intention of the Department at present is not to
provide space and earn rentals. The basic intention is that the POSB customers
of the Post Office should be in a position to transact their accounts, in the
eventuality of the Department providing a Card based payment solution to its
customers. Card based payment solution can be provided only after Any Time
Any Where Banking facility is provided. For this purpose, the Department has
engaged a Consultant to provide a road map, which inter-alia  will contain in
their recommendations, the requirements for Hardware, Software, Connectivity,
Switch, ATM Network, CRM, Process Re-engineering, HRD aspects including
a Budget forecasting and Implementation Plan. The Consultant’s Report, which
is likely to be received shortly, will be examined in the Department in consultation
with other Organisations, if need be.
At the time of implementation, the offers of various Banks will be
considered in entirety as a business case and the most suitable tie-up will be
made. It is at this point of time that the Department would consider sharing
space with the Banks whose offers are considered more suitable keeping in
view the interests of the POSB customers.
COMPLAINTS AND GRIEV ANCES
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee are constrained to find that the number of complaints
received in respect of Money Orders and Registered Letters are quite high and
the rate of disposal of the complaints is quite low. The complaints received
with regard to Money Orders during the years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 were
respectively 98730, 34941 and 59715 and Registered Letters were 3307, 2576
and 2052 during the same period. Whereas the pendency of complaints as on
31.12.2005 with regard to Money orders, Registered Letters were 28811 and
14637 respectively.

33
The Committee also note that to redress the grievances, the Department
of Posts have set up a grievance redressal machinery, 1116 Computerised
Customer Care Centres and Post Forums, but still the pendency of complaints
is quite high. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of
Posts should strengthen their monitoring mechanism so as to have a tab on
the number of complaints received and their proper disposal thereof. In view of
the increasing number of complaints/grievances of the people at large, the
Committee desire that Department of Posts should make all-out efforts to
dispose of these complaints/grievances expeditiously. They would like to be
informed about the concrete measure taken by the Department in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
Though the number of complaints relating to money orders and registered
letters appears to be high, the proportion of complaints with respect to traffic
handled is as follows during the period mentioned:
Service Complaint traffic ratio
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Registered letters 0.0008 0.00123 0.00102
Money Orders 0.00584 0.00359 0.00423
In view of the observations made the Standing Committee, all Chief
Postmasters General have been advised to take effective steps/measures to
settle the complaint cases expeditiously. Efforts are also being made to bring
down the number of complaints. The details of the number of complaints
received relating to money orders and registered letters along with the period
of pendency of unsettled complaints is at Annexure 2.

34
ANNEXURE II
COMPLAINTS RECEIVED SETTLED AND  PENDING
Registered Latters
Year Received Settled Pending Below % wrt 3-6 % wrt 6-12 % wrt Above % wrt
3 pendency months pendency months pendency  12 pendency
months months
2002-03 243390 187807 55583 50570 90.981 3715 6.683 1171 2.106 127 0.228
2003-04 239046 187666 51380 47860 93.149 3076 5.986 348 0.677 96 0.186
2004-05 282514 210571 71943 64450 89.584 7068 9.824 363 0.504 62 0.086
Money Orders
Y ear   Received Settled Pending Below % wrt 3-6 % wrt 6-12 % wrt Above % wrt
3 pendency months pendency months pendency 12 pendency
months months
2002-03 741504 608638 132866 128151 96.451 3330 2.506 1175 0.884 210 0.158
2003-04 430669 343743 86926 84003 96.637 2487 2.861 325 0.373 111 0.127
2004-05 591196 475921 115275 109919 95.353 3509 3.044 1693 1.468 154 0.133

35
REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation  (Para No. 33 & 34)
The Committee note that out of the plots owned by the Department of
Posts all over the country, 1851 plots are lying vacant and out of these 223
plots have been encroached upon. The Committee find that the number of
plots lying vacant is quite large and these are not put to any use. In fact,
valuable real estate resources of the Department are lying dormant and are not
being utilized in a fruitful manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the possibility of commercial utilisation of these plots, which may earn
reasonable revenue for the Department should be explored. In the opinion of
the Committee, this may also enable the Department of Posts to reduce their
revenue deficit. Vigorous efforts should also be made to restore the
Department’s land encroached upon by unauthorized people.
And
The Committee also note that a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPY) has been
set up for development and commercial exploitation of Postal Estates. The
same has been approved by the Postal Service Board and sent to Planning
Commission for their approval and now as per the advice of Planning
Commission a process to undertake a market survey on commercial development
of land has been initiated. The Committee would, therefore, like to have the
details of the survey conducted and the action initiated in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
With regard to utilization of spare land available with the Department,
various steps have already been taken. The Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) has directed the Department of Posts to work out a plan for
commercial exploitation of vacant plots of the Department in consultation with
Ministry of Finance & Department of Urban Development. Accordingly a note
on setting up of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) called the Postal Land
Development Authority (PLDA) for development and commercial exploitation
of Postal Estates has been approved by the Postal Services Board. The proposal
was sent to Planning Commission for in-principle, approval. As per the advice
of Planning Commission, the Department has engaged a consultant to undertake
a market survey on commercial development of land in 4 plots in July, 2006.
Further action will depend upon results of the survey.

36
WELFARE OF WOMEN EMPLOYEES
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee observe that there are a large number of women employees
working in the Postal Department and the Department are also making provisions
for separate facilities including separate rest rooms and recreation rooms, but
no separate budget is earmarked for the welfare of women. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a separate and sufficient budgetary provision should
be made for the welfare activities of women employees.
Action taken by the Government
The present schemes of the 10th Plan have not been devised in a manner
conducive to separating the Gender Budget provision, so it has not been
possible to indicate a separate Gender Budget. However, such a provision will
be made in the 11th Five Year Plan Proposal, which is presently under
formulation.

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—RECOVERIES
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee also note that a proposal for introduction of an Accident
Policy is under examination of the Government. They, therefore, desire that
sincere efforts should be made by the Department of Posts for early introduction
of the scheme. The Committee would like to be informed about the outcome of
the efforts made by the Department of Posts.
Action taken by the Government
As per a recent clarification in this regard, since all types of accident
policies are covered under General Insurance, the proposed Accident Policy
cannot be introduced under Postal Life Insurance (PLI).
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EAST
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are highly perturbed to note that 100 Branch Post Offices
which were to be opened in the North East, have not yet been opened. However,
an assurance was given by the Secretary of the Department during the evidence
that the shortfall will be covered up shortly. The Committee, therefore, trust
that issues like improvement of quality of schemes and opening of Branch
Post office in North East will be rightly addressed at the earliest. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The original proposal for the Tenth Five Year Plan included a target for
opening 100 Departmental Sub Offices (DSOs) and 1000 Extra Departmental
Sub Offices (EDSOs) throughout the country under Plan scheme “Expansion
of Postal Network”. However, when the EFC considered the proposal in the

38
year 2002-03, it approved implementation of the scheme with revised physical
targets only for the first two years of the Plan period -2002-03 and 2003-04. A
directive for rationalising the network was also given. Thus, even the target of
opening 450 BOs, 45 DSOs for the entire country was to be met by redeployment
of existing post office and the expenditure was to be restricted only to provision
of non- recurring cost for opening of new post offices.
While it had earlier been planned to open 100 EDBOs in NE Region, since
the original approval of the scheme was only for the first two years and a target
for 51 BOs and 5 DSOs was allotted to NE Region, it has not been possible to
allot targets to the extent originally planned. Against the approved targets for
the NE Region, 50 BOs and 5 DSOs have been opened.
It was decided by the EFC that the revised proposal for the remaining
period of the Tenth Plan would be based only on recommendations of a Study
Group which was engaged on a study of Rural Postal Network. The EFC will be
meeting in the current financial year to consider the revised proposal for the
scheme “Expansion of Postal Network”, which is based on the recommendations
of the Study Group. Thus, it would not be possible to open any more BOs in
the North Eastern Region in the 10th Five Year Plan in view of the revised
target. However, the Department will be preparing a separate Sub Plan for the
NE Region under the 11th Five Year Plan to ensure the required focus on the
issues that need to be addressed in the Region.

39
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE  NOT BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—GROSS EXPENDITURE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee also notes that the cost of postal services are increasing
steadily due to dependence on manual operation and rising cost of manpower.
It is also a fact that technological growth and computerization of various
activities initiated by the Department of Posts will not only bring down the
operational cost but also generate additional resources in the coming years.
The Committee are of the view that the existing manpower should be rationally
and optimally utilized by their suitable re-deployment instead of reducing the
strength of the Department. The Committee would like to be submitted with a
detailed road map in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
The rationalization of manpower deployment and utilization is a
continuous and ongoing process. In accordance with the policy of the
Government of India, the Department of Posts has been implementing a 2% cut
annually on direct recruitment, as also the instructions regarding not filling up
posts vacant for the prescribed duration.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para 8 of Chapter-I)
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—RECOVERIES
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee are constrained to note that there are huge outstandings
against agency charges pending recovery from the Ministries/Departments
and other organizations respectively amounting to Rs 12 .32 crore on account

40
of EPF, Rs 8.28 crore on account of CMPF, Rs 100 crore from DOT/BSNL (on
account of telegram charges). The Committee in their 26th Report (2005-06) on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) had
strongly recommended that the matter of recovery of agency charges etc.
should be taken up with the respective Ministries/departments at the highest
level for their expeditious recovery. The Committee feel that there is an urgent
need for making concerted efforts to recover the outstanding agency charges
due to the Department. They, therefore, desire that in order to improve the
financial health of the Department of Posts they should devise some innovative
mechanism to make an early recovery of dues. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard within three months from the date of
presentation/laying of report to both houses of Parliament.
Action taken by the Government
Recovery on account of payment of EPF & CMPF is a continuous process
and such balances in these heads cannot be wiped out fully. In case of EPF as
per agreement only 75% advance is received against the payment made. In
case of CMPF there is no provision for advance payment. Therefore, there are
always outstanding amounts. However, Postal Circles are continuously taking
action for liquidation of outstanding amounts. Regarding arrears of telegraph
and rental charges, liaison with BSNL/DOT is being maintained to enable early
settlement of arrears.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I)
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—REVENUE DEFICIT
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee are surprised to note the step-motherly treatment being
meted out to the Department of Posts by charging payments to pensioners
towards operational working expense of the Department. The concern on the
same was shown by the Committee in their earlier reports also and the Committee
once again desire that the Department should take up the matter vigorously
with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission again to treat the

41
pension payments as a separate common head as being done in the case of
other Ministries. The Committee would like to be apprised of the conclusive
action taken by the Department in this regard.
Action taken by the Government
As advised by the Standing Committee, the Department of Posts has
taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance to charge Pension and Pensionary
benefits to the common head of accounts i.e. 2071- Pension and other pensionary
benefits, at par with other Ministries/departments.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I)
BUDGETARY ANALYSIS—BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EAST
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that funds to the tune of Rs 15.00 crore,
Rs. 8.98 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore, Rs. 15.23 crore and Rs. 22.70 crore were allocated
to N.E. Region in the years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07
respectively, whereas the expenditure was only to the tune of Rs. 2.53 crore,
Rs. 3.91 crore and Rs. 4.24 crore in the years 2002- 03, 2003-04 and 2004-05.
Therefore, the percentage of funds utilized over allocation was less than 35%
(approx) on an average during the three years. The Department of Posts have
not specified any reasons for the under-utilisation of budgetary allocations
over the years. They have further informed that for relevant schemes and
activities, a suitable allocation has been made for the NE component under
Capital and Revenue heads and monitoring of implementation of plan activities
will be continued in 2006-07 to ensure the utilisation of the allocation for the
year 2006-07. The Committee feel that under utilisation of funds shows lack of
proper planning and foresight on the part of the Department. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the reasons for under utilisation of
funds over the years in the North Eastern region and desire that the schemes
pertaining to the NE should not languish due to lack of proper management on
the part of the Department. They would also like to emphasise that the funds
allocated for the NE region should be fully and effectively utilized during the
current year.

42
Action taken by the Government
Funds to the tune of Rs. 15.00 crore, Rs. 8.98 crore, Rs. 9.96 crore,
Rs. 15.23 crore and Rs. 22.70 crore were allocated to the NE Region in the years
2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005- 06 and 2006-07 respectively under the mandatory
clause of earmarking 10% of the total outlay under each existing Plan scheme.
The Department finds it very difficult to invest in a manner that can lead to full
utilisation of the allocated funds for North East Region under the constraints
of certain defined parameters adopted for the whole country that did not match
with the specific needs of the Region and, therefore, provide lesser
maneuverability for the execution.
In all these Plan projects, the major component of the total outlay was on
Computerisation of Post Offices. However, under the scope of this Plan,
computerization is to be undertaken up to the level of triple handed post offices.
This criterion of undertaking the computerization only up to triple handed post
offices was relaxed to double-handed level for North East. Computers have
been provided to all the double-handed post offices during the Plan year
2005-06 and there is no further scope for fund utilization under these projects
in the NE Region. Thus, although utilisation of fund is not upto the allocation,
in terms of physical outlays, the achievement is optimal.
Similarly, implementation of the Plan schemes of ‘Expansion of Postal
Network’, ‘Mechanisation and Modernisation of the Mail Movement’,
‘Modernisation/Upgradation and Promotion of Philately’, ‘Training’,
‘Construction of Buildings’ in the NE Region has been effective, despite the
constraints such as execution of the schemes under certain defined parameters
adopted for the whole country which may not be fully applicable in the NE
Region. The ban on the purchase of vehicles by the Finance Ministry also put
restrictions on the ‘Mechanisation of Mail Movement’. Further, there are certain
restrictions on the use of funds in areas like developing the Department’s own
infrastructure in terms of buildings/or operative offices, as Planning Commission
give low priority to construction work.
Despite the constraints mentioned above, Department of Posts has been
able to utilize the funds to the benefit of the North Eastern region to a large
extent. The utilisation of funds allocated for the North East for Plan activities
is being monitored regularly.
Keeping in view the various constraints as discussed above, Department
is going to make a separate Sub-Plan on the North East in the forthcoming 11th
Five year plan that will ensure full utilisation of the earmarked fund for the
North East Region for schemes specific to the region.

43
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I)
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Speed Post and Business Post have the largest chunk of revenue
generation in comparison to other products. In terms of revenue generation
Business Post has 29% growth from the year 2003-04, whereas the Speed Post
has a growth rate of only 18%. The Committee observe that the share of the
total volume of the Speed Post services handled by the Department of Posts is
around 11% as per a projection made by Kurt Salmon & Associates (KSA)
Report on “ Market Survey”. However, market share of India Post is 50% in the
mail delivery market if all mail products are put together. The Committee also
note that constant efforts are being made by the Department of Posts to increase
the market share by providing value additions for the benefit of the customers.
The Committee are constrained to note that inspite of the huge infrastructure
and widespread delivery system, the Department is having only 11 % of the
market share in the express market. The Committee, therefore recommend that
the Department should focus on the core business and evolve comprehensive
strategies to promote growth in the Speed post business by creating more
value additions for the benefit of customer.
Action taken by the Government
For promotion of growth in Speed Post business, the following services/
facilities have been introduced:
1. Pick up by Postmen– The facility of picking up of ordinary mail and
Speed Post articles and sale of postal stamps and stationery by
postmen has been launched from 18.7.05.
2. Speed Post Gold– This is essentially a Speed Post service between
Central Business Districts of major metros and is Time sensitive
with Electronic IOD facility. Dedicated arrangements for collection,
transmission and delivery are there. The cost is speed post
charges + premium charges. In case of delay, automatic refund of
premium charges would be there. The service has been introduced
between Delhi and Mumbai to start with.

44
3. One India One Rate– Since 2006 is the 20th anniversary of Speed
Post, it has been decided that a flat rate of Rs. 25 would be charged
for all articles weighing upto 50 gms for anywhere in India other
than “local’. These charges are effective from 21st August 2006.
4. Local Rates for NCR– It has been decided that Speed Post and
Express Parcel Post articles booked in and destined for Delhi/New
Delhi, Ghaziabad, Gurgoan, Noida and Faridabad would be treated
as local for the purpose of determining of tariff.
Comments of the Committee
(Kindly see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I)

45
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
EXPANSION OF POSTAL NETWORK
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee are constrained to find that review of all single and double
handed post offices undertaken by the Department of Posts in 16 cities in 2002
have shown that over 55% of these urban post offices are incurring losses.
Also, in the urban postal network comprising of 11% of the total network post
offices which are expected to be financially self-sufficient and earn 5% profit
after the first year, are incurring losses as against these norms. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department of Posts should ascertain the specific
reasons for incurring losses by these Post Offices and take suitable remedial
corrective action at the earliest. They also re-emphasize the need for revamping
of the postal services to stay solvent. In this connection, the Committee desire
that a survey may be conducted for covering more cities to have a broader
financial picture of these urban post offices and also to know as to how effective
human resources can be utilized to gain maximum returns.
Action taken by the Government
The Department of Posts is addressing the issue and will keep the
Standing Committee informed of the action taken on the recommendation given
by the Committee.
IMPROVEMENT OF QUALITY OF SERVICES
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that a Budgetary provision of Rs 2.34 crore was
made for the year 2004-2005 to undertake the activities like implementation of
the Mathematical Analysis by Route of Irregularities in Mail (e-MARIA)
software of security of Mail, supply of High Quality Stamp Cancellation
Machine (HQSCM) and date stamping equipment on mail and Integrated Quality
Control Programme (IQCP) to cover all 20 offices. However, the prescribed
targets have not been achieved so far. The Committee are not convinced with
the reasons of non-finalisation of the Integrated Quality Control Programme

46
(IQCP) project and delay in obtaining of Administrative Approval and
expenditure Sanction (AA&ES), which were adverted by the Department of
Posts for not achieving the targets. The time frame work in completion of the
project MARIA is 6 months from the date of approval and HQSCM is 10 months
from the date of approval. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Department that the delay in the scheme has not affected the quality of services
being provided by the Department of Posts. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the approval for the projects should be taken up at the earliest
and completed within the stipulated time. The Committee hope that the
introduction of MARIA and HQSCM schemes will help in providing affordable,
high quality mail service to the people at large in the country.
Action taken by the Government
The e-MARIA and HQSCM projects are ready for implementation and are
expected to be completed in the current year, subject to composite approval by
the competent authority of the Plan Scheme under which these projects have
been included.
NEW DELHI;
13 December, 2006
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)
NIKHIL KUMAR,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on
Information Technology.

47
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13th December, 2006 from
1500 Hours to 1615 Hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Nikhil Kumar    –    Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nikhil Kumar Choudhary
3. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre
4. Shri Sohan Potai
5. Shri Tathagat Satpathy
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Vijay J. Darda
7. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
8. Shri A. Vijayaragahavan
9. Shri Shyam Benegal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P. Sreedharan – Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma – Director
3. Shri Cyril John – Under Secretary

48
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports and adopted the same with some modification:-
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in their Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2006-2007)’ pertaining to Department
of Posts.
3. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise and present
the above mentioned Reports to the House on a date and time convenient to
him.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

49
ANNEXURE II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction ]
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos.: 1, 3, 6, 7,  8, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 23 to 35
Total : 26
Percentage : 74.29%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:
Paragraph Nos.: 4 and 13
Total : 02
Percentage : 5.71%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiterntion:–
Paragraph Nos.: 2, 5, 9, 12 and 22
Total : 05
Percentage : 14.29%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies are of
interim nature:–
Paragraph Nos.: 15 and 18
Total : 02
Percentage : 5.71%